HR 599 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 599
To prevent ground water contamination by pesticides.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
January 20, 1989
Mr. OBERSTAR introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to
the Committees on Agiculture, Energy and Commerce, and Public Works and
Transportation
A BILL
To prevent ground water contamination by pesticides.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
 SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Ground Water Safety
 Act of 1989'.
 SEC. 2. FIFRA AMENDMENT- The Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide
 Act is amended by--
 (a) redesignating section 31 (7 U.S.C. 136y) as section 33; and
 (b) inserting after section 30 (7 U.S.C. 136x) the following new sections:
`SEC. 31. PROTECTION OF GROUND WATER.
 `(a) PURPOSE- It is the purpose of this section to establish standards,
 regulations, and requirements that will prevent contamination of underground
 sources of drinking water by pesticides and to authorize and require the
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency to take appropriate
 regulatory and other actions to protect human health and the environment
 from injury or damage that may result from the presence of pesticides in
 ground water.
 `(b) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) DRINKING WATER WELL- The term `drinking water well' means a well or
 spring currently supplying water for human consumption;
 `(2) GROUND WATER- The term `ground water' means water below the land
 surface in the zone of saturation;
 `(3) GROUND WATER RESIDUE GUIDANCE LEVEL- The term `ground water residue
 guidance level' means--
 `(A) with respect to a pesticide for which a ground water residue guidance
 level has been established under section 1429 of the Safe Drinking Water
 Act, such level, or
 `(B) with respect to any other pesticide which has been detected at 3 or
 more ground water sampling points, 5 micrograms per liter;
 `(4) GROUND WATER SAMPLING POINT- The term `ground water sampling point'
 means a public or community water supply, a private water supply, a spring,
 or a monitoring well or other ground water source, if the well or source
 is reasonably designed and of adequate depth to permit the collection of
 ground water samples;
 `(5) PESTICIDE- The term `pesticide' includes any active or inert ingredient
 of a pesticide product and the metabolites and degradation products of
 such ingredients;
 `(6) RELIABLE ANALYTICAL DATA- The term `reliable analytical data' means
 information indicating the presence of a pesticide in a ground water
 sample at or above the limit of detection and developed according to
 generally recognized standards and good laboratory practices for sampling
 and analysis of pesticides in ground water; and
 `(7) UNDERGROUND SOURCE OF DRINKING WATER- The term `underground source of
 drinking water' includes current and potential sources of drinking water
 and means an aquifer or its portion which:
 `(A) supplies any public water system; or
 `(B) contains a sufficient quantity of ground water to supply a drinking
 water well and which--
 `(i) currently supplies drinking water for human consumption; or
 `(ii) contains fewer than 10,000 mg/l total dissolved solids.
 `(c) Leaching Potential-
 `(1) CRITERIA- The Administrator shall publish and seek comment on criteria
 to determine whether a pesticide has the potential to leach into ground
 water. Such criteria may include, but are not limited to, factors such as:
 the intended use of the pesticide; the timing, rate and method of application
 for the pesticide; the mobility of the pesticide in soil and water under
 various conditions; the persistence of the pesticide in the environment;
 the use of the pesticide in combination with other agents; and the level
 of care necessary to assure that the pesticide is properly used.
 `(2) DATA SUBMISSION- Each person seeking to register or reregister
 a pesticide under this Act shall submit complete and adequate data and
 information with respect to the potential for the pesticide to leach into
 ground water and the fate and transport of the pesticide.
 `(3) DETERMINATION OF LEACHING POTENTIAL- At the time of the initial
 registration of a pesticide or upon issuing a reregistration standard for
 a pesticide (and using the criteria developed under paragraph (1)) the
 Administrator shall determine whether the pesticide has the potential to
 leach into ground water. With respect to a determination made under this
 paragraph, any pesticide detected at three or more ground water sampling
 points shall be determined to have the potential to leach into ground
 water. Any determination that a pesticide does not have the potential
 to leach into ground water made under this paragraph shall be amended,
 if the Administrator receives reliable analytical data that the pesticide
 has been detected at three or more ground water sampling points.
 `(4) AUTHORITY TO DENY REGISTRATION- Nothing in this section shall be
 interpreted, construed or implied to authorize the Administrator to register
 or reregister a pesticide for use, if, in the judgment of the Administrator,
 the requirements of section 3(c)(5) are not satisfied.
 `(5) REQUIREMENT FOR APPLICATION BY CERTIFIED APPLICATORS- For any pesticide
 for which the Administrator has made a determination of a potential to leach
 in accordance with subsection (c) of this section, the Administrator shall
 issue appropriate regulations to ensure that the use of such pesticides
 is restricted to properly trained an certified applicators. In addition,
 the Administrator shall issue regulations, as expeditiously as possible
 but not later than 18 months after enactment, to assure recordkeeping and
 reporting on the sales and use of such pesticides. The Administrator shall
 retain, but make available to the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
 Registry established under Public Law 96-510 upon request, such records
 and reports, for a period of not less than 30 years.
 `(d) RECOMMENDED PRACTICES- If the Administrator determines that a pesticide
 has the potential to leach into ground water according to the provisions
 of subsection (c) of this section, the registrants of the pesticide shall
 develop management practices designed to prevent, to the maximum extent
 practicable, the potential for the pesticide to leach into ground water. In
 developing such practices, the registrants shall consult with agencies of
 the various States which have been designated pursuant to subsection (p) to
 develop and implement programs to prevent water pollution and shall provide
 such agencies any information necessary to carry out such programs. The
 registrant shall disseminate information on such management practices as
 recommended practices to applicators and other persons using the pesticide in
 a form that will facilitate use of the management practices. Such recommended
 practices may include, but are not limited to, practices with respect to--
 `(1) the purposes for and the location at which the pesticide should be used,
 considering factor such as environmentally sensitive areas and conditions;
 `(2) the rate at which the pesticide should be applied;
 `(3) the time or frequency of pesticide use;
 `(4) the method of pesticide application, storage, handling or disposal;
 `(5) the appropriate training of pesticide applicators and other persons
 using the pesticide; and
 `(6) the appropriate response if the pesticide is spilled or otherwise
 released in a manner likely to significantly increase the potential for
 leaching to ground water.
The recommended practices required by this subsection shall be in addition
to label requirements that are imposed under this Act to assure that use of
the pesticide will not present an unreasonable risk of damage or injury to
human health or the environment.
 `(e) MONITORING- In addition to any monitoring which may be required under
 section 3(c)(2)(B) of this Act, monitoring shall also be conducted pursuant
 to the following authorities.
 `(1) LEACHING PESTICIDES- If the Administrator determines that a pesticide
 has the potential to leach into ground water according to the provisions
 of subsection (c) of this section, the registrants of the pesticide
 shall conduct ground water monitoring at representative geographical and
 hydrogeologic areas associated with locations where the pesticide is to
 be used and under conditions of concern and for such time as determined
 by the Administrator. Monitoring by a registrant of a pesticide pursuant
 to this paragraph shall be conducted according to generally recognized
 standards and good laboratory practices (which may be identified by the
 Administrator) for sampling and analysis of pesticides in ground water
 taking into account seasonal and other factors which may affect the fate
 and transport of pesticides in soil and ground water.
 `(2) CONTINUING REGISTRATION-
 `(A) If, in the judgment of the Administrator, additional data on the
 presence of a pesticide in ground water are required to maintain in effect
 an existing registration of the pesticide, registrants of such pesticide
 shall conduct ground water monitoring.
 `(B) The design and the scope of the monitoring requirement should take into
 account information such as the magnitude and frequency of detection, pattern
 of pesticide use and soil types involved in the detection, physical and
 chemical properties of the pesticide, rainfall patterns, well construction,
 rates of degradation, reliability and analytical accuracy of the detection,
 and results of State or other sponsored monitoring.
 `(C) To the extent feasible, monitoring should be conducted at representative
 geographical and hydrogeologic areas associated with locations and conditions
 of concern as determined by the Administrator.
 `(3) AREAWIDE MONITORING- Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act,
 if the Administrator (or the designated State agency) determines, based
 on reliable analytical data, that:
 `(A) a pesticide has been detected in an underground source of drinking
 water;
 `(B) the concentration of the pesticide equals or exceeds 50 percent of the
 ground water residue guidance level for that pesticide or, on the basis of
 reliable analytical data as to a specific site, the Administrator determines
 that there is a likelihood that the ground water residue guidance level
 for that pesticide will be reached or exceeded at that site; and
 `(C) the presence of the pesticide in the underground source of drinking
 water may be the result of use of the pesticide in accordance with the
 label or widespread and commonly recognized practice;
the Administrator (or the designated State agency) may require registrants
of the pesticide to conduct monitoring within the vicinity of the underground
source of drinking water. The purpose of such monitoring shall be to determine
the extent of pesticide contamination of ground water and the geographic
area that will be subject to the use prohibition under subsection (i) and,
to the extent feasible, to determine the cause of the contamination.
 `(4) SAVINGS CLAUSE- Nothing in this section shall limit the authority
 of any State or political subdivision thereof to require ground water
 monitoring by a registrant at any location within that State or subdivision.
 `(f) Notification-
 `(1) REQUIREMENT- When a registrant of a pesticide obtains reliable
 analytical data that the pesticide has been detected at any ground
 water sampling point, the registrant shall file a report containing such
 information within 15 working days with the Administrator, the State where
 such pesticide has been detected, the owner of the property at the ground
 water sampling point, and any other person relying upon the underground
 source of drinking water for drinking water or household needs.
 `(2) CONTENT OF REPORT- A report required under paragraph (1) upon
 detection of a pesticide shall contain information known to the registrant
 on the level detected, frequency of detection, location (including depth),
 date, well construction, soil type, the analytical method used, including
 information on the precision, accuracy, and limit of detection of the
 method and any quality assurance and control procedures and such other
 information as the Administrator may specify.
 `(3) OTHER INFORMATION- The Administrator may receive reports of such
 information from any other person and if such information is received
 by the Administrator it shall be transmitted by the Administrator to the
 designated agency in each State where the pesticide has been detected and
 to the owner of the property at the ground water sampling point.
 `(g) REVIEW FOR FURTHER ACTION- On receiving information of a detection
 of a pesticide at any ground water sampling point, the Administrator
 shall promptly review the information to determine the reliability of the
 detection and to determine whether action should be taken to protect ground
 water resources.
 `(h) Registration Amendments-
 `(1) Requirement-
 `(A) After reviewing reliable analytical data, the Administrator shall
 determine whether there is a reasonable likelihood that the ground water
 residue guidance level for a pesticide will be reached or exceeded in
 underground sources of drinking water in different localities as a result
 of uses of the pesticide in accordance with the labeling on the pesticide
 or as a result of widespread and commonly recognized practice.
 `(B) If the Administrator determines that there is a reasonable likelihood of
 reaching or exceeding such level in different localities, the Administrator
 shall within 60 days propose and require as expeditiously as practicable
 amendments to the registration of the pesticide with respect to which
 the determination has been made which will assure that the use of the
 pesticide in accordance with the amended registration will not cause the
 ground water residue guidance level to be reached or exceeded in underground
 sources of drinking water.
 `(C) The Administrator shall make public any determination (including
 information on which such determination was based) under subparagraph (A).
 `(D) If the Administrator proposes to require registration amendments under
 this paragraph, the Administrator shall notify registrants of such amendments
 and shall publish notice of the determination in the Federal Register.
 `(2) CONSULTATION- In taking action under paragraph (1), the Administrator
 shall notify the Secretary of Agriculture and the designated agency in any
 State where the pesticide (with respect to which the determination is made)
 has been detected in any ground water sampling point and the designated
 agency in each other State in which there is significant use of the pesticide
 or potential for use. The Administrator shall provide each designated
 State agency with information relevant to this determination. Designated
 State agencies shall promptly provide the Administrator with information
 (including information on the actions which the State intends to take
 under any prevention program approved pursuant to section 32 of this Act)
 relevant to taking action under this section and shall make recommendations
 regarding necessary registration amendments with respect to that State.
 `(3) Reasonable likelihood-
 `(A) The Administrator shall determine that there is a reasonable likelihood
 that the ground water residue guidance level for a pesticide will be reached
 or exceeded whenever such pesticide is detected in amounts which exceed
 25 percent of such level unless, considering the other factors described
 in subparagraph (B) of this paragraph, the Administrator determines that
 there is compelling evidence that such level will not be exceeded as a
 result of use of the pesticide in accordance with the labeling on the
 pesticide or as a result of widespread and commonly recognized practice.
 `(B) Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), the Administrator may, after
 consideration of all relevant information, including the frequency and time
 of occurrence at the site of detection and elsewhere, use patterns, soil
 types, physical and chemical properties of the pesticide, rainfall patterns,
 well construction, analytical accuracy, and rates of degradation determine
 that the ground water residue guidance level for a pesticide will not be
 reached or exceeded. The Administrator shall make available a statement
 supporting any determination made under this subparagraph and shall publish
 notice of the availability of such statement in the Federal Register.
 `(4) Scope of amendments-
 `(A) Amendments to the registration of a pesticide required pursuant to
 this section may include--
 `(i) limitations on the purposes for and location at which the pesticide
 may be used, considering factors such as environmentally sensitive areas
 and conditions;
 `(ii) limitations on the rate at which the pesticide is applied;
 `(iii) limitations on the time or frequency of pesticide use;
 `(iv) limitations on the method on pesticide application, storage, handling,
 or disposal;
 `(v) reporting or other requirements, including label changes or changes
 in classification;
 `(vi) requirements for the training or certification of pesticide applicators
 or other persons using the pesticide;
 `(vii) required site-specific responses; or
 `(viii) any other requirement under this Act to ensure that the ground water
 residue guidance level for such pesticide will not be reached or exceeded.
 `(B) The amendments to the registration of a pesticide should, to the extent
 feasible, be directed to the same or similar uses of the pesticide, similar
 or potentially more vulnerable geographical and hydrogeologic areas and
 other similar conditions that led to the determination under subparagraph
 (A) or (B) of paragraph (1).
 `(C) In taking regulatory action under this subsection, the Administrator
 may utilize recommendations provided by the designated State agencies
 under paragraph (2).
 `(5) REVIEW- If the Administrator has imposed registration amendments on
 the use of a pesticide according to the provisions of this subsection,
 the Administrator shall--
 `(A) periodically review reliable analytical data on the occurrence of the
 pesticide at ground water sampling points representative of the locations
 at which the pesticide is used to determine whether such amendments are
 effective in meeting the requirements of paragraph (1) of this section;
 `(B) require additional registration amendments, if such amendments are
 necessary to assure that the ground water residue guidance level for
 such pesticide will not be reached or exceeded in underground sources of
 drinking water;
 `(C) report to the Congress and transmit the report to the States at
 36 months, 60 months, and 96 months after such amendments are first
 imposed indicating whether the amendments have been effective in meeting
 the requirements of paragraph (1) of this subsection and describing any
 additional actions which are being taken by the States pursuant to section
 32 to prevent water pollution.
 `(i) SITE-SPECIFIC RESPONSE-
 `(1) REQUIREMENT-
 `(A) If the Administrator determines that a pesticide is present in an
 underground source of drinking water at a concentration that reaches or
 exceeds 50 percent of the ground water residue guidance level for such
 pesticide, the Administrator shall--
 `(i) notify the designated agency for the State in which the underground
 source of drinking water is located of the determination of the
 Administrator; and
 `(ii) provide the designated State agency with information relevant to
 the determination;
 `(B) The State shall take action within 180 days of such notification to
 prevent any adverse effect on human health or the environment which may
 result from the presence of such pesticide. The State shall take appropriate
 action with respect to the sale or use of the pesticide detected at such
 underground source of drinking water to bring and retain concentration of
 the pesticide at or below the ground water residue guidance level applicable
 to the pesticide.
 `(2) ACTION BY THE ADMINISTRATOR-
 `(A) If--
 `(i) a State does not have the authority to take action required by
 paragraph (1) of this subsection with respect to a pesticide detected
 in an underground source of drinking water or fails to take such action
 within the time period prescribed by such paragraph;
 `(ii) a pesticide is present in an underground source of drinking water
 in the State at a concentration that reaches or exceeds 50 percent of the
 ground water residue guidance level; and
 `(iii) the presence of the pesticide may be the result of use in accordance
 with the labeling or of widespread and commonly recognized practice,
the Administrator shall issue an order prohibiting the use of the pesticide
in the vicinity of the underground source of drinking water or take such
action, including but not limited to issuing such orders as may be necessary
to protect human health or the environment (including an order that the
registrant provide water treatment facilities or alternative water supplies)
or commencing civil or criminal action for appropriate legal, equitable
or other relief to assure that the concentrate of the pesticide in the
underground source of drinking water will not reach or exceed the ground
water residue guidance level for such pesticide.
 `(B) The Administrator shall publish notice of the action in the Federal
 Register and take appropriate steps to inform all registrants, potentially
 affected persons, and interested members of the public. Such notice
 shall specify the factual findings and conclusions relied on in support
 the decision.
 `(C) The Administrator shall promulgate regulations which shall govern and
 define prohibitions ordered under this paragraph. Such regulations shall
 include a formula or other method to be used in determining the land area
 over which any prohibition ordered under this section shall extend. Such
 formula or method shall be designed to facilitate an expeditious and
 definitive determination of such land area using readily available data
 and may reflect factors including, but not limited to, climate and soil
 characteristics, hydrogeologic conditions and the concentrations of the
 pesticide detected at ground water sampling points within the area. The
 regulations shall provide for a country-wide prohibition on use of a
 pesticide whenever such pesticide has been detected at 50 percent of the
 ground water residue guidance level at 5 or more different locations
 within the county. Any judicial review of regulations promulgated
 pursuant to this subparagraph shall be obtained under section 16(b)
 of this Act and application for review shall be made within 60 days of
 promulgation. Regulations promulgated pursuant to this subparagraph shall
 not be subject to judicial review in any civil or criminal proceeding
 resulting from the application of the formula on a site-specific basis.
 `(D) The Administrator shall provide reasonable procedures for a petition
 to modify or terminate the action of the Administrator under this paragraph,
 if the concentration of the pesticide in the water from the undergound source
 of drinking water no longer reaches or exceeds 50 percent of the applicable
 ground water residue guidance level and will likely remain below such level.
 `(j) INFORMATION ON PESTICIDES IN GROUND WATER- The Administrator
 shall collect and make available through a public information file
 information concerning the detection of pesticides at any ground water
 sampling point. The file may summarize for each pesticide that has been
 detected in ground water, based on reliable analytical data, whether the
 pesticide has been detected at a concentration that exceeds 25 percent
 of the applicable ground water residue guidance level and whether the
 presence of the pesticide in ground water appears to have been caused by
 use of the pesticide in compliance with this Act.
 `(k) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE TO STATES- The Administrator shall provide
 technical information to a designated State agency for the purpose of
 implementing this section. The technical information shall include, but
 not be limited to, data on the toxicity, environmental fate, physical
 or chemical pesticide ingredient characteristics, predictive modeling,
 exposure, hydrogeologic conditions relative to areas specifically vulnerable
 to ground water contamination for the purpose of providing vulnerability
 mapping and other relevant subjects. In addition, the Administrator may
 provide information, to the extent reasonably available, on the alternative
 methods of pest control and on agricultural or other management practices
 that could minimize the presence of pesticides in ground water.
 `(l) SPECIAL REVIEW- On receiving reliable analytical data that a pesticide
 has been detected above the ground water residue guidance level in ground
 water not in an underground source of drinking water or that pesticide
 concentrations which are detected below such level in an underground
 source of drinking water may have an adverse effect on the environment as
 a result of discharge to surface waters, the Administrator may initiate
 a public interim administrative review under section 3(c)(8) of this Act
 to determine whether the pesticide may cause unreasonable adverse effects
 on the environment from such use.
 `(m) MONITORING IN THE UNSATURATED ZONE- The Administrator shall undertake
 research activities to develop and demonstrate techniques to monitor for
 the presence of pesticides in the unsaturated zone and to develop models
 that are predictive of the potential for leaching of pesticides to ground
 water based on data gathered by monitoring in the unsaturated zone.
 `(n) SITE-SPECIFIC INFORMATION- The Administrator shall enter into a
 memorandum of understanding with the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary
 of Commerce, and the Secretary of the Interior, for the purpose of initiating
 and developing information management systems and other techniques designed
 to make readily available to State and local officials and agricultural
 producers, applicators and other persons using the pesticide information
 on the soil, hydrology, climate and other characteristics at specific
 sites of pesticide application to be used by such officials and users in
 developing practices and making application decisions that will prevent
 the contamination of ground water by pesticides.
 `(1) Under the direction of the Administrator a council will be established
 in order to assist the Environmental Protection Agency in developing a
 site- specific pesticide information system. This council shall consist
 of experts on information management who have experience with information
 retrieval from the following agencies: the Environmental Protection Agency,
 the National Agricultural Library, the Soil Conservation Service, the United
 States Geological Survey, and the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric
 Administration. This council shall--
 `(A) review existing information retrieval and referral services which
 access information on soil, hydrology, climate, and other characteristics
 at specific sites important to pesticide application;
 `(B) determine what information relevant to making site-specific pesticide
 decisions is available to users of the pesticide products and designated
 State agencies directly from existing data banks; and
 `(C) develop and submit to the Administrator a plan for an information
 management system which would direct and assist users in gaining access
 to site-specific information available in printed and electronic form.
 `(2) The Environmental Protection Agency shall take the plans developed by
 the council into consideration when developing the site-specific pesticide
 information management system.
 `(o) Effect On Other Provisions-
 `(1) Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Administrator
 under other provisions of this Act or under any other law.
 `(2) Nothing in this section shall preclude or deny any right of any
 State or political subdivision thereof to adopt or enforce any regulation,
 requirement or standard that is more stringent than a regulation, requirement
 or standard of performance in effect under this section or to preempt
 any State or local statutue or common law with respect to liability for
 damages and injury caused by pesticides.
 `(p) DESIGNATED STATE AGENCIES- Not later than 90 days after the date of
 enactment of this section, the Governor of each State shall designate a
 single State agency which shall have the duty and responsibility to carry
 out the requirements of this section and section 32 of this Act.
 `(q) AUTHORIZATION- For purposes of carrying out the provisions of this
 section there are authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000 for each of the
 fiscal years ending on September 30, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 and 1994. Of
 such amounts $5,000,000 in each fiscal year shall be available only to
 carry out the purposes of subsection (m).
`SEC. 32. STATE PROGRAMS TO PREVENT WATER POLLUTION.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Not later than 24 months after the date of enactment
 of this section, the Governor of each State (acting through the agency
 designated pursuant to section 31(p)) shall, after notice and opportunity
 for public comment, prepare and submit to the Administrator for approval a
 program to prevent surface and ground water pollution by pesticides which
 the Administrator has determined have the potential to leach to ground
 water pursuant to section 31 of this Act or which have been identified by
 the State for control pursuant to section 303, 307, or 319 of the Clean
 Water Act. Such program shall include--
 `(1) an inventory of the pesticides used in the State which may cause or
 contribute to the pollution of surface water resources or the contamination
 of underground sources of drinking water;
 `(2) an identification of the areas (including information on the crops,
 climate, soil characteristics, hydrological conditions, and pesticide
 application practices in such areas) where such pesticides are used and
 information with respect to the surface water pollution or contamination
 of underground sources of drinking water which may have already occurred;
 `(3) an identification of the process, including intergovernmental
 coordination and public participation, the State will use to develop
 and implement management practices that would be effective in preventing
 surface water pollution or the contamination of underground sources of
 drinking water by such pesticides; and
 `(4) a schedule for the implementation of such practices and identification
 of the methods the State will use to assure that such practices are employed
 in the use of pesticides which may cause or contribute to surface water
 pollution or the contamination of underground sources of drinking water
 at the earliest practicable date.
 `(b) PUBLIC PARTICIPATION- Each State shall establish procedures including,
 but not limited to, the establishment of technical and citizens' advisory
 committees, to encourage public participation in developing the prevention
 programs required by this section. The procedures shall include notice and
 opportunity for public hearing and comment on the State program before it
 is submitted to the Administrator.
 `(c) APPROVAL OF STATE PROGRAMS- Not later than 180 days after the date
 of submission of any State program under this section, the Administrator
 shall either approve or disapprove such program. The Administrator shall
 disapprove a program if the Administrator determines that--
 `(1) the proposed program does not include each of the elements specified
 in subsection (a);
 `(2) adequate authority does not exist or adequate resources are not
 available at the State level to implement the program;
 `(3) the schedule for implementing the program is not sufficiently
 expeditious; or
 `(4) the practices and measures proposed in such program are not adequate
 to prevent the pollution of surface water resources and the contamination
 of underground sources of drinking water in the State by pesticides.
If the Administrator disapproves a proposed program, the State shall be
notified in writing of any modifications which are necessary to obtain
approval. The State shall thereupon have an additional 3 months to submit a
revised program which shall be subject to approval or disapproval according
to the provisions of this subsection. Whenever the Administrator determines
after public hearing that a State is not administering and enforcing a
prevention program approved pursuant to this subsection in accordance with the
provisions of this section, the Administrator shall so notify the State and,
if appropriate action to bring such program into compliance with this section
is not taken within 90 days, the Administrator shall withdraw approval of
such prevention program. The Administrator shall not withdraw approval of
any such prevention program unless the State shall have been notified and
the reasons for withdrawal shall have been stated in writing and made public.
 `(d) FAILURE TO SUBMIT AN APPROVABLE PROGRAM- After 36 months after the
 date of enactment of this section, no pesticide which has the potential
 to leach to ground water (as determined pursuant to section 31 of this
 Act) or which has been identified for control in a State nonpoint source
 pollution management program submitted pursuant to section 319 or identified
 pursuant to section 303 or 307 of the Clean Water Act may be registered
 for use in a State under this Act unless the Administrator has approved
 (and not withdrawn) under this section a program submitted by the State
 to prevent surface water pollution and the contamination of underground
 sources of drinking water by pesticides. Notwithstanding the provisions
 of this subsection, the Administrator may register a pesticide for use in
 a State without an approved program if the Administrator determines that
 the registered use or normal and widespread practice, and the labeling
 requirements imposed for such use, will assure that leaching or run-off of
 such pesticide will not occur under all hydrogeologic conditions found in
 that State. Any such registered use shall be immediately cancelled upon
 detection of the pesticide in surface water or in an underground source
 of drinking water.
 `(e) FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE- The Administrator may make grants, subject to
 such terms and conditions as the Administrator determines appropriate, to
 any State for the purpose of developing and implementing a water pollution
 prevention program under this section. The Federal share shall not exceed
 50 percent of the cost of developing and implementing any State program
 under this section. Any grant to a State made after 3 years after the date
 of enactment of this section shall be made only on the condition that the
 State is making adequate progress in implementing the program approved
 according to the schedule set forth pursuant to subsection (a)(4).
 `(f) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section the terms `pesticide',
 `ground water' and `underground source of drinking water' shall have the
 same definitions as are assigned to such terms in section 31 of this Act.
 `(g) AUTHORIZATION- There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out
 the purposes of this section not to exceed $25,000,000 for each of the
 fiscal years ending September 30, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 and 1994.'.
 (c) UNLAWFUL ACTS- Section 12(a)(2) (7 U.S.C. 136j(a)(2)) is amended by
 adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(U) to violate an order issued under section 31(i)(2).'.
 SEC. 3. SAFE DRINKING WATER ACT AMENDMENT- Part C of title XIV of the
 Public Health Service Act (the Safe Drinking Water Act) is amended by
 adding at the end thereof the following--
 `SEC. 1429. GROUND WATER RESIDUE GUIDANCE LEVEL- (a) REQUIREMENT-
 `(1) The Administrator, on the Administrator's own initiative, may issue a
 ground water residue guidance level for a pesticide registered under the
 Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act. The Administrator
 shall issue a ground water residue guidance level for a pesticide at
 the time the Administrator initially registers the pesticide or upon
 issuing a reregistration standard for the pesticide under such Act if the
 Administrator determines that the pesticide has the potential to leach
 into ground water. In addition, the Administrator shall issue a ground
 water residue guidance level for a pesticide if--
 `(A) based on reliable analytical data, the pesticide has been detected
 at ground water sampling points in three different locations;
 `(B) based on reliable analytical data, the pesticide has been detected
 in a drinking water well or wellfield that serves a public water system; or
 `(C) a Federal agency or a State petitions the Administrator to set a
 ground water residue guidance level for the pesticide.
 `(2)(A) If the Administrator has promulgated or promulgates a maximum
 contaminant level goal under section 1412 that applies to a pesticide,
 the ground water residue guidance level required under paragraph (1) for
 the pesticide shall be set at such level within 30 days of being required
 under such paragraph.
 `(B) If a maximum contaminant level goal that would be applicable to a
 pesticide for which a ground water residue guidance level is required by
 paragraph (1) has not been established under section 1412, the Administrator
 shall issue a ground water residue guidance level for such pesticide at
 a level at which no known or anticipated adverse effect on the health of
 persons occur and including an adequate margin of safety, taking into
 consideration the nature of the toxic effects caused by the pesticide,
 the validity, completeness, and adequacy of data about the pesticide, the
 possible synergistic or additive effects of exposure to the pesticide in
 combination with likely associated chemicals, and the need to protect
 sensitive individuals and subpopulations. If all required chronic,
 oncogenicity, reproduction, neurotoxicity, or teratogenicity data are
 absent or invalid for the pesticide, the ground water residue guidance level
 for the pesticide shall be set at the limit of detection. If any required
 chronic, oncogenicity, reproduction, neurotoxicity, or teratogenicity data
 are absent or invalid for the pesticide, the ground water residue guidance
 level for the pesticide shall include an additional margin of safety that
 takes into account the absence of such data.
 `(3) If the Administrator is required under paragraph (1) to issue a
 ground water residue guidance level for a pesticide and the ground water
 residue guidance level is to be issued pursuant to paragraph (2)(C), the
 Administrator shall issue such level within 180 days after it is required
 pursuant to paragraph (1) and may issue an interim guidance level for use
 as an advisory during such 180-day period.
 `(4) The Administrator may revise a ground water residue guidance level
 for a pesticide. The Administrator shall allow at least 30 days for public
 comment on any proposed revision.
 `(5) An interim ground water residue guidance level shall not be
 subject to judicial review before the expiration of 180 days after its
 issuance. Judicial review of any final ground water residue guidance level
 or failure to establish an interim or final ground water residue guidance
 level shall be governed by section 1448. A ground water residue guidance
 level established under paragraph (2) (A) or (B) shall not be subject to
 judicial review except that review of any action which sets a ground water
 residue guidance level at a level equivalent to a maximum contaminant level
 for a pesticide may be obtained under this Act to determine whether such
 action may present more than a negligible risk of chronic adverse health
 effects or is otherwise inconsistent with paragraph (2)(B)(ii).
 `(b) STATE AUTHORITY- Nothing in this section shall preclude or deny any
 right of any State or political subdivision thereof to adopt or enforce
 any standard that is more stringent than a ground water residue guidance
 level in effect under this section.'.
 SEC. 4. CLEAN WATER ACT AMENDMENT- The Clean Water Act is amended by adding
 at the end of section 319 the following new subsection:
 `(o) NONPOINT SOURCE CONTROL OF GROUND WATER CONTAMINATION BY PESTICIDES-
 `(1) PURPOSES- Contamination of ground water by pesticides is a nonpoint
 source problem, although nonpoint source and pesticide controls are
 frequently seen as contradictory in practice. Further, the State programs
 established under this section and under section 32 (7 U.S.C. 136z) may be
 housed in different State agencies. The purpose of this subsection is to
 develop practices which will protect both surface and ground waters, and
 to assure adequate consultation and coordination between the administering
 agencies and programs.
 `(2) The Administrator shall, in providing grants under this subsection
 and section 32 (7 U.S.C. 136z), encourage full consultation between State
 agencies, or within divisions of the State agency, designated pursuant to
 this section and section 32 (7 U.S.C. 136z), and shall encourage coordination
 between management programs established under such subsection and section.
 `(3) The State shall, if pesticides represent a substantial threat to
 ground water within its boundaries, assure dissemination of the information
 developed under section 32(a) (1) and (2) (7 U.S.C. 136z) to the agency or
 division designated pursuant to this section, and shall assure that the best
 management practices authorized in subsection (b)(2)(A) of this section
 incorporate to the maximum extent practicable the mangement practices
 developed and implemented under section 32(a)(3) (7 U.S.C. 136z).
 `(4) The State may to the extent consistent with this section, use funds
 authorized under this section to incorporate into the programs established
 under subsection (b)(2)(B) of this section (including technical assistance,
 financial assistance, education, training, technology transfer, and
 demonstration projects) the information and practices developed under
 section 32(a)(3) (7 U.S.C. 136z).
 `(5) There is authorized to be appropriated to Environmental Protection
 Agency, for research activities to assist in development of management
 practices which will control pesticide contamination of both surface and
 ground waters, not to exceed $5,000,000 per fiscal year for each of fiscal
 years 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 and 1994.'.