HR 5635 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5635
To provide a penalty for increasing oil prices within 30 days after a
declaration of war, the onset of military police action, or a major oil spill.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
September 17, 1990
Mr. HERTEL (for himself and Mr. MCNULTY) introduced the following bill;
which was referred to the Committee on the Judiciary
A BILL
To provide a penalty for increasing oil prices within 30 days after a
declaration of war, the onset of military police action, or a major oil spill.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. PENALTY FOR INCREASING OIL PRICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subject to subsection (b), whoever increases the price
 charged for crude oil or a refined petroleum product within 30 days after--
 (1) a declaration of war;
 (2) the introduction of United States Armed Forces into hostilities or into
 situations where imminent involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated
 by the circumstances; or
 (3) the notification of a discharge of oil is received by a Federal agency
 pursuant to section 311(b)(5) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1321(b)(5));
shall be fined under title 18, United States Code, or imprisoned not more
than three years, or both.
 (b) EXCEPTION- The provisions of subsection (a) do not apply if the price
 increase is justified by the actual cost of such crude oil or product to
 the person who increased the price.
 (c) DEFINITIONS- For the purposes of this Act--
 (1) the term `refined petroleum product' means gasoline, kerosene,
 distillates (including number 2 fuel oil), LPG, refined lubricating oils,
 or diesel fuel; and
 (2) the term `LPG' means propane and butane, but not ethane.
SEC. 2. NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) WAR; OTHER HOSTILITIES- As soon as possible after the occurrence of
 an event described in subsection (a)(1) or (2) of section 1, the President
 shall publish notification of such in the Federal Register.
 (2) DISCHARGE OF OIL- As soon as possible after receiving notification
 of a discharge of oil pursuant to subsection (a)(3) of section 1, the
 Federal agency involved shall publish notification of such event in the
 Federal Register.
 (b) TEXT- The notification required by subsection (a) shall include--
 (1) a statement that such event has occurred;
 (2) notice that the provisions of this Act are in effect; and
 (3) the complete text of section 1 of this Act.