HR 5890 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5890
To impose strict controls on the importation, transfer, transportation,
manufacture, possession, and ownership of handguns.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
August 12, 1992
Mr. SOLARZ introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on the Judiciary
A BILL
To impose strict controls on the importation, transfer, transportation,
manufacture, possession, and ownership of handguns.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Handgun Control Act of 1992'.
SEC. 2. CONTROLS ON HANDGUNS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting
 after chapter 44 the following:
`CHAPTER 44A--HANDGUNS
`Sec.
`941. Prohibitions.
`942. Licensing.
`943. Recordkeeping and other requirements.
`944. Penalties.
`945. Regulations.
`946. Relationship to State and local law.
`947. Definitions.
`Sec. 941. Prohibitions
 `(a) ACTIVITIES OF NON-CHAPTER 44 LICENSEES-
 `(1) PROHIBITION- It shall be unlawful for a person who is not a chapter
 44 licensee to--
 `(A) import, transfer, transport, or manufacture a handgun; or
 `(B) own or possess a handgun after the 180-day period that begins with
 the date of the enactment of this chapter.
 `(2) EXCEPTIONS- Paragraph (1) shall not apply to--
 `(A) the importation or manufacture of a handgun for, or the transfer
 or transportation of a handgun (other than for purposes of surrendering
 the handgun) to, the United States or any department or agency thereof,
 or any State or any department, agency, or political subdivision thereof,
 or the possession of a handgun in the course of such activity;
 `(B) the conduct of the United States or any department or agency thereof,
 or of any State or any department, agency, or political subdivision thereof;
 `(C) the possession or ownership of a handgun by an entity licensed under
 this chapter;
 `(D) the possession of a handgun on the premises of a licensed pistol club
 by a person authorized by the club to possess the handgun;
 `(E) the possession or transportation of a handgun by an employee of a
 licensed guard service while lawfully engaged in providing services within
 the scope of such employment;
 `(F) the possession, ownership, or transfer to a chapter 44 licensee of
 a handgun by an individual during the 180-day period beginning on the
 date the chief law enforcement officer of the place of residence of the
 individual has issued a written statement that the individual requires
 access to a handgun because of a threat to the life of the transferee or
 of any member of the household of the transferee;
 `(G) the possession or transportation of a handgun, which is in a locked
 container and is not loaded, by any person while transporting the handgun
 for the purpose of surrendering the handgun to law enforcement authorities,
 or the surrender of the handgun to such authorities; or
 `(H) a handgun which--
 `(i) was manufactured before 1890; or
 `(ii) the Secretary determines is--
 `(I) unserviceable;
 `(II) not restorable to firing condition; and
 `(III) intended for use as a curio, museum piece, or collector's item.
 `(b) HANDGUN TRANSFERS BY CHAPTER 44 LICENSEES-
 `(1) PROHIBITION- It shall be unlawful for a chapter 44 licensee to transfer
 a handgun to a person who is not such a licensee, unless--
 `(A) the person is licensed under this chapter;
 `(B) at the time of the transfer, the person presents to the chapter 44
 licensee the license of the person issued under this chapter; and
 `(C) the transfer occurs on the premises covered by the license issued
 under this chapter.
 `(2) EXCEPTIONS- Paragraph (1) shall not apply to--
 `(A) the importation of a handgun for, or the transfer or transportation
 of a handgun (other than for purposes of surrendering the handgun) to,
 the United States or any department or agency thereof, or any State or any
 department, agency, or political subdivision thereof, or the possession
 of a handgun in the course of such activity;
 `(B) the transfer of a handgun to a transferee who has presented to the
 transferor a written statement, issued by the chief law enforcement officer
 of the place of residence of the transferee during the 10-day period ending
 on the date of the most recent proposal of the transfer by the transferee,
 which states that the transferee requires access to a handgun because of
 a threat to the life of the transferee or of any member of the household
 of the transferee;
 `(C) the surrender to law enforcement authorities of a handgun which is
 in a locked container and is not loaded; or
 `(D) a handgun which meets the requirements of subsection (a)(2)(G).
`Sec. 942. Licensing
 `(a) APPLICATION- A pistol club or guard service which desires to obtain
 a license under this chapter shall file an application for such a license
 with the Secretary.
 `(b) REQUIREMENTS FOR DISAPPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS-
 `(1) APPLICATIONS OF PISTOL CLUB- The Secretary shall approve an application
 by a pistol club for a license under this chapter, unless--
 `(A) the club has been convicted of a crime under Federal law or under
 the law of the State or any political subdivision thereof in which the
 club is located;
 `(B) a director, officer, employee, or member of the club is prohibited
 by subsection (g) or (h) of section 922 from receiving a firearm which
 has been shipped or transported in interstate or foreign commerce;
 `(C) a director, officer, employee, or a member of the club has knowingly
 violated chapter 44, this chapter, any regulation prescribed under chapter
 44 or this chapter, or any firearms law of the State or any political
 subdivision thereof in which the club is located;
 `(D) the club does not have procedures and safeguards sufficient to ensure
 that the handguns on the premises of the club are--
 `(i) used safely, and only by directors, officers, employees, and members
 of the club; and
 `(ii) stored securely when not used for lawful sporting or recreational
 purposes; or
 `(E) the club permits a person who is not a director, officer, employee,
 or a member of the club, a chapter 44 licensee, or a licensee under this
 chapter, to enter upon the premises of the club.
 `(2) APPLICATIONS OF GUARD SERVICES- The Secretary shall approve an
 application by a guard service for a license under this chapter, unless--
 `(A) the service has been convicted of a crime under Federal law or under
 the law of the State or any political subdivision thereof in which the
 service is located;
 `(B) a director, officer, or employee of the service is prohibited by
 subsection (g) or (h) of section 922 from receiving a firearm which has
 been shipped or transported in interstate or foreign commerce;
 `(C) a director, officer, or employee of the service has knowingly violated
 chapter 44, this chapter, any regulation prescribed under chapter 44 or
 this chapter, or any firearms law of the State or any political subdivision
 thereof in which the club is located;
 `(D) the service does not have procedures and safeguards sufficient to
 ensure that the handguns possessed or owned by the service are--
 `(i) used safely, and only by directors, officers, and employees of the
 service, as authorized by the service;
 `(ii) stored securely when not used for lawful guard services; and
 `(iii) removable from the premises only by persons who may lawfully do so.
 `(c) DEADLINE FOR ACTION ON APPLICATIONS- Not later than the end of
 the 60-day period that begins with the date the Secretary receives an
 application for a license under this chapter, the Secretary shall approve
 or deny the application.
 `(d) ISSUANCE OF LICENSES- The Secretary shall issue a license to an
 applicant therefor upon approval of the application and payment by the
 applicant of a fee prescribed by the Secretary of an amount sufficient to
 cover administrative expenses.
 `(e) AUTHORITY TO REVOKE LICENSES- The Secretary may, after notice and
 opportunity for hearing, revoke any license issued under this chapter if
 the holder of the license has violated chapter 44, this chapter, or any
 regulation prescribed under chapter 44 or this chapter.
 `(f) NOTICE OF DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE- The Secretary shall provide
 to any person whose application is denied or whose license is revoked
 under this chapter a written notice stating specifically the grounds for
 the denial or revocation. In the case of a license revocation, the notice
 shall be provided to the holder of the license before the effective date
 of the revocation.
 `(g) REVIEW OF ACTION BY SECRETARY-
 `(1) EXCLUSIVENESS OF REMEDIES- The Secretary's action under this section
 may be reviewed only as provided in this subsection.
 `(2) ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- If the Secretary denies an application for a license under
 this chapter, or revokes a license issued under this chapter, the Secretary
 shall, upon request by the aggrieved party, promptly hold a hearing to review
 the denial or revocation at a location convenient to the aggrieved party.
 `(B) STAY OF REVOCATION GRANTED UPON REQUEST- In the case of a license
 revocation, the Secretary shall, upon the request of the holder of the
 license, stay the effective date of the revocation.
 `(C) NOTICE OF DETERMINATION NOT TO REVERSE ACTION- If, after a hearing
 under subparagraph (A), the Secretary determines not to reverse the action
 to deny the application or revoke the license, the Secretary shall provide
 notice of the determination to the aggrieved party.
 `(3) JUDICIAL REVIEW-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Within 60 days after the receipt of a notice provided under
 paragraph (2)(C), the aggrieved party may file a petition with the United
 States district court for the district in which the party resides or has a
 principal place of business for judicial review of the denial or revocation.
 `(B) RELEVANT EVIDENCE- In a proceeding conducted under this paragraph, the
 court may consider any evidence submitted by the parties to the proceeding.
 `(C) REMEDY- If the court decides that the Secretary wrongly denied the
 application or revoked the license, the court shall order the Secretary
 to take such action as may be necessary to comply with the judgment of
 the court.
`Sec. 943. Recordkeeping and other requirements
 `(a) RECORDKEEPING-
 `(1) REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO CHAPTER 44 LICENSEES- A chapter 44 licensee
 shall--
 `(A) maintain records of the transfer of any handgun by the licensee; and
 `(B) permit the Secretary to enter the premises of the licensee at reasonable
 times for the purpose of inspecting the records.
 `(2) REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO LICENSED PISTOL CLUBS- A licensed pistol
 club shall--
 `(A) maintain records of the ownership and possession of any handgun by
 the club; and
 `(B) permit the Secretary to enter the premises of the club at reasonable
 times for the purpose of inspecting the records or any handgun on the
 premises.
 `(3) REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO LICENSED GUARD SERVICES- A licensed guard
 service shall--
 `(A) maintain records of the ownership, possession, and transportation of
 handguns by the service; and
 `(B) permit the Secretary to enter the premises of the service at reasonable
 times for the purpose of inspecting the records.
 `(b) AVAILABILITY OF LICENSES-
 `(1) POSTING ON LICENSED PREMISES- A person issued a license under this
 chapter shall post the license and keep the license available for inspection
 on the premises covered by the license.
 `(2) CARRYING WHILE POSSESSING HANDGUN- While in possession of a handgun--
 `(A) a chapter 44 licensee issued a license under this chapter shall carry
 a copy of the license; and
 `(B) a director, officer, or employee of a licensed guard service shall
 carry--
 `(i) a copy of the license; and
 `(ii) a document attesting to such relationship with the service.
 `(c) REPORT OF LOSS OR THEFT OF HANDGUN- A person who loses a handgun,
 or from whom a handgun is stolen, shall report the loss or theft to the
 Secretary by the end of the business day in which the loss or theft is
 discovered. The report shall include such information as the Secretary
 by regulation shall prescribe, including the time and place of the theft
 or loss.
`Sec. 944. Penalties
 `(a) HANDGUN VIOLATIONS- Whoever knowingly violates section 941 shall be
 fined not more than $5,000, imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both.
 `(b) FALSE STATEMENTS- Whoever knowingly makes any false statement or
 representation with respect to the information required by this chapter
 to be kept in the records of a person licensed under this chapter, or in
 applying for a license under this chapter, shall be fined not more than
 $5,000, imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both.
 `(c) SEIZURES AND FORFEITURES- Any handgun involved in a violation of Federal
 law punishable by imprisonment shall be subject to seizure and forfeiture,
 and section 5872 of the National Firearms Act shall, so far as applicable,
 extend to seizures and forfeitures under this subsection.
`Sec. 945. Regulations
 `The Secretary may prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry
 out this chapter.
`Sec. 946. Relationship to State and local law
 `This chapter shall not be construed to affect any requirement relating
 to handguns imposed by or under the law of any State or any political
 subdivision thereof, to the extent that the requirement is more stringent
 than a requirement imposed by this chapter.
`Sec. 947. Definitions
 `As used in this chapter:
 `(1) CHAPTER 44 LICENSEE- The term `chapter 44 licensee' means an importer,
 a manufacturer, or a dealer, licensed under chapter 44.
 `(2) HANDGUN- The term `handgun' means--
 `(A) any weapon--
 `(i) designed, redesigned, made, or remade to be fired while held in 1 hand;
 `(ii) having a barrel less than 10 inches in length; and
 `(iii) designed, redesigned, made, or remade to use the energy of an
 explosive to expel a projectile or projectiles through a smooth or rifled
 bore; and
 `(B) any combination of parts from which a weapon described in subparagraph
 (A) may be readily assembled.
 `(3) PISTOL CLUB- The term `pistol club' means an entity organized and
 operated for bona fide target or sport shooting, and for other lawful
 recreational purposes.
 `(4) LICENSED PISTOL CLUB- The term `licensed pistol club' means a pistol
 club licensed under this chapter.
 `(5) GUARD SERVICE- The term `guard service' means an entity which is
 engaged in the business of providing armed guards for hire.
 `(6) LICENSED GUARD SERVICE- The term `licensed guard service' means a
 guard service licensed under this chapter.
 `(7) CHIEF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER- The term `chief law enforcement officer'
 means the chief of police, the sheriff, or an equivalent officer, or the
 designee of any such individual.
 `(8) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of the Treasury.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 923 of such title is amended by adding
 at the end the following:
 `(l) Notwithstanding subsection (a), a person may not engage in the business
 of manufacturing firearms or ammunition for purposes of sale or distribution
 if the person is not a licensed dealer.'.
SEC. 3. COMPENSATION FOR LAWFULLY ACQUIRED HANDGUNS SURRENDERED TO LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of the Treasury shall, through Federal,
 State, and local law enforcement agencies, pay to any qualified person
 who surrenders a handgun (as defined in section 947(2) of title 18, United
 States Code) to a law enforcement agency an amount equal to the applicable
 fair market value of the handgun.
 (b) DEFINITIONS- As used in subsection (a):
 (1) QUALIFIED PERSON- The term `qualified person' means--
 (A) a person who--
 (i) surrenders a handgun during the 180-day period that begins with the
 date of the enactment of this Act; and
 (ii) proves that the person lawfully acquired the handgun before such date
 of enactment; and
 (B) an individual who--
 (i) surrenders a handgun during the 180-day period beginning on the date the
 chief law enforcement officer of the place of residence of the individual
 has issued a written statement that the individual requires access to a
 handgun because of a threat to the life of the transferee or of any member
 of the household of the transferee; and
 (ii) proves that the individual lawfully acquired the handgun.
 (2) HANDGUN- The term `handgun' has the meaning given such term by section
 947(2) of title 18, United States Code.
 (3) CHIEF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER- The term `chief law enforcement officer'
 has the meaning given such term by section 947(7) of title 18, United
 States Code.
 (4) APPLICABLE FAIR MARKET VALUE- The term `applicable fair market value'
 means--
 (A) in the case of a person who surrenders a handgun in the circumstances
 described in paragraph (1)(A), the fair market value as of the date of
 the enactment of this Act; and
 (B) in the case of an individual who surrenders a handgun in the
 circumstances described in paragraph (1)(B), the fair market value as of
 the surrender date.
 (c) BUDGET ACT COMPLIANCE- The authority provided by subsection (a) shall
 be effective only to such extent and in such amounts as are provided in
 advance in appropriations Acts.
SEC. 4. NO EFFECT ON OTHER LAWS.
 Neither this Act nor the amendment made by this Act shall be construed as
 modifying or affecting any provision of--
 (1) the National Firearms Act;
 (2) section 38 of the Arms Export Control Act; or
 (3) section 1715 of title 18, United States Code.