S 3248 IS
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 3248
To amend the Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief Act of 1940 to improve and
clarify the protections provided by such Act and to make technical amendments;
to amend title 38, United States Code, to clarify veterans' reemployment
rights and to improve veterans' rights to reinstatement of health insurance,
and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
October 25 (legislative day, OCTOBER 2), 1990
Mr. CRANSTON (for himself, Mr. MURKOWSKI, Mr. DECONCINI, Mr. MITCHELL,
Mr. GRAHAM, Mr. AKAKA, Mr. THURMOND, Mr. SPECTER and Mr. JEFFORDS) introduced
the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on
Veterans' Affairs
A BILL
To amend the Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief Act of 1940 to improve and
clarify the protections provided by such Act and to make technical amendments;
to amend title 38, United States Code, to clarify veterans' reemployment
rights and to improve veterans' rights to reinstatement of health insurance,
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief Act
 Amendments of 1990'.
SEC. 2. EVICTION AND DISTRESS DURING MILITARY SERVICE.
 (a) INCREASED MAXIMUM RENTAL AMOUNT FOR APPLICABILITY OF STAY- Section 300
 of the Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief Act of 1940 (50 U.S.C. App. 530)
 is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsections (1), (2), (3), and (4) as subsections (a),
 (b), (c), and (d), respectively;
 (2) in subsection (c), as so redesignated, by striking out `subsection
 (1)' and inserting in lieu thereof `subsection (a)'; and
 (3) in subsection (a), as so redesignated, by striking out `$150' and
 inserting in lieu thereof `$1,200'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by this section shall apply to
 actions for eviction or distress commenced on or after August 1, 1990.
SEC. 3. EXTENSION OF POWER OF ATTORNEY PROTECTION.
 Subsection (c) of section 701 of the Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief
 Act of 1940 (50 U.S.C. App. 591) is amended to read as follows:
 `(c) This section applies to the following powers of attorney executed by
 persons in military service:
 `(1) A power of attorney that is executed during the Vietnam Era (as
 defined in section 101(29) of title 38, United States Code).
 `(2) A power of attorney that expires by its terms after August 2, 1990.'.
SEC. 4. PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY PROTECTION FOR CERTAIN PERSONS ORDERED TO
ACTIVE DUTY IN THE ARMED FORCES.
 Article VII of the Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief Act (50
 U.S.C. App. 590 et seq.), is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `SEC. 702. (a) This section applies to a person who--
 `(1) after August 1, 1990, is ordered to active duty (other than for
 training) in the Armed Forces pursuant to section 672 (a) or (g), 673,
 673b, 674, 675, or 688 of title 10, United States Code, or who is ordered
 to active duty under section 672(d) of such title during a period when
 members are on active duty pursuant to any of the preceding sections; and
 `(2) immediately before receiving the order to active duty--
 `(A) was engaged in the furnishing of--
 `(i) health-care services; or
 `(ii) other services determined by the Secretary of Defense to be
 professional services; and
 `(B) had in effect a professional liability insurance policy that does
 not continue to cover claims filed with respect to such person during the
 period of the person's active duty unless the premiums are paid for such
 coverage for such period.
 `(b)(1) Coverage of a person referred to in subsection (a) by a professional
 liability insurance policy shall be suspended in accordance with this
 subsection upon receipt of the written request of such person by the
 insurance carrier.
 `(2) A professional liability insurance carrier--
 `(A) may not require that premiums be paid by or on behalf of a person
 for any professional liability insurance coverage suspended pursuant to
 paragraph (1); and
 `(B) shall refund any amount paid for coverage for the period of such
 suspension or, upon the election of such person, apply such amount for the
 payment of any premium becoming due upon the reinstatement of such coverage.
 `(3) A professional liability insurance carrier shall have no liability
 with respect to any claim that is based on professional conduct (including
 any failure to take any action in a professional capacity) of a person
 that occurs during a period of suspension of such person's professional
 liability insurance under this subsection.
 `(c)(1) Professional liability insurance coverage suspended in the case of
 any person pursuant to subsection (b) shall be reinstated by the insurance
 carrier on the date on which such person transmits to the insurance carrier
 a written request for reinstatement.
 `(2) The request of a person for reinstatement shall be effective only if
 the person transmits the request to the insurance carrier within 30 days
 after the date on which the person is released from active duty.
 `(3) The minimum period for which professional liability insurance coverage
 shall be reinstated for a person under this subsection may not be less
 than the balance of the period for which coverage would have continued
 under the insurance policy if the coverage had not been suspended.
 `(d) An insurance carrier may not increase the amount of the premium
 charged for professional liability insurance coverage of any person for
 the minimum period of the reinstatement of such coverage required under
 subsection (c)(3) above the amount chargeable for such coverage for such
 period before the suspension, except to the extent of any general increase
 in the premium amounts charged by that carrier for the same professional
 liability coverage for persons similarly covered by such insurance during
 the period of the suspension.
 `(e) This section does not--
 `(1) require a suspension of professional liability insurance coverage for
 any person who is not a person referred to in subsection (a) and who is
 covered by the same professional liability insurance as a person referred
 to in such subsection; or
 `(2) relieve any person of the obligation to pay premiums for the coverage
 not required to be suspended.
 `(f)(1) A civil or administrative action for damages on the basis of
 the alleged professional negligence or other professional liability of a
 person whose professional liability insurance coverage has been suspended
 under subsection (b) shall be stayed until the end of the period of the
 suspension if--
 `(A) the action was commenced during such period;
 `(B) the action is based on an act or omission that occurred before the
 date on which the suspension became effective; and
 `(C) the suspended professional liability insurance would, except for the
 suspension, on its face cover the alleged professional negligence or other
 professional liability of such person.
 `(2) Whenever a civil or administrative action for damages is stayed under
 paragraph (1) in the case of any person, such action shall be deemed to
 have been filed on the date on which the professional liability insurance
 coverage of such person is reinstated under subsection (c).
 `(g) In the case of a civil or administrative action for which a stay
 could have been granted under subsection (f) by reason of the suspension
 of professional liability insurance coverage of the defendant under this
 section, the period of the suspension of the coverage shall be excluded from
 the computation of any statutory period of limitation on the commencement
 of such action.
 `(h) If a person whose professional liability insurance coverage is
 suspended under subsection (b) dies during the period of the suspension--
 `(1) the requirement for the grant or continuance of a stay in any civil
 or administrative action against such person under subsection (f)(1)
 shall terminate on the date of the death of such person; and
 `(2) the carrier of the professional liability insurance so suspended shall
 be liable for any claim for damages for professional negligence or other
 professional liability of the deceased person in the same manner and to
 the same extent as such carrier would be liable if the person had died
 while covered by such insurance but before the claim was filed.
 `(i) In this section:
 `(1) The term `Armed Forces' has the meaning given the term `armed forces'
 in section 101(4) of title 10, United States Code.
 `(2) The term `active duty' has the meaning given that term in section
 101(22) of title 10, United States Code.
 `(3) The term `profession' includes occupation.
 `(4) The term `professional' includes occupational.'.
SEC. 5. HEALTH INSURANCE REINSTATEMENT UPON REEMPLOYMENT.
 (a) AMENDMENT TO TITLE 38- Paragraph (1) of section 2021(b) of title 38,
 United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(A)' after `(b)(1)'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 `(B) In the case of employer-offered health insurance, no exclusion or
 waiting period may be imposed in connection with coverage of a health or
 physical condition of a person entitled to participate in such insurance
 under subparagraph (A) of this paragraph, or a health or physical condition
 of any individual who is covered by such insurance by reason of the coverage
 of such person, if--
 `(i) the condition arose before or during such person's period of training
 or service;
 `(ii) no exclusion or waiting period would have been imposed for the
 condition during a period of coverage resulting from participation by such
 person in the insurance; and
 `(iii) the condition of such person has not been determined by the Secretary
 to be service-connected.'.
 (b) AMENDMENT TO SOLDIERS' AND SAILORS' CIVIL RELIEF ACT OF 1940- Article VII
 of the Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief Act of 1940 (50 U.S.C. App. 590
 et seq.), as amended by section 4, is further amended by adding at the
 end the following:
 `SEC. 703. (a) A person who, by reason of military service referred to in
 section 702(a)(1) of this Act, is entitled to the rights and benefits of
 this Act shall also be entitled upon release from such military duty to
 reinstatement of any health insurance which (1) was in effect on the day
 before such service commenced, and (2) was terminated effective on a date
 during the period of such service.
 `(b) No exclusion or waiting period may be imposed in connection with
 reinstatement of health insurance coverage of a health or physical condition
 of a person under subsection (a) of this section, or a health or physical
 condition of any individual who is covered by such insurance by reason of
 the coverage of such person, if--
 `(1) the condition arose before or during such person's period of training
 or service;
 `(2) no exclusion or waiting period would have been imposed for the condition
 during a period of coverage resulting from participation by such person
 in the insurance; and
 `(3) the condition of such person has not been determined by the Secretary
 of Veterans Affairs to be a disability incurred or aggravated in the line
 of duty (within the meaning of section 105 of title 38, United States Code).
 `(c) Subsection (a) does not apply in the case of employer-offered insurance
 benefits in which a person referred to in such subsection is entitled to
 participate pursuant to the provisions of chapter 43 of title 38, United
 States Code.'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall take effect
 as of August 1, 1990.
SEC. 6. CLARIFICATION OF TITLE 38 REEMPLOYMENT RIGHTS COVERAGE FOR RESERVISTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 2024(g) of title 38, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by striking out `active duty for not more than 90 days' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `active duty (other than for training)'; and
 (2) by inserting before the period at the end the following: `, including
 any period of extension of active duty under section 673b of title 10'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to any
 member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States who
 is ordered to active duty (other than for training) under section 673b of
 title 10, United States Code, on or after August 1, 1990.
SEC. 7. TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS.
 (a) SOLDIERS' AND SAILORS' CIVIL RELIEF ACT- The Soldiers' and Sailors'
 Civil Relief Act of 1940 is further amended as follows:
 (1) Section 101 (50 U.S.C. App. 511) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by inserting `the Air Force,' after `the Marine
 Corps,'; and
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking out `shall include' and all that follows
 through `discharge' and inserting in lieu thereof `means, in the case of any
 person, the period beginning on the date on which the person enters active
 service and ending on the date of the person's release from active service'.
 (2) Section 102 (50 U.S.C. App. 512) is amended by striking out `, including
 the Philippine Islands while under the sovereignty of the United States,'.
 (3) Section 103(4) (50 U.S.C. App. 513(4)) is amended by striking out
 `after the date of the enactment of the Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief
 Act Amendments of 1942'.
 (4) Section 105 (50 U.S.C. App. 515) is amended--
 (A) by striking out `The Secretary of War and the Secretary of the Navy' and
 all that follows through `to insure' in the first sentence and inserting in
 lieu thereof `The Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Transportation,
 with respect to the Coast Guard when it is not operating as a service in
 the Navy, shall ensure'; and
 (B) by striking out `the Secretary of War and the Secretary of the Navy'
 in the second sentence and inserting in lieu thereof `the Secretary of
 Defense and the Secretary of Transportation'.
 (5) Section 106 (50 U.S.C. App. 516) is amended--
 (A) by striking out `Selective Training and Service Act of 1940, as amended,'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `Military Selective Service Act';
 (B) by striking out `the Enlisted Reserve Corps' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `a reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States'; and
 (C) by striking out `he reports for such service' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `such member reports for military service or the date on which
 the order is revoked, whichever is earlier'.
 (6) Section 205 (50 U.S.C. App. 525) is amended by striking out `the date
 of enactment of the Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief Act Amendments of
 1942' and inserting in lieu thereof `October 6, 1942'.
 (7) Section 206 (50 U.S.C. App. 526) is amended--
 (A) by striking out `his entry' and inserting in lieu thereof `the entry
 of such person'; and
 (B) by striking out `the date of enactment of the Soldiers' and Sailors'
 Civil Relief Act Amendments of 1942' and inserting in lieu thereof `October
 6, 1942'.
 (8) Subsection (d) of section 300 (50 U.S.C. App. 530), as redesignated by
 section 2(a)(1), is amended by striking out `Secretary of War,' and all
 that follows through `as the case may be' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `Secretary of Defense or Secretary of Transportation, with respect to the
 Coast Guard when it is not operating as a service in the Navy,'.
 (9) Section 302(3) (50 U.S.C. App. 532(3)) is amended by striking out
 `the date of enactment of the Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief Act
 Amendments of 1942' and inserting in lieu thereof `October 6, 1942,'.
 (10) Section 400(a) (50 U.S.C. App. 540(a)) is amended by striking out
 `the date of enactment of the Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief Act
 Amendments of 1942' and inserting in lieu thereof `October 6, 1942,'.
 (11) Section 401 (50 U.S.C. App. 541) is amended--
 (A) by striking out `Administrator of Veterans' Affairs' and inserting in
 lieu thereof `Secretary of Veterans Affairs'; and
 (B) by striking out `Veterans' Administration' each place it appears and
 inserting in lieu thereof `Secretary'.
 (12) Section 402 (50 U.S.C. App. 542) is amended--
 (A) in the first sentence, by striking out `Veterans' Administration'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `Secretary of Veterans Affairs'; and
 (B) in the second sentence, by striking out `Veterans Administration'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `Secretary'.
 (13) Section 403 (50 U.S.C. App. 543) is amended--
 (A) in the first sentence, by striking out `Administrator of Veterans'
 Affairs' and inserting in lieu thereof `Secretary of Veterans Affairs'; and
 (B) in the second sentence, by striking out `Administrator of Veterans'
 Affairs' and inserting in lieu thereof `Secretary'.
 (14) Section 404 (50 U.S.C. App. 544) is amended by striking out `Veterans'
 Administration' each place it appears and inserting in lieu thereof
 `Secretary of Veterans Affairs'.
 (15) Section 405 (50 U.S.C. App. 545) is amended by striking out
 `Administrator of Veterans' Affairs' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `Secretary of Veterans Affairs'.
 (16) Section 407 (50 U.S.C. App. 547) is amended--
 (A) in the first sentence, by striking out `Administrator of Veterans'
 Affairs' and inserting in lieu thereof `Secretary of Veterans Affairs'; and
 (B) in the second sentence by striking out `Administrator of Veterans'
 Affairs' and inserting in lieu thereof `Secretary'.
 (17) Section 408 (50 U.S.C. App. 548) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by striking out `prior to the enactment of the Soldiers' and Sailors'
 Civil Relief Act amendments of 1942' and inserting in lieu thereof `before
 October 6, 1942,'; and
 (ii) by striking out `prior to the date of enactment of the Soldiers'
 and Sailors' Civil Relief Act amendments of 1942' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `before October 6, 1942,'; and
 (B) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) by striking out `Administrator of Veterans' Affairs' and inserting in
 lieu thereof `Secretary of Veterans Affairs'; and
 (ii) by striking out `the date of enactment of the Soldiers' and Sailors'
 Civil Relief Act amendments of 1942' and inserting in lieu thereof `October
 6, 1942'.
 (18) Section 504(3) (50 U.S.C. App. 564(3)) is amended by striking out
 `within six months after the effective date of this Act, or'.
 (19) Section 506(2) (50 U.S.C. App. 566(2)) is amended--
 (A) by striking out `within six months after the effective date of this Act,
 or'; and
 (B) by striking out `General Land Office' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `Bureau of Land Management'.
 (20) Section 510(2) (50 U.S.C. App. 570(2)) is amended by striking out
 `prior to the effective date of this Act' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `before October 17, 1940'.
 (21) Section 514 (50 U.S.C. App. 574) is amended--
 (A) by striking out `orders: Provided, That nothing' and inserting
 `orders. Nothing'; and
 (B) by striking out `the use thereof:' and all that follows through
 `has been paid' and insert in lieu thereof `the use thereof, but shall
 not include a license, fee, or excise required by the State or territory,
 possession, or District of Columbia of which the person is a resident or in
 which the person is domiciled if such license, fee, or excise has been paid'.
 (22) Section 600 (50 U.S.C. App. 580) is amended by striking out `the date of
 the approval of this Act' and inserting in lieu thereof `October 17, 1940,'.
 (23) Section 601 (50 U.S.C. App. 581) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking out `Chief of the Bureau of Navigation
 of the Navy Department' and inserting in lieu thereof `Chief of Naval
 Personnel'; and
 (B) in paragraph (3)--
 (i) by striking out `Department of War or the Navy' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `Department of Defense'; and
 (ii) by striking out `jurisdiction: Provided, That no' and inserting in
 lieu thereof `jurisdiction. No'.
 (24) Section 604 (50 U.S.C. App. 584) is amended--
 (A) by striking out `1945: Provided, That' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `1945, except that'; and
 (B) by striking out `thereafter: Provided further, That whenever' and
 inserting in lieu thereof `thereafter. Whenever'.
 (b) TITLE 38- (1) Section 2024(a) of title 38, United States Code, is
 amended by striking out `provided for in this section' and inserting in
 lieu thereof `provided for in this chapter'.
 (2) The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall take effect as of December
 3, 1974.