S 3214 IS
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 3214
To repeal the Federal Employers' Liability Act, to provide for coverage of
railroad employees' injury claims under individual State workers' compensation
programs, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
October 17 (legislative day, OCTOBER 2), 1990
Mr. KASTEN introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources
A BILL
To repeal the Federal Employers' Liability Act, to provide for coverage of
railroad employees' injury claims under individual State workers' compensation
programs, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Railroad Workers' Injury Compensation Act
 of 1990'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) the Federal Employers' Liability Act, enacted in 1908, preceded
 the enactment of State workers' compensation statutes and represents an
 important early effort to provide compensation to workers injured or killed
 in the course of their employment;
 (2) the Federal Employers' Liability Act establishes a fault-based system
 in which employee injury compensation is based on the employee's ability to
 establish negligence on the part of the employer, and in which compensation
 may be reduced or eliminated to the extent the employee is contributorily
 negligent;
 (3) following enactment of the Federal Employers' Liability Act, all of
 the individual States adopted no-fault workers' compensation statutes which
 provide compensation for workers injured or killed in the course of their
 employment without regard to considerations of fault or negligence on the
 part of either the employer or the employee, and which are applicable to
 virtually all other industries in the United States;
 (4) in recognition of the remedy provided to injured railroad employees by
 the Federal Employers' Liability Act, certain State workers' compensation
 laws specifically exclude railroad workers from coverage under the State
 programs;
 (5) the determination of fault as a component of injury compensation produces
 a number of undesirable consequences, including the failure to ensure
 that all injured workers receive compensation, a disincentive to railroad
 safety and sound employer-employee relations, and a lengthy process with
 high transaction and social costs that increase industry costs, burden the
 court system, and decrease the compensation received by the injured worker;
 (6) State workers' compensation programs provide for the receipt of
 compensation (in accordance with benefit schedules established by each State
 to meet its particular needs) by all workers who are injured on the job
 without requiring workers to demonstrate fault or the cause of the accident,
 and with an administrative process that is generally less complicated and
 expensive than litigation through State or Federal court systems;
 (7) subjecting the railroad industry to the fault-based Federal Employers'
 Liability Act puts the industry at a disadvantage in competing with other
 modes of transportation, which are covered by State workers' compensation
 programs, and this inequality of treatment places a burden on interstate
 commerce; and
 (8) the determination of fault as a component of employee injury compensation
 does not represent sound public policy and should be eliminated.
SEC. 3. PURPOSE.
 It is the purpose of this Act to place all railroad employees under the
 workers' compensation laws of the several States, in order to assure that
 railroad employees will be compensated, without a determination of fault
 or negligence, for injuries or death arising out of or in the course of
 their employment.
SEC. 4. REPEAL.
 The Act of April 27, 1908 (45 U.S.C. 51 et seq.), (popularly referred to
 as the `Federal Employers' Liability Act') is repealed.
SEC. 5. APPLICABILITY OF STATE WORKERS' COMPENSATION STATUTES.
 Notwithstanding any provision of State law that excludes railroad employees
 from coverage under a State workers' compensation program or that authorizes
 a railroad employee to bring a tort claim against a railroad, no State
 shall, after the effective date of this Act, prohibit railroad employees from
 access to that State's workers' compensation program and any claim against a
 railroad by an employee of the railroad for injury, death, or occupational
 disease arising out of or in the course of the employee's employment shall
 be treated the same as the claim of a non-railroad employee against his
 or her employer brought under the State's workers' compensation laws.
SEC. 6. AMTRAK TAX EXEMPTION.
 Notwithstanding section 306(n) of the Rail Passenger Service Act (45
 U.S.C. 546) or any other provision of law, the National Railroad Passenger
 Corporation shall be subject to the workers' compensation taxes, fees,
 and assessments of a State in the same manner and to the same extent as
 any other interstate entity doing business within the State and governed
 by the workers' compensation laws of that State.
SEC. 7. CONFORMING AMENDMENT.
 Section 20(a) of the Act of March 4, 1915 (38 Stat. 185), as amended
 (46 U.S.C. 688), is further amended by adding after the words `railroad
 employees' in both instances where they appear the following: `in effect
 prior to the enactment of the Railroad Workers' Injury Compensation Act
 of 1990'.
SEC. 8. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 The provisions of this Act shall become effective nine months after
 the date of enactment. All claims for work-related injuries, including
 occupational disease or death, that accrue prior to such effective date
 shall continue to be processed under the provisions of the Act of April
 27, 1908 (45 U.S.C. 51 et seq.), (popularly referred to as the `Federal
 Employers' Liability Act'). All claims for work-related injuries, including
 occupational disease or death, that accrue on or after such effective
 date shall be processed under the applicable State workers' compensation
 programs. Notwithstanding any other provision contained herein, a claim for
 injury, including occupational disease or death, that is found not covered
 by applicable State workers' compensation law because the injury resulted
 solely from an employment event occurring prior to the effective date of
 this Act may be processed under the provisions of the Act of April 27,
 1908: Provided further, That in such event the time for filing an action
 provided in section 6 of the Act of April 27, 1908 (45 U.S.C. 56), shall
 begin to run only from the date an adverse final decision denying coverage
 under the State workers' compensation law is received.