HR 1250 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1250
To provide that the promotion and certain advertising of tobacco products to
children and the sale from vending machines of tobacco products to children
violate the Federal Trade Commission Act, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
March 2, 1989
Mr. THOMAS A. LUKEN (for himself, Mr. WHITTAKER, and Mr. BATES) introduced
the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To provide that the promotion and certain advertising of tobacco products to
children and the sale from vending machines of tobacco products to children
violate the Federal Trade Commission Act, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Protect our Children from Cigarettes Act
 of 1989'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) tobacco use is the largest preventable cause of illness and premature
 death in the United States and is associated with the unnecessary deaths
 of over 390,000 Americans annually,
 (2) cigarette smoking in the United States is a major cause of cancer of
 the lung, larynx, oral cavity, and esophagus and is a contributory factor
 in cancer of the urinary bladder, kidney, and pancreas,
 (3) cigarette smoking is responsible for 85 percent to 90 percent of the
 approximately 120,000 annual lung cancer deaths plus scores of thousands
 of other cancer related deaths,
 (4) cigarette smoking is a major cause of chronic bronchitis and emphysema
 in the United States,
 (5) cardiovascular disease accounts for nearly one-half of the deaths
 in the United States and it is estimated that one-third of the deaths
 attributed to cardiovascular disease are associated with tobacco use,
 (6) pregnant women who smoke have an elevated risk of miscarriage,
 stillbirths, premature births, and birth weight deficiencies,
 (7) cigarette smoking is the major cause of lung cancer in women, accounting
 for about 75 percent of 38,600 deaths per year,
 (8) the use of smokeless tobacco is a cause of oral and pharyngeal cancer,
 oral leukoplakia, gum disease, and tooth loss,
 (9) pipe and cigar smoking and use of smokeless tobacco are not safe
 alternatives to cigarette smoking,
 (10) quitting or never starting tobacco use will reduce an individual's
 risk of illness or premature death,
 (11) over one-half of all smokers born since 1950 began smoking before
 reaching the age of 18 and approximately 20 percent of high school seniors
 are daily smokers,
 (12) cigarette smoking and the use of smokeless tobacco are addictive,
 (13) in 1985 the United States health care system spent an estimated
 $22,000,000,000 to treat smoking related diseases, of which the Federal
 Government paid about $4,200,000,000, while lost productivity costs due
 to smoking related illness and premature death were $43,000,000,000,
 (14) in 1986 the tobacco industry spent more than $2,000,000,000 in
 advertising and promotion to attract new users, retain current users,
 increase current consumption, and generate favorable long-term attitudes
 toward smoking and tobacco use,
 (15) tobacco product advertising and promotion deceptively portrays the
 use of tobacco as socially acceptable and healthful,
 (16) much of the tobacco product advertising and promotion is seen or
 heard by children,
 (17) much of the tobacco product advertising and promotion is conveyed
 through images other than words,
 (18) the use by State and local governments of their traditional police
 power is an effective way to protect the health of their citizens from
 the dangers of tobacco products,
 (19) sales promotion of tobacco products undermines the credibility of
 government and private health education campaigns against smoking,
 (20) in 1988 a jury found that smoking was the cause of the death of a
 person who began smoking in 1941 and died in 1984 from lung cancer and
 awarded her husband $400,000 in damages,
 (21) the tort system is one effective mechanism for ensuring truthful
 advertising, promotion, and warnings,
 (22) in 1965 Congress approved legislation requiring warning labels for
 cigarette packages,
 (23) in 1970 Congress approved legislation prohibiting cigarette advertising
 on radio and television and strengthened the cigarette package warning label,
 (24) in 1973 Congress approved legislation to include little cigars in
 the radio and television broadcast advertising ban,
 (25) in 1982 Congress approved legislation to double the Federal excise
 tax on cigarettes and cigars,
 (26) in 1984 Congress approved legislation requiring that stronger warning
 statements appear on labels and in advertisements for cigarettes on a
 rotating basis,
 (27) in 1986 Congress approved legislation banning smokeless tobacco
 advertising from radio and television and requiring warning labels
 on smokeless tobacco product packages and in smokeless tobacco print
 advertisements,
 (28) in 1987 Congress approved legislation banning smoking on airplane
 flights of 2 hours or less, and
 (29) such actions, while important steps in addressing the problems caused
 by tobacco product advertising and promotion, have not altered the need
 for further control of tobacco product advertising and promotion that is
 seen or heard by children.
SEC. 3. BAN ON PROMOTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
 (a) SALES PROMOTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS-
 (1) No person may engage in the consumer sales promotion of any tobacco
 product in or affecting commerce if that consumer sales promotion is or
 may be seen or heard by any person under the age of 18.
 (2) Paragraph (1) does not apply to a consumer sales promotion of a tobacco
 product which--
 (A) advertises tobacco products in newspapers, magazines, and other
 publications and on signs or billboards not located in a sports stadium
 or other sports facility if--
 (i) such advertisement does not contain any human figure or facsimile
 thereof, any brand name logo or symbol, or any picture other than a picture
 of a single package of the tobacco product being advertised displayed
 against a neutral background,
 (ii) the print in the advertisement is black on a white background and
 the type size and the type face in the advertisement is the same as the
 type size and type face in the warning in the advertisement required by
 section 4 of the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act, and
 (iii) the product package displayed in the advertisement is no larger
 than the actual size of the product package and contains no human figure
 or facsimile thereof, no brand name logo or symbol, and no pictures, and
 (B) has text on the package of a tobacco product if--
 (i) the text contains and is limited to the brand name, the corporate name
 of the manufacturer or importer (if different), the ingredients, the levels
 of tar, nicotine, and carbon monoxide, and any other information required
 by Federal or State law, and
 (ii) the text is printed in black on a white background with the type size
 and type face being the same as the type size and type face used for the
 level of tar, nicotine, and carbon monoxide.
 (b) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section and section 6:
 (1) The term `tobacco product' means--
 (A) cigarettes and little cigars as defined in section 3 of the Federal
 Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. 1332),
 (B) cigars as defined in section 5702 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954,
 (C) pipe tobacco and loose rolling tobacco,
 (D) smokeless tobacco, including all finely cut, ground, powdered, or leaf
 tobacco that is intended to be placed in the oral or nasal cavity, and
 (E) any other form of tobacco intended for human consumption by inhalation
 or mastication.
 (2) The term `consumer sales promotion' means--
 (A) all radio and television commercials, newspaper and magazine
 advertisements, billboards, posters, signs, decals, matchbook advertising,
 advertising in movie theaters, and point-of-purchase display material
 (except price information) used for promoting the sale or consumption of
 tobacco products to consumers,
 (B) advertising promotion allowances,
 (C) premiums and samples,
 (D) sponsorships of athletic, artistic, or other events under the registered
 brand name of a tobacco product unless the brand name is the name of a
 corporation in existence on August 1, 1988,
 (E) marketing of nontobacco products or services bearing the registered
 brand name or logo of a tobacco product unless the brand name is the name
 of a corporation in existence on August 1, 1988,
 (F) displaying the registered brand name or logo of a tobacco product
 on cars, boats, animals, or other sporting equipment or on nontobacco
 products or services which are sold unless the brand name is the name of
 a corporation in existence on August 1, 1988, and
 (G) payment to have a registered brand name of a tobacco product appear
 in a movie or play unless the brand name is the name of a corporation in
 existence on August 1, 1988.
SEC. 4. GENERAL.
 (a) AUTHORITY OF THE FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION- Nothing in section 3 shall
 be construed to limit or restrict the existing authority of the Federal
 Trade Commission with respect to tobacco products or promotion.
 (b) Enforcement-
 (1) Any violation of section 3 shall be considered to be a violation of
 section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45).
 (2) Any person may commence against any person who violates section 3
 a civil action for damages and other legal and equitable relief in any
 court of competent jurisdiction in any State or the District of Columbia
 or in the district court of the United States for the district in which
 the violation occurred or in which the defendant is found or transacts
 business. In such a civil action in a district court of the United States
 process may be served on a defendant in any judicial district in which the
 defendant resides or may be found and subpoenas requiring attendance of
 witnesses in any such action may be served in any judicial district. The
 court, in issuing any final order in any such action, shall award to the
 plaintiff costs of the suit and reasonable fees for attorneys and expert
 witnesses if the plaintiff prevails.
 (c) PREEMPTION- State and local governments may regulate the consumer
 sales promotion of any tobacco product to the extent not inconsistent
 with section 3, except that no State or local government may by statute
 or regulation require the use of any warning on any tobacco product which
 is different from a warning required by Federal law.
SEC. 5. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 Section 3 shall take effect one year from the date of the enactment of
 this Act, except--
 (1) advertising by billboards which violate section 3 shall be prohibited
 after December 31, 1991, and
 (2) advertising by signs at retail stores which violate section 3 shall
 be prohibited after December 31, 1993.
SEC. 6. VENDING MACHINES.
 (a) PROHIBITION- It shall be unlawful to sell or cause to be sold any
 tobacco product in any place in which a person under the age of 18 may
 lawfully enter unless--
 (1) the product is sold--
 (A) as an over-the-counter product, and
 (B) by the legal owner or proprietor (or by the designated employee of the
 owner or proprietor) of the establishment in which the product is sold, and
 (2) the legal owner or proprietor of the establishment in which the product
 is sold has posted in a conspicuous location in the establishment a sign
 which states `The Sale of Cigarettes to Minors is Strictly Prohibited'.
 (b) ENFORCEMENT-
 (1) A violation of subsection (a) shall be considered a violation of
 section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45).
 (2) Any person may commence against any person who violates this section
 a civil action for damages and other legal and equitable relief in any
 court of competent jurisdiction in any State or the District of Columbia
 or in the district court of the United States for the district in which
 the violation occurred or in which the defendant is found or transacts
 business. The court, in issuing any final order in any such action, shall
 award to the plaintiff costs of the suit and reasonable fees for attorneys
 and expert witnesses if the plaintiff prevails.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- Subsection (a) shall take effect one year from the
 date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 7. STUDY.
 The Federal Trade Commission Act is amended by redesignating sections 24
 and 25 as sections 25 and 26, respectively, and by adding after section
 23 the following:
 `SEC. 24. The Commission shall arrange for a continuing study of the
 constituents of tobacco smoke. The study shall include--
 `(1) random testing of cigarettes produced or sold in the United States to
 determine the amount of tar, nicotine, carbon monoxide, ammonia, cyanide,
 formaldehyde, radioactive compounds, and other constituents of the smoke
 of the cigarettes, and
 `(2) the levels of tar, nicotine, carbon monoxide, ammonia, cyanide,
 formaldehyde, radioactive compounds, and other constituents of the smoke
 of cigarettes when people change their smoking behavior to compensate for
 lower levels of nicotine.
The Commission shall arrange for a laboratory of the Federal Government or
a private, nonprofit laboratory with no connection to a tobacco company to
conduct the study. In making such arrangement the Commission shall require,
as a condition to the arrangement, that the laboratory shall conduct similar
studies for private nonprofit groups. The Commission shall report annually
to the Congress on the results of the study.'.