[Congressional Bills 109th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 4569 Introduced in House (IH)]

109th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 4569

 To require certain analog conversion devices to preserve digital 
 content security measures.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 December 16, 2005

 Mr. Sensenbrenner (for himself and Mr. Conyers) introduced the 
 following bill; which was referred to the Committee on the Judiciary

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To require certain analog conversion devices to preserve digital 
 content security measures.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Digital Transition Content Security 
Act of 2005''.

 TITLE I--REQUIREMENTS FOR ANALOG CONVERSION DEVICES

SEC. 101. PROHIBITIONS.

 No person shall--
 (1) manufacture, import, offer to the public, provide or 
 otherwise traffic in any--
 (A) analog video input device that converts into 
 digital form an analog video signal that is received in 
 a covered format, or an analog video signal in a 
 covered format that is read from a prerecorded medium, 
 unless any portions of that device that are designed to 
 access, record, or pass the content of the analog video 
 signal within that device--
 (i) detect and respond to the rights 
 signaling system with respect to a particular 
 work by conforming the copying and 
 redistributing of that work to the information 
 contained in the rights signaling system for 
 that work in accordance with the compliance 
 rules set forth in section 201 and the 
 robustness rules referred to in section 202; 
 and
 (ii) pass through or properly reinsert and 
 update the CGMS-A portion of the rights 
 signaling system or coding and data pertaining 
 to CGMS-A, and pass through the VEIL portion of 
 the rights signaling system, in accordance with 
 such compliance rules and robustness rules; or
 (B) analog video input device that does not convert 
 into digital form an analog video signal that is 
 received by that device in a covered format, or an 
 analog video signal in a covered format that is read 
 from a prerecorded medium, unless that device--
 (i) preserves, passes through, or properly 
 reinserts the CGMS-A portion of the rights 
 signaling system or coding and data pertaining 
 to CGMS-A, and passes through the VEIL portion 
 of the rights signaling system, in accordance 
 with the compliance rules set forth in section 
 201 and the robustness rules referred to in 
 section 202;
 (ii) outputs the analog video signal in a 
 covered format; or
 (2) manufacture, import, offer to the public, provide, or 
 otherwise traffic in any technology, product, service, device, 
 component, or part thereof, that--
 (A) is primarily designed or produced for the 
 purpose of modifying or causing an analog video input 
 device to no longer conform to the requirements set 
 forth in paragraph (1);
 (B) has only limited commercially significant 
 purpose or use other than to modify or cause an analog 
 video input device to no longer conform to the 
 requirements set forth in paragraph (1); or
 (C) is marketed by that person or another acting in 
 concert with that person with that person's knowledge 
 for use in modifying or causing an analog video input 
 device to no longer conform to the requirements set 
 forth in paragraph (1).

SEC. 102. EXCEPTIONS.

 Section 101 shall not apply to a particular product or device 
that--
 (1) was legally manufactured and sold as new before the 
 effective date of this title and is subsequently offered for 
 sale or otherwise trafficked in, if such product or device has 
 not been modified, after such effective date, so that the 
 product, if in compliance with section 101 before the 
 modification, is configured so that the product or device is no 
 longer in compliance with that section; or
 (2) is a device capable solely of displaying programs and 
 cannot be upgraded or readily modified so as to incorporate 
 transmission, redistribution, or recording capabilities.

SEC. 103. ENCODING RULES.

 No person shall encode a program, or cause a program to be encoded, 
using the rights signaling system, unless such encoding meets the 
following requirements:
 (1) The rights signaling system may be encoded so as to 
 prevent or limit copying, redistribution, or both, of 
 prerecorded media, video-on-demand, pay-per-view, subscription-
 on-demand, and undefined business models that are comparable to 
 any such defined business model.
 (2) The rights signaling system--
 (A) may not be encoded so as to prevent first 
 generation of copies permitted under title II of pay 
 television transmissions, non-premium subscription 
 television, free conditional access delivery, and 
 undefined business models that are comparable to any 
 such defined business model; but
 (B) may be encoded so as to prevent or limit 
 further copying or redistribution, or both, of any 
 defined business model or comparable undefined business 
 model referred to in subparagraph (A).
 (3) The rights signaling system--
 (A) may not be encoded so as to numerically limit 
 copying as permitted under title II of a non-
 conditional access broadcast transmission and undefined 
 business models that are comparable to a non-
 conditional access broadcast transmission; but
 (B) may be encoded so as to prevent redistribution 
 of any such non-conditional access broadcast 
 transmission and comparable undefined business models.
 (4)(A) During the 12-month period beginning on the 
 effective date set forth in section 109, the VEIL portion of 
 the rights signaling system may only be encoded in program 
 formats described in paragraph (1).
 (B) After the end of that 12-month period, the VEIL portion 
 of the rights signaling system may be encoded in any program 
 format, except that, in any case in which a person encodes a 
 program or causes a program to be encoded with the VEIL portion 
 of the rights signaling system, that person shall also encode 
 the program or cause the program to be encoded with the CGMS-A 
 portion of the rights signaling system.

SEC. 104. TRANSMISSION OF RIGHTS SIGNALING SYSTEM.

 Any person making a transmission of a live event or an audiovisual 
work protected by copyright shall, upon the request of an owner or 
authorized licensee of the live event or copyrighted work, include in 
its transmission the rights signaling system for the transmission and 
shall not, without the authorization of such owner or licensee, 
deactivate or alter the rights signaling system. The rights signaling 
system shall be applied in accordance with the request, but in no case 
with encoding restrictions in addition to those required by section 
103.

SEC. 105. IMPROVEMENTS TO VEIL.

 (a) Adoption of Improvements to Veil.--If, upon the petition of any 
interested party, the Director of the Patent and Trademark Office 
determines that the VEIL portion of the rights signaling system has 
become materially ineffective in a way that cannot be adequately 
remedied by existing technical flexibility in the embedding function of 
the VEIL portion of the rights signaling system, then the Director may 
by rule adopt commercially reasonable improvements to the detection 
function of the VEIL portion of the rights signaling system in order to 
maintain the functionality of the rights signaling system under this 
Act. Any such improvements shall be limited to adjustments or upgrades 
solely to the same underlying VEIL technology of the existing rights 
signaling system. The Director shall conduct the rulemaking proceeding 
under this subsection on an expedited basis.
 (b) Participants.--In a rulemaking conducted under subsection (a), 
the Director of the Patent and Trademark Office shall encourage 
representatives of the film industry, the broadcast, cable, and 
satellite industry, the information technology industry, and the 
consumer electronics industry to negotiate in good faith in an effort 
to reach agreement on the commercially reasonable improvements to the 
detection function of the VEIL portion of the rights signaling system 
to be adopted in the rule. The Director shall ensure that such 
negotiation process is open and public and that all potentially 
affected parties are invited to participate in the process through 
public notice. The Director shall cause any agreement for which there 
is substantial consensus of the parties on all material points to be 
published and shall take such agreement into account in any final rule 
adopted.
 (c) Factors.--
 (1) In general.--In determining whether or not to adopt 
 commercially reasonable improvements to the detection function 
 of the VEIL portion of the rights signaling system, including 
 an agreement of the parties as described in subsection (b), the 
 Director of the Patent and Trademark Office shall consider the 
 impact on content owners, content distributors, consumers, 
 manufacturers, and competition generally in all affected 
 markets resulting from the failure to adopt such improvements, 
 as well as from the adoption of such improvements. As part of 
 the determination, the Director shall examine--
 (A) the licensing terms under which improvements 
 would be licensed, ensuring that the licensing terms 
 will impose no materially greater burdens than those 
 terms already established for the VEIL portion of the 
 rights signaling system;
 (B) the intellectual property rights implicated by 
 the improvements; and
 (C) the effect of the improvements on 
 interoperability of consumer audiovisual products 
 (including consumer electronic and information 
 technology products capable of receiving, displaying, 
 or recording programs).
 (2) Disclosure of intellectual property rights.--The 
 Director of the Patent and Trademark Office shall require those 
 parties participating or filing comments in the process of 
 making a determination under this section to disclose any 
 material intellectual property rights in improvements under 
 consideration.
 (3) Timetable for implementation.--The Director of the 
 Patent and Trademark Office shall determine the appropriate 
 timetable for implementation of any improvements adopted under 
 this section, giving due consideration to the generally 
 accepted manufacturing cycle of 18 months in a case involving 
 improvements that require material changes to the design or 
 implementation of detectors.
 (4) Petitions for reconsideration.--After issuing a final 
 rule under this section, the Director of the Patent and 
 Trademark Office shall permit and consider petitions for 
 reconsideration of the rule that are filed.

SEC. 106. CIVIL REMEDIES.

 (a) Civil Actions.--Any person injured by a violation of section 
101 may bring a civil action in an appropriate United States district 
court on account of such violation.
 (b) Powers of the Court.--In an action brought under subsection 
(a), the court--
 (1) may grant temporary and permanent injunctions on such 
 terms as it deems reasonable to prevent or restrain the 
 violation of section 101;
 (2) at any time while an action is pending, may order the 
 impounding, on such terms as it deems reasonable, of any device 
 or product that is in the custody or control of the alleged 
 violator and that the court has reasonable cause to believe was 
 involved in the violation;
 (3) may award damages under subsection (c);
 (4) in its discretion may allow the recovery of costs by or 
 against any party other than the United States or an officer 
 thereof;
 (5) in its discretion may award reasonable attorney's fees 
 to the prevailing party; and
 (6) may, as part of a final judgment or decree finding a 
 violation, order the remedial modification or the destruction 
 of any device or product involved in the violation that is in 
 the custody or control of the violator or has been impounded 
 under paragraph (2).
 (c) Award of Damages.--
 (1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this 
 title, a person committing a violation of section 101 is liable 
 for either--
 (A) the actual damages and any additional profits 
 of the violator, as provided in paragraph (2); or
 (B) statutory damages, as provided in paragraph 
 (3).
 (2) Actual damages.--The court shall award to the 
 complaining party the actual damages suffered by the party as a 
 result of the violation, and any profits of the violator that 
 are attributable to the violation and are not taken into 
 account in computing the actual damages, if the complaining 
 party elects such damages at any time before final judgment is 
 entered.
 (3) Statutory damages.--At any time before final judgment 
 is entered, a complaining party may elect to recover an award 
 of statutory damages for each violation of section 101 in the 
 sum of not less than $200 or more than $2,500 per device, 
 product, component, offer, or performance of service, as the 
 court considers just.
 (4) Repeated violations.--In any case in which the injured 
 party sustains the burden of proving, and the court finds, that 
 a person has violated section 101 within three years after a 
 final judgment was entered against the person for another such 
 violation, the court may increase the award of damages up to 
 triple the amount that would otherwise be awarded, as the court 
 considers just.
 (5) Innocent violations.--
 (A) In general.--The court in its discretion may 
 reduce or remit the total award of damages in any case 
 in which the violator sustains the burden of proving, 
 and the court finds, that the violator was not aware 
 and had no reason to believe that its acts constituted 
 a violation.
 (B) Nonprofit library, archives, educational 
 institutions, or public broadcasting entities.--
 (i) In general.--In the case of a nonprofit 
 library, archives, educational institution, or 
 public broadcasting entity, the court shall 
 remit damages in any case in which the library, 
 archives, educational institution, or public 
 broadcasting entity sustains the burden of 
 proving, and the court finds, that the library, 
 archives, educational institution, or public 
 broadcasting entity was not aware and had no 
 reason to believe that its acts constituted a 
 violation.
 (ii) Definition.--In this subparagraph, the 
 term ``public broadcasting entity'' has the 
 meaning given that term in section 118(g) of 
 title 17, United States Code.

SEC. 107. CRIMINAL OFFENSES AND PENALTIES.

 (a) In General.--Any person who violates section 101 willfully and 
for purposes of commercial advantage or private financial gain--
 (1) shall be fined not more than $500,000 or imprisoned for 
 not more than 5 years, or both, for the first offense; and
 (2) shall be fined not more than $1,000,000 or imprisoned 
 for not more than 10 years, or both, for any subsequent 
 offense.
 (b) Limitation for Nonprofit Library, Archives, Educational 
Institution, or Public Broadcasting Entity.--Subsection (a) shall not 
apply to a nonprofit library, archives, educational institution, or 
public broadcasting entity (as defined in section 118(g) of title 17, 
United States Code).
 (c) Statute of Limitations.--A criminal proceeding under this 
section shall be barred unless such proceeding is commenced within 5 
years after the cause of action arises.

SEC. 108. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Analog video input device.--The term ``analog video 
 input device'' means a hardware device, other than a 
 professional device, and any associated firmware or software, 
 that is designed--
 (A) to receive an analog video signal in a covered 
 format or to read an analog signal in a covered format 
 from a prerecorded medium; and
 (B) to record or digitize such signal, or to alter 
 such signal in a way that affects the state or passage 
 of the rights signaling system if present in such 
 signal.
 (2) Commercial advertising messages.--The term ``commercial 
 advertising messages'' means, with respect to any service, 
 program, or schedule or group of programs, commercial 
 advertising messages other than--
 (A) advertising relating to the service itself or 
 the programming contained therein; or
 (B) advertising which is displayed concurrently 
 with the display of any part of any such program, 
 including station identification logos, frames, and 
 banners.
 (3) Comparable.--The term ``comparable'' means, when used 
 in connection with a defined business model and an undefined 
 business model, that the undefined business model approximates 
 the defined business model more closely than it approximates 
 any other defined business model.
 (4) Compliance rules.--The term ``compliance rules'' means 
 the rules provided for in section 201.
 (5) Conditional access delivery.--The term ``conditional 
 access delivery''--
 (A) means any delivery, whether analog or digital, 
 of a service, program, or schedule or group of programs 
 by means of any technology that controls access to the 
 delivery; and
 (B) does not include a transmission or 
 retransmission of an over-the-air television broadcast.
 (6) Covered format.--The term ``covered format'' means any 
 analog video format for which the rights signaling system is 
 specified, if such specification is certified by the Director 
 of the Patent and Trademark Office under section 202.
 (7) Defined business model.--The term ``defined business 
 model'' means prerecorded media, video-on-demand, pay-per view, 
 pay television transmission, subscription-on-demand, non-
 premium subscription television, free conditional access 
 delivery, or non-conditional access broadcast transmission.
 (8) Free conditional access delivery.--The term ``free 
 conditional access delivery'' means a conditional access 
 delivery for which viewers are not charged any fee, other than 
 government-mandated fees, for the reception or viewing of the 
 programming contained in the delivery.
 (9) Non-conditional access broadcast transmission.--The 
 term ``non-conditional access broadcast transmission'' means a 
 broadcast transmission, including an over-the-air transmission 
 for reception by the general public using radio frequencies 
 allocated for that purpose, whether analog or digital, that is 
 not subject to a technology that controls access to the 
 transmission.
 (10) Non-premium subscription television.--The term ``non-
 premium subscription television'' means an analog or digital 
 delivery of a service, or schedule or group of programs, 
 including those which may be offered for sale together with 
 other services, for which subscribers are charged a 
 subscription fee for the reception or viewing of the 
 programming contained in the delivery, other than pay 
 television and subscription-on-demand.
 (11) Pay-per-view.--(A) The term ``pay-per-view''--
 (i) means an analog or digital delivery of an 
 individual program or specified group of programs in a 
 case in which--
 (I) such individual program, or each 
 individual program of the group of programs, is 
 generally uninterrupted by commercial 
 advertising messages; and
 (II) recipients are charged a separate fee 
 for each such program or specified group of 
 programs; and
 (ii) includes delivery of a single program 
 described in clause (i) for which multiple start times 
 are made available at time intervals which are less 
 than the running time of the program as a whole.
 (B) If a delivery qualifies both as pay-per-view and a pay 
 television transmission, then the delivery shall be deemed, for 
 purposes of this title, to be pay-per-view rather than a pay 
 television transmission.
 (12) Pay television transmission.--(A) The term ``pay 
 television transmission'' means an analog or digital 
 transmission of a service or schedule of programs, in a case in 
 which--
 (i) each individual program of the service or 
 schedule of programs is generally uninterrupted by 
 commercial advertising messages; and
 (ii) subscribing viewers are charged a periodic 
 subscription fee for the service or schedule of 
 programs, such as on a monthly basis, for the reception 
 of the programming delivered by the service, whether 
 separately or together with other services or 
 programming, during the viewing period covered by the 
 fee.
 (B) If a delivery qualifies both as a pay television 
 transmission and pay per view, video-on-demand, or 
 subscription-on-demand, then the delivery shall be deemed, for 
 purposes of this title, to be pay-per-view, video-on-demand or 
 subscription-on-demand rather than a pay television 
 transmission.
 (13) Prerecorded medium.--The term ``prerecorded medium'' 
 means the delivery of one or more programs, in prerecorded 
 form, whether in analog or digital format, on a packaged 
 medium, such as a VHS tape or DVD disc, or on another optical 
 medium or storage device.
 (14) Professional device.--(A) The term ``professional 
 device'' means a device that is designed, manufactured, 
 marketed, and intended for use by a person who regularly 
 employs such a device for lawful business or industrial 
 purposes, such as making, performing, displaying, distributing, 
 or transmitting copies of audiovisual works on a commercial 
 scale at the request of, or with the explicit permission of, 
 the copyright owner.
 (B) If a device is marketed to or is commonly purchased by 
 persons other than those described in subparagraph (A), then 
 such device shall not be considered to be a ``professional 
 device''.
 (15) Program.--The term ``program'' means an audiovisual 
 work, in analog or digital format, as defined in section 101 of 
 title 17, United States Code, that is offered for transmission, 
 delivery, or distribution, either generally or on demand, to 
 subscribers, purchasers, or the public at large, or otherwise 
 for commercial purposes.
 (16) Redistribution.--The term ``redistribution''--
 (A) means the movement of video content beyond the 
 home or similar local environment; and
 (B) does not include the secure movement of video 
 content within any of the rooms or areas within a 
 consumer's primary residence, or within and among 
 locations such as a consumer's car, boat, recreational 
 vehicle, or secondary residence.
 (17) Rights signaling system.--
 (A) Rights signaling system.--The term ``rights 
 signaling system'' means CGMS-A, (``CGMS-A'') 
 supplemented by VEIL.
 (B) CGMS-A.--The term ``CGMS-A'' means Content 
 Generation Management System-Analog.
 (C) VEIL.--The term ``VEIL'' means Video Encoded 
 Invisible Light technology.
 (18) Robustness rules.--The term ``robustness rules'' means 
 the minimum robustness requirements established under section 
 202.
 (19) Subscription-on-demand.--(A) The term ``subscription-
 on-demand'' means the delivery of an individual program or a 
 specified group of programs, in a case in which--
 (i) a subscriber is able, at his or her discretion, 
 to select the time for beginning the exhibition of the 
 program or group of programs;
 (ii) such individual program, or each individual 
 program of the group of programs, is generally 
 uninterrupted by commercial advertising messages; and
 (iii) subscribing viewers are charged a periodic 
 subscription fee for the reception of such programming 
 during the viewing period covered by the fee.
 (B) If a delivery of a program qualifies both as a pay 
 television transmission and subscription-on-demand, then the 
 delivery shall be deemed, for purposes of this title, to be 
 subscription-on-demand rather than a pay television 
 transmission.
 (20) Undefined business model.--The term ``undefined 
 business model'' means the transmission, delivery, or 
 distribution of a program or programs that is not a defined 
 business model.
 (21) Video-on-demand.--(A) term ``video-on-demand'' means a 
 delivery of an individual program or a specified group of 
 programs in a case in which--
 (i) such individual program, or each individual 
 program of the group of program, is generally 
 uninterrupted by commercial advertising messages;
 (ii) recipients are charged a separate fee for such 
 individual program or specified group of programs; and
 (iii) a recipient is able, at his or her 
 discretion, to select the time for beginning the of 
 exhibition of such individual program or specified 
 group of programs.
 (B) If a delivery qualifies as both video-on-demand and a 
 pay television transmission, then the delivery shall be deemed, 
 for purposes of this title, to be video-on-demand.

SEC. 109. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This Act shall take effect 12 months after the date of the 
enactment of this Act.

 TITLE II--COMPLIANCE STANDARDS

SEC. 201. COMPLIANCE RULES.

 (a) Detecting.--Any analog video input device subject to section 
101(1) that receives an analog video signal through transmission from a 
source external to that device or by reading a recording of such signal 
from a prerecorded medium--
 (1) shall detect or cause to be detected the presence of 
 the rights signaling system in the analog video signal; and
 (2) if the rights signaling system is present in the analog 
 video signal--
 (A) shall determine, or cause to be determined, 
 based on information conveyed by the rights signaling 
 system, whether the content contained in such analog 
 video signal is copy unlimited no redistribution 
 content, copy one generation content, or copy 
 prohibited content, in accordance with Table W; and
 (B) shall abide by the relevant recording, output, 
 and passing rules set forth in subsections (b), (c), 
 and (d).
 (b) Recording.--
 (1) Copy prohibited content.--An analog video input device 
 shall not record or cause the recording of copy prohibited 
 content in digital form, including retention and deletion on a 
 frame-by-frame, minute-by-minute, or megabyte-by-megabyte 
 basis, unless--
 (A) the copy prohibited content is retained for a 
 period of not more than 90 minutes from initial receipt 
 of each unit of such content using a bound recording 
 method; and
 (B) such content is destroyed or otherwise rendered 
 unusable no later than the end of that 90-minute 
 period.
 (2) Copy one generation and copy unlimited no 
 redistribution content.--An analog video input device shall not 
 record or cause the recording of copy one generation content or 
 copy unlimited no redistribution content in digital form, other 
 than--
 (A) using an authorized recording method in 
 accordance with any requirements established under 
 section 202(1); or
 (B) using a bound recording method, in which case 
 Copy One Generation Content so recorded becomes Copy 
 Prohibited Content with respect to that device.
 (3) Transitory image.--The requirements under paragraphs 
 (1) and (2) do not prohibit temporary storage of data for the 
 sole purpose of enabling a function not prohibited by those 
 requirements, if such stored data--
 (A) is not maintained in the manner described in 
 section 512(a)(4) of title 17, United States Code, 
 after that function has been performed; and
 (B) is not stored in a way that permits copying or 
 redistribution of such data for other purposes.
 (c) Outputs.--
 (1) Analog outputs.--An analog video input device shall not 
 pass, or direct to be passed, copy prohibited content, copy one 
 generation content, or copy unlimited no redistribution content 
 to an analog output except--
 (A) as an analog video signal that is passed with--
 (i) in the case of copy prohibited content, 
 the rights signaling system encoding indicating 
 ``no copying is permitted'';
 (ii) in the case of copy one generation 
 content, the rights signaling system encoding 
 indicating ``one generation of copies may be 
 made''; or
 (iii) in the case of copy unlimited no 
 redistribution content, the rights signaling 
 system encoding indicating ``copy control 
 restrictions not asserted but redistribution of 
 the work is intended to be limited''; or
 (B) if such device is incorporated into a computer 
 product, to a VGA output or to a similar output that 
 was widely commercially available as of May 1, 2001, 
 and that carries uncompressed video signals with a 
 resolution less than or equal to a constrained image to 
 a computer monitor.
 (2) Digital outputs.--An analog video input device shall 
 not pass, or direct to be passed, copy prohibited content, copy 
 one generation content, or copy unlimited no redistribution 
 content to a digital output except--
 (A) to an output protected by an authorized digital 
 output method in accordance with any requirements 
 established under section 202(1); or
 (B) for the purpose of making a recording (in 
 accordance with paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (c), 
 if such such content is protected, including during 
 transmission, by the corresponding authorized recording 
 method.
 (d) Passing Via Other Than an Output (Add-in Devices).--An analog 
video input device that passes copy prohibited content, copy one 
generation content, or copy unlimited no redistribution content from 
that analog video input device to another product, other than through 
an output in accordance with subsection (d), shall so pass such content 
protected in accordance with the minimum robustness requirements 
established under section 202.

SEC. 202. IMPLEMENTING REGULATIONS.

 Not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Director of the Patent and Trademark Office, in consultation 
with the Register of Copyrights, shall adopt regulations to establish--
 (1) minimum robustness requirements to ensure the content 
 security preservation requirements set forth in section 201 are 
 implemented in a reasonable manner so that such requirements 
 cannot be defeated or circumvented by the use of generally 
 available tools or equipment, and can only with difficulty be 
 defeated or circumvented by use of professional tools or 
 equipment;
 (2) a list of certified analog video signals that typically 
 carry copyrighted video content and are a covered format under 
 this Act;
 (3) a list of certified digital content rights protection 
 output and home networking connection technologies that 
 effectively implement the analog hole rights signaling system 
 detection and content protection responses set forth in Table 
 W;
 (4) a list of certified digital content rights protection 
 recording technologies that effectively implement the analog 
 hole rights signaling system detection and content protection 
 responses set forth in Table W;
 (5) criteria and procedural rules to govern additions to 
 and removal from the lists established under paragraphs (2), 
 (3), and (4); and
 (6) arbitration rules necessary for purposes of resolving 
 disputes arising under paragraph (3) and disputes concerning 
 comparable undefined business models under section 103.

SEC. 203. DEFINITIONS.

 (a) In General.--In this title:
 (1) Analog video signal.--The term ``analog video signal'' 
 means a signal conforming to one of the certified analog signal 
 formats on the list established under section 202(2).
 (2) Authorized digital output method.--The term 
 ``authorized digital output method'' means an output method on 
 the list certified by the Director of the Patent and Trademark 
 Office under section 202(3), as such list may be amended from 
 time to time in accordance with the procedures established 
 under section 202(5).
 (3) Authorized recording method.--The term ``authorized 
 recording method'' means a recording method on the list 
 certified by the Director of the Patent and Trademark Office 
 under section 202(4), as such list may be amended from time to 
 time in accordance with the procedures established under 
 section 202(5).
 (4) Bound recoding method.--The term ``bound recording 
 method'' means a method for recording content that effectively 
 and uniquely associates such recording with a single analog 
 video input device (using a cryptographic protocol or other 
 effective means) so that such recording cannot be accessed in 
 usable form by another product (except where the content of 
 such recording is passed to another product by an authorized 
 digital output method).
 (5) Computer product.--The term ``computer product'' means 
 a device that is designed for or permits the end user to 
 install a wide variety of commercially available software 
 applications thereon, such as a personal computer, handheld 
 ``personal digital assistant'', and similar products, and 
 further includes a subsystem of such a product, such as a 
 graphics card.
 (6) Constrained image.--The term ``constrained image'' 
 means an image that--
 (A) has the visual equivalent of no more than--
 (i) 350,000 pixels per frame (e.g. an image 
 with resolution of 720 x 480 pixels for a 4:3 
 (non-square pixel) aspect ratio); and
 (ii) 30 frames per second;
 (B) may be attained by reducing resolution, such as 
 by discarding, dithering, or averaging pixels to obtain 
 the specified value; and
 (C) can be displayed using video processing 
 techniques such as line doubling or sharpening to 
 improve the perceived quality of the image.
 (7) Copy unlimited no redistribution content.--The term 
 ``copy unlimited no redistribution content'' means, with 
 respect to an analog video input device--
 (A) the content of an analog video signal received 
 by that device through transmission from a source 
 external to that device, or by reading of the signal 
 from a prerecorded medium, with a rights signaling 
 system encoding indicating ``copy control restrictions 
 not asserted but redistribution of the work is intended 
 to be limited'', as defined in Table W; or
 (B) the result of combining content with any 
 content other than copy one generation content or copy 
 prohibited content.
 (8) Copy one generation content.--The term ``copy one 
 generation content'' means, with respect to an analog video 
 input device--
 (A) the content of an analog video signal received 
 by that device through transmission from a source 
 external to that device, or by reading of that signal 
 from a prerecorded medium, with a rights signaling 
 system encoding indicating ``one generation of copies 
 may be made'', as defined in Table W; or
 (B) the result of combining content described in 
 subparagraph (A) with any content other than copy 
 prohibited content.
 (9) Copy prohibited content.--The term ``copy prohibited 
 content'' means, with respect to an analog video input device--
 (A) the content of an analog video signal received 
 by such device through transmission from a source 
 external to that device, or by reading of such signal 
 from a prerecorded medium with a rights signaling 
 system encoding indicating ``no copying is permitted'', 
 as defined in Table W;
 (B) content received by that device as copy one 
 generation content that has been recorded using a bound 
 recording method in accordance with section 
 201(b)(2)(B); or
 (C) the result of combining content described in 
 subparagraph (A) or (B) with any other content.
 (10) Table w.--The term ``Table W'' means the following 
 table:

 TABLE W--Analog Hole Rights Signaling System Detection & Content Protection Response
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 (Step 2) RCI State
 Detected
 (Step 1) CGMS-A (redistribution (Step 3) VEIL Rights Assertion Technical Content
 State Detected control bit to be Detected Description Protection
 detected with CGMS- Response
 A)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1......... Not Present Not Present No No copy or No Technical
 redistribution Protection
 control is being Applied
 asserted
2......... Not Present Not Present Yes INCONSISTENT VIEW ONLY--Protect
 STATE*-- Rights as Copy
 are being Prohibited
 asserted so the Content
 CGMS-A and RCI
 must have been
 stripped.
3......... (0,0) Copy Control Not Present No No Copy or No Technical
 Not Asserted redistribution Protection
 control is being Applied
 asserted
4......... (0,0) Copy Control Not Present Yes INCONSISTENT VIEW ONLY--Protect
 Not Asserted STATE*--Rights as Copy
 are being Prohibited
 asserted so the Content
 CGMS-A was
 probably tampered
 and/or the RCI
 was probably
 stripped.
5......... Not Present (0) Redistribution No It appears that no No Technical
 Control Not copy or Protection
 Asserted redistribution Applied
 control is being
 asserted
6......... Not Present (0) Redistribution Yes INCONSISTENT VIEW ONLY--Protect
 Control Not STATE*--Rights as Copy
 Asserted are being Prohibited
 asserted so the Content
 CGMS-A and/or RCI
 were probably
 stripped or
 tampered.
7......... (0,0) Copy Control (0) Redistribution Yes INCONSISTENT VIEW ONLY--Protect
 Not Asserted Control Not STATE*--Rights as Copy
 Asserted are being Prohibited
 asserted so the Content
 CGMS-A and/or RCI
 were probably
 tampered.
8......... (0,0) Copy Control (1) Redistribution Detection No numeric copy Protect as Copy
 Not Asserted Control Asserted Unnecessary control is being Unlimited No
 asserted but Redistribution
 redistribution Content
 control is being
 asserted
9......... Not Present (1) Redistribution Detection It appears that no Protect as Copy
 Control Asserted Unnecessary numeric copy Unlimited No
 control is being Redistribution
 asserted but Content
 redistribution
 control is being
 asserted
10........ (1,0) Copy One Detection Detection Numeric copy Protect as Copy
 Generation Unnecessary Unnecessary control is being One Generation
 asserted and Content
 redistribution
 control is
 implied by CGMS-A
 state
11........ (0,1) Copy No More Detection Detection Numeric copy VIEW ONLY--Protect
 Unnecessary Unnecessary control is being as Copy
 asserted and Prohibited
 redistribution Content
 control is
 implied by CGMS-A
 state
12........ (1,1) Copy Never Detection Detection Numeric copy VIEW ONLY--Protect
 Unnecessary Unnecessary control is being as Copy
 asserted and Prohibited
 redistribution Content
 control is
 implied by CGMS-A
 state
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 (b) Other Definitions.--The definitions in section 108 apply to 
this title.
 <all>