102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 1579
AMENDMENTS
 S 1579 EAH
In the House of Representatives, U. S.,
February 25, 1992.
 Resolved, That the bill from the Senate (S. 1579) entitled `An Act to
 provide for regulation and oversight of the development and application of
 the telephone technology known as pay-per-call, and for other purposes',
 do pass with the following
AMENDMENTS:
 Strike out all after the enacting clause and insert:
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE, FINDINGS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Telephone Disclosure and
 Dispute Resolution Act'.
 (b) FINDINGS- The Congress finds the following:
 (1) The use of pay-per-call services, most commonly through the use of
 900 numbers, has grown exponentially in the past few years. This payment
 mechanism is convenient to consumers, cost-effective to vendors, and
 profitable to communications common carriers.
 (2) The interstate nature of the pay-per-call industry means that its
 activities are beyond the reach of individual States and therefore requires
 Federal regulatory treatment to protect the public interest.
 (3) The lack of nationally uniform regulatory guidelines has led to
 confusion for consumers, industry, and regulatory agencies as to the rights
 of callers and the oversight responsibilities of regulatory authorities,
 and has allowed some pay-per-call businesses to engage in practices which
 abuse the rights of callers.
 (4) Because the consumer most often incurs a financial obligation as soon as
 a pay-per-call transaction is initiated, the accuracy and descriptiveness
 of vendor advertisements become crucial in avoiding consumer abuse. The
 obligation for accuracy should include price-per-call and duration-of-call
 information, odds disclosure for lotteries, games, and sweepstakes, and
 obligations for obtaining parental consent from callers under 18.
 (5) The continued growth of the legitimate pay-per-call industry is
 dependent upon consumer confidence that unfair and deceptive behavior
 will be effectively curtailed and that consumers will have adequate rights
 of redress.
 (6) Vendors of telephone-billed goods and services must also feel confident
 in their rights and obligations for resolving billing disputes if they are to
 use this new marketplace for the sale of products of more than nominal value.
 (7) Many applications employing audiotext technology such as lotteries,
 games, and sweepstakes, sometimes erroneously have informed consumers
 that they must utilize audiotext services to claim or win a prize, or have
 not adequately informed consumers of the right to participate in the same
 applications through other forms of entry.
 (8) Some interstate audiotext services have offered programs aimed at
 children, inducing them to call such services without their parents'
 permission.
 (9) Consequently, Congress should enact legislation that will offer
 consumers and vendors necessary protections and help facilitate the growth
 of a robust and competitive pay-per-call marketplace.
TITLE I--AUDIOTEXT INDUSTRY OBLIGATIONS AND CONSUMER RIGHTS
SEC. 101. AMENDMENT TO COMMUNICATIONS ACT OF 1934
 Title II of the Communications Act of 1934 is amended by adding at the
 end thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 228. REGULATION OF AUDIOTEXT SERVICES.
 `(a) PURPOSE- It is the purpose of this section--
 `(1) to put into effect a system of national regulation and review that
 will oversee the audiotext business;
 `(2) to give the Commission authority to prescribe regulations and
 enforcement procedures and conduct oversight to afford reasonable protection
 to consumers and to assure that violations of this Act do not occur.
 `(b) AUTHORITY FOR REGULATIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Commission shall, within 270 days after the date of
 enactment of this section, complete a rulemaking proceeding to establish
 a system for oversight and regulation of audiotext services in order
 to provide for the protection of consumers and providers in accordance
 with this Act and other applicable Federal statutes and regulations. The
 Commission's final rules shall--
 `(A) include measures that provide a consumer of audiotext services with
 adequate and clear descriptions of the rights of the caller;
 `(B) define the obligations of common carriers with respect to the provision
 of the audiotext services;
 `(C) include requirements on such carriers to protect against abusive
 practices by providers of audiotext services;
 `(D) prohibit customers from being disconnected from local exchange services
 for refusal to pay for audiotext services; and
 `(E) identify procedures by which common carriers and providers of audiotext
 services may take affirmative steps to protect against nonpayment of
 legitimate charges.
 `(2) MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR PROVIDERS OF AUDIOTEXT SERVICES- The regulations
 required by paragraph (1) shall prohibit any common carrier from offering
 audiotext services of any provider of such services who fails--
 `(A) to include in each audiotext message an introductory disclosure
 message that (i) describes the service being provided, (ii) specifies
 clearly and at a reasonably understandable volume the total cost or the
 cost per minute and any other fees for that service, and for any other
 audiotext service to which the caller may be transferred, (iii) informs
 the caller of the option to hang up at the end of the introductory message
 without incurring any charge, and (iv) informs the caller that parental
 consent is required for calls made by children;
 `(B) to disable any bypass mechanism which allows frequent callers to avoid
 listening to the disclosure message described in subparagraph (A) after the
 institution of any price increase and for a period of time sufficient to give
 such frequent callers adequate and sufficient notice of the price change;
 `(C) to stop the assessment of time-based charges immediately upon
 disconnection by the caller;
 `(D) to include an appropriate and clear signal, at intervals determined
 by the Commission, where technically feasible, during live interactive
 group programs, to alert callers to the passage of time, and explain this
 signal in the disclosure required by subparagraph (A) for such programs,
 except that the requirements of this subparagraph do not apply to programs
 for which the caller is required to preregister or presubscribe; and
 `(E) to comply with such additional standards as the Commission may
 prescribe to prevent abusive practices.
 `(3) COMMON CARRIER OBLIGATIONS- The regulations required by paragraph (1)
 shall require that any common carriers offering audiotext services shall--
 `(A) require, pursuant to contract or tariff, that a provider of audiotext
 services comply with the regulations issued pursuant to paragraph (2),
 and terminate, in accordance with procedures specified in such regulations,
 the offering of an audiotext service of a provider if such service is not
 provided in compliance with such regulations;
 `(B) ensure that a caller is not billed--
 `(i) with respect to audiotext services provided in violation of the
 regulations issued pursuant to paragraph (2); or
 `(ii) under such other circumstances as the Commission determines necessary
 in order to protect callers from abusive practices;
 `(C) establish a local or a toll-free telephone number to answer questions
 and provide information on callers' rights and obligations with regard
 to their use of audiotext services and to provide to callers the name
 and mailing address of any provider of audiotext services offered by the
 common carrier;
 `(D) within 60 days after the issuance of final regulations pursuant to
 paragraph (1), provide, either directly or through contract with any local
 exchange carrier that provides billing or collection services to the common
 carrier, to all of such common carrier's telephone subscribers, to all new
 subscribers, and to all subscribers requesting service at a new location,
 a disclosure statement that--
 `(i) sets forth in clear, standard English, or other languages as specified
 by regulation, all rights and obligations held by the subscriber and the
 carrier with respect to the use and payment for audiotext services;
 `(ii) describes any nonpayment option prescribed by the Commission under
 subparagraph (B) and the applicable blocking option; and
 `(iii) provides an explanation of live interactive programming;
 `(E) ensures that charges for audiotext services are stated separately on
 the bill from the sections relating to local and long distance telephone
 charges and that such statement includes the toll-free telephone number
 specified in subparagraph (C);
 `(F) notify in writing the State regulatory commission of any State within
 which the carrier intends to offer audiotext services of such intention,
 which notification shall include a description of the service to be provided
 to telephone users within that State as well as a list of the carrier's
 policies and procedures;
 `(G) subsequently make available to the State regulatory commission, upon
 request, a list of audiotext telephone numbers accessible by callers within
 that State through such carrier, which list shall include the name, business
 address, and business telephone number of the audiotext provider; and
 `(H) obtain from any provider of audiotext services that solicits charitable
 contributions proof of the tax exempt status of any person or organization
 for which contributions are solicited.
 `(4) BLOCKING REQUIREMENTS- The regulations required by paragraph (1)
 shall require that any local exchange carrier carrying audiotext services
 shall offer callers the option of blocking access to all audiotext services
 from their telephone, whenever technologically feasible. Such regulation
 may permit the costs of such blocking to be recovered by contract or
 tariff, but such costs may not be recovered from local or long distance
 ratepayers. Such option shall be offered at no charge to the caller for
 a reasonable and appropriate period (established by the Commission in
 such regulations) after (A) the effective date of such regulation, (B)
 an initial connection, or (C) subscription for any new telephone line.
 `(5) EXEMPTIONS FROM INTRODUCTORY MESSAGE REQUIREMENTS- The regulations
 prescribed by the Commission pursuant to paragraph (2)(A) may exempt from
 the requirements of such paragraph--
 `(A) calls from frequent callers or regular subscribers using a bypass
 mechanism to avoid listening to the disclosure message required by such
 regulations; or
 `(B) audiotext services provided at nominal charges, as defined by the
 Commission in such regulations.
 `(6) CONSUMER REFUND REQUIREMENTS- The regulations required by paragraph (1)
 shall establish procedures, consistent with the provisions of titles II and
 III of the Telephone Disclosure and Dispute Resolution Act, to ensure that
 carriers offering audiotext services and other parties provide appropriate
 refunds to callers who have been billed for audiotext services pursuant
 to programs that have been found to have violated this subsection or such
 regulations or any other Federal, State, or local consumer protection law.
 `(7) RECOMMENDATIONS ON DATA PAY-PER-CALL- The Commission, within one
 year after the date of enactment of this section, shall submit to the
 Congress the Commission's recommendations with respect to the extension
 of regulations under this section to services that provide, for a per call
 charge, data services that are not audiotext services.
 `(c) EFFECT ON OTHER LAW-
 `(1) NO PREEMPTION OF ELECTION LAW- Nothing in this section shall relieve
 any information provider, common carrier, local exchange carrier, or any
 other person from the obligation to comply with Federal, State, and local
 election laws and regulations.
 `(2) CONSUMER PROTECTION LAWS- Nothing in this section shall relieve any
 provider of audiotext services, common carrier, local exchange carrier,
 or any other person from the obligation to comply with Federal, State,
 or local laws relating to consumer protection or unfair trade.
 `(3) GAMBLING LAWS- Nothing in this section shall preclude any State from
 enforcing its statutes and regulations with regard to lotteries, wagering,
 betting, and other gambling activities.
 `(4) STATE AUTHORITY- Nothing in this section shall preclude any State
 from enacting and enforcing additional and complementary oversight and
 regulatory systems or procedures, or both, so long as such systems and
 procedures do not significantly impede the enforcement of this section or
 other Federal statutes.
 `(5) LIABILITY- No cause of action may be brought in any court or
 administrative agency against any common carrier or any of its affiliates
 on account of any act of the carrier or affiliate, and which the carrier
 or affiliate shows to be in good faith, to terminate any audiotext service
 in order to comply with the regulations prescribed under subsection (b).
 `(d) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) The term `audiotext services' means any service--
 `(A) in which any person provides, through interstate telecommunications--
 `(i) audio information or audio entertainment produced or packaged by such
 person; or
 `(ii) access to simultaneous voice conversation services;
 `(B) for which the caller pays a per-call or per-time-interval charge that is
 greater than, or in addition to, the charge for transmission of the call; and
 `(C) the charge for which is billed and collected by a common carrier or
 local exchange carrier.
Such term does not include directory services provided by a common carrier
or its affiliate or by a local exchange carrier or its affiliate or any
service the charge for which is tariffed.
 `(2) A common carrier `offers audiotext services' by transmitting an
 audiotext service through interstate communications. A local exchange carrier
 shall not be considered to `offer audiotext services' if the local exchange
 carrier only provides exchange access services or billing services, or both,
 to a common carrier in connection with the common carrier's offering of
 audiotext services.'.
SEC. 102. TECHNICAL AMENDMENT.
 Section 3(c) of the Telephone Consumer Protection Act of 1991 is amended
 by striking `section 228' and inserting `section 227'.
TITLE II--USE OF THE 900 TELEPHONE NUMBER
SEC. 201. REGULATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) The Federal Trade Commission shall prescribe rules, as described in
 this subsection, for any advertisement for services or products procured
 through the use of a telephone number with a 900 service access code or any
 other access code under which liability for the service or product provided
 attaches to the telephone bill of the individual calling such number. Such
 rules shall require that the person offering such services or products--
 (A) clearly and conspicuously disclose in any advertising the cost of
 the use of such telephone number, including the rate per minute and,
 if applicable, for the duration of the call,
 (B) in the case of an advertisement which offers a prize or award
 or a service or product at no cost or for a reduced cost, clearly and
 conspicuously disclose the odds of being able to receive such prize, award,
 service, or product at no cost or reduced cost, or, if such odds are not
 calculable in advance, disclose the factors determining such odds,
 (C) in the case of individuals under the age of 18 using such telephone
 number, clearly and conspicuously state, where appropriate, in any
 advertising that such individual must have the consent of such individual's
 parent or legal guardian for the use of such telephone number, and
 (D) be prohibited from using advertisements that emit electronic tones
 which can automatically dial a pay-per-call telephone number.
 (2) The Commission shall by rule require a common carrier that provides
 telephone services to a vendor who uses the telephone number described in
 paragraph (1) to make available to the Commission any records and financial
 information maintained by such carrier relating to the arrangements (other
 than for the provision of local exchange service) between such carrier
 and vendor.
 (3) A rule issued under paragraph (1) or (2) shall be treated as a rule
 issued under section 18(a)(1)(B) of the Federal Trade Commission Act
 (15 U.S.C. 57a(a)(1)(B)).
 (b) RULEMAKING- The Commission shall prescribe the rules under subsection
 (a) within 270 days after the date of enactment of this Act. Such rules shall
 be prescribed in accordance with section 553 of title 5, United States Code.
 (c) ENFORCEMENT- Any violation of any rule prescribed under subsection (a)
 shall be treated as a violation of a rule under section 5 of the Federal
 Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45) regarding unfair or deceptive acts or
 practices. Notwithstanding section 5(a)(2) of such Act (15 U.S.C. 45(a)(2)),
 communications common carriers shall be subject to the jurisdiction of
 the Commission for purposes of this Act.
SEC. 202. ACTIONS BY STATES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Whenever an attorney general of any State has reason to
 believe that the interests of the residents of that State have been or are
 being threatened or adversely affected because any person has engaged or
 is engaging in a pattern or practice of telemarketing which violates any
 rule of the Commission under section 201(a)(1), the State may bring a civil
 action on behalf of its residents in an appropriate district court of the
 United States to enjoin such telemarketing, to enforce compliance with such
 rule of the Commission, to obtain damages on behalf of their residents,
 or to obtain such further and other relief as the court may deem appropriate.
 (b) NOTICE- The State shall serve prior written notice of any civil action
 under subsection (a) upon the Commission and provide the Commission with a
 copy of its complaint, except that if it is not feasible for the State to
 provide such prior notice, the State shall serve such notice immediately
 upon instituting such action. Upon receiving a notice respecting a civil
 action, the Commission shall have the right (1) to intervene in such action,
 (2) upon so intervening, to be heard on all matters arising therein, and
 (3) to file petitions for appeal.
 (c) CONSTRUCTION- For purposes of bringing any civil action under subsection
 (a), nothing in this Act shall prevent an attorney general from exercising
 the powers conferred on the attorney general by the laws of such State
 to conduct investigations or to administer oaths or affirmations or to
 compel the attendance of witnesses or the production of documentary and
 other evidence.
 (d) ACTIONS BY THE COMMISSION- Whenever the Commission has instituted a
 civil action for violation of any rule prescribed under section 201, no
 State may, during the pendency of such action instituted by the Commission,
 institute a civil action under subsection (a) against any defendant named
 in the Commission's complaint for acts or omissions alleged in the complaint
 for violation of any rule as alleged in the Commission's complaint.
 (e) Actions by Other State Officials-
 (1) Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit an authorized State
 official from proceeding in State court on the basis of an alleged violation
 of any general civil or criminal statute of such State.
 (2) In addition to actions brought by an attorney general of a State
 under subsection (a), such an action may be brought by officers of such
 State who are authorized by the State to bring actions in such State for
 protection of consumers and who are designated by the Commission to bring
 an action under subsection (a) against persons that the Commission has
 determined have or are engaged in a pattern or practice of telemarketing
 which violates a rule of the Commission under section 201.
SEC. 203. ADMINISTRATION AND APPLICABILITY OF TITLE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in section 202, this title
 shall be enforced by the Commission under the Federal Trade Commission
 Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.). Consequently, no activity which is outside
 the jurisdiction of that Act shall be affected by this Act, except for
 purposes of this title.
 (b) ACTIONS BY THE COMMISSION- The Commission shall prevent any person
 from violating a rule of the Commission under section 201 in the same
 manner, by the same means, and with the same jurisdiction, powers, and
 duties as though all applicable terms and provisions of the Federal Trade
 Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.) were incorporated into and made a
 part of this title. Any person who violates such rule shall be subject to
 the penalties and entitled to the privileges and immunities provided in
 the Federal Trade Commission Act in the same manner, by the same means,
 and with the same jurisdiction, power, and duties as though all applicable
 terms and provisions of the Federal Trade Commission Act were incorporated
 into and made a part of this title.
SEC. 204. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this title:
 (1) The term `attorney general' means the chief legal officer of a State.
 (2) The term `State' means any State of the United States, the District
 of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Northern Mariana Islands, and any territory
 or possession of the United States.
 (3) The term `Commission' means the Federal Trade Commission.
TITLE III--TELEPHONE SERVICES BILLING AND COLLECTION
SEC. 301. CORRECTION OF BILLING ERRORS.
 (a) INITIATION OF BILLING REVIEW- A customer may initiate a billing review
 under this section with respect to a telephone-billed purchase by sending,
 within 30 days after receipt of a billing statement from a billing carrier
 that contains a charge for such telephone-billed purchase, a written notice
 to that billing carrier in which the customer--
 (1) sets forth or otherwise enables the billing carrier to identify the
 name of the customer and the phone number to which the charge was billed;
 (2) indicates the customer's belief that the statement contains a billing
 error that relates to a telephone-billed purchase and the amount of such
 billing error; and
 (3) sets forth the reasons for the customer's belief (to the extent
 applicable) that the statement contains a billing error.
 (b) RESPONSE TO CUSTOMER NOTICE-
 (1) RESPONSE BY BILLING CARRIER- A billing carrier that receives a notice
 from any customer under subsection (a) shall--
 (A) if the billing error is described in section 308(6) (D), (E), or (F)
 or otherwise relates to the calculation of amounts due, be deemed to be
 a providing carrier for purposes of paragraph (2) of this subsection; or
 (B) transmit such notice within 15 days to the providing carrier for the
 telephone-billed purchase to which the alleged billing error relates.
 (2) RESPONSE BY PROVIDING CARRIER- A providing carrier that receives from
 any customer a notice that meets the requirements of subsection (a) shall,
 unless the customer has, after giving such written notice and before the
 expiration of the time limits herein specified, agreed that the statement
 was correct--
 (A) not later than 30 days after the receipt of the notice, unless the
 action required in subparagraph (B) is taken within such 30-day period, send
 a written acknowledgement thereof to the customer, which acknowledgement
 shall include the name, mailing address, and business telephone number of
 the vendor that is the subject of the notice, and
 (B) not later than two complete billing cycles of the billing carrier
 (in no event later than 90 days) after the receipt of the notice and
 prior to taking any action to collect the amount, or any part thereof,
 indicated by the customer under subsection (a)(2) either--
 (i) make appropriate corrections in the account of the customer, including
 the crediting of any related charges on amounts erroneously billed,
 and transmit to billing carrier and the customer a notification of such
 corrections and the providing carrier's explanation of any change in the
 amount indicated by the customer under subsection (a)(2) and, if any such
 change is made and the customer so requests, copies of documentary evidence
 of the customer's indebtedness; or
 (ii) send a written explanation or clarification to the customer, after
 having conducted an investigation (including, where appropriate, contact
 with the vendor), setting forth to the extent applicable the reasons why
 the providing carrier believes the account of the customer was correctly
 shown in the statement and, upon request of the customer, provide copies
 of documentary evidence of the customer's indebtedness.
 (3) INVESTIGATIONS CONCERNING DELIVERY OF TELEPHONE-BILLED PURCHASES- In
 the case of a billing error where the customer alleges that the billing
 statement reflects goods or services not delivered to the customer in
 accordance with the stated terms of the transaction, a providing carrier may
 not construe such amount to be correctly shown unless the providing carrier
 investigates, with reasonable diligence, whether such goods or services
 were actually delivered or otherwise sent to the customer and provides
 the customer with a written statement of the results of such investigation.
 (4) TERMINATION OF PROVIDING CARRIER RESPONSIBILITY- After complying with
 the provisions of this subsection with respect to an alleged billing error,
 a providing carrier has no further responsibility under this section if
 the customer continues to make substantially the same allegation with
 respect to such error.
 (5) PERMITTED ACTIONS BY BILLING CARRIERS- Nothing in this title shall
 prohibit a billing carrier from removing a charge from a customer's
 billing statement upon receipt of a billing inquiry from the customer if
 the billing carrier--
 (A) informs the appropriate providing carrier that the charge has been
 removed;
 (B) informs the customer that removal of the charge does not limit customer
 liability for that charge if the vendor or providing carrier or its agent
 elects to pursue collection of the charge; and
 (C) informs the customer that, to assure the protection of the customer's
 rights under this title, the customer must send a written notice in
 accordance with subsection (a).
 (c) COLLECTION ACTIONS-
 (1) DEFINITION- For the purposes of subsection (b)(2)(B) of this section,
 `action to collect the amount, or any part thereof, indicated by the customer
 under subsection (a)(2)' does not include the sending of statements of
 account, which may include late charges on amounts in dispute, to the
 customer following written notice from the customer as specified under
 subsection (a), if--
 (A) the customer's account is not restricted or closed because of the failure
 of the customer to pay the amount indicated under subsection (a)(2), and
 (B) the billing carrier indicates to the customer that the payment of
 such amount is not required pending the providing carrier's compliance
 with this section.
 (2) NO EFFECT ON AMOUNTS NOT SUBJECT TO REVIEW- Nothing in this section
 shall be construed to prohibit any action by a vendor, providing carrier,
 or billing carrier to collect any amount which has not been indicated by
 the customer under subsection (a)(2) to contain a billing error.
 (d) FORFEITURE OF RIGHTS- Any billing carrier or providing carrier who fails
 to comply with the requirements of this section or section 302 forfeits
 any right to collect from the customer the amount indicated by the customer
 under subsection (a)(2) of this section, and any late charges thereon.
SEC. 302. REGULATION OF REPORTS.
 (a) ADVERSE REPORTS PROHIBITED- After receiving a notice from a customer as
 provided in section 301, a vendor, billing carrier, providing carrier, or
 its agent may not directly or indirectly threaten to report to any person
 adversely on the customer's credit rating or credit standing because of
 the customer's failure to pay the amount indicated by the customer under
 section 301(a)(2), and such amount may not be reported as delinquent to
 any third party until the billing carrier or providing carrier has met the
 requirements of section 301 and has allowed the customer 20 days thereafter
 to make payment.
 (b) REPORTS DURING CONTINUATION OF DISPUTE- If a billing carrier or providing
 carrier receives a further written notice from a customer that an amount
 is still in dispute within the time allowed for payment under subsection
 (a) of this section, a vendor, billing carrier, or providing carrier or its
 agent may not report to any third party that the account of the customer is
 in arrears because the customer has failed to pay an amount indicated under
 section 301(a)(2), unless the vendor, billing carrier, providing carrier,
 or its agent also reports that the amount is in dispute and, at the same
 time, notifies the customer of the name and address of each party to whom
 the vendor, billing carrier, providing carrier, or its agent is reporting
 information concerning the arrearage.
 (c) REPORTS OF RESOLUTIONS- A vendor, billing carrier, providing carrier,
 or its agent shall report any subsequent resolution of any matter reported
 pursuant to subsection (b) to the parties to whom such matter was initially
 reported.
SEC. 303. PROMPT NOTIFICATION OF CREDIT.
 With respect to any telephone-billed purchase where the vendor is a person
 other than the billing carrier, and where the vendor accepts or allows a
 forgiveness of a debit for the telephone-billed purchase, the vendor shall
 promptly transmit to the billing carrier a credit statement with respect
 thereto and the billing carrier shall credit the account of the customer
 for the amount of the purchase.
SEC. 304. RIGHTS OF CUSTOMERS.
 A billing carrier or providing carrier who seeks to collect charges for a
 telephone-billed purchase from a customer for a vendor shall be subject
 to all claims (other than tort claims) and defenses arising out of any
 telephone-billed purchase in which the customer's telephone billing account
 is used as a method for collection, if the customer has made a good faith
 attempt to obtain satisfactory resolution of a disagreement or problem
 relative to the purchase from the vendor or providing carrier. In no event
 shall the billing carrier be liable for any amount greater than the amount
 billed to the customer for the purchase.
SEC. 305. RELATION TO STATE LAWS.
 (a) STATE LAW APPLICABLE UNLESS INCONSISTENT- This title does not annul,
 alter, or affect, or exempt any person subject to the provisions of this
 title from complying with, the laws of any State with respect to telephone
 billing practices, except to the extent that those laws are inconsistent
 with any provision of this title, and then only to the extent of the
 inconsistency. The Commission is authorized to determine whether such
 inconsistencies exist. The Commission may not determine that any State
 law is inconsistent with any provision of this chapter if the Commission
 determines that such law gives greater protection to the consumer.
 (b) REGULATORY EXEMPTIONS- The Commission shall by regulation exempt
 from the requirements of this title any class of telephone-billed
 purchase transactions within any State if it determines that under the
 law of that State that class of transactions is subject to requirements
 substantially similar to those imposed under this chapter or that such
 law gives greater protection to the consumer, and that there is adequate
 provision for enforcement.
SEC. 306. ENFORCEMENT.
 The Commission shall enforce the requirements of this title. For the purpose
 of the exercise by the Commission of its functions and powers under the
 Federal Trade Commission Act, a violation of any requirement imposed under
 this title shall be deemed a violation of a requirement imposed under that
 Act. All the functions and powers of the Federal Trade Commission under that
 Act are available to the Commission to enforce compliance by any person
 with the requirements imposed under this title, irrespective of whether
 that person is engaged in commerce or meets any other jurisdictional tests
 in that Act. The Commission may prescribe such regulations as are necessary
 or appropriate to implement the provisions of this title.
SEC. 307. STUDY OF NEED FOR ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
 (a) STUDY REQUIRED- The Commission shall conduct an ongoing study of the
 need to develop and implement additional provisions to prevent evasions
 of the requirements of this title, through the use of alternative billing
 or other procedures, that undermine the rights provided to customers under
 this title. In examining such additional provisions, the Commission shall
 consider the extent to which such additional provisions may be implemented
 under the Commission's rulemaking authority pursuant to section 306.
 (b) REPORTS REQUIRED- The Commission shall submit to the Congress, not
 later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, a report
 on the results (as of the end of such period) of the study required by
 subsection (a), and shall submit such additional reports to the Congress
 as are merited by later findings of such study. Such reports shall include
 such recommendations for legislation as the Commission considers necessary
 to carry out the purposes of this title.
SEC. 308. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this title--
 (1) The term `providing carrier' means a local exchange or interexchange
 common carrier providing telephone services (other than local exchange
 services) to a vendor for a telephone-billed purchase that is the subject
 of a billing error complaint.
 (2) The term `billing carrier' means a local exchange or interexchange
 common carrier that transmits to a customer a statement of charges for a
 telephone-billed purchase.
 (3) The term `vendor' means any person who, through the use of the telephone,
 offers goods or services for a telephone-billed purchase.
 (4) The term `customer' means any person who acquires or attempts to
 acquire goods or services in a telephone-billed purchase.
 (5) The term `telephone-billed purchase' means any goods or services
 (including information services) acquired through the use of the telephone,
 any part of the charges for which are compiled and transmitted through
 the use of billing services provided by a local exchange or interexchange
 common carrier, except that such term does not include--
 (A) local exchange telephone services or interexchange telephone services or
 any service that the Federal Communications Commission determines, by rule--
 (i) is closely related to the provision of local exchange telephone services
 or interexchange telephone services; and
 (ii) is subject to billing dispute resolution procedures required by
 Federal or State statute or regulation; or
 (B) the purchase of goods or services which is otherwise subject to billing
 dispute resolution procedures required by Federal statute or regulation.
 (6) A `billing error' consists of any of the following:
 (A) A reflection on a billing statement from a billing carrier of a
 telephone-billed purchase which was not made by the customer or, if made,
 was not in the amount reflected on such statement.
 (B) A reflection on a billing statement of a telephone-billed purchase for
 which the customer requests additional clarification, including documentary
 evidence thereof.
 (C) A reflection on a billing statement of a telephone-billed purchase
 that was not accepted by the customer or not provided to the customer in
 accordance with the stated terms of the transaction.
 (D) The billing carrier's failure to reflect properly on a billing statement
 a payment made by the customer or a credit issued to the customer with
 respect to a telephone-billed purchase.
 (E) A computation error or similar error of an accounting nature of the
 billing carrier on a statement.
 (F) Failure to transmit the billing statement to the last address of the
 customer which has been disclosed to the billing carrier, unless that
 address was furnished less than twenty days before the end of the billing
 cycle for which the statement is required.
 (G) Any other error described in regulations prescribed by the Commission
 pursuant to section 553 of title 5, United States Code.
 (7) The term `Commission' means the Federal Trade Commission.
 Amend the title so as to read: `An Act to protect the public interest and
 the future development of interstate pay-per-call technology by providing
 for the regulation and oversight of the applications and growth of the
 pay-per-call industry, and for other purposes.'.
Attest:
Clerk.
HR 1579 EAH----2
HR 1579 EAH----3