S 1643 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1643
To provide protection to consumers in connection with certain telephone
services.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
September 19 (legislative day, SEPTEMBER 18), 1989
Mr. DIXON introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
A BILL
To provide protection to consumers in connection with certain telephone
services.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Telephone Operator Service Consumer Protection
 Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress hereby finds that--
 (1) the divestiture of AT&T and decisions allowing open entry for competitors
 in the telephone marketplace produced a variety of new services and many
 new providers of existing telephone services;
 (2) the growth of competition in the telecommunications market makes it
 essential to ensure that safeguards are in place to assure fairness for
 consumers and service providers alike;
 (3) a variety of providers of operator services now compete to win
 contracts to provide operator services to hotels, hospitals, airports,
 and other aggregators of telephone business from consumers;
 (4) the mere existence of a variety of service providers in the operator
 services marketplace is significant in making that market competitive
 only when consumers are able to make informed choices from among those
 service providers;
 (5) however, often customers have no choices in selecting a provider
 of operator services, and often customers' attempts to reach their
 preferred long distance carrier by a telephone billing card, credit card,
 or prearranged access code number are blocked;
 (6) a number of State regulatory authorities have taken action to protect
 consumers using intrastate operator services;
 (7) from January 1988 through February 1989, the Federal Communications
 Commission received over 2,000 consumer complaints about operator services;
 (8) these consumers have complained that they are denied access to the
 interexchange carrier of their choice, that they are deceived about the
 identity of the company servicing their calls and the rates being charged,
 that they lack information on what they can do to complain about unfair
 treatment by an operator service provider, and that they are, accordingly,
 being deprived of the free choice essential to the operation of a competitive
 market; and
 (9) a combination of industry self-regulation and government regulation
 is required to ensure that competitive operator services are provided in
 a fair and reasonable manner.
SEC. 3. RULEMAKING REQUIRED.
 (a) INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS- The Commission shall, within 30 days after
 the date of the enactment of this Act, initiate a proceeding pursuant
 to title II of the Act to establish regulations to protect consumers who
 use operator services to place interstate telephone calls from unfair and
 deceptive practices and to ensure that consumers have the opportunity to
 make informed choices in making such calls.
 (b) TIMING AND CONTENTS OF REGULATION- The regulation required by subsection
 (a) shall--
 (1) be prescribed not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of
 this Act;
 (2) contain provisions to implement each of the requirements of section 4(a);
 (3) for purposes of administration and enforcement, be treated as regulations
 prescribed by the Commission pursuant to title II of the Act; and
 (4) take effect not later than 90 days after the date of issuance of
 such regulations.
SEC. 4. MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) REGULATION REQUIREMENTS- The regulations required by section 3 shall,
 at a minimum--
 (1) require that the provider of the operator services--
 (A) identify itself, audibly and distinctly, to the consumer prior to the
 consumer incurring any charges; and
 (B) permit the consumer to terminate the telephone call at no charge;
 (2) require that the provider of operator services ensure, by contract
 or tariff, that each aggregator post on or near the telephone instrument,
 in plain view of consumers--
 (A) the name, address, and toll-free telephone number of the provider; and
 (B) a written disclosure that consumers have a right to obtain access to
 the interstate common carriers for information on accessing that carrier's
 service using that telephone;
 (3) require that the provider of operator services disclose immediately
 to the consumer, upon request--
 (A) a quote of its rates or charges for the call;
 (B) the methods by which such rates or charges will be collected; and
 (C) the methods by which complaints concerning such rates, charges, or
 collection practices will be resolved;
 (4) require that the provider of operator services--
 (A) neither require nor participate in the blocking of any consumer's
 access to the interstate common carrier of the consumer's choice;
 (B) assure, by contract or tariff, that its aggregators neither require nor
 participate in the blocking of access to such interstate common carriers,
 except that the Commission may grant limited, temporary waivers to particular
 providers of operator services for a particular access code upon a showing
 that such waiver is necessary to prevent fraud; and
 (C) withhold payment of any commissions to aggregators at locations at
 which any blocking of access to any interstate common carrier occurs, and
 to limit charges for each interstate call at such locations to the lowest
 rate currently on file at the Commission among all other interstate carriers;
 (5) require--
 (A) that any equipment manufactured or imported more than 18 months after
 the date of enactment of this Act and installed by any aggregator shall be
 technologically capable of providing consumers with access to interstate
 interexchange carriers through the use of access codes approved by the
 Commission;
 (B) that existing equipment used by aggregators be upgraded to comply with
 the requirements imposed pursuant to subparagraph (A) of this paragraph,
 except that the Commission may waive such requirements by rule or order with
 respect to any class or category of equipment if the Commission determines
 that the benefits of applying such requirements to such equipment do not
 justify the cost; and
 (C) any other actions or measures that the Commission considers necessary
 to ensure that aggregators are not exposed to undue risk of fraud;
 (6) establish requirements that--
 (A) prohibit the provider of operator services from knowingly charging
 for uncompleted telephone calls;
 (B) prevent, after consideration of the advice of the carrier liaison
 committee convened by the Commission by its order of February 27, 1989,
 consumers from being charged for a distance that is more than the distance,
 in a straight line, between the calling party's points of origination and
 termination of the telephone call;
 (C) require that any consumer billing an interexchange telephone call on a
 billing card which (i) is provided by an interstate interexchange common
 carrier, and (ii) permits the identification of that carrier, is billed
 at a rate not greater than the rate of that common carrier for that call,
 unless the calling party requests a special service that is not available
 under tariff from that common carrier or consents to a different charge; and
 (D) prohibit call splashing;
 (7) establish minimum standards for providers of operator services to use
 in the routing and handling of emergency telephone calls; and
 (8) establish a policy for requiring common carriers to make public
 information about recent changes in operator services and choices available
 to consumers in that market.
 (b) CONSIDERATION OF COMPENSATION- In conducting the rulemaking required by
 section 3, the Commission shall consider the need to prescribe compensation
 (other than advance payment by consumers) for owners of competitive public
 pay telephones for calls routed to carriers other than the designated
 provider of operator services for such telephones.
SEC. 5. DETERMINATIONS OF RATE COMPLIANCE.
 (a) FILING OF INFORMATIONAL TARIFF- The Commission shall require each
 provider of operator service to file, within 30 days after the date of
 enactment of this Act, and to maintain and keep open for public inspection,
 an informational tariff specifying rates, terms, and conditions, and
 including commissions, surcharges, or other fees which are collected from
 consumers, with respect to calls for which operator services are provided.
 (b) REVIEW OF INFORMATIONAL TARIFF- If the rates and charges filed by any
 provider of operator services under subsection (a) appear upon review by the
 Commission to be unjust or unreasonable, the Commission shall require such
 provider of operator services to demonstrate that its rates and charges are
 just and reasonable and reflect the reasonable costs of providing service,
 plus a reasonable profit.
 (c) PROCEEDING REQUIRED- (1) Within 30 days after the date of enactment
 of this Act, the Commission shall initiate a proceeding--
 (A) to monitor operator service rates;
 (B) to determine the extent to which offerings made by operator service
 providers are improvements, in terms of service quality, price, innovation,
 and other factors, over those available before the entry of new operator
 service providers into the market;
 (C) to assess, both in the aggregate and by individual providers of operator
 services, operator service rates, costs of service, incidences of service
 complaints, and service offerings; and
 (D) to consider the effect that commissions and surcharges have on the
 overall rates charged to consumers.
 (2) Not later than 9 months after the commencement of such proceeding,
 the Commission shall report to Congress on findings and conclusions of such
 proceeding. The Commission shall, during the pendency of such proceeding,
 provide the Congress with quarterly interim reports on the activities and
 progress to date.
 (3) The requirement of subsection (d) shall not apply if, on the basis
 of the proceeding under paragraph (1) of this subsection, the Commission
 makes (and includes in the report required by paragraph (2)) a factual
 determination that market forces are securing rates and charges that
 are just and reasonable, as evidenced by rate levels, costs, complaints,
 service quality, and other relevant factors.
 (d) IMPLEMENTING REGULATIONS- Unless the Commission makes the determination
 described in subsection (c)(3), the Commission shall, within 90 days after
 submission of the report required by subsection (c)(2), complete a proceeding
 pursuant to title II of the Act to establish regulations for implementing
 the requirements of such title (and subsections (a) and (b) of this section)
 that rates and charges for operator services be just and reasonable.
SEC. 6. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act:
 (1) The term `Commission' means the Federal Communications Commission.
 (2) The term `the Act' means the Communications Act of 1934.
 (3) The term `consumer' means a person initiating any interstate telephone
 call using operator services.
 (4) The term `operator services' means any interstate telecommunications
 service that includes, as a component, any automatic or live assistance to
 a consumer to arrange for billing or completion, or both, of an interstate
 telephone call through a method other than--
 (A) automatic completion with billing to the telephone from which the call
 originated; or
 (B) completion through a carrier-specific access code number used by
 the consumer, with billing to an account previously established with the
 carrier by the consumer.
 (5) The term `aggregator' means any person, that, in the ordinary course of
 its operations, makes telephones available to the public or to transient
 users of its premises for interstate telephone calls using a provider
 of operator services, and receives from an operator service provider by
 contract, tariff, or otherwise, commissions or compensation for calls
 delivered from that traffic aggregator's location to that operator service
 provider.
 (6) The term `call splashing' means the transfer of a call from one operator
 service provider to another at a point which is different from the point
 at which the call originates.