HR 5772 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5772
To establish a moratorium on the promulgation and implementation of certain
drinking water regulations promulgated under title XIV of the Public Health
Service Act (commonly known as the Safe Drinking Water Act) until certain
studies and the reauthorization of the Act are carried out, and for other
purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
August 4, 1992
Mr. SKEEN introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To establish a moratorium on the promulgation and implementation of certain
drinking water regulations promulgated under title XIV of the Public Health
Service Act (commonly known as the Safe Drinking Water Act) until certain
studies and the reauthorization of the Act are carried out, and for other
purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. MORATORIUM ON IMPLEMENTATION.
 (a) DEFINITION- As used in this section:
 (1) ACT- The term `Act' means title XIV of the Public Health Service Act
 (commonly known as the Safe Drinking Water Act; 42 U.S.C. 300f et seq.).
 (2) ADMINISTRATOR- The term `Administrator' means the Administrator of
 the Environmental Protection Agency.
 (b) MORATORIUM- Except as provided in subsection (d), the Administrator
 may not implement--
 (1) any national primary drinking water regulation promulgated pursuant
 to section 1412 of the Act (42 U.S.C. 300g-1) after December 21, 1989; or
 (2) any similar rule or regulation,
until such time as the Administrator meets the applicable requirements of
subsection (c) and authorizing legislation that extends the authorization
with respect to the provisions of the Act is enacted.
 (c) STUDY AND REPORT-
 (1) STUDY- Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this section,
 the Administrator shall conduct a comprehensive study to review--
 (A) each final regulation that has been promulgated under the Act as of
 the date of the review, and regulatory alternatives to the regulation
 that reflect a range of levels of safety or direct health benefits (or a
 combination of both);
 (B) for each regulatory alternative described in subparagraph (A)--
 (i) any health effect the regulatory alternative would prevent; and
 (ii) the system-level incremental cost of the alternative;
 (C) in consultation with the Director of the National Academy of Sciences,
 the list of contaminants listed pursuant to section 1412 of the Act (42
 U.S.C. 300g-1) for the purpose of considering revisions to the list to
 take into account--
 (i) whether the contaminant is known (or reasonably anticipated) to cause
 a significant adverse effect on human health;
 (ii) if the contaminant is not known (or reasonably anticipated) to cause
 a significant adverse effect on human health, the risk or safety factors
 associated with the maximum contaminant level for the contaminant under
 section 1412 of the Act (including any safety factor associated with relative
 source contribution and assumptions concerning water consumption); and
 (iii) whether the contaminant is known to be, or reasonably anticipated
 to occur, in public water systems located within each State and region
 covered by the Act;
 (D) the compliance deadlines under the Act (to determine whether any
 revision would be appropriate);
 (E) each regulation and proposed regulation described in subsection (b),
 for the purpose of determining whether a regulation to apply exclusively
 to small public water systems (as determined by the Administrator) would be
 more appropriate to address the needs of small communities (as determined
 by the Administrator); and
 (F) the funding needs of States and political subdivisions of States to
 meet the requirements of the Act, and recommended alternatives to ensure
 that States and political subdivisions of States meet the funding needs.
 (2) REPORT- Upon completion of the study described in paragraph (1), the
 Administrator shall submit to Congress a written report that documents
 the findings of the study and includes recommended legislative changes to
 the Act.
 (d) ISSUANCE OF REGULATIONS- If the Administrator, in consultation with
 the States, and after considering available resources for managing risks
 associated with drinking water, determines that the immediate implementation
 or promulgation of a national primary drinking water regulation under
 section 1412 of the Act (42 U.S.C. 300g-1), or similar rule or regulation,
 is justifiable in order to protect human health, the Administrator shall
 implement or promulgate the regulation without regard to subsection (b).