HR 751 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 751
To amend title XIX of the Social Security Act to assure appropriate coverage
and payment for inpatient hospital services under the medicaid program.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
January 31, 1989
Mr. STARK introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend title XIX of the Social Security Act to assure appropriate coverage
and payment for inpatient hospital services under the medicaid program.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. ASSURING ADEQUATE PAYMENT LEVELS FOR INPATIENT HOSPITAL SERVICES
UNDER THE MEDICAID PROGRAM.
 (a) IN GENERAL- A State plan under title XIX of the Social Security Act
 shall not be considered to meet the requirement of section 1902(a)(13)(A)
 of such Act (insofar as it requires payments to hospitals for inpatient
 hospital services that are reasonable and adequate to meet the costs which
 must be incurred by efficiently and economically operated facilities),
 as of January 1, 1991, unless the State has submitted to the Secretary of
 Health and Human Services (in this Act referred to as the `Secretary'), by
 not later than such date, an amendment to such plan that assures that, in
 the aggregate, the amount of payments for inpatient hospital services under
 the plan in subsection (d) hospitals (as defined in section 1886(d)(1)(B)
 of such Act) that are not less than 90 percent of the amount of payments
 for such services that would be made under title XVIII of such Act (without
 regard to any deductible imposed under section 1813(a) of such Act or any
 limitation on the coverage of inpatient hospital services under such title)
 for such services if covered under such title. In computing such amounts,
 the Secretary shall adjust for differences in case mix, volume, the age
 and disability of the populations covered by the two programs, and other
 relevant factors identified by the Secretary.
 (b) REVIEW- The Secretary, by not later than 90 days after the date of
 submission of a plan amendment under subsection (a), shall--
 (1) review each such amendment for compliance with the requirement of
 section 1902(a)(13)(A) of the Social Security Act, and
 (2) approve or disapprove each such amendment.
If the Secretary disapproves such an amendment, the State shall immediately
submit a revised amendment which meets such requirement.
 (c) COLLECTION OF DATA- The Secretary may provide for such collection of
 data on payment for inpatient hospital services as may be necessary to
 carry out this section.
 (d) NONWAIVABILITY- The provisions of this section may not be waived by
 the Secretary under section 1115 or 1915(b) of the Social Security Act.
SEC. 2. ASSURING COVERAGE AND PAYMENT FOR MEDICALLY NECESSARY INPATIENT
HOSPITAL SERVICES.
 (a) COVERAGE-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 1902(a)(10) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)) is amended, in the matter after and below subparagraph
 (E), by amending subdivision (X), as added by section 302(b)(1)(B)
 of the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act of 1988, to read as follows:
 `(X) the plan may not provide for any limitation on the amount, duration,
 or scope of medical assistance for inpatient hospital services which are
 medically necessary'.
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by paragraph (1) shall take effect
 on January 1, 1991, without regard to whether or not final regulations to
 carry out such amendments made been promulgated by such date.
 (b) PAYMENT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- If a State plan under title XIX of the Social Security Act
 provides for payment for inpatient hospital services on a prospective basis
 (whether per diem, per case, or otherwise), the plan shall not be considered
 to meet the requirement of section 1902(a)(13)(A) of such Act (insofar as
 it requires payments to hospitals for inpatient hospital services that
 are reasonable and adequate to meet the costs which must be incurred by
 efficiently and economically operated facilities), as of January 1, 1991,
 unless the State has submitted to the Secretary of Health and Human Services,
 by not later than such date, an amendment to such plan that provides for
 an outlier adjustment in payment amounts for medically necessary inpatient
 hospital services provided on or after such date involving exceptionally
 high costs or exceptionally long lengths of stay.
 (2) REVIEW- The Secretary, by not later than 90 days after the date of
 submission of a plan amendment under paragraph (1), shall--
 (A) review each such amendment for compliance with the requirement of
 section 1902(a)(13)(A) of the Social Security Act, and
 (B) approve or disapprove each such amendment.
If the Secretary disapproves such an amendment, the State shall immediately
submit a revised amendment which meets such requirement.
 (c) NONWAIVABILITY- The amendments made by, and the provisions of, this
 section may not be waived by the Secretary under section 1115 or 1915(b)
 of the Social Security Act.