HR 2295 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2295
To repeal a provision of Federal tort claim law relating to the civil
liability of Government contractors for certain injuries, losses of property,
and deaths, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
May 9, 1989
Mrs. VUCANOVICH (for herself and Mr. BILBRAY) introduced the following
bill; which was referred jointly to the Committees on Armed Services and
the Judiciary
A BILL
To repeal a provision of Federal tort claim law relating to the civil
liability of Government contractors for certain injuries, losses of property,
and deaths, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be cited as
 `Radiation Victims Fair Treatment Act'.
REPEALER
 SEC. 2. Section 1631 of the Department of Defense Authorization Act of
 1985 (relating to the application of the remedy against the United States
 provided by sections 1346(c) and 2672 of title 28, United States Code,
 or by the Act of March 9, 1920, to any civil action for an injury, or
 death described in subsection (a)(1) of such section 1631) is repealed.
APPLICATION
 SEC. 3. (a)(1) The period during which section 1631 of the Department
 of Defense Authorization Act (98 Stat. 2646) was in effect shall not be
 taken into account in computing the period provided in any Federal or
 State statute of limitations applicable to any civil action for an injury,
 loss of property, personal injury, or death described in subsection (a)(1)
 of such section
 (2) In civil actions which were filed before the date of enactment of
 section 1631 of Public Law 98-525, and were subsequently dismissed pursuant
 to the provisions of such section, the period beginning with the initial
 filing of such action and ending with the repeal of such section shall not
 be taken into account in computing the period provided in any Federal or
 State statute of limitations applicable to such civil actions.
 (b) If the period provided in any Federal or State statute of limitations
 applicable to a civil action referred to in subsection (a) expires within
 one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the action shall not
 be barred by such statute, but shall be forever barred if not commenced
 within one year after such date.