[Congressional Bills 104th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 1233 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

104th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 S. 1233

To assure equitable coverage and treatment of emergency services under 
 health plans.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 September 12 (legislative day, September 5), 1995

 Ms. Mikulski introduced the following bill; which was read twice and 
 referred to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

To assure equitable coverage and treatment of emergency services under 
 health plans.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Access to 
Emergency Medical Services Act of 1995''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title.
Sec. 2. Findings; purposes.
Sec. 3. Assuring equitable health plan coverage with respect to 
 emergency services.
Sec. 4. Requirements for medicare and medicaid managed care.
Sec. 5. Effect on State law.
Sec. 6. Enforcement.
Sec. 7. Regulations.
Sec. 8. Definitions.
Sec. 9. Effective dates.
Sec. 10. Report on application to plans including medical savings 
 accounts.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS; PURPOSES.

 (a) Findings.--The Congress finds the following:
 (1) Federal medicare law requires emergency physicians and 
 other providers to evaluate, treat, and stabilize any 
 individual seeking treatment in a hospital emergency 
 department.
 (2) This law specifically prohibits emergency physicians 
 from delaying any treatment needed to evaluate or stabilize an 
 individual in order to determine the health insurance status of 
 the individual.
 (3) Many health plans routinely deny payment for these 
 Federally-required emergency services furnished to their 
 enrollees, basing such denials on--
 (A) failure to obtain prior approval of such 
 services from the plan, or
 (B) an after-the-fact determination that the 
 medical condition identified through the Federally-
 required evaluation was not an emergency medical 
 condition.
 (4) These denials by health plans impose significant 
 financial burdens on--
 (A) their enrollees who, based on symptoms that 
 reasonably suggest a medical emergency, prudently seek 
 care in a hospital emergency department, and
 (B) emergency physicians, the hospital emergency 
 departments, and others involved in furnishing 
 emergency services to the enrollees.
 (5) These burdens discourage enrollees from seeking 
 emergency care in cases where it is appropriate and, 
 ultimately, threaten the financial livelihood of hospital 
 emergency departments in providing emergency services to the 
 entire population, including beneficiaries of the medicare and 
 medicaid programs and of other Federal health care programs.
 (6) Health plans have engaged in practices that discourage 
 the appropriate use of the 911 emergency telephone number and 
 may adversely impact on the health of enrollees.
 (b) Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are--
 (1) to require health plans to cover and pay for their fair 
 share for emergency services that hospital emergency 
 departments are required to provide;
 (2) to protect health plan enrollees by establishing a 
 uniform definition of emergency medical condition that is based 
 on the average knowledge of a prudent layperson;
 (3) to prohibit health plans from requiring prior approval 
 for Federally-required emergency services; and
 (4) to assure that health plans promote the appropriate use 
 of the 911 emergency telephone number.

SEC. 3. ASSURING EQUITABLE HEALTH PLAN COVERAGE WITH RESPECT TO 
 EMERGENCY SERVICES.

 (a) Prohibition of Contractual Limitations on Coverage of Emergency 
Services.--A health plan that provides any coverage with respect to 
emergency services shall cover emergency services furnished to an 
enrollee of the plan--
 (1) without regard to whether or not the provider 
 furnishing the emergency services has a contractual or other 
 arrangement with the plan for the provision of such services to 
 such enrollees, and
 (2) without regard to prior authorization.
 (b) Prohibition of Discriminatory Payment or Cost-Sharing.--
 (1) In general.--A health plan that provides any coverage 
 with respect to emergency services--
 (A) shall determine and make prompt payment in a 
 reasonable and appropriate amount for such services 
 (including services required to
 be provided under section 1867 of the Social Security 
Act), and
 (B) subject to paragraph (2), may not impose cost-
 sharing for services furnished in a hospital emergency 
 department that is calculated in a manner (such as the 
 use of a different percentage) that imposes greater 
 cost sharing with respect to such services compared to 
 comparable services furnished in other settings.
 (2) Imposition of reasonable copayment permitted.--A health 
 plan may impose a reasonable copayment (as determined in 
 accordance with standards established by the Secretary) in lieu 
 of coinsurance to deter inappropriate use of services of 
 hospital emergency departments.
 (c) Assuring Timeliness of Prior Authorization Determination for 
Needed Care Identified in Initial Evaluation.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) Access to process.--If an enrollee of a health 
 plan receives emergency services from an emergency 
 department pursuant to a screening evaluation conducted 
 by a treating physician or other emergency department 
 personnel and pursuant to the evaluation such physician 
 or personnel identifies items and services (other than 
 emergency services) promptly needed by the enrollee, 
 the health plan shall provide access 24 hours a day, 7 
 days a week, to such persons as may be authorized to 
 make any prior authorization determinations respecting 
 coverage of such promptly needed items and services.
 (B) Deemed approval.--A health plan is deemed to 
 have approved a request for a prior authorization for 
 such promptly needed items and services if such 
 physician or other personnel--
 (i) has attempted to contact such a person 
 for authorization--
 (I) to provide an appropriate 
 referral for the items and services, or
 (II) to provide the items and 
 services to the enrollee,
 and access to the person has not been provided 
 (as required under subparagraph (A)), or
 (ii) has requested such authorization from 
 such a person and the person has not denied the 
 authorization within 30 minutes after the time 
 the request is made.
 (2) Referral by physician to hospital emergency department 
 deemed prior authorization.--If a physician (or, in the case of 
 a managed care plan, a participating physician or other person 
 authorized to make prior authorization determinations for the 
 plan) refers an enrollee to a hospital emergency department for 
 evaluation or treatment, a request for prior authorization of 
 the items and services reasonably furnished the enrollee 
 pursuant to such referral shall be deemed to have been made and 
 approved.
 (3) Effect of approval.--
 (A) In general.--Approval of a request for a prior 
 authorization determination (including a deemed 
 approval under paragraph (1) or (2)) shall be treated 
 as approval of any health care items and services 
 required to treat the medical condition identified 
 pursuant to a screening evaluation referred to in 
 paragraph (1)(A).
 (B) Payment.--A health plan may not subsequently 
 deny or reduce payment for an item or service furnished 
 pursuant to such an approval unless the approval was 
 based on information about the medical condition of an 
 enrollee that was fraudulent.
 (d) Encouraging Appropriate Use of 911 Emergency Telephone 
Number.--A health plan--
 (1) shall include, in any educational materials the plan 
 makes available to its enrollees on the procedures for 
 obtaining emergency services--
 (A) a statement that it is appropriate for an 
 enrollee to use the 911 emergency telephone number for 
 an emergency medical condition (as defined in section 
 8(3)), and
 (B) an explanation of what is an emergency medical 
 condition;
 (2) shall not discourage appropriate use of the 911 
 emergency telephone number by enrollees with emergency medical 
 conditions; and
 (3) shall not deny coverage or payment for an item or 
 service solely on the basis that an enrollee uses the 911 
 emergency telephone number to summon treatment for an emergency 
 medical condition.
SEC. 4. REQUIREMENTS FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID MANAGED CARE.

 (a) Medicare.--Subparagraph (B) of section 1876(c)(4) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395mm(c)(4)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(B) meets the requirements of section 3 of the Access to 
 Emergency Medical Care Act of 1995 with respect to enrollees of 
 the plan who are enrolled under this section.''.
 (b) Medicaid.--Title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 
et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 1908 the following new 
section:

``access to emergency services for individuals enrolled in managed care 
 plan

 ``Sec. 1909. (a) In General.--A state plan may not be approved 
under this title unless the plan requires each managed care plan 
providing (or arranging for the provision of) health care items and 
services to individuals who are eligible for medical assistance and 
enrolled with the managed care plan to comply with the requirements of 
section 3 of the Access to Emergency Medical Care Act of 1995 with 
respect to such individuals.
 ``(b) Waivers Prohibited.--The requirement of subsection (a) may 
not be waived under section 1115 or section 1915(b).
 ``(c) Managed Care Plan.--For purposes of this section, the term 
`managed care plan' means a health plan that provides or arranges for 
the provision health care items and services to enrollees primarily 
through participating physicians and providers.''.

SEC. 5. EFFECT ON STATE LAW.

 (a) Preemption.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed as 
preempting or otherwise superseding any provision of State law unless 
such provision directly conflicts with this Act.
 (b) Consumer Protections.--A provision of State law shall not be 
considered to conflict directly with this Act if the provision provides 
the enrollees of health plans with protections that exceed the 
protections of this Act.

SEC. 6. ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) Civil Money Penalties.--A health plan that violates a 
requirement of section 3 shall be subject to a civil money penalty of 
not more than the greatest of--
 (1) $10,000 for each such violation;
 (2) in the case of a violation of section 3, 3 times the 
 amount that the health plan would have paid for items and 
 services if the plan had not violated such section; or
 (3) in the case of a pattern of repeated and substantial 
 violations, $1,000,000.
 (b) Procedures.--
 (1) In general.--The provisions of section 1128A of the 
 Social Security Act (other than subsections (a) and (b)) shall 
 apply to a civil money penalty under this section in the same 
 manner as such provisions apply with respect to a penalty or 
 proceeding under section 1128A(a) of such Act.
 (2) Corrective action.--In determining the amount or scope 
 of any civil money penalty under this section, the Secretary 
 shall take into account whether a health plan has taken 
 corrective action, such as--
 (A) payment for items and services for which 
 coverage or payment has been denied in violation of a 
 requirement of section 3, and
 (B) establishment of policies and procedures to 
 prevent the same type of violation from occurring in 
 the future.
 (c) Indemnification.--The Secretary may, out of any civil money 
penalty collected pursuant to this section, make a payment to an 
enrollee or provider (as appropriate) in an amount equal to the amount 
a health plan would have paid for an item or service (if any) if the 
plan had not denied coverage or payment for such item or service in 
violation of section 3.
 (d) Violations.--For purposes of subsection (a), the Secretary 
shall treat at least the following acts or omissions as violations of 
section 3:
 (1) Coverage of emergency services.--Failure to cover 
 emergency services in violation of section 3(a).
 (2) Failure to provide for payment.--Failure to provide for 
 payment for emergency services in violation of section 
 3(b)(1)(A).
 (3) Improper cost sharing.--Imposition of cost sharing in 
 violation of section 3(b)(1)(B).
 (4) Access to prior authorization.--Failure to provide 
 access to prior authorization determinations in violation of 
 section 3(c)(1)(A).
 (4) Deemed approval.--Failure to pay for services that are 
 deemed to be approved under section 3(c).
 (5) Educational materials.--Failure to include educational 
 materials as required by section 3(d)(1).
 (6) Use of 911.--Discouraging the appropriate use of the 
 911 emergency telephone number or denial of payment in 
 violation of paragraph (2) or (3) of section 3(d).
SEC. 7. REGULATIONS.

 The Secretary shall issue such rules and regulations as may be 
necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.

SEC. 8. DEFINITIONS.

 For purposes of this Act:
 (1) Cost-sharing.--The term ``cost-sharing'' means any 
 deductible, coinsurance amount, copayment, or other out-of-
 pocket payment that an enrollee is responsible for paying with 
 respect to a health care item or service covered under a health 
 plan.
 (2) Emergency department.--The term ``emergency 
 department'' includes, with respect to a hospital, a trauma 
 center in the hospital if the center--
 (A) is designated under section 1213 of the Public 
 Health Service Act, or
 (B) is in a State that has not made such 
 designations and is determined by the Secretary to meet 
 the standards under such section for such designation.
 (3) Emergency medical condition.--The term ``emergency 
 medical condition'' means a medical condition, the onset of 
 which is sudden, that manifests itself by symptoms of 
 sufficient severity, including severe pain, that a prudent 
 layperson, who possesses an average knowledge of health and 
 medicine, could reasonably expect the absence of immediate 
 medical attention to result in--
 (A) placing the person's health in serious 
 jeopardy,
 (B) serious impairment to bodily functions, or
 (C) serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or 
 part.
 (4) Emergency services.--The term ``emergency services'' 
 means--
 (A) health care items and services furnished in the 
 emergency department of a hospital, and
 (B) ancillary services routinely available to such 
 department,
 to the extent they are required to evaluate and treat an 
 emergency medical condition (as defined in paragraph (3)) until 
 the condition is stabilized.
 (5) Enrollee.--The term ``enrollee'' means, with respect to 
 a health plan, an individual enrolled with the health plan.
 (6) Health plan.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``health plan'' refers to 
 any plan or arrangement (other than a plan or 
 arrangement described in subparagraph (B)) that 
 provides, or pays the cost of, health benefits, whether 
 through insurance, reimbursement, or otherwise.
 (B) Exception.--A plan or arrangement is described 
 in this subparagraph if it is:
 (i) Coverage only for accidental death or 
 dismemberment.
 (ii) Coverage providing wages or payments 
 in lieu of wages for any period during which 
 the employee is absent from work on account of 
 sickness or injury.
 (iii) A Medicare supplemental policy (as 
 defined in section 1882(g)(1) of the Social 
 Security Act).
 (iv) Coverage issued as a supplement to 
 liability insurance.
 (v) Worker's compensation or similar 
 insurance.
 (vi) Automobile medical-payment insurance.
 (vii) Coverage for a specified disease or 
 illness.
 (viii) A long-term care policy.
 (ix) A Federally-funded health care program 
 (except when such program contracts with a 
 health plan to provide items and services to 
 individuals eligible for benefits under the 
 program).
 (7) Managed care plan.--The term ``managed care plan'' 
 means a health plan that provides or arranges for the provision 
 of health care items and services to enrollees primarily 
 through participating physicians and providers.
 (8) Participating.--The term ``participating'' means, with 
 respect to a physician or provider, a physician or provider 
 that furnishes health care items and services to enrollees of 
 managed care plan under an agreement with the plan.
 (9) Prior authorization determination.--The term ``prior 
 authorization determination'' means, with respect to health 
 care items and services for which coverage may be provided 
 under a health plan, a determination, before the provision of 
 the items and services and as a condition of coverage of the 
 items and services under the plan, that coverage will be 
 provided for the items and services under the plan.
 (10) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (11) Stabilized.--The term ``stabilized'' means, with 
 respect to an emergency medical condition, that no material 
 deterioration of the condition is likely, within reasonable 
 medical probability, to result or occur before an individual 
 can be transferred in compliance with the requirements of 
 section 1867 of the Social Security Act.
 (12) 911 emergency telephone number.--The term ``911 
 emergency telephone number'' includes, in the case of a 
 geographic area where 911 is not in use for emergencies, such 
 other telephone number as is in use for emergencies.

SEC. 9. EFFECTIVE DATES.

 (a) In General.--This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall 
become effective on the earlier of--
 (1) 30 days after the date the Secretary issues regulations 
 pursuant to subsection (c), or
 (2) 210 days after the date of the enactment of this Act 
 (without regard to whether such regulations have been issued by 
 such date).
 (b) Application.--The provisions of section 3 (other than 
paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (d)) shall apply to items and 
services furnished on or after the effective date described in 
subsection (a).
 (c) Deadline for Regulations.--The Secretary shall issue 
regulations to implement this Act and the amendments made by this Act 
not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act. 
Such regulations may take effect on a final basis at the time of 
publication, subject to revision based on subsequent public comment.

SEC. 10. REPORT ON APPLICATION TO PLANS INCLUDING MEDICAL SAVINGS 
 ACCOUNTS.

 (a) Study.--The Secretary shall provide for a study of the 
application of this Act in the case of health plans composed of a high-
deductible, catastrophic health insurance policy with a medical savings 
account. In particular, the study shall evaluate the feasibility and 
desirability of requiring the application of amounts in such an account 
toward costs in providing emergency services and in providing promptly 
needed items and services identified in connection with the provision 
of emergency services.
 (b) Report.--The Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on 
such study not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.
 <all>
S 1233 IS----2