[Congressional Bills 108th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 2132 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

108th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 S. 2132

 To prohibit racial profiling.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 February 26, 2004

 Mr. Feingold (for himself, Mr. Corzine, Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Lautenberg, 
Mr. Kennedy, Mr. Schumer, Mr. Durbin, Mr. Kerry, Mrs. Boxer, Mr. Reid, 
 Mr. Dodd, Ms. Cantwell, Ms. Mikulski, and Mr. Edwards) introduced the 
 following bill; which was referred to the Committee on the Judiciary

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To prohibit racial profiling.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``End Racial 
Profiling Act of 2004''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings and purposes.
 TITLE I--PROHIBITION OF RACIAL PROFILING

Sec. 101. Prohibition.
Sec. 102. Enforcement.
 TITLE II--PROGRAMS TO ELIMINATE RACIAL PROFILING BY FEDERAL LAW 
 ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES

Sec. 201. Policies to eliminate racial profiling.
 TITLE III--PROGRAMS TO ELIMINATE RACIAL PROFILING BY STATE AND LOCAL 
 LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES

Sec. 301. Policies required for grants.
Sec. 302. Best practices development grants.
 TITLE IV--DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE REPORTS ON RACIAL PROFILING IN THE 
 UNITED STATES

Sec. 401. Attorney General to issue reports on racial profiling in the 
 United States.
Sec. 402. Limitation on use of data.
 TITLE V--DEFINITIONS AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Sec. 501. Definitions.
Sec. 502. Severability.
Sec. 503. Savings clause.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) Federal, State, and local law enforcement agents play a 
 vital role in protecting the public from crime and protecting 
 the Nation from terrorism. The vast majority of law enforcement 
 agents nationwide discharge their duties professionally and 
 without bias.
 (2) The use by police officers of race, ethnicity, 
 religion, or national origin in deciding which persons should 
 be subject to traffic stops, stops and frisks, questioning, 
 searches, and seizures is improper.
 (3) In his address to a Joint Session of Congress on 
 February 27, 2001, President George W. Bush declared that 
 ``racial profiling is wrong and we will end it in America.'' He 
 directed the Attorney General to implement this policy.
 (4) In June 2003, the Department of Justice issued a Policy 
 Guidance regarding racial profiling by Federal law enforcement 
 agencies which stated: ``Racial profiling in law enforcement is 
 not merely wrong, but also ineffective. Race-based assumptions 
 in law enforcement perpetuate negative racial stereotypes that 
 are harmful to our rich and diverse democracy, and materially 
 impair our efforts to maintain a fair and just society.''
 (5) The Department of Justice Guidance is a useful first 
 step, but does not achieve the President's stated goal of 
 ending racial profiling in America: it does not apply to State 
 and local law enforcement agencies, does not contain a 
 meaningful enforcement mechanism, does not require data 
 collection, and contains an overbroad exception for immigration 
 and national security matters.
 (6) Current efforts by State and local governments to 
 eradicate racial profiling and redress the harms it causes, 
 while also laudable, have been limited in scope and 
 insufficient to address this national problem. Therefore, 
 Federal legislation is needed.
 (7) Statistical evidence from across the country 
 demonstrates that racial profiling is a real and measurable 
 phenomenon.
 (8) As of November 15, 2000, the Department of Justice had 
 14 publicly noticed, ongoing, pattern or practice 
 investigations involving allegations of racial profiling, and 
 had filed 5 pattern and practice lawsuits involving allegations 
 of racial profiling, with 4 of those cases resolved through 
 consent decrees.
 (9) A large majority of individuals subjected to stops and 
 other enforcement activities based on race, ethnicity, 
 religion, or national origin are found to be law abiding and 
 therefore racial profiling is not an effective means to uncover 
 criminal activity.
 (10) A 2001 Department of Justice report on citizen-police 
 contacts in 1999 found that, although African-Americans and 
 Hispanics were more likely to be stopped and searched, they 
 were less likely to be in possession of contraband. On average, 
 searches and seizures of African-American drivers yielded 
 evidence only 8 percent of the time, searches and seizures of 
 Hispanic drivers yielded evidence only 10 percent of the time, 
 and searches and seizures of white drivers yielded evidence 17 
 percent of the time.
 (11) A 2000 General Accounting Office report on the 
 activities of the United States Customs Service during fiscal 
 year 1998 found that--
 (A) black women who were United States citizens 
 were 9 times more likely than white women who were 
 United States citizens to be x-rayed after being 
 frisked or patted down;
 (B) black women who were United States citizens 
 were less than half as likely as white women who were 
 United States citizens to be found carrying contraband; 
 and
 (C) in general, the patterns used to select 
 passengers for more intrusive searches resulted in 
 women and minorities being selected at rates that were 
 not consistent with the rates of finding contraband.
 (12) In some jurisdictions, local law enforcement practices 
 such as ticket and arrest quotas, and similar management 
 practices, may have the unintended effect of encouraging law 
 enforcement agents to engage in racial profiling.
 (13) Racial profiling harms individuals subjected to it 
 because they experience fear, anxiety, humiliation, anger, 
 resentment, and cynicism when they are unjustifiably treated as 
 criminal suspects. By discouraging individuals from traveling 
freely, racial profiling impairs both interstate and intrastate 
commerce.
 (14) Racial profiling damages law enforcement and the 
 criminal justice system as a whole by undermining public 
 confidence and trust in the police, the courts, and the 
 criminal law.
 (15) In the wake of the September 11, 2001, terrorist 
 attacks, many Arabs, Muslims, Central and South Asians, and 
 Sikhs, as well as other immigrants and Americans of foreign 
 descent, were treated with generalized suspicion and subjected 
 to searches and seizures based upon religion and national 
 origin, without trustworthy information linking specific 
 individuals to criminal conduct. Such profiling has failed to 
 produce tangible benefits, yet has created a fear and mistrust 
 of law enforcement agencies in these communities.
 (16) Racial profiling violates the equal protection clause 
 of the Constitution. Using race, ethnicity, religion, or 
 national origin as a proxy for criminal suspicion violates the 
 constitutional requirement that police and other government 
 officials accord to all citizens the equal protection of the 
 law. Arlington Heights v. Metropolitan Housing Development 
 Corporation, 429 U.S. 252 (1977).
 (17) Racial profiling is not adequately addressed through 
 suppression motions in criminal cases for two reasons. First, 
 the Supreme Court held, in Whren v. United States, 517 U.S. 806 
 (1996), that the racially discriminatory motive of a police 
 officer in making an otherwise valid traffic stop does not 
 warrant the suppression of evidence. Second, since most stops 
 do not result in the discovery of contraband, there is no 
 criminal prosecution and no evidence to suppress.
 (18) A comprehensive national solution is needed to address 
 racial profiling at the Federal, State, and local levels. 
 Federal support is needed to combat racial profiling through 
 specialized training of law enforcement agents, improved 
 management systems, and the acquisition of technology such as 
 in-car video cameras.
 (b) Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are--
 (1) to enforce the constitutional right to equal protection 
 of the laws, pursuant to the Fifth Amendment and section 5 of 
 the 14th Amendment to the Constitution of the United States;
 (2) to enforce the constitutional right to protection 
 against unreasonable searches and seizures, pursuant to the 
 Fourth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States;
 (3) to enforce the constitutional right to interstate 
 travel, pursuant to section 2 of article IV of the Constitution 
 of the United States; and
 (4) to regulate interstate commerce, pursuant to clause 3 
 of section 8 of article I of the Constitution of the United 
 States.

 TITLE I--PROHIBITION OF RACIAL PROFILING

SEC. 101. PROHIBITION.

 No law enforcement agent or law enforcement agency shall engage in 
racial profiling.

SEC. 102. ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) Remedy.--The United States, or an individual injured by racial 
profiling, may enforce this title in a civil action for declaratory or 
injunctive relief, filed either in a State court of general 
jurisdiction or in a district court of the United States.
 (b) Parties.--In any action brought pursuant to this title, relief 
may be obtained against--
 (1) any governmental unit that employed any law enforcement 
 agent who engaged in racial profiling;
 (2) any agent of such unit who engaged in racial profiling; 
 and
 (3) any person with supervisory authority over such agent.
 (c) Nature of Proof.--Proof that the routine or spontaneous 
investigatory activities of law enforcement agents in a jurisdiction 
have had a disparate impact on racial, ethnic, or religious minorities 
shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of this title.
 (d) Attorney's Fees.--In any action or proceeding to enforce this 
title against any governmental unit, the court may allow a prevailing 
plaintiff, other than the United States, reasonable attorney's fees as 
part of the costs, and may include expert fees as part of the 
attorney's fee.

 TITLE II--PROGRAMS TO ELIMINATE RACIAL PROFILING BY FEDERAL LAW 
 ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES

SEC. 201. POLICIES TO ELIMINATE RACIAL PROFILING.

 (a) In General.--Federal law enforcement agencies shall--
 (1) maintain adequate policies and procedures designed to 
 eliminate racial profiling; and
 (2) cease existing practices that encourage racial 
 profiling.
 (b) Policies.--The policies and procedures described in subsection 
(a)(1) shall include--
 (1) a prohibition on racial profiling;
 (2) the collection of data on routine investigatory 
 activities sufficient to determine if law enforcement agents 
 are engaged in racial profiling and submission of that data to 
 the Attorney General;
 (3) independent procedures for receiving, investigating, 
 and responding meaningfully to complaints alleging racial 
 profiling by law enforcement agents of the agency;
 (4) procedures to discipline law enforcement agents who 
 engage in racial profiling; and
 (5) such other policies or procedures that the Attorney 
 General deems necessary to eliminate racial profiling.

 TITLE III--PROGRAMS TO ELIMINATE RACIAL PROFILING BY STATE AND LOCAL 
 LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES

SEC. 301. POLICIES REQUIRED FOR GRANTS.

 (a) In General.--An application by a State or governmental unit for 
funding under a covered program shall include a certification that such 
unit and any agency to which it is redistributing program funds--
 (1) maintains adequate policies and procedures designed to 
 eliminate racial profiling; and
 (2) has ceased any existing practices that encourage racial 
 profiling.
 (b) Policies.--The policies and procedures described in subsection 
(a) shall include--
 (1) a prohibition on racial profiling;
 (2) the collection of data on routine investigatory 
 activities sufficient to determine if law enforcement agents 
 are engaged in racial profiling, and submission of that data to 
 the Attorney General;
 (3) independent procedures for receiving, investigating, 
 and responding meaningfully to complaints alleging racial 
 profiling by law enforcement agents;
 (4) procedures to discipline law enforcement agents who 
 engage in racial profiling; and
 (5) such other policies or procedures that the Attorney 
 General deems necessary to eliminate racial profiling.
 (c) Noncompliance.--If the Attorney General determines that a 
grantee is not in compliance with conditions established under this 
title, the Attorney General shall withhold the grant, in whole or in 
part, until the grantee establishes compliance. The Attorney General 
shall provide notice regarding State grants and opportunities for 
private parties to present evidence to the Attorney General that a 
grantee is not in compliance with conditions established under this 
title.

SEC. 302. BEST PRACTICES DEVELOPMENT GRANTS.

 (a) Grant Authorization.--The Attorney General may make grants to 
States, law enforcement agencies and other governmental units, Indian 
tribal governments, or other public and private entities, to develop 
and implement best practice devices and systems to ensure the racially 
neutral administration of justice.
 (b) Uses.--The funds provided pursuant to subsection (a) may be 
used to support--
 (1) development and implementation of training to prevent 
 racial profiling and to encourage more respectful interaction 
 with the public;
 (2) acquisition and use of technology to facilitate the 
 collection of data regarding routine investigatory activities 
 in order to determine if law enforcement agents are engaged in 
 racial profiling;
 (3) acquisition and use of technology to verify the 
 accuracy of data collection, including in-car video cameras and 
 portable computer systems;
 (4) development and acquisition of early warning systems 
 and other feedback systems that help identify officers or units 
 of officers engaged in or at risk of racial profiling or other 
 misconduct, including the technology to support such systems;
 (5) establishment or improvement of systems and procedures 
 for receiving, investigating, and responding meaningfully to 
 complaints alleging racial, ethnic, or religious bias by law 
 enforcement agents; and
 (6) establishment or improvement of management systems to 
 ensure that supervisors are held accountable for the conduct of 
 their subordinates.
 (c) Equitable Distribution.--The Attorney General shall ensure that 
grants under this section are awarded in a manner that reserves an 
equitable share of funding for small and rural law enforcement 
agencies.
 (d) Authorization of Appropriations.--The Attorney General shall 
make available such sums as are necessary to carry out this section 
from amounts appropriated for programs administered by the Attorney 
General.

 TITLE IV--DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE REPORTS ON RACIAL PROFILING IN THE 
 UNITED STATES

SEC. 401. ATTORNEY GENERAL TO ISSUE REPORTS ON RACIAL PROFILING IN THE 
 UNITED STATES.

 (a) Reports.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the enactment 
 of this Act, and each year thereafter, the Attorney General 
 shall submit to Congress a report on racial profiling by 
 Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies in the 
 United States.
 (2) Scope.--The reports issued pursuant to paragraph (1) 
 shall include--
 (A) a summary of data collected pursuant to 
 sections 201(b)(2) and 301(b)(2) and any other reliable 
 source of information regarding racial profiling in the 
 United States;
 (B) the status of the adoption and implementation 
 of policies and procedures by Federal law enforcement 
 agencies pursuant to section 201;
 (C) the status of the adoption and implementation 
 of policies and procedures by State and local law 
 enforcement agencies pursuant to sections 301 and 302; 
 and
 (D) a description of any other policies and 
 procedures that the Attorney General believes would 
 facilitate the elimination of racial profiling.
 (b) Data Collection.--Not later than 6 months after the enactment 
of this Act, the Attorney General shall by regulation establish 
standards for the collection of data under sections 201(b)(2) and 
301(b)(2), including standards for setting benchmarks against which 
collected data shall be measured. Such standards shall result in the 
collection of data, including data with respect to stops, searches, 
seizures, and arrests, that is sufficiently detailed to determine 
whether law enforcement agencies are engaged in racial profiling and to 
monitor the effectiveness of policies and procedures designed to 
eliminate racial profiling.
 (c) Public Access.--Data collected under sections 201(b)(2) and 
301(b)(2) shall be available to the public.

SEC. 402. LIMITATION ON USE OF DATA.

 Information released pursuant to section 401 shall not reveal the 
identity of any individual who is detained or any law enforcement 
officer involved in a detention.

 TITLE V--DEFINITIONS AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

SEC. 501. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) Covered program.--The term ``covered program'' means 
 any program or activity funded in whole or in part with funds 
 made available under--
 (A) the Edward Byrne Memorial State and Local Law 
 Enforcement Assistance Programs (part E of title I of 
 the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 
 (42 U.S.C. 3750 et seq.));
 (B) the ``Cops on the Beat'' program under part Q 
 of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe 
 Streets Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 3796dd et seq.), but not 
 including any program, project, or other activity 
 specified in section 1701(d)(8) of that Act (42 U.S.C. 
 3796dd(d)(8)); and
 (C) the Local Law Enforcement Block Grant program 
 of the Department of Justice, as described in 
 appropriations Acts.
 (2) Governmental unit.--The term ``governmental unit'' 
 means any department, agency, special purpose district, or 
 other instrumentality of Federal, State, local, or Indian 
 tribal government.
 (3) Law enforcement agency.--The term ``law enforcement 
 agency'' means a Federal, State, local, or Indian tribal public 
 agency engaged in the prevention, detection, or investigation 
 of violations of criminal, immigration, or customs laws.
 (4) Law enforcement agent.--The term ``law enforcement 
 agent'' means any Federal, State, local, or Indian tribal 
 official responsible for enforcing criminal, immigration, or 
 customs laws, including police officers and other agents of 
 Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies.
 (5) Racial profiling.--The term ``racial profiling'' means 
 the practice of a law enforcement agent relying, to any degree, 
 on race, ethnicity, religion, or national origin in selecting 
 which individuals to subject to routine or spontaneous 
 investigatory activities, or in deciding upon the scope and 
 substance of law enforcement activity following the initial 
 investigatory procedure, except when there is trustworthy 
 information, relevant to the locality and timeframe, that links 
 persons of a particular race, ethnicity, religion, or national 
 origin to an identified criminal incident or scheme.
 (6) Routine or spontaneous investigatory activities.--The 
 term ``routine or spontaneous investigatory activities'' means 
 the following activities by law enforcement agents: interviews; 
 traffic stops; pedestrian stops; frisks and other types of body 
 searches; consensual or nonconsensual searches of the persons 
 or possessions (including vehicles) of motorists or 
 pedestrians; inspections and interviews of entrants into the 
 United States that are more extensive than those customarily 
 carried out; immigration related workplace investigations; and 
 such other types of law enforcement encounters compiled by the 
 FBI and the Justice Department's Bureau of Justice Statistics.

SEC. 502. SEVERABILITY.

 If any provision of this Act or the application of such provision 
to any person or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional, the 
remainder of this Act and the application of the provisions of such to 
any person or circumstance shall not be affected thereby.

SEC. 503. SAVINGS CLAUSE.

 Nothing in this Act shall be construed to limit legal or 
administrative remedies under section 1979 of the Revised Statutes of 
the United States (42 U.S.C. 1983), section 210401 of the Violent Crime 
Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (42 U.S.C. 14141), the Omnibus 
Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 3701 et seq.), 
and title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.).
 <all>