HR 3405 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3405
To amend the Public Health Service Act to provide for affordable prices for
drugs purchased by certain entities receiving financial assistance under
such Act, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
September 24, 1991
Mr. WYDEN (for himself and Mr. COOPER) introduced the following bill; which
was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Public Health Service Act to provide for affordable prices for
drugs purchased by certain entities receiving financial assistance under
such Act, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Public Health Clinic Prudent Pharmaceutical
 Purchasing Act'.
SEC. 2. REBATES FOR THE PURCHASE OF CERTAIN DRUGS.
 Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 243 et
 seq.) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating section 317A as section 317B; and
 (2) by inserting after section 317 the following new section:
`REBATES FOR THE PURCHASE OF CERTAIN DRUGS
 `SEC. 317A. (a) REQUIREMENT- An entity receiving financial assistance under
 this Act may not purchase any drug from a manufacturer unless there is in
 effect an agreement with the Secretary that requires the manufacturer to
 provide a rebate, as determined under subsection (c), to covered entities
 for the purchase of the drug, except that such an agreement may not require
 a rebate in the case of any quantity of a drug for which reimbursement
 has been made under title XIX of the Social Security Act.
 `(b) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section:
 `(1) The term `drug' means a drug as defined in section 1927(k)(2) of the
 Social Security Act, and any over-the-counter drug or birth control device,
 that is purchased and dispensed by a covered entity.
 `(2) The term `covered entity' means any of the following entities:
 `(A) A migrant health center receiving financial assistance under section
 329.
 `(B) A community health center receiving financial assistance under
 section 330.
 `(C) An entity receiving financial assistance under section 340.
 `(D) An alcohol or drug treatment entity or mental health entity receiving
 financial assistance under title V or title XIX.
 `(E) A family planning project receiving financial assistance under
 section 1001.
 `(F) An entity receiving financial assistance under title XXVI.
 `(G) A black lung clinic receiving financial assistance under this Act.
 `(H) A clinic that treats sexually transmitted diseases and is receiving
 financial assistance under this Act.
 `(3) The term `financial assistance' means a grant, cooperative agreement,
 or contract.
 `(c) AMOUNT- The amount of a rebate for a drug for purposes of subsection
 (a) shall be the amount of the rebate applicable to the drug under section
 1927(c) of the Social Security Act. This subsection may not be construed
 as limiting the right of a covered entity to negotiate with a manufacturer
 of a drug the price at which the covered entity will purchase the drug.
 `(d) NEGOTIATION OF CONTRACTS- The Secretary shall attempt, on behalf
 of and in cooperation with covered entities, to negotiate new contracts
 or renegotiate current contracts for drugs purchased or dispensed by such
 entities with a view toward achieving a price comparable to, or lower than,
 the price charged such entities by the manufacturer on September 1, 1990,
 increased by the fiscal year 1991 consumer price index, as determined by
 the Secretary.
 `(e) CLAIMS AND PAYMENT-
 `(1) SUBMISSION OF CLAIM-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Each covered entity eligible for a rebate under this
 section shall submit to the Secretary a rebate claim for the total number
 of dosage form units of each drug purchased, and the average price paid
 for each such units, during a period which is no later than 60 days after
 the end of the calendar quarter or other applicable reporting period and
 as required by the Secretary.
 `(B) EXCEPTION- Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), if a covered entity is
 of the type described in subparagraph (D) or (H) of subsection (b)(2),
 the Secretary may permit such entities to consolidate rebate claims on a
 State or project area basis.
 `(2) PAYMENTS- Not later than 30 days after the end of each applicable
 reporting period as described in paragraph (1)(A), the Secretary shall
 consolidate all rebate claims received for such period and notify the
 manufacturer of each drug for which such a claim is submitted of the
 amount that such manufacturer shall provide as a rebate with respect to the
 particular covered entities submitting such claims. The manufacturer shall
 promptly remit to the Secretary the amounts due under such claims and the
 Secretary shall forward such amounts to the appropriate claiming entities.
 `(3) TIME PERIOD- In the agreements described in subsection (a), the
 manufacturer shall agree to remit amounts due under any rebate determined
 under this section to the Secretary not later than 30 days after the
 receipt of the notice under paragraph (2) concerning the total number of
 dosage form units of each drug purchased during the calendar quarter or
 other applicable reporting period.
 `(f) NO REDUCTION IN AMOUNT OF ASSISTANCE- Notwithstanding any other
 provision of law, grants awarded under Federal law to covered entities
 shall not be reduced as a result of such entities receiving rebates under
 this section.
 `(g) REPORT- Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of the
 Public Health Clinic Prudent Pharmaceutical Purchasing Act, the Secretary
 shall prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report
 that shall contain--
 `(1) a description of the drugs purchased under agreements entered into
 under this section and the amounts of such purchases;
 `(2) an assessment of the effectiveness of the rebate program under this
 section, including the savings achieved and the administrative costs
 associated with such program;
 `(3) an assessment of the feasibility of making drugs available to covered
 entities under this section through the utilization of the Federal supply
 schedule, or the Federal depot system, or both;
 `(4) recommendations for legislation that would improve such program,
 including the establishment or utilization of recommended distribution
 networks for making drugs available to clinics under this section; and
 `(5) any other information determined appropriate by the Secretary.
 `(h) PROHIBITION ON RESALE- A covered entity that receives a rebate
 under this section for the purchase of a drug may not resell such drug. A
 covered entity found to have sold a drug in violation of this subsection
 shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $25,000 for each
 such violation.'.