S 3127 IS
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 3127
To provide for the energy security of the Nation through encouraging the
production of domestic oil and gas resources in deep water on the Outer
Continental Shelf, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
August 4 (legislative day, JULY 23), 1992
Mr. JOHNSTON introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
A BILL
To provide for the energy security of the Nation through encouraging the
production of domestic oil and gas resources in deep water on the Outer
Continental Shelf, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be referred to
 as the `Outer Continental Shelf Deep Water Production Incentives Act'.
 SEC. 2. The Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act, as amended, is amended by
 redesignating section 8(a)(3) as section 8(a)(3)(A) and by adding at the
 end thereof the following:
 `(B)(i) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, with respect
 to any lease located in water depth of 200 meters or greater from which
 royalties are first received by the Secretary after the date of enactment
 of the Outer Continental Shelf Deep Water Production Incentives Act, no
 royalty payment shall be required on production from such lease until the
 capital investment costs related to such production have been recovered
 by the lessee out of proceeds from such lease.
 `(ii) For purposes of this subparagraph, capital investment costs shall
 include exploration costs incurred after the acquisition of the lease and
 development costs, as defined by the Secretary. Such capital investment
 costs shall not include any amounts paid as bonus bids.
 `(iii) The provisions of this subparagraph shall not apply in any calendar
 year when the arithmetic average of the daily price postings on the New
 York Mercantile Exchange for West Texas Intermediate crude oil exceeds
 $34 per barrel for two consecutive quarters.
 `(iv) The $34 per barrel price of crude oil referred to in clause (iii)
 of this subparagraph shall be increased during any calendar year after
 1993 by the percentage if any by which the Consumer Price Index for the
 preceding calendar year, as defined in section (1)(f)(4) of title 26 of the
 United States Code, exceeds the Consumer Price Index for calendar year 1993.
 `(v) Nothing contained in this subparagraph shall affect the amount of
 any payment to a state made pursuant to this Act.'.
 SEC. 3. The Secretary shall promulgate such rules and regulations as are
 necessary to implement the provisions of this Act within one hundred and
 twenty days after the date of enactment of this Act.