S 1622 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1622
To amend the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 to improve the
provisions of such Act with respect to the health and safety of employees,
and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
August 1 (legislative day, JULY 8), 1991
Mr. KENNEDY (for himself and Mr. METZENBAUM) introduced the following bill;
which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources
A BILL
To amend the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 to improve the
provisions of such Act with respect to the health and safety of employees,
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Comprehensive Occupational Safety and Health
 Reform Act'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
 (a) FINDINGS- Congress finds that--
 (1) during the past two decades progress has been made in reducing workplace
 fatalities, injuries and exposures to toxic substances through efforts of the
 Federal agencies, States, employers, employees and employee representatives;
 (2) despite the progress described in paragraph (1), work-related injuries,
 illnesses and fatalities continue to occur at rates that are unacceptable and
 that impose a substantial burden upon employers, employees and the nation
 in terms of lost production, wage loss, medical expenses, compensation
 payments and disability;
 (3) employers and employees are not sufficiently involved in joint efforts
 to identify and correct occupational safety and health hazards;
 (4) employers and employees require better training to identify safety
 and health problems;
 (5) Federal agency standard-setting has not kept pace with knowledge about
 safety and health hazards;
 (6) enforcement of occupational safety and health standards has not been
 adequate to bring about timely abatement of hazardous conditions or to
 deter future violation of occupational health and safety standards;
 (7) millions of American workers exposed to serious occupational safety
 and health hazards are excluded from full coverage under the Occupational
 Safety and Health Act of 1970; and
 (8) the lack of accurate data and information on work related fatalities,
 injuries and illnesses has impeded efforts to prevent such fatalities,
 injuries and illnesses.
 (b) PURPOSE- It is the purpose of this Act to--
 (1) increase the joint participation of employers and employees in
 identifying and correcting occupational safety and health hazards,
 by requiring the establishment of employer safety and health programs,
 joint employer-employee safety and health committees, and training and
 education programs;
 (2) improve and expedite the setting of occupational safety and health
 standards;
 (3) strengthen Federal and State agency enforcement of violations of safety
 and health standards;
 (4) assure that all employees are afforded full coverage and protection
 from safety and health hazards under the Occupational Safety and Health
 Act of 1970 or other Federal laws; and
 (5) improve information and data on work related injuries, illnesses and
 fatalities for purposes of enhancing occupational safety and health.
SEC. 3. REFERENCES.
 Except as otherwise provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal
 is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other
 provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or
 other provision of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29
 U.S.C. 651 et seq.).
TITLE I--SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAMS
SEC. 101. SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAMS.
 Section 27 (29 U.S.C. 676) is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 27. SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAMS.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each employer shall, in accordance with this section,
 establish and carry out a safety and health program to reduce or eliminate
 hazards and to prevent injuries and illnesses to employees.
 `(2) MODIFICATIONS TO SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAMS- The Secretary may,
 pursuant to regulations promulgated under subsection (c)(1), modify the
 application of the requirements of this section to classes of employers
 where the Secretary determines that, in light of the nature of the risks
 faced by the employees of such employers, such a modification would not
 reduce the employees' safety and health protection.
 `(3) WORKSITES- As used in this section and section 28, the term `worksite'
 means a single physical location where business is conducted or where
 operations are performed by employees of an employer.
 `(b) REQUIREMENTS- A safety and health program established and carried
 out under subsection (a) shall be a written program that shall include--
 `(1) methods and procedures for identifying, evaluating, and documenting
 safety and health hazards;
 `(2) methods and procedures for correcting the safety and health hazards
 identified under paragraph (1);
 `(3) methods and procedures for investigating work-related fatalities,
 injuries and illnesses;
 `(4) methods and procedures for providing occupational safety and health
 services, including emergency response and first aid procedures;
 `(5) methods and procedures for employee participation in the implementation
 of the safety and health program, including participation through any
 safety and health committee established under section 28;
 `(6) methods and procedures for responding to the recommendations of the
 safety and health committee, where applicable;
 `(7) methods and procedures for providing safety and health training and
 education to employees and to members of any safety and health committee
 established under section 28;
 `(8) the designation of a representative of the employer who has the
 qualifications and responsibility to identify safety and health hazards
 and the authority to initiate corrective action where appropriate;
 `(9) in the case of a worksite where employees of two or more employers
 work, procedures for each employer to protect employees at the worksite
 from hazards under the employer's control, including procedures to provide
 information on safety and health hazards to other employers and employees
 at the worksite; and
 `(10) such other provisions as the Secretary requires to effectuate the
 purposes of the Act.
 `(c) REGULATIONS ON EMPLOYER SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAMS-
 `(1) GENERAL REGULATIONS-
 `(A) ESTABLISHMENT- Not later than 1 year after the effective date of this
 section, the Secretary shall promulgate final regulations concerning the
 establishment and implementation of employer safety and health programs
 under this section.
 `(B) TRAINING AND EDUCATION- Regulations promulgated under subparagraph
 (A) shall include provisions for the training and education of employees,
 and of safety and health committee members, as required under subsection
 (b)(6). Such regulations shall--
 `(i) provide for the training and education of employees, including safety
 and health committee members, in a manner that is readily understandable
 by such employees, concerning safety and health hazards, control measures,
 the employer's safety and health program, employee rights and applicable
 laws and regulations;
 `(ii) provide for the training and education of safety and health committee,
 concerning methods and procedures for hazard recognition and control, the
 conduct of worksite safety and health inspections, the rights of the safety
 and health committee, and concerning other information necessary to enable
 such members to carry out the activities of the committee under section 28;
 `(iii) require that training and education be provided to employees at the
 time of employment and to safety and health committee members at the time
 of selection; and
 `(iv) require that refresher training be provided on at least an annual
 basis and that additional training be provided to employees and to safety and
 health committee members when there are changes in conditions or operations
 that may expose employees to new or different safety or health hazards
 or when there are changes in safety and health regulations or standards
 under this Act that apply to the employer.
 `(2) NO LOSS OF PAY- The time during which employees are participating
 in training and education activities under this subsection shall be
 considered as hours worked for purposes of wages, benefits, and other
 terms and conditions of employment. Such training and education shall be
 provided by an employer at no cost to the employees of the employer.'.
TITLE II--SAFETY AND HEALTH COMMITTEES AND EMPLOYEE SAFETY AND HEALTH
REPRESENTATIVES
SEC. 201. SAFETY AND HEALTH COMMITTEES AND EMPLOYEE SAFETY AND HEALTH
REPRESENTATIVES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 28 is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 28. SAFETY AND HEALTH COMMITTEES AND EMPLOYEE SAFETY AND HEALTH
REPRESENTATIVES.
 `(a) REQUIREMENT- Each employer of not less than 11 employees shall provide
 for the establishment of safety and health committees and the selection of
 employee safety and health representatives in accordance with this section.
 `(b) SAFETY AND HEALTH COMMITTEES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each employer covered by this section shall establish a
 safety and health committee at each worksite of the employer, except that the
 Secretary may, by regulation, modify the application of this paragraph to--
 `(A) an employer whose employees do not primarily report to or work at a
 fixed location;
 `(B) worksites at which less than eleven employees of a covered employer
 are employed; or
 `(C) worksites where employees of more than one employer are employed.
Each employer required to establish a safety and health committee under
this section shall, pursuant to regulations promulgated by the Secretary,
enable such committee to exercise the rights described in this section.
 `(2) MEMBERSHIP- A committee established under paragraph (1) shall
 consist of--
 `(A) the employee safety and health representatives elected or appointed
 under subsection (c)(2); and
 `(B) as determined appropriate by the employer, employer representatives,
 the number of which may not exceed the number of employee representatives
 described in subparagraph (A).
 `(3) CHAIRPERSONS- A committee established under paragraph (1) shall be
 cochaired by--
 `(A) a representative selected by the employer; and
 `(B) a representative selected by the employee members of such committee.
 `(4) RIGHTS- A committee established under paragraph (1) shall have the
 right, within reasonable limits and in a reasonable manner, to--
 `(A) review any safety and health program established under section 27 by
 the employer;
 `(B) review incidents involving work-related fatalities, injuries and
 illnesses and complaints regarding safety or health hazards by employees;
 `(C) review, upon the request of the committee or upon the request of the
 employer representatives or employee representatives of the committee,
 the employer's work injury and illness records, other than personally
 identifiable medical information, and other reports or documents relating
 to occupational safety and health;
 `(D) conduct inspections of the worksite at least once every 3 months and
 in response to complaints regarding safety or health hazards by employees
 or committee members;
 `(E) conduct interviews with employees in conjunction with inspections of
 the worksite;
 `(F) conduct meetings, at least once every 3 months, and maintain written
 minutes of such meetings;
 `(G) observe the measurement of employee exposure to toxic materials and
 harmful physical agents;
 `(H) establish procedures for exercising the rights of the committee;
 `(I) make recommendations on behalf of the committee, and in making
 such recommendations, permit any member of such committee to submit the
 separate views of such member, or on behalf of the employer or employee
 representatives on such committee, to the employer for improvements in the
 employer's safety and health program and for the correction of hazards to
 employee safety or health, except that such recommendations shall be advisory
 only and the employer shall retain full authority to manage the worksite; and
 `(J) accompany the Secretary or the Secretary's representative during any
 physical inspection of the worksite under section 8(a).
 `(5) TIME FOR COMMITTEE ACTIVITIES- The employer shall permit members
 of the committee established under paragraph (1) to take such time from
 work as is reasonably necessary to exercise the rights of the committee,
 without suffering any loss of pay or benefits for time spent on duties of
 the committee.
 `(6) REGULATIONS- Not later than 1 year after the effective date of
 this section, the Secretary shall promulgate final regulations for the
 establishment and functioning of safety and health committees under this
 section. Such regulations shall include provisions concerning--
 `(A) the establishment of such committees by an employer whose employees
 do not primarily report to or work at a fixed location;
 `(B) the establishment of such committees with regard to worksites at
 which less than 11 employees of a covered employer are employed;
 `(C) the establishment of committees at worksites where employees of more
 than one employer are employed; and
 `(D) the employer's obligation to enable the committee to function properly
 and effectively, including the provision of facilities and materials
 necessary for the committee to conduct its activities, and the maintenance
 of records and minutes developed by the committee.
 `(c) EMPLOYEE SAFETY AND HEALTH REPRESENTATIVES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Safety and health committees established under this
 section shall include--
 `(A) one employee safety and health representative where the average number
 of nonmanagerial employees of the employer at the worksite during the year
 ending January 1 was more than 10, but less than 50;
 `(B) two employee safety and health representatives where the average
 number of nonmanagerial employees of the employer at the worksite during
 the year ending January 1 was more than 50, but less than 100;
 `(C) an additional employee safety and health representative for each
 additional 100 such employees at the worksite, up to a maximum of six
 employee safety and health representatives, except as provided in paragraph
 (2)(C); and
 `(D) where an employer's employees do not primarily report to or work
 at a fixed location, at worksites at which less than 11 employees of a
 covered employer are employed, or at worksites where employees of more
 than one employer are employed, a number of employee safety and health
 representatives as determined by the Secretary by regulation.
 `(2) SELECTION- Employee safety and health representatives shall be selected
 by and from among the employer's nonmanagerial employees, as follows:
 `(A) Where none of the employer's employees at a worksite are represented by
 an exclusive bargaining representative, the employees shall elect employee
 safety and health representatives in an election held in conformity with
 procedures pursuant to regulations promulgated by the Secretary.
 `(B) Where the employer's employees are represented by a single exclusive
 bargaining representative, the bargaining representative shall designate
 the employee safety and health representatives.
 `(C) Where the employer's employees are represented by more than one
 exclusive representative or where some but not all of the employees
 are represented by an exclusive representative, each bargaining unit
 of represented employees (and any residual group of unrepresented
 employees) shall have a proportionate number of employee safety and health
 representatives based on the number of employees in each bargaining unit
 or group, except that each such unit or group of 11 or more employees shall
 have at least one representative. The selection process shall be conducted
 in accordance with the provisions of subparagraph (A) or (B) as applicable.
 `(3) REGULATIONS- Not later than 1 year after the effective date of this
 section, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations concerning safety
 and health representatives. Such regulations shall include provisions
 concerning--
 `(A) the number of employee safety and health representatives where an
 employer's employees do not primarily report to work at a fixed location;
 `(B) the number of employee safety and health representatives with respect to
 worksites at which less than 11 employees of a covered employer are employed;
 `(C) the number of employee safety and health representatives at worksites
 where employees of more than one employer are employed; and
 `(D) the selection and election procedures for employee safety and health
 representatives, such election procedures to provide for a fair election
 by secret ballot and protect employee's equal rights to participate in the
 election without being subject to penalty, discipline, improper interference
 or reprisal.
 `(d) ADDITIONAL RIGHTS- The rights and remedies provided to employees
 and employee safety and health representatives by this section are in
 addition to, and not in lieu of, any other rights and remedies provided
 by contract, by other provisions of this Act or by other applicable law,
 and are not intended to alter or affect such rights and remedies.'.
 (b) EFFECT OF AMENDMENT- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall not be
 construed to affect the amendments made by section 28 of the Occupational
 Safety and Health Act of 1970 as such section existed on the date of
 enactment of such Act.
TITLE III--COVERAGE
SEC. 301. EXTENSION OF COVERAGE TO PUBLIC EMPLOYEES.
 (a) DEFINITION OF EMPLOYER- Section 3(5) (29 U.S.C. 652(5)) is amended by
 striking `but does not include' and inserting `including'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Section 19 (29 U.S.C. 668) is repealed.
 (2) Section 410(b) of title 39, United States Code, is amended by striking
 paragraph (7) and inserting the following new paragraph:
 `(7) the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 651 et
 seq.);'.
SEC. 302. APPLICATION OF ACT.
 Section 4(b) (29 U.S.C. 653(b)(1)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1) to read as follows:
 `(1) Where a Federal agency has promulgated and is enforcing standards or
 regulations affecting the occupational safety or health of some or all of the
 employees within that agency's regulatory jurisdiction, and the Secretary
 of Labor determines that a standard or regulation as promulgated and the
 manner in which such standard or regulation is being enforced provides
 protection to those employees that is at least as effective as the protection
 provided to those employees by the Secretary's enforcement of this Act, the
 Secretary may publish a notice in the Federal Register setting forth such
 determination and the reasons therefore and certifying that the Secretary
 has ceded jurisdiction to that Federal agency with respect to the specified
 hazards to which the designated employees are exposed. Such certification
 shall remain in effect unless and until rescinded by the Secretary.';
 (2) by redesignating paragraphs (2) through (4) as paragraph (5) through
 (7), respectively; and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (1), the following new paragraphs:
 `(2) The Secretary shall, by regulation, establish procedures by which
 any affected person may petition the Secretary to rescind a certification
 under paragraph (1). Upon receipt of such a petition the Secretary shall
 investigate the matter and shall, within 90 days after receipt of the
 petition, publish a decision with respect to the petition in the Federal
 Register.
 `(3) Any person who may be adversely affected by a decision of the Secretary
 certifying that the Secretary has ceded jurisdiction to another Federal
 agency pursuant to paragraph (1), or by a decision of the Secretary denying
 a petition to rescind such a certification under paragraph (2), may at any
 time prior to the 60th day after such decision is published in the Federal
 Register file a petition challenging such decision with the United States
 court of appeals for the circuit wherein such person resides or has his or
 her principal place of business, for judicial review of such decision. A
 copy of the petition shall be forthwith transmitted by the clerk of the
 court to the Secretary. The Secretary's decision shall be set aside if
 found to be arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise
 not in accordance with law.
 `(4) Nothing in this Act shall apply to working conditions covered by the
 Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 (30 U.S.C. 801 et seq.).'.
SEC. 303. APPLICATION OF OSHA TO DOE NUCLEAR FACILITIES.
 Paragraph (6) of section 4(b) (29 U.S.C. 653(b)(2)) (as redesignated by
 section 302(2)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(6) Notwithstanding paragraph (1) or any other provision of this law, this
 Act shall apply with respect to employment performed in the Federal nuclear
 facilities under the control or jurisdiction of the Department of Energy.'.
SEC. 304. EXTENSION OF EMPLOYER DUTIES TO ALL EMPLOYEES WORKING AT A PLACE
OF EMPLOYMENT.
 Paragraph (1) of section 5(a) (29 U.S.C. 654(a)(1)) is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(1) shall furnish employment and a place of employment which are free
 from recognized hazards that are causing or are likely to cause death
 or serious physical harm to the employees of the employer or to other
 employees at the place of employment.'.
TITLE IV--OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH STANDARDS
SEC. 401. TIMEFRAMES FOR SETTING STANDARDS.
 (a) RECOMMENDATIONS AND PETITIONS FOR STANDARDS- Paragraph (2) of section
 6(b) (29 U.S.C. 655(b)(2)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(2)(A) If the Secretary receives a recommendation of an advisory committee,
 the Secretary of Health and Human Services or the Administrator of the
 Environmental Protection Agency or a petition from an interested person
 that sets forth with reasonable particularity the facts that the person
 claims establish that an occupational safety or health standard should be
 promulgated, modified or revoked, the Secretary shall, not later than 90
 days after receipt of such recommendation or petition, publish in the
 Federal Register a response stating whether the Secretary intends to
 publish a proposed rule promulgating, modifying or revoking such standard.
 `(B) If the response of the Secretary under subparagraph (A) states that the
 Secretary does not intend to publish a proposed rule, the Secretary shall
 set forth the reasons for that decision. In all other cases, the Secretary
 shall, not later than 12 months after the receipt of a recommendation
 or petition under subparagraph (A), publish in the Federal Register a
 proposed rule promulgating, modifying or revoking the standard discussed
 in the petition or recommendation.'.
 (b) PROCEDURE FOR COMMENT AND HEARING- Paragraph (3) of section 6(b)
 (29 U.S.C. 655(b)(3)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating such paragraph as subparagraph (B) of paragraph (3); and
 (2) by inserting before such subparagraph, as so redesignated, the following
 new subparagraph:
 `(A) Where information developed by or submitted to the Secretary indicates
 that a rule should be proposed promulgating, modifying, or revoking an
 occupational safety or health standard, the Secretary shall publish such a
 proposed rule in the Federal Register and shall afford interested persons
 a period of at least 30 days after publication to submit written data
 or comments.'.
 (c) TIME FRAME FOR ISSUING RULES- Section 6(b)(4) (29 U.S.C. 655(b)(4))
 is amended by striking `sixty days' both places such appears and inserting
 `180 days'.
 (d) REVIEW OF SECRETARY'S FAILURE OR REFUSAL TO ISSUE RULES- Section 6
 (29 U.S.C. 655) is amended--
 (1) by adding at the end of subsection (f) the following new sentence:
 `Judicial review of the validity of an occupational safety and health
 standard may be obtained exclusively through a petition for review in the
 appropriate United States court of appeals, acting under this subsection
 or under subsection (h).'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(h)(1) Any person who may be adversely affected by a determination by
 the Secretary under subsection (b)(2) not to propose a rule promulgating,
 modifying, or revoking a standard may at any time prior to the expiration
 of 60 days after such determination is published in the Federal Register
 file a petition seeking review of such determination with the United States
 court of appeals for the circuit wherein such person resides or has his or
 her principal place of business. A copy of the petition shall be forthwith
 transmitted by the clerk of the court to the Secretary. The Secretary's
 determination shall be set aside if found to be arbitrary, capricious,
 an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law.
 `(2) Any person who may be adversely affected by a failure of the Secretary
 to take any action required by this section within the time period prescribed
 by this section may at any time after such period of time has elapsed file
 a petition for review stating that such action has been unlawfully withheld
 or unreasonably delayed. Such petition may be filed with the United States
 court of appeals for the circuit wherein such person resides or has his or
 her principal place of business. A copy of the petition shall be forthwith
 transmitted by the clerk of the court to the Secretary. The reviewing
 court shall compel the Secretary to take any action that is found to have
 been unlawfully withheld or unreasonably delayed. In deciding whether to
 compel such action the court shall consider whether the Secretary's failure
 to act is consistent with the time limits set forth in this section. The
 Secretary's desire to confer with, or to receive approval from any other
 Federal agency or Federal executive official, shall not justify the
 withholding or delaying of action by the Secretary, except where such
 consultation or solicitation of approval is required by Federal law.'.
SEC. 402. BASIS FOR STANDARDS.
 Paragraph (8) of section 3 (29 U.S.C. 652(8)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(8) The term `occupational safety and health standard' means a standard
 that addresses a significant risk to the safety or health of employees
 by requiring conditions, or the adoption or use of one or more practices,
 means, methods, operations, or processes that most adequately assure, to the
 extent feasible, safe and healthful employment and places of employment.'.
SEC. 403. RECORDING OF WORK RELATED ILLNESSES.
 Section 6(b)(7) (29 U.S.C. 655(b)(7)) is amended by inserting after the third
 sentence the following new sentence: `The standard shall also prescribe
 requirements for recording or reporting a work-related illness determined
 as a result of a medical examination or test conducted under the standard.'.
SEC. 404. PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF ALL COMMUNICATIONS ON STANDARDS.
 Section 6(b) (29 U.S.C. 655(b)) is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new paragraph:
 `(9) The Secretary shall place all written comments and communications,
 and a summary of all verbal communications, with parties outside the
 Department of Labor (including communications with other government
 agencies), regarding the promulgation, modification or revocation of a
 standard under this section, in the public record.'.
SEC. 405. REVISION OF PERMISSIBLE EXPOSURE LIMITS.
 Section 6 (29 U.S.C. 655) (as amended by section 401(d)) is further amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(i) In addition to other health and safety standards promulgated under
 subsection (b), the Secretary shall, in cooperation with the Secretary of
 Health and Human Services, modify and establish exposure limits for toxic
 materials and harmful physical agents on a regular basis, in accordance
 with the requirements of subsection (b)(5), in the following manner:
 `(1) The Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the National
 Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, shall regularly evaluate
 available scientific evidence, data and information to determine if exposure
 limits for toxic materials and harmful physical agents promulgated under
 subsections (a) and (b) should be modified or established to protect exposed
 employees against material impairment of health or functional capacity. Such
 evaluations shall include a review of the scientific literature, standards
 of private and professional organizations, national consensus standards,
 standards adopted by other countries, and recommendations of State and
 Federal agencies.
 `(2) Not less than once every 3 years the Secretary of Health and Human
 Services, acting through the National Institute for Occupational Safety
 and Health, shall develop and transmit to the Secretary recommendations
 identifying toxic materials and harmful physical agents, if any, for which
 exposure limits should be modified or established to protect employees from
 material impairment of health or functional capacity. For each such material
 or agent, the recommendation shall include a suggested permissible exposure
 limit, the basis for the suggested exposure limit and, where available,
 information on feasible control measures.
 `(3) Not later than 30 days after the receipt of such recommendations,
 the Secretary shall publish such recommendations on exposure limits in the
 Federal Register and provide a period of 30 days for public comment. The
 Secretary shall evaluate the recommendations and public comments and,
 not later than 6 months after the receipt of such recommendations,
 shall publish a proposed rule to maintain, modify or establish exposure
 limits for each toxic material and harmful physical agent as to which the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services has recommended that exposure limits
 be modified or established. If a proposed exposure limit is not the same as
 the exposure limit suggested by the Secretary of Health and Human Services,
 the Secretary shall explain why the suggested limit is not being proposed.
 `(4) Not later than 1 year after the publication of the proposed exposure
 limits, the Secretary shall issue a final standard and such standard shall
 be subject to the requirements of subsection (b)(5). If a final exposure
 limit is not the same as the exposure limit suggested by the Secretary of
 Health and Human Services, the Secretary shall explain the reasons that
 the suggested exposure limit is not being adopted.
 `(5) In addition to the periodic review of permissible exposure limits
 required by this subsection, the Secretary shall also establish or modify
 exposure limits for toxic materials and harmful physical agents whenever
 such action is warranted, pursuant to subsections (b)(5) and (g).'.
SEC. 406. EXPOSURE MONITORING AND MEDICAL SURVEILLANCE.
 Section 6 (42 U.S.C. 655) (as amended by sections 401(d) and 405) is
 further amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(j)(1) Not later than 2 years after the effective date of this subsection,
 the Secretary shall promulgate final standards on exposure monitoring and
 medical surveillance programs in accordance with subsection (b)--
 `(2) The standards on exposure monitoring promulgated under paragraph (1)
 shall include the following:
 `(A) Requirements for a formal exposure assessment in a case where workers
 may be exposed to toxic materials or harmful physical agents that are
 subject to standards issued under this section, including toxic materials
 or harmful physical agents covered under section 1910.1200 of title 29,
 Code of Federal Regulations.
 `(B) Requirements for regular monitoring and measurement of toxic materials
 or harmful physical agents for which an exposure limit has been established
 by the Secretary or adopted by the employer, where such monitoring and
 measurements will assist in protecting the health and safety of workers
 exposed to such toxic materials or harmful physical agents.
 `(C) Requirements for a written compliance plan for reducing exposures where
 exposures are determined to exceed limits established by the Secretary or
 adopted by the employer.
 `(D) Requirements for employees to be notified in writing of exposures
 above exposure limits established by the Secretary or adopted by the
 employer and the steps the employer is taking to reduce exposures.
 `(E) Requirements for the maintenance of and access to exposure records
 according to the provisions of section 1910.20 of title 29, Code of
 Federal Regulations.
 `(F) Requirements for any safety and health committee established under
 section 28 to review the exposure assessment and exposure monitoring program,
 to observe exposure monitoring, to receive and have access to copies of
 assessment and monitoring results, to review written compliance plans,
 and to make recommendations with respect to such programs and plans.
 `(3) The standards on medical surveillance programs promulgated under
 paragraph (1) shall include the following:
 `(A) Requirements for an evaluation of employee exposure assessments
 and exposure monitoring to identify which employees may be at risk of
 material impairment of health or functional capacity due to exposure to
 toxic materials or harmful physical agents.
 `(B) Requirements for periodic medical examinations for employees identified
 to be at risk of material impairment of health or functional capacity
 due to exposure to toxic materials or harmful physical agents where such
 examinations are appropriate to identify or to prevent material impairment
 to health or functional capacity.
 `(C) Requirements for the evaluation of the results of medical examinations
 to determine if an employee or a group of employees are exhibiting
 indications of present or potential material impairment of health
 or functional capacity due to exposure to toxic substances or harmful
 physical agents.
 `(D) Requirements for the notification of employees of the results of
 medical examinations in a manner that is understood by the employees.
 `(E) Provisions setting forth the qualifications for health care providers
 who may conduct medical examinations mandated by this section. Where
 feasible, the Secretary in cooperation with the Secretary of Health and
 Human Services shall establish criteria and procedures for the certification
 of health care providers who conduct medical examinations under this section.
 `(F) Provisions to assure the confidentiality of personally identifiable
 medical information developed under this section.
 `(G) Provisions to prohibit discrimination against employees based on the
 results of medical examinations and, as appropriate, provisions to provide
 for the protection of the wages, benefits, seniority and other relevant
 conditions of employment of employees who are transferred or removed
 from their jobs due to the result of medical examinations conducted under
 this section.
 `(H) Records developed under this subsection shall be maintained and made
 available according to the provisions of section 1910.20 of title 29,
 Code of Federal Regulations.
 `(I) Requirements for the safety and health committee established under
 section 28 to review the employer's medical surveillance program and to
 make recommendations with respect thereto.'.
SEC. 407. STANDARD ON ERGONOMIC HAZARDS.
 Section 6 (42 U.S.C. 655) (as amended by sections 401(d), 405 and 406)
 is further amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(k)(1) Not later than 1 year after the effective date of this subsection,
 the Secretary shall issue a final standard on ergonomic hazards to protect
 employees from work-related musculoskeletal disorders in accordance with
 subsection (b)(5).
 `(2) The final standard issued under paragraph (1) shall include the
 following:
 `(A) A requirement for an ergonomics program for employees who are exposed to
 ergonomic hazards, that shall include provisions for hazard identification,
 control measures, medical management, training and education, and employee
 participation.
 `(B) Requirements for an evaluation of job processes, work station design,
 rate of work, and work methods to identify ergonomic risk factors that
 cause or are likely to cause musculoskeletal disorders.
 `(C) Requirements for control measures to reduce stressors and
 musculoskeletal disorders including engineering controls, new equipment
 or work organization controls.
 `(D) Requirements for an effective medical management program for
 musculoskeletal disorders including requirements for qualified health
 care providers, health surveillance, appropriate diagnosis, treatment,
 and followup.
 `(E) Requirements for recording musculoskeletal disorders as an illness as
 defined under section 8(c)(2) and reporting such illnesses to the Secretary.
 `(F) Requirements for the training and education of employees exposed
 to ergonomic hazards on ergonomic risk factors, control measures and the
 employer's medical management program.
 `(G) Requirements for employee participation in the establishment and
 implementation of the employer's ergonomic program through any safety and
 health committee established under section 28.'.
SEC. 408. TIMETABLE FOR SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
 Section 6 (42 U.S.C. 655) (as amended by sections 401(d), 405, 406 and 407)
 is further amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(l) The Secretary shall issue the following safety and health standards
 under subsection (b):
 `(1) Not later than November 30, 1991, the Secretary shall issue a final
 standard concerning bloodborne pathogens.
 `(2) Not later than December 31, 1991, the Secretary shall issue final
 standards concerning:
 `(A) permissible exposure limits, update for construction, maritime and
 agriculture;
 `(B) electric power generator, transmission and distribution;
 `(C) logging operations;
 `(D) face, head, eye and foot protection;
 `(E) walking and working surfaces;
 `(F) hazardous materials; and
 `(G) motor vehicle inspection, maintenance and safety.
 `(2) Not later than June 30, 1992, the Secretary shall issue final
 standards on:
 `(A) cadmium;
 `(B) confined space entry;
 `(C) asbestos (remand);
 `(D) accreditation of training for programs for hazardous waste operations;
 and
 `(E) methylene chloride.
 `(3) Not later than December 31, 1992, the Secretary shall issue final
 standards on:
 `(A) respiratory protection;
 `(B) 1.3-butadiene;
 `(C) scaffolds;
 `(D) fall protection; and
 `(E) glycol ethers.
 `(4) Not later than December 31, 1993, the Secretary shall issue final
 standards on:
 `(A) indoor air quality; and
 `(B) safety and health regulations for longshoring.
 `(5) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as limiting the Secretary
 from issuing additional safety and health standards under subsection (b).'.
TITLE V--ENFORCEMENT
SEC. 501. NO LOSS OF EMPLOYEE PAY FOR INSPECTIONS.
 Section 8(e) (29 U.S.C. 657(e)) is amended by inserting after the first
 sentence the following new sentence: `Time spent by an employee on any
 such inspection shall be deemed to be hours worked for purposes of wages,
 benefits, and other terms and conditions of employment.'.
SEC. 502. COMPLAINTS.
 Section (8)(f)(1) (29 U.S.C. 657(f)(1)) is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence, by inserting `the Act or' after `violation
 of'; and
 (2) by inserting after the third sentence the following new sentence:
 `If the Secretary, upon notification from any other source determines
 that there are reasonable grounds to believe that an imminent danger (as
 described in section 13(a)) or serious violation (as described in section
 17(k)) exists in a place of employment, the Secretary shall also make a
 special inspection in accordance with this section.'.
SEC. 503. TIMEFRAME FOR RESPONSE.
 The last sentence of section 8(f)(1) (29 U.S.C. 657(f)(1)) is amended by
 inserting before the period the following: `not later than 30 days after
 the receipt of the request for inspection'.
SEC. 504. MANDATORY SPECIAL EMPHASIS.
 Section 8 (29 U.S.C. 657) is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new subsection:
 `(h)(1) The Secretary shall establish and carry out a special emphasis
 inspection program for conducting inspections of industries or operations
 where existing hazards, newly recognized or new hazards introduced into
 worksites warrant a more intensive than normal inspection program.
 `(2) The Secretary shall annually designate the industries and operations
 for the special emphasis inspection program and identify the number of
 special emphasis inspections that the Secretary plans to conduct in each
 designated industry and operation and the number of enforcement personnel
 required for such inspections.
 `(3) Inspections conducted under this subsection shall be in addition to
 other inspections conducted under this Act.
 `(4) The Secretary shall annually submit a report to the Congress on the
 special emphasis inspection program as part of the Secretary's annual
 report required under section 26 which shall include the information
 on inspections described in paragraph (2) that were carried out in the
 preceding and current year.'.
SEC. 505. INVESTIGATIONS OF FATALITIES AND SERIOUS INCIDENTS.
 Section 8 (29 U.S.C. 657) (as amended by section 504) is further amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(i)(1) The Secretary shall investigate any work-related fatality or
 serious incident.
 `(2) If a fatality or serious incident occurs in a place of employment
 covered by this Act, the employer shall notify the Secretary of the
 fatality or serious incident and shall take appropriate measures to
 prevent the destruction or alteration of any evidence that would assist
 in investigating the fatality or serious incident.
 `(3) As used in this subsection, the term `serious incident' means an
 incident that results in the hospitalization of two or more employees.'.
SEC. 506. ABATEMENT OF SERIOUS HAZARDS DURING EMPLOYER CONTESTS.
 (a) CITATIONS- Section 9(a) (29 U.S.C. 658(a)) is amended by inserting
 after the third sentence the following new sentence: `If the Secretary or
 an authorized representative of the Secretary believes that an alleged
 violation is serious and presents such a substantial risk to the safety
 or health of employees that the initiation of review proceedings should
 not suspend the running of the period for the correction of the violation,
 the citation shall so state.'.
 (b) CITATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT- Section 10 (29 U.S.C. 659) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b), by striking out `(which period shall not begin to
 run until the entry of a final order by the Commission in the case of any
 review proceedings under this section initiated by the employer in good
 faith and not solely for delay or avoidance of penalties)'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(d)(1) Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3), the period permitted
 for the correction of a violation shall begin to run from the date of the
 receipt of the citation.
 `(2) If the employer initiates timely review proceedings under this section
 in which the employer contests matters other than the proposed assessment
 of penalty or characterization of the violation and the proceedings
 are initiated by the employer in good faith and not solely for delay,
 the period permitted for the correction of a violation shall, except as
 provided in paragraph (3), not begin to run until the entry of a final
 order by the Commission.
 `(3) If the citation states that the violation is serious and presents
 such a substantial risk to the safety or health of employees that the
 initiation of review proceedings shall not suspend the running of the
 period for correction of the violation and if, simultaneous with initiating
 timely review proceedings under the citation, the employer files a statement
 asserting that the period for correction of the violation should be suspended
 during such proceedings, the Commission shall expedite the consideration
 and decision of the employer's review proceeding. In its decision resolving
 that proceeding, the Commission may modify the citation's provision that
 the period for the correction of the violation shall run from the date
 of the receipt of the citation, if the Commission determines, based on a
 consideration of the nature of the violation, that the nature and degree
 of risk posed to employees by the employer's refusal to undertake prompt
 correction of the violation, and the extent of any irreparable injury the
 employer would incur by undertaking correction of the violation during
 the pendency of review proceedings, that such provision is unreasonable
 in the circumstances.'.
 (c) PENALTIES- Section 17(d) (29 U.S.C. 666(d)) is amended by striking out
 `(which period shall not begin to run until the date of the final order
 of the Commission in the case of any review proceeding under section
 10 initiated by the employer in good faith and not solely for delay or
 avoidance of penalties)'.
 (d) VERIFICATION OF ABATEMENT- Section 10 (as amended by subsection (b))
 is further amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(e)(1) Each employer to whom a citation for a serious, willful or repeated
 violation has been issued under section 9 shall verify the abatement of
 such violation in writing to the Secretary not later than 30 days after the
 period for the correction of the violation has expired, with appropriate
 documentary evidence. Each such employer shall prominently post, at or near
 each place that a violation referred to in the citation occurred, a notice
 that the violation has been abated, and shall make available to employees
 and employee representatives for inspection a copy of the verification of
 abatement provided to the Secretary pursuant to this subsection.
 `(2) Not later than 1 year after the effective date of this subsection,
 the Secretary shall promulgate final regulations regarding the requirements
 of this subsection, including provisions concerning--
 `(A) the documentary evidence required to verify abatement of a violation;
 and
 `(B) the posting of notice of abatement of a violation.'.
SEC. 507. RIGHT TO CONTEST CITATIONS AND PENALTIES.
 The first sentence of section 10(c) (29 U.S.C. 659(c)) is amended by
 inserting after `files a notice with the Secretary' the following:
 `alleging that the citation fails properly to designate the provisions
 of the Act, standard, rule, regulation or order that have been violated,
 or that the citation fails properly to designate the violation as serious,
 willful or repeated, or that the proposed penalty is not adequate, or'.
SEC. 508. RIGHT OF EMPLOYEE REPRESENTATIVES TO PARTICIPATE IN OTHER
PROCEEDINGS.
 The last sentence of section 10(c) (29 U.S.C. 659(c)) is amended by
 inserting after `participate as parties to hearings' the following:
 `or other proceedings conducted'.
SEC. 509. OBJECTIONS TO MODIFICATION OF CITATIONS.
 Section 10 (29 U.S.C. 659) (as amended by section 506) is further amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(f)(1) If the Secretary intends to withdraw or to modify a citation as
 a result of any agreement with the cited employer, the rules of procedure
 prescribed by the Commission shall provide for prompt notice to affected
 employees or representatives of affected employees, and that such notice
 include the terms of the proposed agreement.
 `(2) Not later than 15 working days after the receipt of the notice
 provided in accordance with paragraph (1), any employee or representative
 of employees, regardless of whether such employee or representative has
 previously elected to participate in the proceedings, shall have the right
 to file a notice with the Secretary alleging that the proposed agreement
 fails to effectuate the purposes of this Act, and stating the respects in
 which it fails to do so.
 `(3) Upon receipt of a notice filed under paragraph (2), the Secretary
 shall consider the matter, and if the Secretary determines to proceed with
 the proposed agreement, shall respond with particularity to the statements
 presented in that notice.
 `(4) Not later than 15 working days following the Secretary's response
 provided pursuant to paragraph (3), the employee or representative of
 employees shall upon filing a petition for service with the Commission have
 the right to a hearing as to whether adoption of the proposed agreement
 would effectuate the purposes of the Act, including a determination as to
 whether the proposed agreement would adequately abate the alleged violations.
 `(5) If the Commission determines that a proposed agreement fails to
 effectuate the purposes of the Act, the proposed agreement shall not be
 entered as an order of the Commission, nor shall the citation be withdrawn
 or modified in accordance with the proposed agreement.'.
SEC. 510. IMMINENT DANGER INSPECTIONS.
 (a) CORRECTION OF CONDITIONS- Section 13 (29 U.S.C. 662) is amended--
 (1) by striking out subsection (c);
 (2) by redesignating subsections (a) and (b) as subsections (b) and (c),
 respectively; and
 (3) by inserting before subsection (b), as so redesignated, the following
 new subsection:
 `(a)(1) If any representative of the Secretary determines, on the basis
 of an inspection or investigation under this section, that a condition
 or practice in a place of employment is such that an imminent danger to
 safety or health exists that could reasonably be expected to cause death or
 serious physical harm or permanent impairment of the health or functional
 capacity of employees if not corrected immediately, the representative
 of the Secretary shall so inform the employer and affected employees and
 shall request that the condition or practice be corrected immediately or
 that employees be immediately removed from exposure to such danger.
 `(2) If the employer refuses to comply with a request under paragraph
 (1), the representative of the Secretary shall consult by telephone
 or similarly direct medium of communication with the Secretary or the
 Secretary's designee to determine whether notice should be posted in the
 workplace pursuant to paragraph (3).
 `(3) If the Secretary or the Secretary's designee so authorizes, the
 representative of the Secretary shall immediately cause notice to be posted
 in the workplace identifying the equipment, process or practice that is
 the source of the imminent danger. Such notice shall take the form of a
 tag or other device that will be seen by employees who might otherwise be
 exposed to the dangerous equipment, process or practice. The notice shall
 be removed only by the Secretary or a representative of the Secretary.
 `(4) The fact that such notice has been posted shall be noted in any
 citation issued pursuant to section 9 with respect to the hazard involved.
 `(5) No person shall discharge or in any manner discriminate against any
 employee because such employee has refused to perform a duty that would
 expose the employee to the condition or a practice that has been identified
 as the source of imminent danger by a notice posted pursuant to paragraph
 (3). The right to refuse to perform such a duty shall be in addition to
 any other right to refuse to perform hazardous work that is afforded to
 employees by this Act, by standards or regulations issued pursuant to this
 Act, by contract, or by other applicable law.'.
 (4) in subsection (b), as so redesignated, by striking out the first
 sentence and inserting in lieu thereof the following new sentence: `The
 United States district courts shall have jurisdiction, upon petition of
 the Secretary, to restrain any conditions or practices in any place of
 employment which pose an imminent danger as described in subsection (a).'.
 (b) PENALTIES- Subsection (e) of section 17 (29 U.S.C. 666) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(1)' after the subsection designation; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(2) In the event that an employer does not immediately correct the hazard
 referenced in a notice posted under section 13(a) or remove all employees
 from exposure thereto, the employer shall be assessed a civil penalty of
 not less than $10,000 and not more than $50,000 for each day during which
 an employee continues to be exposed to the hazard. This paragraph shall
 not apply if the Commission determines that the condition or practice was
 not of such a nature as to be covered by section 13(a).'.
SEC. 511. CITATIONS AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF SECTION 27 AND SECTION 28.
 (a) CITATIONS- Section 9(a) (29 U.S.C. 658(a)) is amended by inserting `,
 27 or 28' after `section 5'.
 (b) PENALTIES- Section 17 (29 U.S.C. 666) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by inserting `, 27 or 28' after `section 5';
 (2) in subsection (b), by inserting `, 27 or 28' after `section 5'; and
 (3) in subsection (c), by inserting `, 27 or 28' after `section 5'.
SEC. 512. OSHA CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 17 (29 U.S.C. 666) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (e)--
 (A) by striking `fine of not more than $10,000' and inserting `fine in
 accordance with section 3571 of title 18, United States Code,';
 (B) by striking `six months' and inserting `10 years';
 (C) by striking `fine of not more than $20,000' and inserting `fine in
 accordance with section 3571 of title 18, United States Code,'; and
 (D) by striking `one year' and inserting `20 years';
 (2) in subsection (f), by striking `fine of not more than $1,000 or by
 imprisonment for not more than six months,' and inserting `fine in accordance
 with section 3571 of title 18, United States Code, or by imprisonment for
 not more than 2 years,';
 (3) in subsection (g), by striking `fine of not more than $10,000,
 or by imprisonment for not more than six months,' and inserting `fine
 in accordance with section 3571 of title 18, United States Code, or by
 imprisonment for not more than 1 year,';
 (4) by redesignating subsections (h) through (l) as subsections (i) through
 (m), respectively;
 (5) by inserting after subsection (g) the following new subsection:
 `(h) Any employer who willfully violates any standard, rule, or order
 promulgated pursuant to section 6, or any regulation prescribed pursuant to
 this Act, and that violation causes serious bodily injury to any employee but
 does not cause death to any employee, shall, upon conviction, be punished
 by a fine in accordance with section 3571 of title 18, United States Code,
 or by imprisonment for not more than 5 years, or by both, except that if
 the conviction is for a violation committed after a first conviction of
 such person, punishment shall be by a fine in accordance with section 3571
 of title 18, United States Code, or by imprisonment for not more than 10
 years, or by both,'; and
 (6) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(n) If a penalty or fine is imposed on a director, officer, or agent of an
 employer under subsection (e), (f), (g), or (h), such penalty or fine shall
 not be paid out of the assets of the employer on behalf of that individual.'.
 (b) DEFINITION- Section 3 (29 U.S.C. 652) is amended by adding at the end
 thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(15) The term `serious bodily injury' means bodily injury that involves--
 `(A) a substantial risk of death;
 `(B) protracted unconsciousness;
 `(C) protracted and obvious physical disfigurement; or
 `(D) protracted loss or impairment of the function of a bodily member,
 organ, or mental faculty.'.
 (c) JURISDICTION FOR PROSECUTION UNDER STATE AND LOCAL CRIMINAL LAWS-
 Section 17 (29 U.S.C. 666) (as amended by subsection (a)) is further
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(o) Nothing in this Act shall preclude State and local law enforcement
 agencies from conducting criminal prosecutions in accordance with the laws
 of such State or locality.'.
TITLE VI--PROTECTION OF EMPLOYEES FROM DISCRIMINATION
SEC. 601. ANTIDISCRIMINATION PROVISIONS.
 Section 11(c) (29 U.S.C. 660(c)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by adding before the period the following: `, including
 reporting any injury, illness or unsafe condition to the employer, agent
 of the employer, the safety and health committee or employee safety and
 health representative';
 (2) by striking out paragraphs (2) and (3), and inserting the following
 new paragraphs:
 `(2) No person shall discharge or in any manner discriminate against
 an employee for refusing to perform the employee's duties because of the
 employee's reasonable apprehension that performing such duties would result
 in serious injury to the employee or other employees. The circumstances
 causing the employee's apprehension of serious injury must be of such a
 nature that a reasonable person, under the circumstances then confronting
 the employee would conclude that there is a bona fide danger of an injury
 or serious impairment of health resulting from the circumstances. In order
 to qualify for protection, the employee must have sought from his employer,
 and have been unable to obtain, corrections of the circumstances causing
 the refusal to perform the employee's duties.
 `(3) Any employee who believes that such employee has been discharged,
 disciplined, or otherwise discriminated against by any person in violation
 of this subsection may, within 180 days after such alleged violation occurs,
 file (or have filed by any person on the employee's behalf) a complaint with
 the Secretary alleging such discharge, discipline, or discrimination. Upon
 receipt of such a complaint, the Secretary shall notify the person named
 in the complaint of the filing of the complaint.
 `(4)(A) Not later than 60 days after the receipt of a complaint filed under
 paragraph (3), the Secretary shall conduct an investigation and determine
 whether there is reasonable cause to believe that the complaint has merit
 and shall notify the complainant and the person alleged to have committed
 a violation of this section of such findings. Where the Secretary has
 concluded that there is reasonable cause to believe that a violation has
 occurred, the Secretary shall accompany such findings with a preliminary
 order providing the relief prescribed by this subsection. Thereafter, either
 the person alleged to have committed the violation or the complainant may,
 within 30 days, file objections to the findings or preliminary order, or
 both, and request a hearing on the record, except that the filing of such
 objections shall not operate to stay any reinstatement remedy contained in
 the preliminary order. Such hearings shall be expeditiously conducted. Where
 a hearing is not timely requested, the preliminary order shall be deemed a
 final order which is not subject to judicial review. Upon the conclusion of
 such hearing, the Secretary shall issue a final order within 120 days. In
 the interim, such proceedings may be terminated at any time on the basis
 of an agreement entered into by the Secretary, the complainant, and the
 person alleged to have committed the violation.
 `(B) If, in response to a complaint filed under paragraph (1) or (2),
 the Secretary determines that a violation of this subsection has occurred,
 the Secretary shall order--
 `(i) the person who committed such violation to take action to correct
 the violation;
 `(ii) such person to reinstate the complainant to the complainant's
 former position together with the compensation (including backpay), terms,
 conditions, and privileges of the complainant's employment; and
 `(iii) compensatory damages.
If such an order is issued, the Secretary, at the request of the complainant,
may assess against the person against whom the order is issued a sum equal
to the aggregate amount of all costs and expenses (including attorney's
fees) reasonably incurred as determined by the Secretary of Labor, by the
complainant for, or in connection with, the bringing of the complaint upon
which the order was issued.
 `(5)(A) Any person adversely affected or aggrieved by an order issued
 after a hearing under paragraph (4)(B) may obtain review of the order in
 the United States Court of Appeals for the circuit in which the violation,
 with respect to which the order was issued, allegedly occurred, or the
 circuit in which such person resided on the date of such violation. The
 petition for review must be filed within 60 days from the issuance of
 the order of the Secretary. Such review shall be in accordance with the
 provisions of chapter 7, of title 5, United States Code, and shall be
 heard and decided expeditiously.
 `(B) Whenever a person has failed to comply with an order issued under
 paragraph (4)(B), the Secretary shall file a civil action in the United
 States district court for the district in which the violation was found
 to occur in order to enforce such order. In actions brought under this
 subsection, the district court shall have jurisdiction to grant all
 appropriate relief, including injunctive relief, reinstatement, back pay
 and compensatory damages.
 `(6) The legal burdens of proof that prevail under section 1221(e) of title
 5, United States Code, shall govern adjudication of protected activities
 under this subsection.'.
TITLE VII--OSHA AND NIOSH TRAINING AND EDUCATION
SEC. 701. OSHA AND NIOSH TRAINING ACTIVITIES.
 (a) EXPANSION- Section 21 (29 U.S.C. 670) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a) by inserting after `qualified personnel to carry out
 the purpose of this Act,' the following: `, including education programs for
 employees and members of safety and health committees, as appropriate,'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(d) The Secretary shall develop, directly or by grants or contracts,
 training materials, model curricula and programs to assist employers
 in providing the training and education required by section 27 and in
 complying with the standards issued under section 6.'.
TITLE VIII--RECORDKEEPING AND REPORTING
SEC. 801. DATA COLLECTED BY SECRETARY.
 Section 24(a) (29 U.S.C. 673) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(1)' after the subsection designation; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraphs:
 `(2) For the purpose of setting safety and health standards, targeting
 inspections to individual establishments, evaluating standard setting and
 enforcement programs, and for other purposes, the Secretary shall collect
 information and conduct analyses that identify--
 `(A) industries, employers, processes, operations, and occupations that
 have a high rate of injury or illness;
 `(B) factors that cause or contribute to injuries and illnesses; and
 `(C) workers' compensation costs associated with the injuries and illnesses.
 `(3) The Secretary shall issue regulations that require each employer
 covered by this Act to report to the Secretary each work-related death of
 an employee of the employer immediately upon knowledge of the employer,
 and to report each serious incident that results in the hospitalization
 of two or more employees of the employer within 24 hours of the incident.
 `(4) Data collected under this subsection shall be publicly available in
 a form suitable for further statistical analysis.'.
SEC. 802. EMPLOYEE REPORTED ILLNESSES.
 Section 8(c)(2) (29 U.S.C. 657(c)(2)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `deaths, injuries and illnesses' and inserting `deaths
 and injuries'; and
 (2) by inserting before the period at the end the following: `, and work
 related illnesses and suspected work related illnesses (including a work
 related illness reported by an employee or an employee's physician),
 unless the employer makes a reasonable determination that the illness is
 not work related'.
SEC. 803. EMPLOYEE ACCESS.
 Section 8(c)(2) (29 U.S.C. 657(c)(2)) is amended by adding at the end
 the following new sentence: `The records and reports required under this
 section shall be made available to the Secretary, the Secretary of Health
 and Human Services, to employees and to employee representatives.'.
TITLE IX--NIOSH
SEC. 901. HAZARD EVALUATION REPORTS.
 Section 20(a)(6) (29 U.S.C. 669(a)(6)) is amended--
 (1) in the second sentence, by inserting `and whether any hazardous condition
 or harmful physical agent found in the place of employment poses a risk
 to exposed employees' after `as used or found'; and
 (2) by inserting after the second sentence, the following new sentence: `If
 a determination is not made within 6 months of the receipt of a request, the
 Secretary shall provide the employer and affected employees with an interim
 report on the known or suspected hazards and recommendations for control
 and an estimate of the time that a final determination will be made.'.
SEC. 902. SAFETY RESEARCH AND EVALUATIONS.
 Section 20(a) (29 U.S.C. 669(a)) is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new paragraph:
 `(8) The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall identify major
 factors contributing to occupational injuries and fatalities through
 accident investigations, and epidemiological research.'.
SEC. 903. INFORMATION AND EDUCATION ABOUT OCCUPATIONAL ILLNESSES.
 Section 20(a) (29 U.S.C. 669(a)) (as amended by section 902) is further
 amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(9) The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall carry out a program to
 identify and notify employees at increased risk of occupational illnesses,
 injuries, and fatalities, including public information and education
 programs for groups of workers at increased risk. In carrying out the
 program, the Secretary shall notify subjects of studies conducted or
 funded by the Secretary who are found to be at increased risk and shall
 make recommendations on appropriate medical surveillance for groups of
 employees at increased risk.'.
SEC. 904. CONTRACTOR RIGHTS.
 Section 20(b) (29 U.S.C. 669(b)) is amended by inserting after `Secretary of
 Health and Human Services' the following: `or the designees or contractors
 of such Secretary.'.
SEC. 905. NATIONAL SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM.
 Section 20 (29 U.S.C. 669) is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new subsection:
 `(f)(1) The Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the
 National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, shall (in cooperation
 with other agencies of the Department of Health and Human Services and the
 Secretary of Labor) establish a national surveillance program to identify
 cases of occupational illnesses, fatalities, and serious injuries. In
 conducting the national surveillance program, the Secretary of Health and
 Human Services shall coordinate the activities of the Secretary with State
 health agencies and Federal and State workers' compensation agencies.
 `(2)(A) The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall collect data each
 year on the number and characteristics of all occupational fatalities,
 selected occupational illnesses, and selected occupational injuries.
 `(B) In selecting occupational diseases and injuries for the collection of
 data under subparagraph (A), the Secretary of Health and Human Services
 shall consider the known frequency of the disorder, the severity of the
 disorder, and the size of the population at risk.
 `(3) The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall prepare reports and
 analysis of fatalities, occupational diseases, and injuries collected
 under the national surveillance program and transmit the information
 to the Secretary of Labor, State health agencies, employers, employees,
 and other interested parties.
 `(4) The Secretary of Health and Human Services may issue regulations
 to require an employer, through a physician or other health professional
 employed by or under contract to the employer, to report information on
 occupational fatalities, illnesses and injuries in order to carry out the
 provisions of this subsection.'.
SEC. 906. ESTABLISHMENT OF NIOSH AS A SEPARATE AGENCY WITHIN PUBLIC HEALTH
SERVICE.
 The second sentence of section 22(b) (29 U.S.C. 671(b)) is amended by
 inserting after `The Institute shall be' the following: `established as
 a separate agency within the Public Health Service and be'.
TITLE X--STATE PLANS
SEC. 1001. STATE PLAN COMMITTEES AND PROGRAMS.
 Section 18(c) (29 U.S.C. 667(c)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (7);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (8) and inserting a
 comma; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(9) provides for the development of safety and health programs, training
 programs, and safety and health committees that are at least as effective
 as those required under section 27 and 28, and'.
SEC. 1002. ACCESS TO INFORMATION; EMPLOYEE RIGHTS.
 Section 18(c) (29 U.S.C. 667(c)) (as amended by section 1001) is further
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(10) provides for reporting requirements, protection of employee rights,
 and access to information that are at least as effective as those required
 under this Act or other Federal laws which govern access to information
 related to this Act.'.
SEC. 1003. COMPLAINTS AGAINST A STATE PLAN.
 Section 18 (29 U.S.C. 667) is amended--
 (1) in the third sentence of subsection (e)--
 (A) by inserting after `preceding sentence' the following: `and except as
 provided in subsections (f), (i) and (j)'; and
 (B) by striking out `(except for the purpose of' and all that follows
 through `of this section)'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(i)(1) If the Secretary receives a written complaint from an employer,
 employee, or employee representative that a State is deficient in its
 compliance with a provision of its State plan and the Secretary determines
 that there are reasonable grounds to believe that such a deficiency exists,
 the Secretary shall promptly investigate any such complaint. Complaints
 that allege a deficiency in an enforcement action by a State shall be
 investigated not later than 30 days after the receipt of such complaint.
 `(2) The Secretary shall, not later than 30 days after the completion of
 an investigation under paragraph (1), transmit in writing to the State and
 to the complainant the findings of such investigations and recommendations
 for the correction of any deficiency that is identified. If the Secretary
 determines there are no reasonable grounds to believe that a deficiency
 exists the Secretary shall notify the complainant in writing of such
 determination.
 `(3) Not later than 30 days after the receipt of a finding transmitted
 under paragraph (2), the State shall respond to the Secretary in writing
 concerning what action the State has taken in response to the Secretary's
 findings and recommendations.
 `(4) If after receipt of the response of the State under paragraph (3),
 the Secretary believes a serious violation of the Act exists for which the
 State has failed to issue a citation, the Secretary shall with reasonable
 promptness issue a citation.'.
SEC. 1004. ACTION AGAINST STATE PLAN.
 Section 18(f) (29 U.S.C 667(f)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(1)' after the subsection designation;
 (2) by redesignating the second sentence as paragraph (3) and indenting
 such appropriately;
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (1), the following new paragraph:
 `(2)(A) If the Secretary at any time finds reasonable grounds to believe
 that a State has failed to comply substantially with any provision of the
 State plan or any assurance contained therein, the Secretary shall give
 notice to the State of the deficiencies and shall allow 6 months for the
 correction of the deficiencies.
 `(B) If after 6 months the Secretary determines that the State has not
 corrected the deficiencies and that grounds for withdrawing approval of
 the State plan exist, the Secretary shall institute proceedings pursuant
 to paragraph (3) for the withdrawal of approval of the plan, unless the
 Secretary determines in writing that exceptional circumstances exist that
 justify a decision not to institute such proceedings.'; and
 (4) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(4) During the pendency of proceedings pursuant to paragraph (3), the
 Secretary shall exercise jurisdiction, concurrent with the State, over
 the safety and health issues that are subject to the State plan.'.
SEC. 1005. APPLICATION OF FEDERAL STANDARDS.
 Section 18 (29 U.S.C. 667) (as amended by section 1003) is further amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(j) In the event a State, within 6 months after the promulgation of a safety
 and health standard by the Secretary under section 6, fails to adopt or
 promulgate a standard that is at least as effective as the Federal standard,
 the State shall enforce the Federal standard until a State standard is in
 effect that is at least as effective as the Federal standard.'.
SEC. 1006. STATE PLAN CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
 Section 18 (29 U.S.C. 667) (as amended by section 1003 and 1005) is further
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(k) Each State which is exercising authority to operate a State safety
 and health plan under section 18 shall within 1 year of the effective
 date of this subsection modify the plan to conform with the requirements
 of this Act.'.
TITLE XI--VICTIM'S RIGHTS
SEC. 1101. OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH HAZARDS VICTIM'S RIGHTS
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 29 is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 29. OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH HAZARDS VICTIM'S RIGHTS
 `(a) DEFINITION- As used in this section, the term `victim' means--
 `(1) an employee who has sustained a work-related injury or illness which
 is the subject of an inspection or investigation conducted under section
 8(i); or
 `(2) a family member of an employee, if--
 `(A) the employee is killed as a result of a work-related injury or illness
 which is the subject of an inspection or investigation conducted under
 section 8(i); or
 `(B) the employee sustains a work-related injury which is the subject of an
 inspection or investigation conducted under section 8(i), and the employee
 cannot reasonably exercise the rights of the employee under this section.
 `(b) VICTIM'S RIGHTS- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, on request,
 a victim shall be afforded the right to--
 `(1) meet with the Secretary or an authorized representative regarding the
 inspection or investigation conducted under section 8(i) concerning the
 employee's injury, illness or death, prior to the Secretary's decision to
 issue a citation or take no action; and
 `(2) receive at no cost, a copy of any citations or reports, issued as a
 result of the inspection or investigation, at the time of issuance, and
 be informed of any notice of contest filed under section 10 that shall
 be accompanied by an explanation of the rights of employee and employee
 representatives to participate in proceedings conducted under section 10.
For the purposes of section 10, a victim shall have the same rights as
an employee.
 `(c) DISCUSSION ON MODIFICATION OF CITATION- Prior to entering into
 an agreement to withdraw or modify a citation issued as a result of an
 inspection of a fatality or serious incident conducted under section 8(i),
 on request, the Secretary shall provide an opportunity to the victim to
 appear and make a statement before the parties conducting the settlement
 negotiations.
 `(d) REMEDIES- For a violation of this section, in addition to any other
 remedies that might be available to a victim under Federal or State law,
 a victim shall be entitled to--
 `(1) declaratory relief;
 `(2) injunctive relief;
 `(3) any costs incurred by the victim in securing the documents referred
 to in subsections (b)(2) and (c); and
 `(4) reasonable attorneys fees and costs.
 `(e) NOTIFICATION- The Secretary shall take reasonable actions to inform
 victims of their rights under this section.'.
 (b) EFFECT OF AMENDMENT- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall not be
 construed to affect the amendments made by section 29 of the Occupational
 Safety and Health Act of 1970 as such section existed on the date of
 enactment of such Act.
TITLE XII--EFFECTIVE DATE
SEC. 1201. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall become effective on
 the date that is 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.