S 1727 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1727
To amend the Federal Election Campaign Act to provide comprehensive campaign
finance reform, to lessen the power of special economic interests, and to
restore competition to American Congressional elections.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
October 5 (legislative day, SEPTEMBER 18), 1989
Mr. DOLE (for himself, Mr. MCCONNELL, Mr. SIMPSON, and Mr. MCCAIN) introduced
the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on
Rules and Administration
A BILL
To amend the Federal Election Campaign Act to provide comprehensive campaign
finance reform, to lessen the power of special economic interests, and to
restore competition to American Congressional elections.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
 SECTION 1. This Act may be cited as `Comprehensive Campaign Finance Reform
 Act of 1989'.
LIMITATIONS ON POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEES
 SEC. 2. (a) Section 316 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2
 U.S.C. 441b) is amended by deleting all of the text following subsection
 (b)(2)(B).
 (b) Section 315(a)(2) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2
 U.S.C. 441a(a)(2)) is amended by striking out `5,000' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `2,500' in subsection (A), and by placing a period after the word
 `committee' and striking all that follows in subsection (C).
 (c) Section 316 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 441b)
 is amended by inserting the following text as a new subparagraph `(c)':
 `(c) It is unlawful for any bank, labor organization, or corporation
 referred to in subparagraph (a) of this section to make any contribution
 or expenditure for the establishment, administration, or solicitation of
 contributions to any political committee.'.
LIMITATIONS ON MULTIPLE POLITICAL COMMITTEES
 SEC. 3. (a) Section 315 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971
 (2 U.S.C. 441a) is amended as follows:
 (1) Subsections (a)(6) through (a)(8) inclusive are renumbered (a)(7)
 through (a)(9) inclusive, and,
 (2) The following text is inserted as subparagraph (a)(6):
 `(6) For the purposes of the limitations provided by paragraphs (1)
 and (2) of this subparagraph, all contributions made to any political
 committee which is established or financed or maintained or controlled by
 any candidate or Federal officeholder shall be deemed to be a contribution
 to said individual.'.
 (b) Section 302 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 432)
 is amended by deleting subsection (e)(3)(B).
PROTECTIONS FOR EMPLOYEES
 SEC. 4. (a) Section 315(a)(8) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971
 (2 U.S.C. 441a(a)(8)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(9) For purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) contributions made by a person, either directly or indirectly, to or
 on behalf of a particular candidate, including contributions which are in
 any way earmarked or otherwise directed through an intermediary or conduit
 to such candidate, shall be treated as contributions from such person to
 such candidate;
 `(B) in all cases where contributions are made by a person either directly or
 indirectly to or on behalf of a particular candidate through an intermediary
 or conduit, the intermediary or conduit shall report the original source
 and the intended recipient of such contribution to the Commission and to
 the intended recipient; and,
 `(C) no conduit or intermediary shall deliver or arrange to have delivered
 contributions from more than two persons who are employees of the same
 employer or members of the same labor organization.'.
 (b) Section 316(b) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2
 U.S.C. 441b(b)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2), by inserting `political committee,' after `campaign
 committee,';
 (2) by inserting the following new paragraph after paragraph (2):
 `(3)(A) Subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (2) apply only to labor
 organizations which--
 `(i) provide to all employees within the labor organization's bargaining
 unit(s), at least once annually, and to new employees within thirty days
 after commencement of their employment, written notification presented in
 a manner to inform any such employee of the following information:
 `(I) that an employee cannot be obligated to pay, through membership dues
 or any other mandatory payment, for the political activities of the labor
 organization, including but not limited to, political communications to
 members, vote registration and get-out-the-vote campaigns;
 `(II) that an employee may elect to pay an agency fee to the labor
 organization, in lieu of formal membership in such organization and the
 payment of full membership dues;
 `(III) that the amount of such agency fee shall be limited to the
 employee's pro rata share of the cost of the labor organization's exclusive
 representation services to its bargaining unit(s), that is, collective
 bargaining, contract administration, and grievance adjustment;
 `(IV) that an employee who elects to be a full member of the labor
 organization and pay membership dues is entitled to a reduction of those
 dues by the employee's pro rata share of the total spending by the labor
 organization for political activities, from funds contributed by membership
 dues;
 `(V) that the cost of the labor organization's exclusive representation
 services and the amount of spending by such organization for political
 activities from funds contributed by membership dues, shall be computed
 according to the immediately preceding fiscal year of such organizations; and
 `(VI) the amount of labor organization full membership dues, initiation fees,
 and assessments for the current year; the amount of the reduced membership
 dues, subtracting the employee's pro rate share of the organization's
 spending for political activities, for the current year; and the amount
 of such agency fee, for the current year.
 `(ii) for the purpose of verifying the cost of such organization's
 exclusive representation services, submit to an annual inspection, by an
 independent certified public account, of financial statements supplied by
 such organization which reveal the cost of such services; and
 `(iii) maintain procedures to determine which costs may properly be
 charged to agency fee payors as costs of exclusive representation, and
 explain such procedure in the written notification required in clause
 (i)(I) of this subparagraph.
 `(B) Any labor organization which does not satisfy the requirements of
 paragraph (3)(A) shall finance any expenditures specified in subparagraphs
 (A) or (B) of paragraph (2) with funds properly collected under the
 Act. For purposes of this paragraph, subparagraph (A) of paragraph (2)
 shall apply only with respect to communications for political purposes.'.
DISCLOSURE OF INDEPENDENT EXPENDITURES
 SEC. 5. Section 318 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2
 U.S.C. 441d) is amended by renumbering subsection (b) thereof as subsection
 (c), and by inserting a new subsection (b):
 `(b) For purposes of subsection (a)(3) of this section, the term `clearly'
 shall mean that the statement regarding sponsorship of the communication--
 `(1) is given at the beginning of the communication;
 `(2) is given at the end of the communication;
 `(3) is easily readable or audible;
 `(4) is in such a format or design as to be completely unambiguous regarding
 the actual payor and sponsor of the communication, and
 `(5) contains the statement that the communication is `not authorized by
 any candidate.'.
INCREASED ROLE FOR POLITICAL PARTIES
 SEC. 6. (a) Sections 315(d) (2) and (3) of the Federal Election Campaign Act
 of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 441a(d) (2) and (3)) are amended by substituting the words
 `5 cents' for the words `2 cents' each time they appear in said subsections.
 (b) Section 315(d)(3)(A)(ii) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of
 1971 (2 U.S.C. 441a(d)(3)(A)(ii)) is amended by striking out `20,000'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `50,000.'.
 (c) Section 315(d)(3)(B) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2
 U.S.C. 441a(d)(3)(B)) is amended by striking out `10,000' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `25,000.'.
EXCESS CAMPAIGN FUNDS PROHIBITIONS
 SEC. 7. Section 313 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2
 U.S.C. 439a), is hereby amended to read as follows:
`Sec. 439a. Use of surplus campaign funds
 `(a) Amounts received as contributions by the authorized political committee
 of a candidate that are in excess of the amount necessary to defray the
 expenditures incurred by that political committee, may be transferred without
 limitation to any national, state or local committee of any political party;
 or may be refunded to contributors on a pro rata basis.
 `(b) Any amount of surplus campaign funds that has not been disposed of
 in accordance with the terms set forth in subparagraph (a) of this section
 shall be transferred to the Treasurer of the United States and applied to
 the National Debt Retirement Account.
 `(c) It shall be unlawful for any political committee authorized by
 a candidate, or for any person acting as an agent of such a political
 committee, to utilize or dispose of surplus campaign funds in any manner
 except as described in subparagraphs (a) or (b) of this section. It shall
 also be unlawful for any person to accept or receive surplus campaign funds
 for purposes, or in a manner, other than that specified in subparagraphs
 (a) or (b) of this section.
 `(d) All dispositions of surplus campaign funds shall be reported through
 an itemization of each such expenditure pursuant to section 304 of the
 Federal Election Campaign Act as amended (2 U.S.C. 434) on the post election
 semiannual report that is filed on or before July 31 of the year following
 the election for which they were raised.
 `(e) This section shall apply to any surplus campaign funds existing on
 November 7, 1990, and thereafter.
 `(f) For purposes of this section `surplus campaign funds' means the
 balance remaining, if any, between the contributions made for the purpose
 of influencing the election of the candidate who authorized the campaign
 committee and the expenditures made by said committee for the purpose of
 influencing the election of said candidate.'.
TIGHTENING ENFORCEMENT
 SEC. 8. (a) Section 406 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971
 (2 U.S.C. 455) is repealed.
 (b) Section 309(a)(12) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2
 U.S.C. 437g(a)(12)(A)) is amended by adding thereto the following text as
 a new subsection `(C)':
 `(C) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit or prevent the
 Federal Election Commission from making information contained in compliance
 files available to the Attorney General, at his request, in connection
 with an investigation and/or a trial.'.
LIMITATIONS ON CONGRESSIONAL FRANK
 SEC. 9. (a) Subsection (a) of section 3210 of title 39, United States Code,
 if amended--
 (1) in paragraph (6)(A), by placing a period after the words `franked mail'
 and deleting all that follows;
 (2) in paragraph (6)(C) by placing a period after the words `franked mail'
 and deleting all that follows; and
 (3) by deleting paragraph (6)(D).
 (b) Effective October 1, 1989, subsection (a)(2) of section 3216 of
 title 39, United States Code, is amended by striking out `by a lump sum
 appropriation to the legislative branch' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `from funds appropriated to (or otherwise available from) the Senate
 (for costs attributable to the Senate) and from funds appropriated to
 (or otherwise available from) the House (for costs attributable to the
 House of Representatives).'.
 (c) Subsection (c) of section 3216 of title 39, United States Code, is
 repealed and subsection (d) of such section is redesignated subsection (c).
 (d) Effective October 1, 1989, there shall be--
 (1) within the contingent fund of the Senate, a separate appropriation
 account to be known as the `Senate Official Mail Costs Account', which
 shall be administered by the Secretary of the Senate, and
 (2) within the fund for Contingent Expenses of the House, a separate
 appropriation account to be known as the `House Official Mail Costs Account',
 which shall be administered by the Clerk of the House of Representatives.
 (e) The Senate Select Committee on Ethics and House Commission on
 Congressional Mailing Standards shall prescribe for each respective House
 rules and regulations governing any franked mail. Such rules and regulations
 shall include, for each Member of each respective House, an allocation from
 the amount appropriated for official mail. For Members of the Senate, such
 allocation shall be related to the population of the State represented. The
 costs for postage for such franked mail mailed by or for a Member in excess
 of the amount of the allocation shall be charged to such Member and shall
 be paid by such Member (if the allocation is from the Senate) in accordance
 with rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Senate Committee
 on Rules and Administration, and (if the allocation is from the House)
 in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the
 House Commission on Congressional Mailing Standards.
 (f)(1) Two weeks after the close of each calendar quarter, or as soon as
 practicable thereafter, the Sergeant at Arms and Doorkeeper of the Senate
 shall send to each Senator a statement of the cost of postage and paper
 and of the other operating expenses incurred as a result of mass mailings,
 as defined in subparagraphs (iv) through (vii) of section 3210(a)(6)(C)
 of title 39, United States Code, processed for such Senator during such
 quarter. The statement shall separately identify the cost of postage and
 paper and other costs and shall distinguish the costs attributable to
 different classes of mass mailings. The statement shall also include the
 total cost per capita in the State. A compilation of all such statements
 shall be sent to the Committee on Rules and Administration. A summary
 tabulation of such information shall be printed in the Congressional
 Record next printed after the statements are received by the Committee
 and shall be included in the semiannual Report of the Secretary of the
 Senate. Such summary tabulations shall set forth for each Senator the
 following information: the Senator's name, the total number of pieces of
 mass-mail mailed during the quarter, the total cost of such mail, and the
 cost of such mail divided by the total population of the State from which
 the Senator was elected.
 (2) Two weeks after the close of each calendar quarter, or as soon as
 practicable thereafter, the House Commission on Congressional Mailing
 Standards shall send to each Member of the House of Representatives a
 statement of the cost of postage and paper and of the other operating
 expenses incurred as a result of mass mailings, as defined in subparagraphs
 (iv) through (vii) of section 3210(a)(6)(C) of title 39, United States Code,
 processed for such Member during such quarter. The statement shall separately
 identify the cost of postage and paper and other costs, and shall distinguish
 the costs attributable to different classes of mass mailings. The statement
 shall also include the total cost per capita in the district from which such
 Member was elected. A compilation of all such statements shall be sent to
 the House Committee on House Administration. A summary tabulation of such
 information shall be printed in the Congressional Record next printed after
 the statements are received by the Committee and shall be included in the
 quarterly Report of the Clerk of the House. Such summary tabulations shall
 set forth for each Member the following information: the Representative's
 name, the total number of pieces of mass-mail mailed during the quarter,
 the total cost of such mail, and the cost of such mail divided by the
 total population of the district from which the Member was elected.
SOFT MONEY DISCLOSURE AND ALLOCATION
 SEC. 10. (a) Section 304 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971
 (2 U.S.C. 434(b)(6)) is amended by adding the following new subsection:
 `(c) All accounts maintained by any political committee subject to
 registration under this Act shall be subject to the provisions of this
 section.'.
 (b) The following new section is added to the Federal Election Campaign
 Act as amended as a new section 324 thereof:
`Sec. 324. Required allocation of contributions and expenditures made for
mixed purposes
 `(a) Within one hundred and eighty days of the effective date of this Act
 the Commission shall issue final regulations providing for a uniform and
 realistic method for allocating the costs for any mixed activity between
 Federal and non- Federal accounts.
 `(b) Such regulations shall--
 `(i) recognize the importance of Federal races in affecting the solicitation
 and distribution of funds for mixed activities, by requiring that a certain
 minimum proportion of the funds shall be allocated to the Federal race
 or races, which proportion in no event shall, except in extraordinary
 circumstances, be less than 33 per centum; and,
 `(ii) require any reporting of disbursements on a mixed activity under this
 Act to indicate the method and rationale used in allocating the cost of the
 mixed activity as well as the amount and percentage of the overall expense
 of the activity allocated to one or more Federal or non-Federal accounts.
 `(c) For purposes of this section, the term `mixed activity' shall include
 any activity the expense of which must be allocated between Federal and
 non-Federal accounts because such activities affect both Federal and
 non-Federal races. Such activities shall include, but not be limited to,
 voter registration and get-out-the-vote drives in connection with elections
 which involve both Federal and non-Federal races, and general political
 advertising, brochure, or other material, which includes reference, however
 incidental, to Federal as well as non-Federal candidates, or which urge
 support for or opposition to all the candidates of a political party.'.
LIMITATIONS ON GERRYMANDERING
 SEC. 11. (a) Section 22 of the Act entitled `An Act to provide for the
 fifteenth and subsequent decennial censuses and to provide for apportionment
 of Representatives in Congress,' approved June 18, 1929, as amended (2
 U.S.C. 2a) is amended by striking out subsection (c)(1-5).
 (b) The second paragraph (relating to congressional redistricting) of the
 Act entitled `An Act for the relief of Doctor Ricardo Vallejo Samala and
 to provide for congressional redistricting' approved December 14, 1967 (2
 U.S.C. 2c) is repealed, and in lieu thereof the following sections are added:
 `(c) In each State entitled in the One Hundred Third Congress or in any
 subsequent Congress to more than one Representative under an apportionment
 made pursuant to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, there
 shall be established in the manner provided by the law thereof a number
 of districts equal to the number of Representatives to which such State
 is so entitled, and Representatives shall be elected only by eligible
 voters from districts so established, no district to elect more than one
 Representative. Such districts shall be established in accordance with
 the provisions of this Act as soon as practicable after the decennial
 census date established in section 141(a) of title 13, United States Code,
 but in no case later than such time as is reasonably sufficient for their
 use in the elections for the One Hundred Third Congress and in each fifth
 Congress thereafter.
 `(d) The number of persons in congressional districts within each State
 shall be as nearly equal as is practicable, as determined under the then
 most recent decennial census. The enumeration established according to the
 Federal decennial census pursuant to Article I, section II, United States
 Constitution, shall be the sole basis of population for the establishment
 of congressional districts.
 `(e) Congressional districts shall be comprised of contiguous territory,
 including adjoining insular territory.
 `(f) Congressional districts shall not be established with the intent and
 effect of diluting the voting strength of any person, group of persons,
 or members of any political party.
 `(g) Congressional districts shall be compact in form. In establishing
 such districts, nearby population shall not be bypassed in favor of more
 distant population.
 `(h) Congressional districts boundaries shall avoid the unnecessary division
 of counties or their equivalent in any State.
 `(i) Congressional district boundaries shall be established in such a
 manner as to minimize the division of cities, towns, villages, and other
 political subdivisions.
 `(j)(1) It is the intent of the Congress that congressional districts
 established pursuant to this section be subject to reasonable public
 scrutiny and comment prior to their establishment.
 `(2) At the same time that Federal decennial census tabulations data,
 reports, maps, or other material or information produced or obtained using
 Federal funds and associated with the congressional reapportionment and
 redistricting process, are made available to any officer or public body in
 any State, such materials shall be made available by such State at the cost
 of duplication to any person from that State meeting the qualifications
 for voting in an election of a Member of the House of Representatives.
 `(k) Nothing in this section shall be construed to supersede any provision
 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended.
 `(l) Any State may establish by law criteria for implementing the standards
 set forth in this section. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
 limiting the power of a State to strengthen or add to these standards,
 nor to interpret these standards in a manner consistent with the law of
 the State, to the extent that such additional criteria or interpretations
 are not in conflict with this section.'.
 (c)(1) The district courts shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear
 and determine any action to enforce section 11 of this Act. Any person
 meeting a State's qualifications for voting in an election of a Member
 of the House of Representatives from such State may bring an action in
 the district court for the district in which such person resides, without
 regard to any amount in controversy, to enforce the provisions of section
 11 of this Act with regard to the State in which such person resides.
 (2) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the district
 court shall have authority to issue all judgments, orders, and decrees
 necessary to ensure that any criteria established by State law pursuant
 to this section are not in conflict with the section.
 (3) With the exception of actions brought under subsection (c)(2), the
 district court for the purposes of this section shall be a three-judge
 district court pursuant to section 2284 of title 28, United States Code. Upon
 motion of any party in accordance with section 1657 of title 28, United
 States Code, it shall be the duty of the district court to assign the
 case for briefing and hearing at the earliest practicable date, and to
 cause the case to be in every way expedited. The district court shall have
 authority to enter all judgments, orders and decrees necessary to bring
 a State into compliance with this Act. Any such action with respect to
 the establishment of congressional districts in a State after a Federal
 decennial census may not be brought after the end of the nine-month period
 beginning on the date on which the last such district is so established.
 (4) For the purposes of this section, an order dismissing a complaint for
 failure to state a cause of action shall be appealable in accordance with
 section 1253 of title 28, United States Code.
 (5) If the district court fails to establish a briefing and hearing schedule
 that will permit resolution of the case prior to the next general election,
 any party may seek a writ of mandamus from the United States Court of
 Appeals for the circuit in which the district court sits. The court of
 appeals shall have jurisdiction over the motion for a writ of mandamus and
 shall establish an expedited briefing and hearing schedule for resolution of
 the motion. Such a motion shall not stay proceedings in the district court.
 (6) If the district court determines that the districts established
 by the State's redistricting authority pursuant to this Act are not in
 compliance with this Act, the court shall remand the plan to the State's
 redistricting authority to establish new districts consistent with section
 11. The district court shall retain jurisdiction over the case after remand.
 (7) If, after remand in accord with subsection (6) of this section, the
 district court determines that the districts established by the State's
 redistricting authority under the remand order are not consistent with
 section 11, the district court shall enter an order establishing districts
 that are consistent with section 11 of this Act for the next general
 congressional election.
 (8) If any question of State law arises in a case under this section that
 would require abstention, the district court shall not abstain. However,
 in any State permitting certification of such questions, the district court
 shall certify that question to the highest court of the State whose law is in
 question. Such certification shall not stay proceeding in the district court.
 (9) With the exception of actions brought under subsection (c)(2), an
 appeal from a decision of the district court under this section shall be
 taken in accord with section 1253 of title 28, United States Code. An appeal
 under this section shall be noticed in the district court and perfected by
 docketing in the Supreme Court within thirty days of the entry of judgment
 below. Appeals brought to the Supreme Court under this subsection shall
 be heard as soon as practicable.
 (10) For purposes of this section, `redistricting authority' shall mean
 the officer, officers, public body, public bodies, or any combination
 thereof, having initial responsibility for the congressional redistricting
 of each State.
 (d) The first sentence of section 1657 of title 28, United States Code,
 is amended by striking out `or' and inserting in lieu thereof `any action
 under section 11 of the Comprehensive Campaign Reform Act of 1989, or'.
 (e) Section 141(c) of title 13, United States Code is amended to add at the
 end of that section the following: `Where this subsection requires that
 the Secretary provide criteria to, consult with, or report tabulations
 of population to (or where the Secretary otherwise provides material or
 information to) the public bodies having responsibility for the legislative
 apportionment or districting of each State, the Secretary shall provide,
 without cost, such criteria, consultations, tabulations, or other material
 or information simultaneously to the leadership of each political party
 represented on such public bodies. For purposes of this subsection,
 `political party' shall mean any political party whose candidates for
 Representatives to Congress received, as the candidates of such party,
 5 per centum or more of the total number of votes received statewide by
 all candidates for such office in any of the five most recent general
 congressional elections. Such materials may include those developed by
 the Census Bureau for redistricting purposes for the 1990 Census.'.
SEVERABILITY
 SEC. 12. If any provision of this Act or any amendment made by this Act,
 or the application of any such provisions to any person or circumstance is
 held invalid, the validity of any other such provision, and the application
 of such provision to other persons and circumstances shall not be affected
 thereby.
EFFECTIVE DATE
 SEC. 13. Unless otherwise stated herein, this Act and the amendments made
 by this Act shall become effective on November 7, 1990, and shall apply
 to all contributions and expenditures made after such date.