[Congressional Bills 105th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 2558 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

105th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 S. 2558

 To provide economic security for battered women, and for other 
 purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 October 6 (legislative day, October 2), 1998

 Mrs. Murray (for herself and Mr. Wellstone) introduced the following 
 bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on the 
 Judiciary

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To provide economic security for battered women, and for other 
 purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Battered Women's 
Economic Security Act''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Definitions.
 TITLE I--DOMESTIC VIOLENCE PREVENTION

 Subtitle A--Housing for Victims of Domestic Violence

Sec. 101. Short title.
Sec. 102. Definitions.
Sec. 103. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 104. Use of amounts for housing assistance for victims of domestic 
 violence.
 Subtitle B--Victims of Abuse Insurance Protection

Sec. 121. Short title.
Sec. 122. Definitions.
Sec. 123. Discriminatory acts prohibited.
Sec. 124. Insurance protocols for subjects of abuse.
Sec. 125. Reasons for adverse actions.
Sec. 126. Life insurance.
Sec. 127. Subrogation without consent prohibited.
Sec. 128. Enforcement.
Sec. 129. Effective date.
 Subtitle C--Access to Safety and Advocacy

Sec. 131. Short title.
Sec. 132. Purpose.
Sec. 133. Definitions.
Sec. 134. Grant program.
Sec. 135. Provision of technical assistance and training.
Sec. 136. Evaluation.
Sec. 137. Funding.
 Subtitle D--Conforming Amendments

Sec. 141. Law enforcement and prosecution grants.
Sec. 142. Family Violence Prevention and Services Act.
 Subtitle E--Battered Immigrant Women's Economic Security

Sec. 151. Nonapplicability of special rules relating to the treatment 
 of non-213A aliens.
Sec. 152. Discretionary first time offender waivers for aliens making 
 child support payments.
Sec. 153. Misrepresentation waivers for battered spouses of United 
 States citizens and lawful permanent 
 residents.
Sec. 154. Public charge.
Sec. 155. Access to naturalization for divorced victims of abuse.
Sec. 156. Work authorization.
Sec. 157. Filing fees.
Sec. 158. Access to food stamps for qualified battered aliens.
Sec. 159. Access to housing for qualified immigrants.
Sec. 160. Clarifying welfare reporting requirements for benefit 
 applicants.
Sec. 161. Conforming definition of ``family'' used in laws granting 
 welfare access for battered immigrants to 
 State family law.
Sec. 162. Ensuring that battered immigrants may continue to receive 
 food stamps and SSI using their abusive 
 spouse's qualifying quarters.
 TITLE II--VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND THE WORKPLACE

Sec. 201. Findings.
 Subtitle A--National Clearinghouse on Domestic Violence and Sexual 
 Assault in the Workplace Grant

Sec. 211. National clearinghouse on domestic violence and sexual 
 assault in the workplace grant.
 Subtitle B--Victims' Employment Rights

Sec. 221. Short title.
Sec. 222. Purposes.
Sec. 223. Definitions.
Sec. 224. Prohibited discriminatory acts.
Sec. 225. Enforcement.
Sec. 226. Attorney's fees.
 Subtitle C--Workplace Violence Against Women Prevention Tax Credit

Sec. 231. Short title.
Sec. 232. Credit for costs to employers of implementing workplace 
 safety programs to combat violence against 
 women.
 Subtitle D--Employment Protection for Battered Women

Sec. 241. Short title and reference.
Sec. 242. Purposes.
Sec. 243. Unemployment compensation.
Sec. 244. Entitlement to leave for addressing domestic violence for 
 non-Federal employees.
Sec. 245. Entitlement to leave for addressing domestic violence for 
 Federal employees.
Sec. 246. Existing leave usable for domestic violence.
Sec. 247. Effect on other laws and employment benefits.
Sec. 248. Effective date.
 Subtitle E--Battered Women's Shelters and Services

Sec. 251. Short title.
Sec. 252. Authorization of appropriations for family violence 
 prevention and services.
Sec. 253. Family Violence Prevention and Services Act improvements.
TITLE III--PROTECTIONS FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE UNDER PROGRAMS 
 AUTHORIZED UNDER THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

Sec. 301. Social Security number changes for victims of domestic 
 violence.
Sec. 302. Waivers for victims of domestic violence under the TANF 
 program.
Sec. 303. Disclosure protections under the child support program.
Sec. 304. Bonus to encourage women and children's well-being.

SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) Domestic violence.--The term ``domestic violence'' 
 includes acts or threats of violence, not including acts of 
 self defense, committed by--
 (A) a current or former spouse of the victim;
 (B) a person with whom the victim shares a child in 
 common;
 (C) a person who is cohabiting with or has 
 cohabited with the victim;
 (D) a person who is or has been in a continuing 
 social relationship of a romantic or intimate nature 
 with the victim;
 (E) a person similarly situated to a spouse of the 
 victim under the domestic or family violence laws of 
 the jurisdiction; or
 (F) any other person against a victim who is 
 protected from that person's acts under the domestic or 
 family violence laws of the jurisdiction.
 (2) Sexual assault.--The term ``sexual assault''--
 (A) means any conduct proscribed by chapter 109A of 
 title 18, United States Code, whether or not the 
 conduct occurs in the special maritime and territorial 
 jurisdiction of the United States or in a Federal 
 prison; and
 (B) includes both assaults committed by offenders 
 who are strangers to the victim and assaults committed 
 by offenders who are known to the victim or related by 
 blood or marriage to the victim.
 (3) Stalking.--The term ``stalking'' means engaging in a 
 course of conduct directed at a specific person that would 
 cause a reasonable person under the circumstances to have a 
 fear of death or bodily injury to the person or a member of the 
 immediate family of the person, if--
 (A) the individual engaging in such conduct has 
 knowledge or should have knowledge that the conduct 
 will cause the specific person to have that fear; and
 (B) the conduct causes the specific person to have 
 that fear.

 TITLE I--DOMESTIC VIOLENCE PREVENTION

 Subtitle A--Housing for Victims of Domestic Violence

SEC. 101. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Domestic Violence Victims' 
Housing Act''.

SEC. 102. DEFINITIONS.

 In this subtitle:
 (1) Family victimized by domestic violence.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``family victimized by 
 domestic violence''--
 (i) means a family or household that 
 includes an individual who has been determined 
 under subparagraph (B) to have been a victim of 
 domestic violence, but does not include any 
 individual who committed the domestic violence; 
 and
 (ii) includes any such family or household 
 in which only a minor or minors are the 
 individual or individuals who was or were a 
 victim of domestic violence, only if such 
 family or household also includes a parent, 
 stepparent, legal guardian, or other 
 responsible caretaker for the child.
 (B) Determination that family or individual was a 
 victim of domestic violence.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), a determination under this 
 subparagraph is a determination that domestic violence 
 has been committed, which is made by any agency or 
 official of a State or unit of general local government 
 (including a public housing agency) based upon--
 (i) information provided by any medical, 
 legal, counseling, or other clinic, shelter, 
 sexual assault program, or other program or 
 entity licensed, recognized, or authorized by 
 the State or unit of general local government 
 to provide services to victims of domestic 
 violence or sexual assault;
 (ii) information provided by any agency of 
 the State, unit of general local government, or 
 nonprofit nongovernmental organization that 
 provides or administers the provision of 
 social, medical, legal, or health services;
 (iii) information provided by any clergy;
 (iv) information provided by any hospital, 
 clinic, medical facility, or doctor licensed or 
 authorized by the State or unit of general 
 local government to provide medical services;
 (v) a petition or complaint filed in a 
 court or law or documents or records of action 
 of any court or law enforcement agency, 
 including any record of any protection order, 
 injunction, or temporary or final order issued 
 by civil or criminal courts or any police 
 report; or
 (vi) any other reliable evidence that 
 domestic violence has occurred, including the 
 statement of a victim that domestic violence 
 has occurred, unless the agency has an 
 independent, reasonable basis to find the 
 victim not credible.
 (2) Public housing agency.--The term ``public housing 
 agency'' has the meaning given the term in section 3(b) of the 
 United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437a(b)).
 (3) Qualified nonprofit organization.--The term ``qualified 
 nonprofit organization'' means a private organization that--
 (A) is organized, or has as one of its primary 
 purposes, to provide shelter or transitional housing 
 for victims of domestic violence;
 (B) is organized under State or local laws;
 (C) has no part of its net earnings inuring to the 
 benefit of any member, shareholder, founder, 
 contributor, or individual;
 (D) is approved by the Secretary as to financial 
 responsibility; and
 (E) demonstrates experience in providing services 
 to victims of domestic violence.
 (4) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Housing and Urban Development.
 (5) State.--The term ``State'' means the States of the 
 United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of 
 Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, 
 Guam, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, and any other 
 territory or possession of the United States.
 (6) Tenant-based assistance.--The term ``tenant-based 
 assistance'' has the meaning given the term in section 8(f) of 
 the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f(f)).
 (7) Unit of general local government.--The term ``unit of 
 general local government'' has the meaning given the term in 
 section 102(a) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 
 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5302(a)).

SEC. 103. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 The budget authority under section 5(c) of the United States 
Housing Act of 1937 for assistance under subsections (b) and (o) of 
section 8 of such Act is authorized to be increased by $50,000,000 on 
or after October 1, 1998, and by such sums as may be necessary on or 
after October 1, 1999.

SEC. 104. USE OF AMOUNTS FOR HOUSING ASSISTANCE FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC 
 VIOLENCE.

 (a) In General.--Amounts available pursuant to section 103 shall be 
made available by the Secretary only to public housing agencies and 
qualified nonprofit organizations only for use for providing tenant-
based assistance on behalf of families victimized by domestic violence 
who have left or who are leaving a residence as a result of the 
domestic violence.
 (b) Determination.--For purposes of subsection (a), a family 
victimized by domestic violence shall be considered to have left or to 
be leaving a residence as a result of domestic violence if the public 
housing agency or qualified nonprofit organization providing rental 
assistance under this section determines that the member of the family 
who was a victim of the domestic violence reasonably believes that 
relocation from such residence will assist in avoiding future domestic 
violence against such member or another member of the family.
 (c) Allocation.--Amounts made available pursuant to section 103 
shall be allocated by the Secretary on the basis of a national 
competition to the public housing agencies and qualified nonprofit 
organizations that submit applications to the Secretary that best 
demonstrate a need for such assistance, including the extent of service 
to underserved populations (as defined in section 2003 of the Omnibus 
Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 3796gg-2)), and 
the ability to undertake and carry out a program under this subtitle, 
as the Secretary shall determine. Not less than 25 percent of the total 
number of grants awarded under this section shall be awarded to 
qualified nonprofit organizations.

 Subtitle B--Victims of Abuse Insurance Protection

SEC. 121. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Victims of Abuse Insurance 
Protection Act''.

SEC. 122. DEFINITIONS.

 In this subtitle:
 (1) Abuse.--The term ``abuse'' means the occurrence of one 
 or more of the following acts by a current or former household 
 or family member, intimate partner, or caretaker:
 (A) Attempting to cause or causing another person 
 bodily injury, physical harm, substantial emotional 
 distress, psychological trauma, rape, sexual assault, 
 or involuntary sexual intercourse.
 (B) Engaging in a course of conduct or repeatedly 
 committing acts toward another person, including 
 following the person without proper authority and under 
 circumstances that place the person in reasonable fear 
 of bodily injury or physical harm.
 (C) Subjecting another person to false imprisonment 
 or kidnapping.
 (D) Attempting to cause or causing damage to 
 property so as to intimidate or attempt to control the 
 behavior of another person.
 (2) Health carrier.--The term ``health carrier'' means a 
 person that contracts or offers to contract on a risk-assuming 
 basis to provide, deliver, arrange for, pay for or reimburse 
 any of the cost of health care services, including a sickness 
 and accident insurance company, a health maintenance 
 organization, a nonprofit hospital and health service 
 corporation or any other entity providing a plan of health 
 insurance, health benefits or health services.
 (3) Insured.--The term ``insured'' means a party named on a 
 policy, certificate, or health benefit plan, including an 
 individual, corporation, partnership, association, 
 unincorporated organization or any similar entity, as the 
 person with legal rights to the benefits provided by the 
 policy, certificate, or health benefit plan. For group 
 insurance, such term includes a person who is a beneficiary 
 covered by a group policy, certificate, or health benefit plan. 
 For life insurance, the term refers to the person whose life is 
 covered under an insurance policy.
 (4) Insurer.--The term ``insurer'' means any person, 
 reciprocal exchange, inter insurer, Lloyds insurer, fraternal 
 benefit society, or other legal entity engaged in the business 
 of insurance, including agents, brokers, adjusters, and third 
 party administrators. The term also includes health carriers, 
 health benefit plans, and life, disability, and property and 
 casualty insurers.
 (5) Policy.--The term ``policy'' means a contract of 
 insurance, certificate, indemnity, suretyship, or annuity 
 issued, proposed for issuance or intended for issuance by an 
 insurer, including endorsements or riders to an insurance 
 policy or contract.
 (6) Subject of abuse.--The term ``subject of abuse'' 
 means--
 (A) a person against whom an act of abuse has been 
 directed;
 (B) a person who has prior or current injuries, 
 illnesses, or disorders that resulted from abuse; or
 (C) a person who seeks, may have sought, or had 
 reason to seek medical or psychological treatment for 
 abuse, protection, court-ordered protection, or shelter 
 from abuse.

SEC. 123. DISCRIMINATORY ACTS PROHIBITED.

 (a) In General.--No insurer may, directly or indirectly, engage in 
any of the following acts or practices on the basis that the applicant 
or insured, or any person employed by the applicant or insured or with 
whom the applicant or insured is known to have a relationship or 
association, is, has been, or may be the subject of abuse or has 
incurred or may incur abuse-related claims:
 (1) Denying, refusing to issue, renew or reissue, or 
 canceling or otherwise terminating an insurance policy or 
 health benefit plan.
 (2) Restricting, excluding, or limiting insurance coverage 
 for losses or denying a claim, except as otherwise permitted or 
 required by State laws relating to life insurance 
 beneficiaries.
 (3) Adding a premium differential to any insurance policy 
 or health benefit plan.
 (b) Prohibition on Limitation on Claims.--No insurer may, directly 
or indirectly, deny or limit payment of a claim incurred by an innocent 
insured as a result of abuse.
 (c) Prohibition on Termination.--
 (1) In general.--No insurer or health carrier may terminate 
 health coverage for a subject of abuse because coverage was 
 originally issued in the name of the abuser and the abuser has 
 divorced, separated from, or lost custody of the subject of 
 abuse or the abuser's coverage has terminated voluntarily or 
 involuntarily and the subject of abuse does not qualify for an 
 extension of coverage under part 6 of subtitle B of title I of 
 the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 
 1161 et seq.) or section 4980B of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986.
 (2) Payment of premiums.--Nothing in paragraph (1) shall be 
 construed to prohibit the insurer from requiring that the 
 subject of abuse pay the full premium for the subject's 
 coverage under the health plan if the requirements are applied 
 to all insureds of the health carrier.
 (3) Exception.--An insurer may terminate group coverage to 
 which this subsection applies after the continuation coverage 
 period required by this subsection has been in force for 18 
 months if it offers conversion to an equivalent individual 
 plan.
 (4) Continuation coverage.--The continuation of health 
 coverage required by this subsection shall be satisfied by any 
 extension of coverage under part 6 of subtitle B of title I of 
 the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 
 1161 et seq.) or section 4980B of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986 provided to a subject of abuse and is not intended to be 
 in addition to any extension of coverage otherwise provided for 
under such part 6 or section 4980B.
 (d) Use of Information.--
 (1) Limitation.--
 (A) In general.--In order to protect the safety and 
 privacy of subjects of abuse, no person employed by or 
 contracting with an insurer or health benefit plan may 
 use, disclose, or transfer information relating to 
 abuse status, acts of abuse, abuse-related medical 
 conditions or the applicant's or insured's status as a 
 family member, employer, or associate, person in a 
 relationship with a subject of abuse for any purpose 
 unrelated to the direct provision of health care 
 services unless such use, disclosure, or transfer is 
 required by an order of an entity with authority to 
 regulate insurance or an order of a court of competent 
 jurisdiction. In addition, such a person may not 
 disclose or transfer information relating to an 
 applicant's or insured's location or telephone number 
 or the location and telephone number of a shelter for 
 subjects of abuse except where such disclosure or 
 transfer is required in order to provide insurance 
 coverage, provided such disclosure or transfer does not 
 have the potential to endanger the safety of a subject 
 of abuse.
 (B) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this 
 paragraph shall be construed as limiting or precluding 
 a subject of abuse from obtaining the subject's own 
 insurance records from an insurer.
 (2) Authority of subject of abuse.--A subject of abuse, at 
 the absolute discretion of the subject of abuse, may provide 
 evidence of abuse to an insurer for the limited purpose of 
 facilitating treatment of an abuse-related condition or 
 demonstrating that a condition is abuse-related. Nothing in 
 this paragraph shall be construed as authorizing an insurer or 
 health carrier to disregard such provided evidence.

SEC. 124. INSURANCE PROTOCOLS FOR SUBJECTS OF ABUSE.

 Insurers shall develop and adhere to written policies specifying 
procedures to be followed by employees, contractors, producers, agents 
and brokers for the purpose of protecting the safety and privacy of a 
subject of abuse and otherwise implementing this subtitle when taking 
an application, investigating a claim, or taking any other action 
relating to a policy or claim involving a subject of abuse.

SEC. 125. REASONS FOR ADVERSE ACTIONS.

 An insurer that takes an action that adversely affects a subject of 
abuse, shall advise the subject of abuse applicant or insured of the 
specific reasons for the action in writing. For purposes of this 
section, reference to general underwriting practices or guidelines 
shall not constitute a specific reason.

SEC. 126. LIFE INSURANCE.

 Nothing in this subtitle shall be construed to prohibit a life 
insurer from declining to issue a life insurance policy if the 
applicant or prospective owner of the policy is or would be designated 
as a beneficiary of the policy, and if--
 (1) the applicant or prospective owner of the policy lacks 
 an insurable interest in the insured; or
 (2) the applicant or prospective owner of the policy is 
 known, on the basis of police or court records, to have 
 committed an act of abuse against the proposed insured.

SEC. 127. SUBROGATION WITHOUT CONSENT PROHIBITED.

 Subrogation of claims resulting from abuse is prohibited without 
the informed consent of the subject of abuse.

SEC. 128. ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) Federal Trade Commission.--
 (1) In general.--The Federal Trade Commission shall have 
 the power to examine and investigate any insurer to determine 
 whether such insurer has been or is engaged in any act or 
 practice prohibited by this subtitle.
 (2) Cease and desist orders.--If the Federal Trade 
 Commission determines an insurer has been or is engaged in any 
 act or practice prohibited by this subtitle, the Commission may 
 take action against such insurer by the issuance of a cease and 
 desist order as if the insurer was in violation of section 5 of 
 the Federal Trade Commission Act. Such cease and desist order 
 may include any individual relief warranted under the 
 circumstances, including temporary, preliminary, and permanent 
 injunctive and compensatory relief.
 (b) Private Cause of Action.--
 (1) In general.--An applicant or insured who believes that 
 the applicant or insured has been adversely affected by an act 
 or practice of an insurer in violation of this subtitle may 
 maintain an action against the insurer in a Federal or State 
 court of original jurisdiction.
 (2) Relief.--Upon proof of such conduct by a preponderance 
 of the evidence in an action described in paragraph (1), the 
 court may award appropriate relief, including temporary, 
 preliminary, and permanent injunctive relief and compensatory 
 and punitive damages, as well as the costs of suit and 
 reasonable fees for the aggrieved individual's attorneys and 
 expert witnesses.
 (3) Statutory damages.--With respect to compensatory 
 damages in an action described in paragraph (1), the aggrieved 
 individual may elect, at any time prior to the rendering of 
 final judgment, to recover in lieu of actual damages, an award 
 of statutory damages in the amount of $5,000 for each 
 violation.

SEC. 129. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This subtitle shall apply with respect to any action taken on or 
after the date of enactment of this Act, except that section 124 shall 
only apply to actions taken after the expiration of 60 days after such 
date of enactment.

 Subtitle C--Access to Safety and Advocacy

SEC. 131. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Access to Safety and Advocacy 
Act''.

SEC. 132. PURPOSE.

 The purpose of this subtitle is to enhance safety and justice for 
victims of domestic violence throughout the United States through 
improved access to the justice system and improved legal assistance.

SEC. 133. DEFINITIONS.

 In this subtitle:
 (1) Domestic violence program.--The term ``domestic 
 violence program'' means a nonprofit organization, the primary 
 purpose of which is to provide advocacy on behalf of and 
 comprehensive services to victims of domestic violence, 
 including--
 (A) crisis hotlines;
 (B) shelter or safe homes;
 (C) transitional housing;
 (D) task forces or coordinating councils;
 (E) food assistance;
 (F) counseling;
 (G) systems advocacy;
 (H) transportation;
 (I) safety planning;
 (J) information and referral; and
 (K) legal advocacy and representation.
 (2) Eligible grantee.--The term ``eligible grantee'' means 
 any--
 (A) domestic violence program;
 (B) State, tribal, or local bar association;
 (C) law school clinical program;
 (D) nonprofit legal service;
 (E) court-based pro se program;
 (F) bar association or domestic violence legal 
 information and referral service or hotline; or
 (G) State coalition of domestic violence programs.
 (3) Law school program.--The term ``law school program'' 
 means an internship, externship, clinic, or other legal 
 representation program or initiative located at an accredited 
 school of law which has as its primary purpose the provision of 
 legal representation, information, or assistance to victims of 
 domestic violence directed at stopping the violence, enhancing 
 victim safety, achieving economic justice, or protecting child 
 victims of domestic violence.
 (4) Legal assistance.--The term ``legal assistance'' 
 includes--
 (A) direct representation of and assistance to 
 victims of domestic violence in any civil action, 
 administrative proceeding, criminal case in which the 
 defendant advances a claim of duress or a defense of 
 self or other, or clemency proceeding, from intake 
 through adjudication, enforcement, and appeal, directed 
 at stopping the violence, enhancing victim safety, 
 assuring economic protection and well-being, and 
 protecting child victims of domestic violence; and
 (B) legal advocacy, including issue identification, 
 safety planning, evaluating options, policy analysis, 
 representation enhancement, outreach activities, 
 accompaniment, information, directories, and referral, 
 monitoring the civil and criminal justice process, and 
 coordinating among legal, social, and health care 
 systems, offered by personnel of domestic violence 
 programs, that is directed at stopping the violence, 
 enhancing victim safety, assuring economic protection 
 and well-being, or protecting child victims of domestic 
 violence.
 (5) Nonprofit direct legal services.--The term ``nonprofit 
 direct legal services'' means a nonprofit legal organization 
 that has as its primary purpose the provision of legal 
 assistance persons on a no-cost, sliding scale, deferred 
 payment or fixed fee basis on civil or criminal legal matters 
 and which provides specialized representation to victims of 
 domestic violence directed at stopping the violence, enhancing 
 victim safety, achieving economic justice, or protecting child 
 victims of domestic violence.
 (6) Pro bono program.--The term ``pro bono program'' means 
 a program affiliated with a State, tribal, or local court, bar 
 association, nonprofit direct legal services organization or a 
 domestic violence program that offers no-cost representation, 
 legal educational programs or information and referral services 
 to victims of domestic violence directed at stopping the 
 violence, enhancing victim safety, achieving economic justice, 
 or protecting child victims of domestic violence.
 (7) Pro se program.--The term ``pro se program'' means a 
 program based in a State, tribal, or local court, a nonprofit 
 direct legal services organization, or a domestic violence 
 program, in order to assist victims of domestic violence--
 (A) in preparation and filing of court pleadings, 
 forms, memos, proposed orders, and related documents, 
 in effecting service and in representation of 
 themselves in any civil or administrative matters or 
 proceedings directed at stopping the violence, 
 enhancing victim safety, achieving economic justice, or 
 protecting child victims of domestic violence;
 (B) to develop comprehensive safety plans; and
 (C) to offer information and referral services.
 (8) State.--The term ``State'' means the States of the 
 United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of 
 Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, 
 Guam, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, and any other 
 territory or possession of the United States.
 (9) State, tribal, or local bar association.--The term 
 ``State, tribal, or local bar association'' means a State, 
 tribal, or local association of attorneys of a specified 
 geographic area whose members are licensed to practice in the 
 jurisdiction or jurisdictions, as applicable, and that offers 
 information, referral, or pro bono legal services to victims of 
 domestic violence related to civil actions, administrative 
 proceedings and criminal defense directed at stopping the 
 violence, enhancing victim safety, achieving economic justice, 
 or protecting child victims of domestic violence.
 (10) State coalition of domestic violence programs.--The 
 term ``State coalition of domestic violence programs'' means a 
 statewide membership organization of domestic violence programs 
 that, among other activities, provides training and technical 
 assistance to domestic violence programs within the State, 
 Commonwealth, territory, or lands under Federal military or 
 tribal authority.
 (11) Tribal organization.--The term ``tribal organization'' 
 means a tribally chartered organization operating within the 
 boundaries of an Indian reservation whose governing body 
 reflects the populations served.

SEC. 134. GRANT PROGRAM.

 (a) Grant Authority.--The Attorney General may make grants to 
eligible grantees in accordance with this section, which shall be used 
to further the health, safety, and economic needs of victims of 
domestic violence, regardless of the race, ethnicity, gender, sexual 
orientation, religion, or immigration status of those victims, through 
the provision of legal assistance to those victims.
 (b) Application Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), in order to 
 receive a grant under this section, an eligible grantee shall--
 (A) with respect to any eligible grantee described 
 in subparagraphs (B) through (F) of section 133(4), 
 include documentation of an ongoing partnership and 
 working relationship with a domestic violence program;
 (B) demonstrate a history of providing direct legal 
 or advocacy services in a manner that is accountable to 
 the community served; and
 (C) certify in writing that--
 (i) any person providing direct legal 
 representation or advocacy through a program 
 funded under this section has completed 
 training on domestic violence law and practice;
 (ii) any training program conducted in 
 satisfaction of the requirement of clause (i) 
 will be developed with input from and in 
 collaboration with a domestic violence program;
 (iii) the applicant agency will, to the 
 maximum extent practicable, petition for the 
 shifting of litigation costs to the abuser;
 (iv) the applicant agency does not require 
 clients to engage in mediation or encourage 
 mediation in domestic violence cases or related 
 civil matters;
 (v) any person providing direct legal 
 representation or advocacy through a program 
 funded under this section has informed the 
 appropriate State domestic violence coalitions 
 of their work and participates in any statewide 
 networking among legal assistance providers to 
 victims of domestic violence; and
 (vi) the applicant agency's policies and 
 practices do not encourage victims to seek or 
 obtain the insurance of mutual orders of 
 protection.
 (2) Waiver.--
 (A) In general.--The Attorney General may waive the 
 requirements of paragraph (1) for good cause, if the 
 applicant--
 (i) is seeking a grant to fund activities 
 described in paragraphs (1) through (5) of 
 subsection (c);
 (ii) cannot meet all of the conditions 
 described in clauses (i) through (vi) of 
 paragraph (1)(C) of this subsection; and
 (iii) demonstrates a commitment to improved 
 access to the justice system for victims of 
 domestic violence.
 (B) Application for waiver.--An eligible grantee 
 seeking a waiver under this paragraph shall submit to 
 the Attorney General an application that--
 (i) contains a certification by the 
 applicant's chief executive officer or its 
 designee that the applicant is seeking a waiver 
 under this paragraph; and
 (ii) describes plans to further the 
 purposes as stated in paragraphs (1) through 
 (6) of subsection (c).
 (c) Purposes.--Grants under this section may be used to--
 (1) enhance the availability and quality of legal 
 representation to victims of domestic violence in civil 
 actions, criminal defense, administrative proceedings, and 
 other courts;
 (2) strengthen and expand legal advocacy programs for 
 victims of domestic violence;
 (3) encourage the development of partnerships between 
 domestic violence programs and the full spectrum of legal 
 representation and advocacy programs, including--
 (A) private practitioners;
 (B) government and public sector lawyers; direct 
 legal services programs;
 (C) bar associations;
 (D) legal hotlines; and
 (E) clinical law school initiatives;
 (4) increase the participation of the private bar in pro 
 bono and low-cost representation of and assistance to victims 
 of domestic violence;
 (5) improve judicial and administrative handling of cases 
 involving victims of domestic violence; and
 (6) improve legal education on domestic violence in law 
 schools and in continuing professional education programs.
 (d) Matching Requirement.--The Attorney General may not make a 
grant to an eligible grantee under this section unless the eligible 
grantee agrees that, with respect to the costs to be incurred by the 
eligible grantee in carrying out the program for which the grant was 
awarded, the State will make available (directly or through donations 
from public or private entities) non-Federal contributions in an amount 
not to exceed 20 percent of Federal funds provided under the grant.
 (e) Nonsupplantation.--Federal funds received under this section 
shall be used to supplement, not supplant, other Federal and non-
Federal funds that would otherwise be available for expenditure on 
activities described in this section. Amounts made available under this 
section may be used to fund new programs or to expand or enhance 
existing programs.

SEC. 135. PROVISION OF TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND TRAINING.

 The Attorney General may provide, either directly or through 
contracts or other arrangements with 1 or more other entities--
 (1) technical assistance to further the purpose of this 
 subtitle, including--
 (A) consultation to and problem-solving with any 
 grantee related to the implementation of grants;
 (B) litigation support for advocates, lawyers, and 
 grantee programs, to include, but not be limited to the 
 establishment of an archive and database related to 
 trial memos, briefs, and case law on civil, 
 administrative, and criminal matters on domestic 
 violence;
 (C) the development of materials to assist in the 
 education of legal advocates, law students, and lawyers 
 on providing services to victims of domestic violence 
 and their children;
 (D) the development of information packets on 
 mentoring programs for building the capacity of 
 advocates and lawyers to enhance the quality of 
 services to victims of domestic violence;
 (E) the identification of promising practices for 
 partnerships between direct legal services programs, 
 the private bar, and law schools with domestic violence 
 programs to enhance legal advocacy and representation 
 of victims of domestic violence and their children; and 
 the development of protocols or program guidelines for 
 partnership initiatives; and
 (F) the development of statewide databases and a 
 national clearinghouse and database relating to the 
 provision of advocacy and representation for victims of 
 domestic violence; and
 (2) training to further the purpose of this subtitle, 
 including--
 (A) training to educate legal advocates and 
 attorneys about stopping the violence, enhancing victim 
 safety, achieving economic justice, and protecting 
 child victims and witnesses of domestic violence, 
 including--
 (i) the identification and development of 
 training materials on an array of civil, 
 administrative, and criminal issues related to 
 domestic violence; and
 (ii) the provision of site, regional, or 
 national consultations and training of 
 advocates, attorneys, or law faculty on 
 domestic violence advocacy and representation; 
 and
 (B) training relating to--
 (i) legal strategies and practice issues in 
 civil, administrative, and criminal cases and 
 in enforcement proceedings relating to domestic 
 violence;
 (ii) safety planning for victims and their 
 children;
 (iii) statutory, regulatory, and case law 
 which affect or protect victims of domestic 
 violence and their children;
 (iv) coordinating efforts in civil, 
 criminal, administrative, and other proceedings 
 affecting a victim of domestic violence or the 
 victim's family;
 (v) developing partnerships for advocacy 
 and representation for victims of domestic 
 violence; and
 (vi) creating multidisciplinary, community-
 based approaches to enhance legal advocacy and 
 representation in justice-seeking efforts for 
 victims of domestic violence.

SEC. 136. EVALUATION.

 The Attorney General may evaluate the grants funded under this 
subtitle through contract or other arrangements with 1 or more other 
entities that have expertise in domestic violence and evaluation 
research.

SEC. 137. FUNDING.

 (a) In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry 
out this subtitle--
 (1) $23,000,000 for fiscal year 1999;
 (2) $44,000,000 for fiscal year 2000; and
 (3) $57,000,000 for fiscal year 2001.
 (b) Allocation.--Of the amount made available to carry out this 
subtitle in each fiscal year--
 (1) not less than 70 percent shall be used for grants for 
 legal assistance programs under section 134;
 (2) not more than 15 percent shall be used to provide 
 technical assistance and training under section 135;
 (3) not more than 5 percent shall be used for evaluation 
 under section 136;
 (4) not more than 5 percent shall be used for the costs of 
 administration; and
 (5) not less than 5 percent shall be used for grants to 
 tribal organizations.
 (c) Assistance to State Domestic Violence Coalitions.--Any grant 
awarded under this subtitle to a tribal organization or a State 
domestic violence coalition shall be in addition to any assistance made 
available to the tribal organization or State domestic violence 
coalition under the Violence Against Women Act of 1994 or any provision 
of law amended by that Act.

 Subtitle D--Conforming Amendments

SEC. 141. LAW ENFORCEMENT AND PROSECUTION GRANTS.

 Part T of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 
(42 U.S.C. 3796gg et seq.) is amended--
 (1) in section 2001(b)(5), by striking ``to racial, 
 cultural, ethnic, and language minorities'' and inserting ``to 
 underserved populations'';
 (2) in section 2002(d)(1), by striking subparagraph (D) and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(D) demographic characteristics of the 
 populations to be served, including marital status and 
 the characteristics of any underserved populations;'';
 (3) in section 2003, by striking paragraph (7) and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(7) the term `underserved populations' includes 
 populations underserved because of race, ethnicity, age, 
 disability, sexual orientation, religion, alienage status, 
 geographic location (including rural isolation), language 
 barriers, and any other populations determined to be 
 underserved by the State planning process; and''; and
 (4) in section 2004(b)(3), by striking ``victim to 
 offender'' and inserting ``victim to offender and the 
 membership of persons served in any underserved populations; 
 and''.

SEC. 142. FAMILY VIOLENCE PREVENTION AND SERVICES ACT.

 (a) State Demonstration Grant Application.--Section 303(a)(2)(C) of 
the Family Violence Prevention and Services Act (42 U.S.C. 
10402(a)(2)(C)) is amended by striking ``populations underserved 
because of ethnic, racial, cultural, language diversity or geographic 
isolation;'' and inserting ``populations underserved because of race, 
ethnicity, age, disability, sexual orientation, religion, alienage 
status, geographic location (including rural isolation), or language 
barriers, and any other populations determined by the Secretary to be 
underserved;''.
 (b) State Domestic Violence Coalition Grant Activities.--Section 
311(a)(4) (42 U.S.C. 10410(a)(4)) of the Family Violence Prevention and 
Services Act is amended by striking ``underserved racial, ethnic or 
language-minority populations'' and inserting ``underserved 
populations, as that term is used in section 303(a)(2)(C)''.
 (c) National Domestic Violence Hotline Grant Application.--Section 
316(e)(4) (42 U.S.C. 10416(e)(4)) is amended by striking all that 
follows ``to the provision of services'' and inserting ``to underserved 
populations, as that term is used in section 303(a)(2)(C); and''.

 Subtitle E--Battered Immigrant Women's Economic Security

SEC. 151. NONAPPLICABILITY OF SPECIAL RULES RELATING TO THE TREATMENT 
 OF NON-213A ALIENS.

 Section 408(f)(6) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 608(f)(6)) 
is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``or'' at the end;
 (2) in subparagraph (C), by striking the period and 
 inserting ``; or''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(D) described in section 421(f) of the Personal 
 Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act 
 of 1996 (8 U.S.C. 1631(f)) but for the fact that the 
 individual is a non-213A alien.''.

SEC. 152. DISCRETIONARY FIRST TIME OFFENDER WAIVERS FOR ALIENS MAKING 
 CHILD SUPPORT PAYMENTS.

 Section 237(a)(2)(E) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 
U.S.C. 1227(a)(2)(E)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
clauses:
 ``(iii) Discretionary waiver of deportation 
 ground for first offenders paying court ordered 
 child support.--At the sole and unreviewable 
 discretion of the Attorney General, the 
 Attorney General may waive deportability of an 
 alien who is convicted under clause (i) or who 
 is a found in violation of a protection order 
 by a determination entered by a court, if--
 ``(I) the conviction or finding was 
 the alien's first conviction or 
 violation;
 ``(II) the alien is not otherwise 
 deportable under this paragraph, unless 
 the alien has obtained a waiver 
 available under the provisions of this 
 paragraph;
 ``(III) in the case of an alien 
 described in clause (iv); and
 ``(IV) any ongoing cohabitation 
 with the abuse victim will not be in 
 violation of any court order.
 ``(iv) Covered aliens.--
 ``(I) In general.--An alien 
 described in clause (iii)(III) is an 
 alien who--
 ``(aa) is separated from 
 the person against whom he 
 committed the crime domestic 
 violence and who is--

 ``(aaa) subject to 
 a court order requiring 
 him to pay child 
 support for any 
 children he has in 
 common with the person 
 against whom he 
 committed the crime of 
 domestic violence; and

 ``(bbb) current on 
 all child support 
 payments due under such 
 order or is in 
 compliance with a 
 court-approved payment 
 plan; or

 ``(bb) resides in the same 
 household as the person against 
 whom he committed the crime of 
 domestic violence and who 
 demonstrates to the immigration 
 judge in the removal proceeding 
 that the alien has been and 
 will continue to provide 
 adequate, ongoing support for 
 the victim and any children in 
 common, if the parties have 
 children in common.
 ``(II) Applicable child support 
 guidelines.--For purposes of the 
 determination of the adequacy of child 
 support provided under subclause 
 (I)(bb), the immigration judge shall 
 refer to the child support guidelines 
 of the jurisdiction in which the 
 parties reside.
 ``(iv) Reinstatement of deportation 
 grounds.--Any person who obtains a waiver under 
 clause (iii) who thereafter is found by a court 
 with jurisdiction over the child support matter 
 to have failed to make court-ordered child 
 support payments or failed to comply with a 
 court-approved payment plan is deportable and 
 no further waiver is available under clause 
 (iii).''.

SEC. 153. MISREPRESENTATION WAIVERS FOR BATTERED SPOUSES OF UNITED 
 STATES CITIZENS AND LAWFUL PERMANENT RESIDENTS.

 (a) Waiver of Inadmissibility.--Section 212(i) of the Immigration 
and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1182(i)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by inserting before the period at the 
 end the following: ``or in the case of an alien granted 
 classification under section 204(a)(1)(A) (iii), (iv), or (v) 
 or section 204(a)(1)(B) (ii) or (iii), or who qualifies for 
 relief under section 240A(b)(2) or 244(a)(3) (as in effect 
 before the date of enactment of the Illegal Immigration Reform 
 and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996), the alien 
 demonstrates extreme hardship to the alien or the alien's 
 United States citizen or lawful permanent resident parent, 
 child, son, or daughter''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(3) The Attorney General may also waive the application of clause 
(ii) of section 212(a)(6)(C) in the case of an alien who qualifies for 
classification under clause (iii), (iv), or (v) of section 204(a)(1)(A) 
or clause (ii) or (iii) of section 204(a)(1)(B), or who qualifies for 
relief under section 240A(b)(2) or 244(a)(3) (as in effect before the 
date of enactment of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant 
Responsibility Act of 1996), for humanitarian purposes, to assure 
family unity, or when it is otherwise in the public interest.''.
 (b) Waiver of Deportability.--Section 237(a) of the Immigration and 
Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1227(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(H)--
 (A) in clause (ii), by striking the period and 
 inserting ``; or''; and
 (B) by inserting after clause (ii) the following 
 new clause:
 ``(iii) is an alien who qualifies for 
 classification under clause (iii), (iv), or (v) 
 of section 204(a)(1)(A) or clause (ii) or (iii) 
 of section 204(a)(1)(B), or who qualifies for 
 relief under section 240A(b)(2), or 244(a)(3) 
 (as in effect before the date of enactment of 
 the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant 
 Responsibility Act of 1996).''; and
 (2) in paragraph (3)(D)--
 (A) by inserting ``(i) In general.--'' before ``Any 
 alien''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(ii) Waiver authorized.--The Attorney 
 General may waive clause (i) in the case of an 
 alien who qualifies for classification under 
 clause (iii), (iv), or (v) of section 
 204(a)(1)(A) or clause (ii) or (iii) of section 
 204(a)(1)(B), or who qualifies for relief under 
 section 240(A)(b)(2), or 244(a)(3) (as in 
 effect before the enactment of the Illegal 
 Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility 
 Act of 1996).''.

SEC. 154. PUBLIC CHARGE.

 Section 212(a)(4) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 
1182(a)(4)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subparagraph:
 ``(E) Exception.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply 
 to--
 ``(i) an alien who qualifies for 
 classification as a spouse, parent, or child of 
 a United States citizen or lawful permanent 
 resident under clause (iii), (iv), or (v) of 
 section 204(a)(1)(A) or clause (ii) or (iii) of 
 section 204(a)(1)(B);
 ``(ii) an alien who qualifies for 
 classification as the spouse or child of a 
 United States citizen or lawful permanent 
 resident under section 204(a)(1)(A)(i) or (ii) 
 or section 204(a)(1)(B)(i) and who has been 
 battered or subjected to extreme cruelty; or
 ``(iii) any derivatives or immediate 
 relative children of aliens under clause (i) or 
 (ii) of this subparagraph.''.

SEC. 155. ACCESS TO NATURALIZATION FOR DIVORCED VICTIMS OF ABUSE.

 Section 319(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 
1430(a)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``, or any person who obtained status as a 
 lawful permanent resident by reason of his or her status as a 
 spouse or child of a United States citizen who battered him or 
 her or subjected him or her to extreme cruelty,'' after 
 ``United States'' the first place such term appears;
 (2) by inserting ``(except in the case of a person who 
 obtained lawful permanent residence because he or she was the 
 spouse or child of a United States citizen who battered or 
 subjected him or her to extreme cruelty)'' after ``has been 
 living in marital union with the citizen spouse''.

SEC. 156. WORK AUTHORIZATION.

 The Attorney General may authorize an alien who has properly filed 
an application for relief under sections 204(a)(1)(A) (iii), (iv), or 
(v), 204(a)(1)(B) (ii) or (iii), 240A(b)(2), or 244(c)(3) (as in effect 
before the enactment of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant 
Responsibility Act of 1996) of the Immigration and Nationality Act to 
engage in employment in the United States during the pendency of such 
application and may provide the alien with an ``employment authorized'' 
endorsement or other appropriate document signifying authorization of 
employment. The Attorney General shall authorize such employment in all 
cases in which an application has been pending for a period exceeding 
180 days and has not been denied.

SEC. 157. FILING FEES.

 (a) Petitions for Classification.--Section 204(a)(1)(A)(iii)(I) of 
the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1154(a)(1)(A)(iii)(I)) is 
amended by adding at the end the following: ``No fee shall be charged 
for the filing or processing of any application under section 204(a)(1) 
(A) (iii), (iv), or (v), or (B) (ii) or (iii), or any application for 
work authorization or renewal thereof where such applications formed 
the basis for the alien's work authorization eligibility.''.
 (b) Cancellations of Removal.--Section 240A(b)(2) of the 
Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1229b) is amended by adding 
at the end the following: ``No fee shall be charged for the filing or 
processing of any application under this subsection or any application 
for work authorization or renewal thereof, if the application forms the 
basis for the alien's work authorization eligibility.''.
 (c) Suspension of Deportation.--No fee shall be charged for the 
filing or processing of any application under section 244(a)(3) of the 
Immigration and Nationality Act (as in effect before the date of 
enactment of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant 
Responsibility Act of 1996), or any application for work authorization 
or renewal thereof, if the applications forms the basis for the alien's 
work authorization eligibility.

SEC. 158. ACCESS TO FOOD STAMPS FOR QUALIFIED BATTERED ALIENS.

 Section 402(a)(2) of the Personal Responsibility and Work 
Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (8 U.S.C. 1612(a)(2)) is amended 
by adding at the end the following:
 ``(L) Food stamp exception for certain battered 
 aliens.--With respect to eligibility for benefits for 
 the specified Federal program described in paragraph 
 (3)(B), paragraph (1) shall not apply to any individual 
 who has been battered or subjected to extreme cruelty 
 (as defined under guidance issued by the Attorney 
 General in accordance with section 431) in the United 
 States and is a qualified alien under section 
 431(c).''.

SEC. 159. ACCESS TO HOUSING FOR QUALIFIED IMMIGRANTS.

 Section 214 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1980 
(42 U.S.C. 1436(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(j) Eligibility for Housing Assistance for Qualified Battered 
Aliens.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this section--
 ``(1) the restrictions on use of assisted housing by aliens 
 under this section shall not apply to any--
 ``(A) qualified alien under subsection (b) or (c) 
 of section 431 of the Personal Responsibility and Work 
 Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1986 (8 U.S.C. 1641); 
 or
 ``(B) child included in the application for lawful 
 immigration status of an alien described in 
 subparagraph (A); and
 ``(2) no private, government, or nonprofit organization 
 providing shelter or services to battered women or abused 
 children receiving any Federal funds shall deny, restrict, or 
 condition assistance to any applicant based on alienage.''.

SEC. 160. CLARIFYING WELFARE REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR BENEFIT 
 APPLICANTS.

 The Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 301 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) in section 411A, by adding at the end the following: 
 ``Collection of information about, and inquiries into, the 
 immigration status of an individual who is a parent applying on 
 behalf of his or her child who is a United States citizen or a 
 qualified alien (as defined in section 431(b) of the Personal 
 Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 
 (8 U.S.C. 1641(b))) for assistance under the State program 
 funded under this part, shall not be made if the individual is 
 not applying for benefits for themselves, whether or not the 
 individual is determined, under Federal or State law, to be 
 part of a family unit receiving assistance under that 
 program.''; and
 (2) in section 1631(e)(9), by adding at the end the 
 following: ``Collection of information about, and inquiries 
 into, the immigration status of an individual who is a parent 
 applying on behalf of his or her child who is a United States 
 citizen or a qualified alien (as defined in section 431(b) of 
 the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation 
 Act of 1996 (8 U.S.C. 1641(b))) for benefits under this title 
 (or for benefits supplemented by a State with an agreement 
 under section 1616), shall not be made if the individual is not 
 applying for benefits for themselves, whether or not the 
 individual is determined, under Federal or State law, to be 
 part of a family unit receiving such benefits.''.

SEC. 161. CONFORMING DEFINITION OF ``FAMILY'' USED IN LAWS GRANTING 
 WELFARE ACCESS FOR BATTERED IMMIGRANTS TO STATE FAMILY 
 LAW.

 Section 431(c) of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity 
Reconciliation Act of 1996 (8 U.S.C. 1641(c)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking ``by a spouse or a 
 parent, or by a member of the spouse or parent's family 
 residing in the same household as the alien and the spouse or 
 parent consented to, or acquiesced in, such battery or 
 cruelty,'' and inserting ``by a spouse, parent, son, or 
 daughter, or by any individual having a relationship with the 
 alien covered by the civil or criminal domestic violence 
 statutes of the State or Indian country where the alien 
 resides, or the State or Indian country in which the alien, the 
 alien's child, or the alien child's parents received a 
 protection order, or by any individual against whom the alien 
 could obtain a protection order,''; and
 (2) in paragraph (2)(A), by striking ``by a spouse or 
 parent of the alien (without the active participation of the 
 alien in the battery or cruelty), or by a member of the spouse 
 or parent's family residing in the same household as the alien 
 and the spouse or parent consented or acquiesced to such 
 battery or cruelty,'' and inserting ``by a spouse, parent, son 
 or daughter of the alien (without the active participation of 
 the alien in the battery or cruelty) or by any person having a 
 relationship with the alien covered by the civil or criminal 
 domestic violence statutes of the State or Indian country where 
 the alien resides, or the State or Indian country in which the 
 alien, the alien's child or the alien child's parent received a 
 protection order, or by any individual against whom the alien 
 could obtain a protection order,''.

SEC. 162. ENSURING THAT BATTERED IMMIGRANTS MAY CONTINUE TO RECEIVE 
 FOOD STAMPS AND SSI USING THEIR ABUSIVE SPOUSE'S 
 QUALIFYING QUARTERS.

 Section 435 of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity 
Reconciliation Act of 1996 (8 U.S.C. 1645) is amended in paragraph (2) 
by striking ``and the alien remains married to such spouse or such 
spouse is deceased'' and inserting ``if such spouse is deceased or if 
the alien remains married to such spouse (except that qualified aliens 
covered by section 431(c) may continue after divorce to count the 
qualifying quarters worked by their spouse during the marriage)''.

 TITLE II--VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND THE WORKPLACE

SEC. 201. FINDINGS.

 Congress makes the following findings:
 (1) Victims of crime and their families suffer from crime 
 and its effects on a daily basis.
 (2) Domestic crime against adults accounts for 
 approximately 15 percent of total crime costs in the United 
 States each year.
 (3) Violence against women has been reported to be the 
 leading cause of physical injury to women. It has a devastating 
 impact on women's physical and emotional health and financial 
 security.
 (4) The Department of Justice estimates that intimate 
 partners commit more than 1,000,000 violent crimes against 
 women every year.
 (5) Employees in the United States who have been victims of 
 crime too often suffer adverse consequences in the workplace as 
 a result of their experiences as victims of crime.
 (6) Victims of crime are particularly vulnerable to changes 
 in employment, pay, and benefits as a result of their 
 victimizations, and are, therefore, in need of legal 
 protection.
 (7) The prevalence of violence against women at work is 
 dramatic. Homicide is the leading cause of death for women on 
 the job. Eight percent of all rapes occur in the workplace. 
 Women who are victims of violent workplace crimes are twice as 
 likely as men to know their attackers. Husbands, boyfriends, 
 and ex-partners commit 15 percent of workplace homicides 
 against women. One study found that three-quarters of battered 
 women who work were harassed by telephone by their abuser at 
 work.
 (8) Nearly 50 percent of rape victims lose their employment 
 or are forced to quit their jobs following the crime. One 
 quarter of battered women surveyed have lost a job due in part 
 to the effects of domestic violence.
 (9) The availability of economic support is a critical 
 factor in the ability of battered women to leave abusive 
 situations that threaten them and their children. Over half of 
 battered women surveyed stayed with their batterers because 
 they lacked resources to support themselves and their children.
 (10) According to the National Institute of Justice, crime 
 costs an estimated $450,000,000,000 annually in medical 
 expenses, lost earnings, social service costs, pain, suffering, 
 and reduced quality of life for victims, all of which harm our 
 Nation's productivity and drain our Nation's resources. Violent 
 crime accounts for $426,000,000,000 of this amount.
 (11) Rape exacts the highest costs-per-victim of any 
 criminal offense, an estimated total of $127,000,000,000 per 
 year. Recent governmental estimates indicate that between 
 300,000 and 600,000 rapes and sexual assaults occur annually in 
 the United States.
 (12) Other violent offenses take unacceptably high tolls on 
 the economy as well, including assault ($93,000,000,000), 
 murder ($71,000,000,000), drunk driving (excluding fatalities) 
 ($61,000,000,000), and child abuse ($56,000,000,000).
 (13) Violent crime results in wage losses equivalent to 1 
 percent of all American earnings, causes 3 percent of the 
 Nation's medical spending and 14 percent of injury-related 
 medical spending.
 (14) Estimates demonstrate that employers pay between 
 $3,000,000,000 and $5,000,000,000 annually to cover the cost of 
 crimes against employees and their families.
 (15) Surveys of business executives and corporate security 
 directors also underscore the heavy toll that workplace 
 violence takes on American women, businesses, and interstate 
 commerce.
 (16) Ninety-four percent of corporate security and safety 
 directors at companies nationwide rank domestic violence as a 
 high-risk security problem.
 (17) Forty-nine percent of senior executives recently 
 surveyed said domestic violence has a harmful effect on their 
 company's productivity, 47 percent said domestic violence 
 negatively affects attendance, and 44 percent said domestic 
 violence increases health care costs.
 (18) Only 12 States have enacted statutes forbidding 
 employers from taking adverse action against employees who have 
 been victims of crime and must participate in the criminal 
 justice process during working hours. No State explicitly 
 protects crime victims from other adverse action which may 
 result from their experiences and status as crime victims.
 (19) Existing Federal law neither expressly authorizes 
 battered women to take leave from work to seek legal assistance 
 and redress, counseling, or assistance with safety planning 
 activities nor does it protect crime victims from retaliation, 
 discharge, or other workplace penalties that may result from 
 their experiences and status as crime victims.

 Subtitle A--National Clearinghouse on Domestic Violence and Sexual 
 Assault in the Workplace Grant

SEC. 211. NATIONAL CLEARINGHOUSE ON DOMESTIC VIOLENCE AND SEXUAL 
 ASSAULT IN THE WORKPLACE GRANT.

 (a) Authority.--The Attorney General may make a grant in accordance 
with this section to a private, nonprofit entity that meets the 
requirements of subsection (b), including a nonprofit entity operating 
within the boundaries of an Indian reservation, in order to provide for 
the establishment and operation of a national clearinghouse and 
resource center to provide information and assistance to employers and 
labor organizations in their efforts to develop and implement 
appropriate responses to assist victims of domestic violence and sexual 
assault.
 (b) Grantees.--Each applicant for a grant under this section shall 
submit to the Attorney General an application, which shall--
 (1) demonstrate that the applicant--
 (A) has a nationally recognized expertise in the 
 area of domestic violence and sexual assault and a 
 record of commitment and quality responses to reduce 
 domestic violence and sexual assault; and
 (B) will provide matching funds from non-Federal 
 sources in an amount equal to not less than 10 percent 
 of the total amount of the grant under this section; 
 and
 (2) include a plan to maximize, to the extent practicable, 
 outreach to employers (including private companies, as well as 
 public entities such as universities, and State and local 
 governments) in developing and implementing appropriate 
 responses to assist employees who are victims of domestic 
 violence and sexual assault.
 (c) Use of Grant Amount.--A grant under this section may be used 
for staff salaries, travel expenses, equipment, printing, and other 
reasonable expenses necessary to assemble, maintain, and disseminate to 
employers and labor organizations information on and appropriate 
responses to domestic violence and sexual assault, including--
 (1) training to promote a better understanding of 
 appropriate assistance to victims;
 (2) conferences;
 (3) outreach counseling;
 (4) development of protocols and model workplace policies;
 (5) coordination of victim services; and
 (6) assessments of the workplace costs of domestic violence 
 and sexual assault.
 (d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $500,000 for each of fiscal 
years 1999 through 2003.

 Subtitle B--Victims' Employment Rights

SEC. 221. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Victims' Employment Rights 
Act''.

SEC. 222. PURPOSES.

 The purposes of this subtitle are, pursuant to the affirmative 
power of Congress to enact legislation under section 5 of the 14th 
amendment to the Constitution, as well as under the portion of section 
8 of article I of the Constitution relating to regulation of commerce 
among the several States--
 (1) to promote the national interest in ensuring that 
 victims and survivors of domestic violence, sexual assault, and 
 stalking can recover from and cope with the effects of those 
 crimes and participate in the criminal and civil justice 
 processes without fear of adverse economic consequences from 
 their employers;
 (2) to minimize the negative impact on interstate commerce 
 from dislocations of employees and decreases in productivity 
 that may arise when employees are victimized by those crimes;
 (3) to promote the purposes of the 14th amendment by 
 addressing the failure of existing laws to protect the 
 employment rights of victims of domestic violence, sexual 
 assault, and stalking and by furthering the right of domestic 
 violence, sexual assault, and stalking victims to employment 
 free from discrimination; and
 (4) to accomplish the purposes described in paragraphs (1), 
 (2), and (3) in a manner that accommodates the legitimate 
 interests of employers and protects the safety of all persons 
 in the workplace.

SEC. 223. DEFINITIONS.

 In this subtitle:
 (1) Employee.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``employee'' means any 
 person employed by an employer. In the case of an 
 individual employed by a public agency, such term means 
 an individual employed as described in section 3(e) of 
 the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 
 203(e)).
 (B) Basis.--The term includes a person employed as 
 described in subparagraph (A) on a full- or part-time 
 basis, for a fixed time period, on a temporary basis, 
 pursuant to a detail, as an independent contractor, or 
 as a participant in a work assignment as a condition of 
 receipt of Federal or State income-based public 
 assistance.
 (2) Employer.--The term ``employer''--
 (A) means any person engaged in commerce or in any 
 industry or activity affecting commerce who employs 
 individuals; and
 (B) includes any person acting directly or 
 indirectly in the interest of an employer in relation 
 to an employee, and includes a public agency, but does 
 not include any labor organization (other than when 
 acting as an employer) or anyone acting in the capacity 
 of officer or agent of such labor organization.
 (3) Person.--The term ``person'' means an individual, 
 partnership, association, corporation, business trust, legal 
 representative, or any organized group of individuals.
 (4) Public agency.--The term ``public agency'' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 3 of the Fair Labor Standards 
 Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203).

SEC. 224. PROHIBITED DISCRIMINATORY ACTS.

 An employer shall not fail or refuse to hire or discharge any 
individual, or otherwise discriminate against any individual with 
respect to compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of 
employment, of the individual (including retaliation in any form or 
manner) because the individual--
 (1) is or is perceived to be a victim of domestic violence, 
 sexual assault, or stalking;
 (2) attended, participated in, or prepared for, or 
 requested leave to attend, participate in, or prepare for a 
 criminal or civil court proceeding relating to a crime of 
 domestic violence, sexual assault, or stalking of which the 
 employee was a victim; or
 (3) requested an adjustment to a job structure or workplace 
 facility, including a transfer, reassignment, or modified 
 schedule, leave, a changed telephone number or seating 
 assignment, or installation of a lock or implementation of a 
 safety procedure, in response to actual or threatened domestic 
 violence, sexual assault, or stalking, regardless of whether 
 the request was granted.

SEC. 225. ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) Civil Action by Employees.--
 (1) Liability.--Any employer who violates section 224 shall 
 be liable to any eligible employee affected--
 (A) for damages equal to the amount of wages, 
 salary, employment benefits (as defined in section 101 
 of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 
 2611)), or other compensation denied to or lost by such 
 employee by reason of the violation, and the interest 
 on that amount calculated at the prevailing rate;
 (B) compensatory damages, including but not limited 
 to future pecuniary losses, emotional pain, suffering, 
 inconvenience, mental anguish, loss of enjoyment or 
 life, and other nonpecuniary losses;
 (C) such punitive damages, up to 3 times the amount 
 of actual damages sustained, as the finder of fact 
 described in paragraph (2) shall determine to be 
 appropriate; and
 (D) for such equitable relief as may be 
 appropriate, including employment, reinstatement, and 
 promotion.
 (2) Right of action.--An action to recover the damages or 
 equitable relief prescribed in paragraph (1) may be maintained 
 against any employer (including a public agency) in any Federal 
 or State court of competent jurisdiction by any 1 or more 
 employees.
 (b) Action by Department of Justice.--The Attorney General may 
bring a civil action in any Federal or State court of competent 
jurisdiction to recover the damages described in subsection (a)(1).

SEC. 226. ATTORNEY'S FEES.

 Section 722(b) of the Revised Statutes (42 U.S.C. 1988(b)) is 
amended in the last sentence, by inserting ``the Victims' Employment 
Rights Act,'' after ``title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964,''.

 Subtitle C--Workplace Violence Against Women Prevention Tax Credit

SEC. 231. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Workplace Violence Against 
Women Prevention Tax Credit Act''.

SEC. 232. CREDIT FOR COSTS TO EMPLOYERS OF IMPLEMENTING WORKPLACE 
 SAFETY PROGRAMS TO COMBAT VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN.

 (a) In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end 
the following:

``SEC. 45D. WORKPLACE SAFETY PROGRAM CREDIT.

 ``(a) In General.--For purposes of section 38, the workplace safety 
program credit determined under this section for the taxable year is, 
for any employer, an amount equal to 40 percent of the violence against 
women safety and education costs paid or incurred by such employer 
during the taxable year.
 ``(b) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Violence against women safety and education cost.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `violence against women 
 safety and education cost' means any cost certified by 
 the Attorney General to the Secretary as being for the 
 purpose of--
 ``(i) ensuring the safety of employees from 
 violent crimes against women,
 ``(ii) providing assistance to employees 
 and the spouses and dependents of employees 
 with respect to violent crimes against women,
 ``(iii) providing legal or medical services 
 to employees and the spouses and dependents of 
 employees subjected to, or at risk from, 
 violent crimes against women,
 ``(iv) educating employees about the issue 
 of violent crimes against women, or
 ``(v) implementing human resource or 
 personnel policies initiated to protect 
 employees from violent crimes against women or 
 to support employees who have been victims of 
 violent crimes against women.
 ``(B) Types of costs.--Such term includes costs 
 certified by the Attorney General to the Secretary as 
 being for the purpose of--
 ``(i) the hiring of new security personnel 
 in order to address violent crimes against 
 women,
 ``(ii) the creation of buddy systems or 
 escort systems for walking employees to parking 
 lots, parked cars, subway stations, or bus 
 stops, in order to address violent crimes 
 against women,
 ``(iii) the purchase or installation of new 
 security equipment, including surveillance 
 equipment, lighting fixtures, cardkey access 
 systems, and identification systems, in order 
 to address violent crimes against women,
 ``(iv) the establishment of an employee 
 assistance line or other employee assistance 
 services, in order to address violent crimes 
 against women, for the use of individual 
 employees, including counseling or referral 
 services undertaken in consultation and 
 coordination with national, State, or local 
 domestic violence and sexual assault coalitions 
 or programs,
 ``(v) the retention of an attorney to 
 provide legal services to employees seeking 
 restraining orders or other legal recourse from 
 violent crimes against women,
 ``(vi) the establishment of medical 
 services addressing the medical needs of 
 employees who are victims of violent crimes 
 against women,
 ``(vii) the retention of a financial expert 
 or an accountant to provide financial 
 counseling to employees seeking to escape from 
 violent crimes against women,
 ``(viii) the establishment of an education 
 program for employees, consisting of seminars 
 or training sessions about violent crimes 
 against women undertaken in consultation and 
 coordination with national, State, or local 
 domestic violence and sexual assault coalitions 
 or programs,
 ``(ix) studies of the cost, impact, or 
 extent of violent crimes against women at the 
 employer's place of business, if such studies 
 are made available to the public and protect 
 the identity of employees included in the 
 study,
 ``(x) the publication of a regularly 
 disseminated newsletter or other regularly 
 disseminated educational materials about 
 violent crimes against women,
 ``(xi) the implementation of leave policies 
 for the purpose of allowing or accommodating 
 the needs of victims of violent crimes against 
 women to pursue legal redress against 
 assailants, including leave from work to attend 
 meetings with attorneys, to give evidentiary 
 statements or depositions, and to attend 
 hearings or trials in court,
 ``(xii) the implementation of flexible work 
 policies for the purpose of allowing or 
 accommodating the needs of employees who are 
 victims of violent crimes against women, or 
 employees at risk with respect to such crimes, 
 to avoid assailants,
 ``(xiii) the implementation of transfer 
 policies for the purpose of allowing or 
 accommodating the needs of employees subjected 
 to violent crimes against women to change 
 office locations within the company in order to 
 avoid assailants or to allow the transfer of an 
 employee who has perpetrated violent crimes 
 against women in order to protect the victim, 
 including payment of costs for the transfer and 
 relocation of an employee to another city, 
 county, State, or country for the purpose of 
 maintaining an employee's safety from violent 
 crimes against women, or
 ``(xiv) the provision of any of the 
 services described in clauses (iv) through 
 (viii) to the spouses or dependents of 
 employees.
 ``(C) Notification of possible tax consequences.--
 In no event shall any cost for goods or services which 
 may be included in the income of any employee receiving 
 or benefiting from such goods or services be treated as 
 a violence against women safety and education cost 
 unless the employer notifies the employee in writing of 
 the possibility of such inclusion.
 ``(2) Violent crimes against women.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `violent crimes against 
 women' includes sexual assault and domestic violence.
 ``(B) Domestic violence.--The term `domestic 
 violence' has the meaning given the term in section 2 
 of the Battered Women's Economic Security Act.
 ``(C) Sexual assault.--The term `sexual assault'--
 ``(i) means any conduct proscribed by 
 chapter 109A of title 18, United States Code, 
 whether or not the conduct occurs in the 
 special maritime and territorial jurisdiction 
 of the United States or in a Federal prison; 
 and
 ``(ii) includes both assaults committed by 
 offenders who are strangers to the victim and 
 assaults committed by offenders who are known 
 to the victim or related by blood or marriage 
 to the victim.
 ``(3) Employee and employer.--
 ``(A) Partners and partnerships.--The term 
 `employee' includes a partner and the term `employer' 
 includes a partnership.
 ``(B) Related persons.--Persons shall be treated as 
 related to each other if such persons are treated as a 
 single employer under subsection (a) or (b) of section 
 52.
 ``(c) Coordination With Other Provisions.--No credit or deduction 
shall be allowed under any other provision of this title for any amount 
for which a credit is allowed under this section.''.
 (b) Treatment as General Business Credit.--
 (1) In general.--Subsection (b) of section 38 of such Code 
 (relating to general business credit) is amended by striking 
 ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (11), by striking the period 
 at the end of paragraph (12) and inserting ``, plus'', and by 
 adding at the end the following:
 ``(13) the workplace safety program credit determined under 
 section 45D.''.
 (2) Transitional rule for carrybacks.--Subsection (d) of 
 section 39 of such Code (relating to transitional rules) is 
 amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(9) No carryback of section 45d credit before effective 
 date.--No portion of the unused business credit for any taxable 
 year which is attributable to the workplace safety program 
 credit determined under section 45D may be carried back to a 
 taxable year beginning on or before the date of enactment of 
 section 45D.''.
 (3) Deduction for unused credits.--Subsection (c) of 
 section 196 of such Code (relating to deduction for certain 
 unused business credits) is amended by striking ``and'' at the 
 end of paragraph (6), by striking the period at the end of 
 paragraph (7) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end 
 the following:
 ``(8) the workplace safety program credit determined under 
 section 45D.''.
 (c) Credit Not a Defense in Legal Actions.--The allowance of a 
credit under section 45D of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as added 
by this subtitle) shall not absolve employers of their responsibilities 
under any other law and shall not be construed as a defense to any 
legal action (other than legal action by the Secretary of the Treasury 
under such Code).
 (d) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of 
part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding 
at the end the following:

 ``Sec. 45D. Workplace safety program 
 credit.''.

 Subtitle D--Employment Protection for Battered Women

SEC. 241. SHORT TITLE AND REFERENCE.

 (a) Short Title.--This subtitle may be cited as the ``Battered 
Women's Employment Protection Act''.
 (b) Reference.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in 
this subtitle an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an 
amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference 
shall be considered to be made to that section or other provision of 
the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2601 et seq.).

SEC. 242. PURPOSES.

 The purposes of this subtitle are, pursuant to the affirmative 
power of Congress to enact legislation under section 5 of the 14th 
amendment to the Constitution, as well as under the portions of section 
8 of article I of the Constitution relating to providing for the 
general welfare and to regulation of commerce among the several 
States--
 (1) to promote the national interest in reducing domestic 
 violence by enabling victims of domestic violence to maintain 
 the financial independence necessary to leave abusive 
 situations, to achieve safety and minimize the physical and 
 emotional injuries from domestic violence, and to reduce the 
 devastating economic consequences of domestic violence to 
 employers and employees, by--
 (A) providing unemployment insurance for victims of 
 domestic violence who are forced to leave their 
 employment as a result of domestic violence; and
 (B) entitling employed victims of domestic violence 
 to take reasonable leave under the Family and Medical 
 Leave Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2601 et seq.) to seek 
 medical help, legal assistance, counseling, and safety 
 planning and assistance without penalty from their 
 employers;
 (2) to promote the purposes of the 14th amendment by 
 protecting the civil and economic rights of victims of domestic 
 violence and by furthering the equal opportunity of women for 
 employment and economic self-sufficiency;
 (3) to minimize the negative impact on interstate commerce 
 from dislocations of employees and harmful effects on 
 productivity, health care costs, and employer costs, caused by 
 domestic violence; and
 (4) to accomplish the purposes described in paragraphs (1), 
 (2), and (3) in a manner that accommodates the legitimate 
 interests of employers.

SEC. 243. UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION.

 (a) Unemployment Compensation.--Section 3304 of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph 
 (18);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph 
 (19) and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (19) the 
 following:
 ``(20) compensation is to be provided where an individual 
 is separated from employment due to circumstances directly 
 resulting from the individual's experience of domestic 
 violence.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(g) Construction.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a)(20), an 
 employee's separation from employment shall be treated as due 
 to circumstances directly resulting from the individual's 
 experience of domestic violence if the separation resulted 
 from--
 ``(A) the employee's reasonable fear of future 
 domestic violence at or en route to or from the 
 employee's place of employment;
 ``(B) the employee's wish to relocate to another 
 geographic area in order to avoid future domestic 
 violence against the employee or the employee's family;
 ``(C) the employee's need to recover from traumatic 
 stress resulting from the employee's experience of 
 domestic violence;
 ``(D) the employer's denial of the employee's 
 request for the temporary leave from employment 
 authorized by section 102 of the Family and Medical 
 Leave Act of 1993 to address domestic violence and its 
 effects; or
 ``(E) any other circumstance in which domestic 
 violence causes the employee to reasonably believe that 
 termination of employment is necessary for the future 
 safety of the employee or the employee's family.
 ``(2) Reasonable efforts to retain employment.--For 
 purposes of subsection (a)(20), if State law requires the 
 employee to have made reasonable efforts to retain employment 
 as a condition for receiving unemployment compensation, such 
 requirement shall be met if the employee--
 ``(A) sought protection from, or assistance in 
 responding to, domestic violence, including calling the 
 police or seeking legal, social work, medical, 
 clerical, or other assistance;
 ``(B) sought safety, including refuge in a shelter 
 or temporary or permanent relocation, whether or not 
 the employee actually obtained such refuge or 
 accomplished such relocation; or
 ``(C) reasonably believed that options such as 
 taking a leave of absence, transferring jobs, or 
 receiving an alternative work schedule would not be 
 sufficient to guarantee the employee or the employee's 
 family's safety.
 ``(3) Active search for employment.--For purposes of 
 subsection (a)(20), if State law requires the employee to 
 actively search for employment after separation from employment 
 as a condition for receiving unemployment compensation, such 
 requirement shall be treated as met where the employee is 
 temporarily unable to actively search for employment because 
 the employee is engaged in seeking safety or relief for the 
 employee or the employee's family from domestic violence, 
 including--
 ``(A) going into hiding or relocating or attempting 
 to do so, including activities associated with such 
 hiding or relocation, such as seeking to obtain 
 sufficient shelter, food, schooling for children, or 
 other necessities of life for the employee or the 
 employee's family;
 ``(B) actively pursuing legal protection or 
 remedies, including meeting with the police, going to 
 court to make inquiries or file papers, meeting with 
 attorneys, or attending court proceedings; or
 ``(C) participating in psychological, social, or 
 religious counseling or support activities to assist 
the employee in coping with domestic violence.
 ``(4) Provision of information to meet certain 
 requirements.--In determining if an employee meets the 
 requirements of paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), the unemployment 
 agency of the State in which an employee is requesting 
 unemployment compensation by reason of subsection (a)(20) may 
 require the employee to provide--
 ``(A) a written statement describing the domestic 
 violence and its effects;
 ``(B) documentation of the domestic violence, such 
 as, but not limited to, police or court records, or 
 documentation from a shelter worker or an employee of a 
 domestic violence program, an attorney, a clergy 
 member, or a medical or other professional from whom 
 the employee has sought assistance in addressing 
 domestic violence and its effects; or
 ``(C) other corroborating evidence, such as, but 
 not limited to, a statement from any other individual 
 with knowledge of the circumstances which provide the 
 basis for the claim, or physical evidence of domestic 
 violence, such as photographs, torn or bloody clothes, 
 or other damaged property.
 All evidence of domestic violence experienced by an employee, 
 including an employee's statement, any corroborating evidence, 
 and the fact that an employee has applied for or inquired about 
 unemployment compensation available by reason of subsection 
 (a)(20) shall be retained in the strictest confidence of such 
 State unemployment agency, except to the extent the disclosure 
 is requested, or consented to, by the employee for the purpose 
 of protecting the employee or her family member's safety or 
 assisting in documenting domestic violence for a court or 
 agency.''.
 (b) Social Security Personnel Training.--Section 303(a) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 503(a)) is amended by redesignating 
paragraphs (4) through (10) as paragraphs (5) through (11), 
respectively, and by adding after paragraph (3) the following:
 ``(4) Such methods of administration as will ensure that 
 claims reviewers and hearing personnel are adequately trained 
 in the nature and dynamics of domestic violence and in methods 
 of ascertaining and keeping confidential information about 
 possible experiences of domestic violence, so that employee 
 separations stemming from domestic violence are reliably 
 screened, identified, and adjudicated, and full confidentiality 
 is provided for the employee's claim and submitted evidence.''.
 (c) Definitions.--Section 3306 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(u) Domestic Violence.--The term `domestic violence' has the 
meaning given the term in section 2 of the Battered Women's Economic 
Security Act.''.

SEC. 244. ENTITLEMENT TO LEAVE FOR ADDRESSING DOMESTIC VIOLENCE FOR 
 NON-FEDERAL EMPLOYEES.

 (a) Definitions.--Section 101 of the Family and Medical Leave Act 
of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2611) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(14) Addressing domestic violence and its effects.--The 
 term `addressing domestic violence and its effects' means--
 ``(A) experiencing domestic violence;
 ``(B) seeking medical attention for or recovering 
 from injuries caused by domestic violence;
 ``(C) seeking legal assistance or remedies, 
 including communicating with the police or an attorney, 
 or participating in any legal proceeding, related to 
 domestic violence;
 ``(D) attending support groups for victims of 
 domestic violence;
 ``(E) obtaining psychological counseling related to 
 experiences of domestic violence;
 ``(F) participating in safety planning and other 
 actions to increase safety from future domestic 
 violence, including temporary or permanent relocation; 
 and
 ``(G) participating in any other activity 
 necessitated by domestic violence that must be 
 undertaken during the hours of employment involved.
 ``(15) Domestic violence.--The term `domestic violence' has 
 the meaning given the term in section 2 of the Battered Women's 
 Economic Security Act.''.
 (b) Leave Requirement.--Section 102 (29 U.S.C. 2612) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1), by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(E) In order to care for the son, daughter, or 
 parent of the employee, if such son, daughter, or 
parent is addressing domestic violence and its effects.
 ``(F) Because the employee is addressing domestic 
 violence and its effects, which make the employee 
 unable to perform the functions of the position of such 
 employee.'';
 (2) in subsection (b), by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Domestic violence.--Leave under subparagraph (E) or 
 (F) of subsection (a)(1) may be taken by an eligible employee 
 intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule. The taking of 
 leave intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule pursuant to 
 this paragraph shall not result in a reduction in the total 
 amount of leave to which the employee is entitled under 
 subsection (a) beyond the amount of leave actually taken.''; 
 and
 (3) in subsection (d)(2)(B), by striking ``(C) or (D)'' and 
 inserting ``(C), (D), (E), or (F)''.
 (c) Certification.--Section 103 (29 U.S.C. 2613) is amended--
 (1) in the title of the section, by inserting before the 
 period the following: ``; confidentiality''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(f) Domestic Violence.--In determining if an employee meets the 
requirements of subparagraph (E) or (F) of section 102(a)(1), the 
employer of an employee may require the employee to provide--
 ``(1) a written statement describing the domestic violence 
 and its effects;
 ``(2) documentation of the domestic violence involved, such 
 as, but not limited to, a police or court record, or 
 documentation from a shelter worker, attorney, member of the 
 clergy, or medical or other professional from whom the employee 
 has sought assistance in addressing domestic violence and its 
 effects; or
 ``(3) other corroborating evidence, such as, but not 
 limited to, a statement from any other individual with 
 knowledge of the circumstances that provide the basis for the 
 claim of domestic violence, or physical evidence of domestic 
 violence, such as a photograph, torn or bloody clothing, or any 
 other damaged property.
 ``(g) Confidentiality.--All evidence provided to the employer under 
subsection (f) of domestic violence experienced by an employee or the 
son, daughter, or parent of an employee, including a statement of an 
employee, any other documentation or corroborating evidence, and the 
fact that an employee has requested leave for the purpose of 
addressing, or caring for a son, daughter, or parent who is addressing, 
domestic violence and its effects, shall be retained in the strictest 
confidence by the employer, except to the extent that disclosure is 
consented to, or requested by the employee for the purpose of--
 ``(1) protecting the safety of the employee or her family 
 member or a co-worker of the employee; or
 ``(2) assisting in documenting domestic violence for a 
 court or agency.''.

SEC. 245. ENTITLEMENT TO LEAVE FOR ADDRESSING DOMESTIC VIOLENCE FOR 
 FEDERAL EMPLOYEES.

 (a) Definitions.--Section 6381 of title 5, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) at the end of paragraph (5), by striking ``and'';
 (2) in paragraph (6), by striking the period and inserting 
 a semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(7) the term `addressing domestic violence and its 
 effects' means--
 ``(A) experiencing domestic violence;
 ``(B) seeking medical attention for or recovering 
 from injuries caused by domestic violence;
 ``(C) seeking legal assistance or remedies, 
 including communicating with the police or an attorney, 
 or participating in any legal proceeding, related to 
 domestic violence;
 ``(D) attending support groups for victims of 
 domestic violence;
 ``(E) obtaining psychological counseling related to 
 experiences of domestic violence;
 ``(F) participating in safety planning and other 
 actions to increase safety from future domestic 
 violence, including temporary or permanent relocation; 
 and
 ``(G) participating in any other activity 
 necessitated by domestic violence that must be 
 undertaken during the hours of employment involved; and
 ``(8) the term `domestic violence' has the meaning given 
 the term in section 2 of the Battered Women's Economic Security 
 Act.''.
 (b) Leave Requirement.--Section 6382 of title 5, United States 
Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1), by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(E) In order to care for the son, daughter, or parent of 
 the employee, if such son, daughter, or parent is addressing 
 domestic violence and its effects.
 ``(F) Because the employee is addressing domestic violence 
 and its effects, which make the employee unable to perform the 
 functions of the position of such employee.'';
 (2) in subsection (b), by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Domestic violence.--Leave under subparagraph (E) or 
 (F) of subsection (a)(1) may be taken by an employee 
 intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule. The taking of 
 leave intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule pursuant to 
 this paragraph shall not result in a reduction in the total 
 amount of leave to which the employee is entitled under 
 subsection (a) beyond the amount of leave actually taken.''; 
 and
 (3) in subsection (d), by striking ``(C), or (D)'' and 
 inserting ``(C), (D), (E), or (F)''.
 (c) Certification.--Section 6383 of title 5, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) in the title of the section, by adding at the end the 
 following: ``; confidentiality''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(f) In determining if an employee meets the requirements of 
subparagraph (E) or (F) of section 6382(a)(1), the employing agency of 
an employee may require the employee to provide--
 ``(1) a written statement describing the domestic violence 
 and its effects;
 ``(2) documentation of the domestic violence involved, such 
 as a police or court record, or documentation from a shelter 
 worker, attorney, member of the clergy, or medical or other 
 professional from whom the employee has sought assistance in 
 addressing domestic violence and its effects; or
 ``(3) other corroborating evidence, such as a statement 
 from any other individual with knowledge of the circumstances 
 that provide the basis for the claim of domestic violence, or 
 physical evidence of domestic violence, such as a photograph, 
 torn or bloody clothing, or other damaged property.
 ``(g) All evidence provided to the employing agency under 
subsection (f) of domestic violence experienced by an employee or the 
son, daughter, or parent of an employee, including a statement of an 
employee, any other documentation or corroborating evidence, and the 
fact that an employee has requested leave for the purpose of 
addressing, or caring for a son, daughter, or parent who is addressing, 
domestic violence and its effects, shall be retained in the strictest 
confidence by the employing agency, except to the extent that 
disclosure is--
 ``(1) consented to by the employee for the purpose of 
 protecting the safety of the employee or a co-worker of the 
 employee; or
 ``(2) requested by the employee to document domestic 
 violence for a court or agency.''.

SEC. 246. EXISTING LEAVE USABLE FOR DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Addressing domestic violence and its effects.--The term 
 ``addressing domestic violence and its effects'' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 101 of the Family and Medical 
 Leave Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2611), as amended in section 
 244(a).
 (2) Employee.--The term ``employee'' means any person 
 employed by an employer. In the case of an individual employed 
 by a public agency, such term means an individual employed as 
 described in section 3(e) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 
 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203(e)).
 (3) Employer.--The term ``employer''--
 (A) means any person engaged in commerce or in any 
 industry or activity affecting commerce who employs 
 individuals, if such person is also subject to the 
 Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2601 et 
 seq.) or to any provision of a State or local law, 
 collective bargaining agreement, or employment benefits 
 program or plan, addressing paid or unpaid leave from 
 employment (including family, medical, sick, annual, 
 personal, or similar leave); and
 (B) includes any person acting directly or 
 indirectly in the interest of an employer in relation 
 to any employee, and includes a public agency, who is 
 subject to a law, agreement, program, or plan described 
 in subparagraph (A), but does not include any labor 
 organization (other than when acting as an employer) or 
 anyone acting in the capacity of officer or agent of 
 such labor organization.
 (4) Employment benefits.--The term ``employment benefits'' 
 has the meaning given the term in section 101 of the Family and 
Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2611).
 (5) Parent; son or daughter.--The terms ``parent'' and 
 ``son or daughter'' have the meanings given the terms in 
 section 101 of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 
 U.S.C. 2611).
 (6) Public agency.--The term ``public agency'' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 3 of the Fair Labor Standards 
 Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 203).
 (b) Use of Existing Leave.--An employee who is entitled to take 
paid or unpaid leave (including family, medical, sick, annual, 
personal, or similar leave) from employment, pursuant to State or local 
law, a collective bargaining agreement, or an employment benefits 
program or plan, shall be permitted to use such leave for the purpose 
of addressing domestic violence and its effects, or for the purpose of 
caring for a son or daughter or parent of the employee, if such son or 
daughter or parent is addressing domestic violence and its effects.
 (c) Certification.--In determining whether an employee qualifies to 
use leave as described in subsection (b), an employer may require 
documentation of domestic violence or corroborating evidence consistent 
with section 103(f) of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 
U.S.C. 2613(f)), as amended by section 244(c).
 (d) Confidentiality.--All evidence provided to the employer under 
subsection (c) of domestic violence experienced by an employee or the 
son or daughter or parent of the employee, including a statement of an 
employee, any other documentation or corroborating evidence, and the 
fact that the employee has requested leave for the purpose of 
addressing, or caring for a son or daughter or parent who is 
addressing, domestic violence and its effects, shall be retained in the 
strictest confidence by the employer, except to the extent that 
disclosure is--
 (1) consented to by the employee for the purpose of 
 protecting the safety of the employee or a coworker of the 
 employee; or
 (2) requested by the employee to assist in documenting 
 domestic violence for a court or agency.
 (e) Prohibited Acts.--
 (1) Interference with rights.--
 (A) Exercise of rights.--It shall be unlawful for 
 any employer to interfere with, restrain, or deny the 
 exercise of or the attempt to exercise, any right 
 provided under this section.
 (B) Discrimination.--It shall be unlawful for any 
 employer to discharge or in any other manner 
 discriminate against an individual for opposing any 
 practice made unlawful by this section.
 (2) Interference with proceedings or inquiries.--It shall 
 be unlawful for any person to discharge or in any other manner 
 discriminate against any individual because such individual--
 (A) has filed any charge, or had instituted or 
 caused to be instituted any proceeding, under or 
 related to this section;
 (B) has given, or is about to give, any information 
 in connection with any inquiry or proceeding relating 
 to any right provided under this section; or
 (C) has testified, or is about to testify, in any 
 inquiry or proceeding relating to any right provided 
 under this section.
 (f) Enforcement.--
 (1) Public enforcement.--The Secretary of Labor shall have 
 the powers set forth in subsections (b), (c), (d), and (e) of 
 section 107 of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 
 U.S.C. 2617) for the purpose of public agency enforcement of 
 any alleged violation of subsection (e) against any employer.
 (2) Private enforcement.--The remedies and procedures set 
 forth in subsection (a) of section 107 of the Family and 
 Medical Leave Act of 1993 shall be the remedies and procedures 
 pursuant to which an employee may initiate a legal action 
 against an employer for alleged violations of subsection (e).
 (3) References.--For purposes of paragraph (1) and (2), 
 references in section 107 of the Family and Medical Leave Act 
 of 1993 to section 105 of such Act shall be considered to be 
 references to subsection (e).
 (4) Employer liability under other laws.--Nothing in this 
 section shall be construed to limit the liability of an 
 employer to an employee for harm suffered relating to the 
 employee's experience of domestic violence pursuant to any 
 other Federal or State law, including a law providing for a 
 legal remedy.

SEC. 247. EFFECT ON OTHER LAWS AND EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS.

 (a) More Protective Laws, Agreements, Programs, and Plans.--Nothing 
in this subtitle or the amendments made by this subtitle shall be 
construed to supersede any provision of any Federal, State, or 
local law, collective bargaining agreement, or other employment 
benefits program or plan that provides greater unemployment 
compensation or leave benefits for employed victims of domestic 
violence than the rights established under this subtitle or such 
amendments.
 (b) Less Protective Laws, Agreements, Programs, and Plans.--The 
rights established for employees under this subtitle or the amendments 
made by this subtitle shall not be diminished by any State or local 
law, collective bargaining agreement, or employment benefits program or 
plan.

SEC. 248. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 (a) General Rule.--Except as provided in subsection (b), this 
subtitle and the amendments made by this subtitle take effect 180 days 
after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (b) Unemployment Compensation.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 amendments made by section 243 shall apply in the case of 
 compensation paid for weeks beginning on or after the 
 expiration of 180 days from the date of enactment of this Act.
 (2) Meeting of state legislature.--
 (A) In general.--If the Secretary of Labor 
 identifies a State as requiring a change to its 
 statutes or regulations in order to comply with the 
 amendments made by section 243, the amendments made by 
 section 243 shall apply in the case of compensation 
 paid for weeks beginning after the earlier of--
 (i) the date the State changes its statutes 
 or regulations in order to comply with the 
 amendments made by this section; or
 (ii) the end of the first session of the 
 State legislature which begins after the date 
 of enactment of this Act or which began prior 
 to such date and remained in session for at 
 least 25 calendar days after such date;
 except that in no case shall the amendments made by 
 this Act apply before the date that is 180 days after 
 the date of enactment of this Act.
 (B) Session defined.--In this paragraph, the term 
 ``session'' means a regular, special, budget, or other 
 session of a State legislature.

 Subtitle E--Battered Women's Shelters and Services

SEC. 251. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Battered Women's Shelters and 
Services Act''.

SEC. 252. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR FAMILY VIOLENCE 
 PREVENTION AND SERVICES.

 (a) Reauthorization.--Section 310(a) of the Family Violence 
Prevention and Services Act (42 U.S.C. 10409(a)) is amended to read as 
follows:
 ``(a) In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry 
out this title--
 ``(1) $120,000,000 for fiscal year 1999;
 ``(2) $160,000,000 for fiscal year 2000;
 ``(3) $200,000,000 for fiscal year 2001; and
 ``(4) $260,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 and 
 2003.''.
 (b) Information and Technical Assistance Centers.--Section 310(c) 
of the Family Violence Prevention and Services Act (42 U.S.C. 10409(c)) 
is amended by inserting before ``5 percent shall'' the following: ``the 
lesser of $7,500,000 and''.
 (c) Funds for State Domestic Violence Coalitions.--Section 310(d) 
of the Family Violence Prevention and Services Act (42 U.S.C. 10409(d)) 
is amended--
 (1) by striking ``not less than'' and inserting ``the 
 lesser of $22,000,000 or''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following: ``For any fiscal 
 year for which the amount of funds made available under this 
 subsection exceeds $11,000,000, the Secretary shall reserve not 
 more than 20 percent of the funds made available under this 
 subsection. The Secretary shall make the reserved funds 
 available to State domestic violence coalitions under sections 
 319 through 321 or by carrying out other priority activities, 
 as determined by the Secretary in consultation with State 
 domestic violence coalitions and entities carrying out domestic 
 violence programs that provide shelter or related 
 assistance.''.

SEC. 253. FAMILY VIOLENCE PREVENTION AND SERVICES ACT IMPROVEMENTS.

 (a) Denial of Application.--Section 303(a) of the Family Violence 
Prevention and Services Act (42 U.S.C. 10402(a)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (5); and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following:
 ``(4) The Secretary shall deny any application submitted under this 
subsection that fails to provide documentation, including memoranda of 
understanding, of the specific involvement of the State domestic 
violence coalition and other knowledgeable individuals and interested 
organizations, in the development of the State application.''.
 (b) Allotment of Funds.--Section 304 of the Family Violence 
Prevention and Services Act (42 U.S.C. 10403) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1)--
 (i) by inserting after ``grant authorized 
 under section 303(a)'' the following: 
 ``$500,000, with the remaining funds to be 
 allotted to each State in''; and
 (ii) by striking ``such sums'' and 
 inserting ``such remaining funds'';
 (B) by striking ``except that--'' and all that 
 follows through ``(2)'' and inserting ``except that''; 
 and
 (C) by striking all after paragraph (2); and
 (2) in subsection (d)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by inserting before the 
 period the following: ``, in proportion to the original 
allotments made to the States for such year'';
 (B) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph 
 (3); and
 (C) by inserting before paragraph (3) the 
 following:
 ``(2) If, at the end of the sixth month of a fiscal year for which 
sums are appropriated under section 310--
 ``(A) the entire portion of such sums that is made 
 available for grants under section 303(b) has not been 
 distributed to Indian tribes and organizations described in 
 section 303(b) in grants because of the failure of 1 or more of 
 the tribes or organizations to meet the requirements for such a 
 grant, the Secretary shall--
 ``(i) use the remainder of the portion to make 
 grants under section 303(b) to Indian tribes and 
 organizations who meet the requirements; and
 ``(ii) make the grants in proportion to the 
 original grants made to the tribes and organizations 
 under section 303(b) for such year;
 ``(B) the amount allotted to an entity under section 311 
 has not been made available to such entity in grants under 
 section 311 because of the failure of such entity to meet the 
 requirements for a grant or because a limitation on expenditure 
 has been reached, the Secretary shall--
 ``(i) use the amount to make allotments and grants 
 under subsections (a) and (b) of section 303 and 
 section 304 to States, Indian tribes, and other 
 organizations who meet the requirements of those 
 sections; and
 ``(ii) make the allotments and grants in proportion 
 to the original allotments and grants made to the 
 States, tribes, and organizations under sections 303 
 and 304 for such year; and
 ``(C) the entire portion of such sums that is made 
 available for grants under section 308 has not been distributed 
 to entities described in section 308 in grants because of the 
 failure of 1 or more of the entities to meet the requirements 
 for such a grant or because a limitation on expenditure has 
 been reached, the Secretary shall--
 ``(i) the remainder of the portion to make 
 allotments and grants under subsections (a) and (b) of 
 section 303 and section 304 to States, Indian tribes, 
 and other organizations who meet the requirements of 
 those sections; and
 ``(ii) make the allotments and grants in proportion 
 to the original allotments and grants made to the 
 States, tribes, and organizations under sections 303 
 and 304 for such year.''.
 (c) Information and Technical Assistance Centers.--Section 308 of 
the Family Violence Prevention and Services Act (42 U.S.C. 10407) is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(2)--
 (A) by adding ``on providing information, training, 
 and technical assistance'' after ``focusing''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following: ``From such 
 amounts, the Secretary may award grants to private 
 nonprofit organizations for technical assistance and 
 training initiatives in the subject areas identified in 
 subsection (c), if such initiatives do not duplicate 
 the activities of the entities funded under subsection 
 (c) and if the total amounts awarded for such 
 initiatives do not exceed $500,000.'';
 (2) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1)--
 (i) by inserting ``on emerging issues 
 concerning domestic violence service, 
 prevention, or law'' after ``service 
 providers,''; and
 (ii) by striking ``of domestic violence 
 service, prevention, or law'' after ``following 
 areas''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(8) Providing technical assistance and training to local 
 entities carrying out domestic violence programs that provide 
 shelter or related assistance.
 ``(9) Improving access to services, information, and 
 training, concerning domestic violence, within Indian tribes 
 and Indian tribal agencies.
 ``(10) Responding to such emerging issues in fields 
 concerning domestic violence as the Secretary may identify in 
 consultation with advocates for local entities carrying out 
 domestic violence programs that provide shelter or related 
 assistance, State domestic violence coalitions, and national 
 domestic violence organizations.'';
 (3) in subsection (e)--
 (A) by inserting before ``Not'' the following:
 ``(1) Reports after receipt.--''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) Report by grant recipients.--
 ``(A) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the 
 date of enactment of section 320, each recipient of a 
 grant under this section shall prepare and submit to 
 the Secretary a report that evaluates the effectiveness 
 of the use of amounts received under such grant by the 
 recipient and containing such other information as the 
 Secretary may prescribe.
 ``(B) Notice and public comment.--Before renewing 
 any grant under this section, the Secretary shall 
 publish in the Federal Register a copy of each report 
 submitted under subparagraph (A) and provide not less 
 than 90 days for notice and opportunity for public 
 comment on the published report.''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(h) Multiple Grants.--Nothing in this section shall prohibit the 
Secretary from making multiple grants to any private nonprofit entity 
to fulfill the purpose of this section.''.
 (d) Model Leadership Grants; Direct Emergency Assistance; Technical 
Assistance and Training.--Title III of the Family Violence Prevention 
and Services Act (42 U.S.C. 10401 et seq.), is further amended by 
adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 319. MODEL LEADERSHIP GRANTS FOR DOMESTIC VIOLENCE INTERVENTION 
 IN UNDERSERVED COMMUNITIES.

 ``(a) Grants.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall award grants to 
 develop and implement model community intervention strategies 
 to address domestic violence in underserved populations.
 ``(2) Limitations.--In awarding grants under paragraph (1), 
 the Secretary shall award grants to not more than 10 State 
 domestic violence coalitions and to not more than 10 local 
 entities that carry out domestic violence programs providing 
 shelter or related assistance.
 ``(3) Purposes.--Grants awarded under paragraph (1) shall 
 be used for--
 ``(A) assessing the needs of underserved 
 populations in the State involved;
 ``(B) building collaborative relationships between 
 the grant recipients and community-based organizations 
 serving underserved populations; and
 ``(C) developing and implementing model community 
 intervention strategies to decrease the incidence of 
 domestic violence in underserved populations.
 ``(4) Periods.--The Secretary shall award grants under 
 paragraph (1) for periods of not more than 3 years.
 ``(b) Eligibility.--
 ``(1) Initial eligibility.--To be eligible for an initial 
 year of funding through a grant awarded under subsection 
 (a)(1), an applicant shall--
 ``(A) submit to the Secretary an application 
 containing an acceptable plan for assessing the needs 
 of underserved populations for the model community 
 intervention strategies described in subsection (a)(3), 
 and identifying a specific population for development 
 of such an intervention strategy, in the first year of 
 the grant; and
 ``(B) demonstrate to the Secretary inclusion of 
 representatives from community-based organizations in 
 underserved communities in planning, designing, and 
 disseminating the needs assessment under subparagraph 
 (A).
 ``(2) Continued eligibility.--To be eligible for continued 
 funding for not more than 2 additional years through a grant 
 awarded under subsection (a)(1), a recipient of funding for the 
 initial year shall submit to the Secretary an application 
 containing--
 ``(A) a plan for implementing the intervention 
 strategy, and specifying the collaborative 
 relationships with community-based organizations 
 serving the identified underserved populations to be 
 supported under the grant; and
 ``(B) a plan for disseminating the intervention 
 strategy throughout the State and, at the option of the 
 recipient, to other States, in the third year of the 
 grant.
 ``(c) Priority for Collaborative Funding.--
 ``(1) In general.--In awarding grants under subsection 
 (a)(1), the Secretary shall give priority to State domestic 
 violence coalitions, and local entities that carry out domestic 
 violence programs, that submit applications in collaboration 
 with community-based organizations serving underserved 
 populations.
 ``(2) Amounts.--The Secretary shall award grants under 
 subsection (a)(1) to coalitions and entities described in 
 paragraph (1) in amounts of not less than $100,000 per fiscal 
 year.
 ``(d) Definition.--The term `underserved population' has the 
meaning given the term in section 2003 of the Omnibus Crime Control and 
Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 3796gg-2).

``SEC. 320. DIRECT EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC 
 VIOLENCE.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall award grants to State 
domestic violence coalitions for the purpose of enabling the coalitions 
to provide emergency assistance, through an emergency assistance fund 
administered by the coalitions, for victims of domestic violence.
 ``(b) Use of Funds.--
 ``(1) Provision of assistance.--A State domestic violence 
 coalition that receives a grant under subsection (a) may use 
 funds received through the grant only to provide emergency 
 assistance--
 ``(A) directly to victims of domestic violence who 
 are in the process of fleeing an abusive situation; or
 ``(B) to such victims through entities that carry 
 out domestic violence programs providing shelter or 
 related assistance and that request such assistance on 
 behalf of victims.
 ``(2) Emergency assistance.--Emergency assistance provided 
 with such funds may include transportation, housing, and 
 payment of other expenses associated with relocation.
 ``(c) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
subsection (a), a State domestic violence coalition shall submit to the 
Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing 
such information as the Secretary may require, including--
 ``(1) a detailed description of the process that the 
 coalition will use to receive and review applications for the 
 emergency assistance;
 ``(2) a detailed description of the process that the 
 coalition will use for notifying entities that carry out 
 domestic violence programs described in subsection (b)(2) about 
 the availability of emergency assistance under this section;
 ``(3) an application form for the applications described in 
 paragraph (1) that requires applicants for emergency assistance 
 to specify the type of assistance requested from the coalition, 
 a statement of need for the assistance, a statement about the 
 impact of the assistance on a victim's ability to escape 
 domestic violence, and such other information as would be 
 helpful in disbursing emergency assistance;
 ``(4) a description of the process that the coalition will 
 use to make payments to recipients of the assistance; and
 ``(5) a statement of procedures the coalition will use to 
 protect the confidentiality of information relating to the 
 identity of the recipients.
 ``(d) Reports.--The State domestic violence coalition shall 
annually prepare and submit to the Secretary a report describing the 
distribution of emergency assistance to victims of domestic violence 
under this section, analyzing the distribution by type and amount of 
assistance provided. For reasons of safety and confidentiality, such 
reports shall not contain information that allows the identification of 
individual victims.

``SEC. 321. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND TRAINING FOR STATE AND LOCAL 
 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE PROGRAMS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall award grants to State 
domestic violence coalitions for the purpose of providing training and 
technical assistance for State domestic violence coalitions and other 
nonprofit, nongovernmental entities carrying out State and local 
domestic violence programs.
 ``(b) Use of Funds.--A State domestic violence coalition that 
receives a grant under subsection (a) shall use funds received through 
the grant to develop and implement regional training and technical 
assistance initiatives within a region served by a regional office of 
the Department of Health and Human Services. In implementing the 
initiatives, the coalition shall use the funds to prioritize, plan, and 
implement solutions to regional problems experienced by State domestic 
violence coalitions, and entities carrying out domestic violence 
programs providing shelter or related assistance, within the region.
 ``(c) Collaborative Efforts.--To the extent practicable, the 
coalition shall implement the initiatives in collaboration with 
domestic violence advocates and organizations operating outside of the 
region, and with the national resource center and special issue 
resource centers established in section 308, in order to obtain the 
expertise of the advocates, organizations, and centers in delivering 
training and technical assistance within the region.
 ``(d) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
subsection (a), a State domestic violence coalition shall--
 ``(1) be a nonprofit, nongovernmental State domestic 
 violence coalition;
 ``(2) demonstrate to the Secretary that a majority of State 
 domestic violence coalitions within the region to be served 
 support the selection of the coalition to receive the grant; 
 and
 ``(3) have its principal place of operation within the 
 region.
 ``(e) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
subsection (a), a State domestic violence coalition shall submit an 
application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and 
containing such information as the Secretary may require.
 ``(f) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to 
prohibit entities that carry out domestic violence programs serving 
Indian tribes from receiving technical assistance and training under 
this section.
 ``(g) Reports.--The State domestic violence coalition shall 
annually prepare and submit to the Secretary a report describing the 
entities receiving training and technical assistance from the coalition 
under this section, and the type of technical assistance and training 
received.''.

TITLE III--PROTECTIONS FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE UNDER PROGRAMS 
 AUTHORIZED UNDER THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT

SEC. 301. SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER CHANGES FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC 
 VIOLENCE.

 Section 205(c)(2)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
405(c)(2)(B)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(iv)(I) The Commissioner of Social Security shall review a 
request from an individual who is a victim of domestic violence to 
change the individual's social security account number assigned in 
accordance with this paragraph in order to protect the individual or 
any dependent children of the individual from a risk or threat of 
further domestic violence, including incidents of stalking. Any 
individual who submits a request for a change in their social security 
number on the basis of domestic violence shall include corroborating 
evidence such as physical evidence, police or other law enforcement 
records, court documents, medical, mental health or counseling records, 
government agency records, penal system records, or documentation from 
domestic violence program personnel, attorneys, members of the clergy, 
or other professionals who have provided assistance to the individual. 
Law enforcement or court advocacy organizations shall verify that an 
individual who submits a request in accordance with this subclause is a 
victim of domestic violence.
 ``(II) Not later than 180 days after the date that a request 
described in subclause (I) is verified as having been submitted by a 
victim of domestic violence, the Commissioner shall grant the request 
unless the Commissioner determines that changing the individual's 
social security account number is not necessary to protect the 
individual or any dependent children of the individual. The 
Commissioner shall bear the burden of proof for making such a 
determination.
 ``(III) The Commissioner may not deny a request to change a social 
security number in accordance with this clause without cause. The 
Commissioner shall provide an individual whose request is denied with 
an explanation for the denial.''.

SEC. 302. WAIVERS FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE UNDER THE TANF 
 PROGRAM.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds that--
 (1) the intent of Congress in amending part A of title IV 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) in section 
 103(a) of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity 
 Reconciliation Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-193; 110 Stat 2112) 
 was to allow States to take into account the effects of the 
 epidemic of domestic violence in establishing their welfare 
 programs, by giving States the flexibility to grant individual, 
 temporary waivers for good cause to victims of domestic 
 violence who meet the criteria set forth in section 
 402(a)(7)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 602(a)(7)(B));
 (2) the allowance of waivers under such sections was not 
 intended to be limited by other, separate, and independent 
 provisions of part A of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 601 et seq.);
 (3) under section 402(a)(7)(A)(iii) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 602(a)(7)(A)(iii)), requirements under the temporary assistance 
 for needy families program under part A of title IV of such Act 
 may, for good cause, be waived for so long as necessary; and
 (4) good cause waivers granted pursuant to section 
 402(a)(7)(A)(iii) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 602(a)(7)(A)(iii)) are 
 intended to be temporary and directed only at particular 
 program requirements when needed on an individual case-by-case 
 basis, and are intended to facilitate the ability of victims of 
 domestic violence to move forward and meet program requirements 
 when safe and feasible without interference by domestic 
 violence.
 (b) Clarification of Waiver Provisions.--
 (1) In general.--Section 402(a)(7) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 602(a)(7)) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(C) No numerical limits.--In implementing this 
 paragraph, a State shall not be subject to any 
 numerical limitation in the granting of good cause 
 waivers under subparagraph (A)(iii).
 ``(D) Waivered individuals not included for 
 purposes of certain other provisions of this part.--Any 
 individual to whom a good cause waiver of compliance 
 with this Act has been granted in accordance with 
 subparagraph (A)(iii) shall not be included for 
 purposes of determining a State's compliance with the 
 participation rate requirements set forth in section 
 407, for purposes of applying the limitation described 
 in section 408(a)(7)(C)(ii), or for purposes of 
 determining whether to impose a penalty under paragraph 
 (3), (5), or (9) of section 409(a).
 ``(E) Secretarial review.--If, but for subparagraph 
 (D), a State would fail to comply with the 
 participation rate requirements set forth in section 
 407, exceed the limitation described in section 
 408(a)(7)(C)(ii), or have a penalty imposed under 
 paragraph (3), (5), or (9) of section 409(a), the 
 Secretary may review the good cause waivers granted by 
 a State under subparagraph (A)(iii) to determine 
 whether the State has granted such waivers pursuant to 
 a determination of good cause, and may revoke any 
 waivers that the Secretary finds were not granted in 
 accordance with the requirements of this paragraph.''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) 
 takes effect as if it had been included in the enactment of 
 section 103(a) of the Personal Responsibility and Work 
 Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-193; 110 
 Stat. 2112).

SEC. 303. DISCLOSURE PROTECTIONS UNDER THE CHILD SUPPORT PROGRAM.

 (a) Federal Parent Locator Service.--Section 453 of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 653), as amended by section 5534 of the 
Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (Public Law 105-33; 111 Stat. 627), is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)(2)--
 (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by 
 inserting ``, or that the health, safety, or liberty or 
 a parent or child would by unreasonably put at risk by 
 the disclosure of such information,'' before ``provided 
 that'';
 (B) in subparagraph (A), by inserting ``, that the 
 health, safety, or liberty or a parent or child would 
 be unreasonably put at risk by the disclosure of such 
 information,'' before ``and that information''; and
 (C) in subparagraph (B)(i), by striking ``be 
 harmful to the parent or the child'' and inserting 
 ``place the health, safety, or liberty of a parent or 
 child unreasonably at risk''; and
 (2) in subsection (c)(2), by inserting ``, or to serve as 
 the initiating court in an action to seek an order,'' before 
 ``against a noncustodial''.
 (b) State Plan Requirements.--Section 454(26) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 654), as amended by section 5552 of the 
Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (Public Law 105-33; 111 Stat. 635), is 
amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``result in physical 
 or emotional harm to the party or the child'' and inserting 
 ``place the health, safety, or liberty of a parent or child 
 unreasonably at risk'';
 (2) in subparagraph (D), by striking ``of domestic violence 
 or child abuse against a party or the child and that the 
 disclosure of such information could be harmful to the party or 
 the child'' and inserting ``that the health, safety, or liberty 
 of a parent or child would be unreasonably put at risk by the 
 disclosure of such information''; and
 (3) in subparagraph (E), by striking ``of domestic 
 violence'' and all that follows through the semicolon and 
 inserting ``that the health, safety, or liberty of a parent or 
 child would be unreasonably put at risk by the disclosure of 
 such information pursuant to section 453(b)(2), the court shall 
 determine whether disclosure to any other person or persons of 
 information received from the Secretary could place the health, 
 safety, or liberty or a parent or child unreasonably at risk 
 (if the court determines that disclosure to any other person 
 could be harmful, the court and its agents shall not make any 
 such disclosure);''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect as if included in the enactment of the Balanced Budget Act of 
1997 (Public Law 105-33; 111 Stat. 251).

SEC. 304. BONUS TO BUILD REAL OPPORTUNITIES FOR POOR FAMILIES.

 Section 403(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 603(a)) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(6) Building opportunities bonus.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall make a grant 
 pursuant to this paragraph to each State for each bonus 
 year for which the State is a high performing State.
 ``(B) Amount of grant.--
 ``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), 
 the Secretary shall determine the amount of the 
 grant payable under this paragraph to a high 
 performing State for a bonus year, which shall 
 be based on the score assigned to the State 
 under subparagraph (D)(i) for the fiscal year 
 that immediately precedes the bonus year.
 ``(ii) Limitation.--The amount payable to a 
 State under this paragraph for a bonus year 
 shall not exceed 5 percent of the State family 
 assistance grant and shall be used to address 
 the issues set forth in subparagraph (C).
 ``(C) Criteria for measuring state performance.--
 Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of 
 this paragraph, the Secretary, in consultation with the 
 National Governor's Association and the Institute for 
 Women's Policy Research, shall develop criteria for 
 measuring State performance in operating the State 
 program funded under this part in addressing the 
 following issues as they relate to the ability of 
 recipients of assistance under the State program to 
 become economically self-sufficient:
 ``(i) Child care.--Whether States are--
 ``(I) ensuring an adequate supply 
 of safe, accessible, appropriate, and 
 quality child care slots;
 ``(II) helping women identify and 
 place children in safe, accessible, 
 appropriate, and quality child care;
 ``(III) ensuring that available 
 child care slots are filled;
 ``(IV) improving the quality of 
 child care by ensuring that child care 
 providers are adequately paid and 
 trained;
 ``(V) increasing access to safe, 
 accessible, appropriate, and quality 
 child care by making child care 
 subsidies available to recipients of 
 assistance under the State program 
 funded under this part and families 
 that earn up to 85 percent of the 
 State's median income;
 ``(VI) collaborating with State 
 child care resource and referral 
 agencies and child care development 
 experts in developing and implementing 
 child care programs and policies; and
 ``(VII) collaborating with State 
 domestic violence coalitions to address 
 the child care needs of families 
 affected by domestic violence.
 ``(ii) Employment.--Whether States are--
 ``(I) providing education and 
 training for recipients of assistance 
 under the State program under this part 
 in employment that pays a sustainable 
 wage, such as apprenticeable, 
 technical, and professional 
 occupations, and nontraditional 
 employment;
 ``(II) placing such recipients in 
 employment that pays a sustainable 
 wage, such as apprenticeable, 
 technical, and professional 
 occupations, and nontraditional 
 employment;
 ``(III) retaining such recipients 
 in employment that pays a sustainable 
 wage, such as apprenticeable, 
 technical, and professional 
 occupations, and nontraditional 
 employment;
 ``(IV) providing career development 
 assistance including job readiness 
 training, reliable, up-to-date career 
 counseling services, and employability 
 assessments on available employment 
 that pays a sustainable wage, such as 
 nontraditional training and education 
 options and employment opportunities to 
 all women entering welfare-to-work 
 programs, including programs 
 established under title I of the 
 Workforce Investment Act of 1998; and
 ``(V) utilizing resources available 
 under title I of the Workforce 
 Investment Act of 1998 to support State 
 efforts on education, training, 
 placement, and retention under 
 subparagraphs I through IV.
 ``(iii) Domestic violence.--Whether States 
 are--
 ``(I) in collaboration with State 
 domestic violence coalitions, 
 implementing substantive programs 
 addressing domestic violence as an 
 impediment to women's work and 
 education, such as demonstration and 
 model projects, programs placing 
 domestic violence advocates in welfare 
 offices, and programs providing 
 employment and support services for 
 victims of domestic violence that will 
 reach a substantial number of battered 
 women;
 ``(II) in collaboration with State 
 domestic violence coalitions, adopting 
 and implementing the option under the 
 State plan relating to domestic 
 violence set forth in section 
 402(a)(7);
 ``(III) in collaboration with State 
 domestic violence coalitions, requiring 
 training on domestic violence for case 
 workers for the State program funded 
 under this part;
 ``(IV) in collaboration with State 
 domestic violence coalitions, requiring 
 training on domestic violence for job 
 training, education, and job placement 
 programs that are contracted by the 
 State program funded under this part 
 and requiring that such programs 
 implement strategies and programs to 
 support victims of domestic violence in 
 the workplace;
 ``(V) conducting outreach to 
 employers of recipients of assistance 
 to ensure that employers are aware of 
 and are implementing strategies and 
 programs to support victims of domestic 
 violence in the workplace; and
 ``(VI) conducting public education 
 on domestic violence.
 ``(D) Scoring of state performance; setting of 
 performance thresholds.--For each bonus year, the 
 Secretary shall--
 ``(i) use the criteria developed under 
 subparagraph (C) to assign a score to each 
 eligible State for the fiscal year that 
 immediately precedes the bonus year; and
 ``(ii) prescribe a performance threshold in 
 such a manner so as to ensure that--
 ``(I) the average annual total 
 amount of grants to be made under this 
 paragraph for each bonus year equals 
 $200,000,000; and
 ``(II) the total amount of grants 
 to be made under this paragraph for all 
 bonus years equals $1,000,000,000.
 ``(E) Definitions.--As used in this paragraph:
 ``(i) Bonus year.--The term `bonus year' 
 means fiscal years 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, and 
 2005.
 ``(ii) Child care.--The term `child care' 
 means all programs and arrangements utilized by 
 parents for the care of children from birth 
 through age 14, and for the care of children 
 who are older than age 14 and have special 
 needs, including day care services provided by 
 centers, family day care, group family day 
 care, informal care, after hours care, and 
 before- and after-school programs.
 ``(iii) Domestic violence.--The term 
 `domestic violence' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 2 of the Battered Women's 
 Economic Security Act.
 ``(iv) High performance state.--The term 
 `high performance State' means, with respect to 
 a bonus year, an eligible State whose score 
 assigned pursuant to subparagraph (D)(i) for 
 the fiscal year immediately preceding the bonus 
 year equals or exceeds the performance 
 threshold prescribed under subparagraph (D)(ii) 
 for such preceding fiscal year.
 ``(v) Sustainable wage.--The term 
 `sustainable wage' means a wage that is at 
 least 185 percent above the poverty line and 
 that takes into account costs related to 
 employment such as Federal, State, and local 
 taxes, child care, transportation, food, and 
 shelter costs for a particular geographic area.
 ``(vi) Nontraditional employment.--The term 
 `nontraditional employment' means occupations 
 in which women comprise 25 percent or less of 
 total workers.
 ``(vii) Poverty line.--The term `poverty 
 line' has the meaning given such term in 
 section 673(2) of the Community Services Block 
 Grant Act (42 U.S.C. 9902(2)), including any 
 revision required by such section.
 ``(F) Appropriation.--Out of any money in the 
 Treasury of the United States not otherwise 
 appropriated, there are appropriated for fiscal years 
 2001 through 2005, $1,000,000,000 for grants under this 
 paragraph.''.
 <all>