S 872 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 872
To phaseout production of certain ozone-depleting chemicals; to institute
a policy promoting safe alternatives to ozone-depleting chemicals, and for
other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
May 1 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. GORE introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Environment and Public Works
A BILL
To phaseout production of certain ozone-depleting chemicals; to institute
a policy promoting safe alternatives to ozonedepleting chemicals, and for
other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Upper-Ozone Chemicals Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that because no level of stratospheric ozone depletion
 or global climate change caused by human activities can be deemed safe--
 (1) emissions of chlorofluorocarbons and other substances covered by this
 Act, including halogenated carbons with ozone-depleting potential, should
 be terminated rapidly;
 (2) the highest priority must be given to developing and deploying safe
 alternative chemicals and technologies to replace ozone-depleting substances
 within five years; and
 (3) production of the most dangerous ozone-depleting substances must be
 phased out within five years.
SEC. 3. OBJECTIVES AND NATIONAL GOAL.
 (a) The objectives of the Act are to protect human health and natural
 ecosystems from all known and potential dangers due to depletion of the
 stratospheric ozone layer, which is or would be caused by consumer products
 containing chlorofluorocarbons, halons, or other chemicals covered by this
 Act by--
 (1) phasing out production of the most dangerous ozone-depleting substances
 within five years; and
 (2) promoting the development of safe alternatives to the use of the
 chlorofluorocarbons and other chemicals covered by this Act.
 (b) In order to achieve the objectives of this Act, it is the national
 goal to phaseout production of chemicals with the potential for depleting
 stratospheric ozone.
SEC. 4. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act:
 (1) The term `Administrator' means the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency.
 (2) The term `household appliances' means noncommercial personal effects,
 including air-conditioners, refrigerators, and motor vehicles.
 (3) The term `import' means to land on, bring into, or introduce into,
 or attempt to land on, bring into, or introduce into, any place subject
 to the jurisdiction of the United States, whether or not such landing,
 bringing, or introduction constitutes an importation within the meaning
 of the customs laws of the United States.
 (4) The term `manufactured substance' means any organic or inorganic
 chemical of a particular molecular identity, or any mixture, that has been
 manufactured for commercial purposes.
 (5) The term `medical purposes' means medical devices and diagnostic
 products (A) for which no safe substitute has been developed and (B)
 that, after notice and opportunity for public comment, have been approved
 and determined to be essential by the Commissioner of the Food and Drug
 Administration, in consultation with the Administrator.
 (6) The term `person' means an individual, corporation (including a
 government corporation), partnership, firm, joint stock company, trust,
 association, or any other private entity, or any officer, employee, agent,
 department, or instrumentality of the Federal Government, or of any State
 or political subdivision thereof (including any interstate body), or of
 any foreign government (including any international instrumentality).
 (7) The term `ozone depletion potential' means the chemical effectiveness
 with which a substance depletes stratospheric ozone, relative to
 chlorofluorocarbon-11.
 (8) The term `substances covered by this Act' means those manufactured
 chemicals that are listed under subsections (a) or (b) of section 5 of
 this Act.
SEC. 5. LISTING OF REGULATED SUBSTANCES.
 (a) PRIORITY REGULATED SUBSTANCES- Within sixty days after the date of
 enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall publish a priority list of
 manufactured substances that are known or may reasonably be anticipated to
 cause or contribute to stratospheric ozone depletion. The initial list shall
 include chlorofluorocarbon-11, chlorofluorocarbon-12, chlorofluorocarbon-113,
 halon-1211, halon-1301, and carbon tetrachloride.
 (b) OTHER REGULATED SUBSTANCES- Simultaneously with publication of the
 priority list, the Administrator shall publish a list of other manufactured
 substances that, in the judgment of the Administrator, meet the criteria set
 forth in the first sentence of subsection (a). The list of other manufactured
 substances shall include chlorofluorocarbon-22, chlorofluorocarbon-114,
 chlorofluorocarbon-115, methyl chloroform, and methylene chloride. At
 least annually thereafter, the Administrator shall publish a proposal to
 add to such list each other manufactured substance that, in the judgment
 of the Administrator, meets the criteria set forth in the first sentence
 of subsection (a). Within one hundred and eighty days after any such
 proposal, following an opportunity for public comment, the Administrator
 shall promulgate a regulation adding each such substance to the list,
 unless the Administrator determines that such substance clearly does not
 meet the criteria set forth in the first sentence of subsection (a). At
 any time, the Administrator may reclassify a substance from subsection
 (b) to subsection (a), if concerns over protection of the stratospheric
 ozone layer dictate such action.
 (c) OZONE DEPLETION FACTOR- Simultaneously with publication of the lists
 or additions thereto under this section, and at least annually thereafter,
 the Administrator shall assign to each listed substance a numerical value
 representing the ozone depletion potential of each manufactured substance,
 on a mass (per kilogram) basis, as compared with chlorofluorocarbon-11. The
 numerical value shall, for the purposes of section 9, constitute the ozone
 depletion factor of each chemical. Until the Administrator promulgates
 regulations under this subsection, the following ozone depletion factors
 shall apply:
Chlorofluorocarbon-11
--1.0
Chlorofluorocarbon-12
--1.0
Chlorofluorocarbon-22
--0.05
Chlorofluorocarbon-113
--0.78
Carbon tetrachloride
--1.06
Methyl chloroform
--0.10
Halon-1211
--2.69
Halon-1301
--11.43
SEC. 6. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) PRIORITY REGULATED SUBSTANCES- Within ninety days after the date of
 enactment of this Act, each person producing or importing a substance
 listed pursuant to subsection (a) of section 5 of this Act shall file a
 report with the Administrator setting forth the amount of the substance
 that was produced or imported by such person during calendar year 1986. Not
 less than annually thereafter, each such producer or importer shall file
 a report with the Administrator setting forth the production levels of
 such substance in each successive twelve-month period until such producer
 or importer ceases production or importation of the substance. Each such
 report shall be signed and attested by a responsible corporate officer.
 (b) OTHER REGULATED SUBSTANCES- Within ninety days after the date of
 enactment of this Act, each person producing or importing a substance
 listed pursuant to subsection (b) of section 5 of this Act shall file a
 report with the Administrator setting forth the amount of the substance that
 was produced or imported by such person during the twelve months preceding
 the date of listing. Not less than annually thereafter, each such producer
 or importer shall file a report with the Administrator setting forth the
 production or importation levels of such substance in each successive
 twelve-month period until such producer or importer ceases production or
 importation of the substance. Each such report shall be signed and attested
 by a responsible corporate officer.
SEC. 7. PRODUCTION PHASEOUT.
 (a) Effective one year after the date of enactment of this Act, it shall be
 unlawful for any person to produce a substance listed pursuant to subsection
 (a) of section 5 of this Act in annual quantities greater than that produced
 by such person during calendar year 1986.
 (b) Effective two years after the date of enactment of this Act, it
 shall be unlawful for any person to produce a substance listed pursuant
 to subsection (a) of section 5 of this Act in annual quantities greater
 than 75 per centum of that produced by such person during calendar year 1986.
 (c) Effective three years after the date of enactment of this Act, it
 shall be unlawful for any person to produce a substance listed pursuant
 to subsection (a) of section 5 of this Act in annual quantities greater
 than 50 per centum of that produced by such person during calendar year 1986.
 (d) Effective four years after the date of enactment of this Act, it
 shall be unlawful for any person to produce a substance listed pursuant
 to subsection (a) of section 5 of this Act in annual quantities greater
 than 5 per centum of that produced by such person during calendar year 1986.
 (e) Effective five years after the date of enactment of this Act, it shall be
 unlawful for any person to produce a substance listed pursuant to subsection
 (a) of section 5 of this Act for any use other than medical purposes.
 (f) Effective ten years after the date of enactment of this Act, it shall be
 unlawful for any person to produce a substance listed pursuant to section
 5 of this Act for any use other than for medical purposes.
SEC. 8. LIMITATION ON USE.
 (a) Effective five years after the date of enactment of this Act, it shall
 be unlawful to introduce into interstate commerce or to use a substance
 listed under subsection (a) of section 5 of this Act except for medical
 purposes approved by the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration,
 in consultation with the Administrator, and, during a period not to extend
 beyond January 1, 2005, for purposes of maintaining and servicing household
 appliances.
 (b) Effective ten years after the date of enactment of this Act, it shall
 be unlawful to introduce into interstate commerce or to use a substance
 listed under subsection (b) of section 5 of this Act except for medical
 purposes approved by the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration,
 in consultation with the Administrator, and, during a period not to
 extend beyond January 1, 2005, for purposes of maintaining and servicing
 household appliances. For purposes of this subsection and section 7(f), a
 manufacturing process utilizing such a substance solely as an intermediate
 in a manufacturing process in which the substance is wholly consumed and
 none is released does not constitute a use.
SEC. 9. LIMITATION ON OZONE DEPLETION POTENTIAL.
 (a) Effective one year after the date of enactment of this Act, it shall
 be unlawful for any person to produce substances covered by this Act in
 annual quantities that, based upon the ozone depletion factor assigned
 to each substance under subsection (c) of section 5 of this Act, yield a
 total ozone depletion potential greater than that produced by such person
 during calendar year 1986.
 (b) Effective two years after enactment of this Act, it shall be unlawful
 for any person to produce substances covered by this Act in annual quantities
 that, based upon the ozone depletion factor assigned to each substance under
 subsection (c) of section 5, yield a total ozone depletion potential greater
 than 75 per centum of that produced by such person during calendar year 1986.
 (c) Effective three years after enactment of this Act, it shall be unlawful
 for any person to produce substances covered in this Act in annual quantities
 that, based upon the ozone depletion factor assigned to each substance under
 subsection (c) of section 5, yield a total ozone depletion potential greater
 than 50 per centum of that produced by such person during calendar year 1986.
 (d) Effective four years after enactment of this Act, it shall be unlawful
 for any person to produce substances covered in this Act in annual quantities
 that, based upon the ozone depletion factor assigned to each substance under
 subsection (c) of section 5, yield a total ozone depletion potential greater
 than 5 per centum of that produced by such person during calendar year 1986.
 (e) Effective five years after enactment of this Act, it shall be unlawful
 for any person to produce a substance listed pursuant to section 5(a)
 of this Act for any use other than for medical purposes.
 (f) If the Administrator determines that such revised or specific schedule
 is necessary to protect human health and the environment based on new
 information regarding the harmful effects on the stratosphere or climate that
 may be associated with a listed substance, or is attainable, based on the
 availability of substitutes for a listed substance, the Administrator shall
 promulgate regulations, after notice and opportunity for public comment,
 which require each producer to reduce its production of the substance--
 (1) if the substance is listed under subsection (a) of section 5 of this
 Act, more rapidly than the schedule provided under this Act; or
 (2) if the substance is listed under subsection (b) of section 5, on a
 specific schedule not otherwise provided for in this Act.
Any person may petition the Administrator to revise such regulations within
one hundred and eighty days after receipt of any such petition, unless the
Administrator has previously denied the petition.
SEC. 10. PRODUCTION PHASEOUT EXCEPTION FOR NATIONAL SECURITY.
 (a) The President may issue such orders regarding production and use
 of halon-1211 and halon-1301 at any specified site or facility as may be
 necessary to protect the national security interests of the United States if
 the President personally finds that adequate substitutes are not available
 and that the production and use of such substance is necessary to protect
 such national security interests. Such orders may include, where necessary
 to protect such interests, an exemption from any requirement contained
 in this Act. The President shall notify the Congress within thirty days
 of the issuance of an order under this paragraph providing for any such
 exemption. Such notification shall include a statement of the reasons for
 granting the exemption. An exemption under this paragraph shall be for
 a specified period which may not exceed one year. Additional exemptions
 may be granted, each upon the President's issuance of a new order under
 this paragraph. Each such additional exemption shall be for a specified
 period that shall not exceed one year. No exemption shall be granted
 under this paragraph due to lack of appropriation unless the President
 shall have specifically requested such appropriation as a part of the
 budgetary process and the Congress shall have failed to make available
 such requested appropriation.
 (b) The Secretary of Defense shall seek to eliminate all emissions of
 halon-1211 and halon-1301 that presently occur during the testing of
 fire-extinguishing equipment. In so doing, the Secretary of Defense shall
 investigate the feasibility of testing such equipment with alternative
 methods that do not result in the release of halon-1211 and halon-1301
 into the atmosphere.
SEC. 11. CERTIFICATION OF EQUIVALENT FOREIGN PROGRAMS.
 (a) IMPORTS- Effective twelve months after the date on which a substance is
 placed on the priority list pursuant to section 5 of this Act, it shall be
 unlawful for any person to import such substance, any product containing
 such substance, or any product manufactured with a process that uses such
 substance unless the Administrator, in consultation with the Secretary of
 State, has published a decision, after notice and opportunity for public
 comment, certifying that the nations in which such substance or product
 was manufactured and from which such substance or product is imported
 have established and are fully implementing programs that require reduced
 production of such listed substances, and limit production of other
 substances covered by this Act, on a schedule and in a manner at least
 as stringent as the reduction schedule for, and limitations on, domestic
 production that apply under this Act. The prohibition on the import of
 any product manufactured with a process that uses a substance listed under
 subsection (a) of section 5 shall include, after notice and opportunity for
 public comment, any product that the Administrator has reason to believe
 may have been manufactured with a process that uses such substance. The
 Administrator's decision that a product may have been manufactured with
 a process that uses such substance shall constitute a rebuttable presumption.
 (b) CERTIFICATION OF FOREIGN PROGRAMS- The Administrator shall not certify
 any foreign program under subsection (a) unless it is determined that--
 (1) the nation involved has adopted legislation or regulations that gives
 the reduction schedule for each listed substance the force of law; and
 (2) such legislation or regulations include reporting requirements and
 enforcement provisions no less stringent than those specified in this Act,
 and that the information contained in such reports is available to the
 Administrator and the Secretary of State.
 (c) REVOCATION- At least annually, the Administrator, in consultation with
 the Secretary of State, shall review each certification made under this
 section and shall revoke such certification, after notice and opportunity for
 public comment, unless it is determined that the conditions of subsections
 (a) and (b) remain satisfied and that the reduction schedule for each
 listed substance is in fact being carried out in such nations. Any such
 revocation shall take effect one hundred and eighty days after notice of
 the revocation has been published.
 (d) ALLOCATION- Any person who imports a substance covered by this Act or
 a product containing such substance shall, for the purposes of applying
 the provisions of section 7 and section 9, be deemed to have produced an
 equivalent amount of such substance on the date of such importation.
SEC. 12. MANUFACTURE AND DISPOSAL.
 (a) MANUFACTURE- Effective July 1, 1991--
 (1) No person shall manufacture, process, distribute in commerce or otherwise
 use (except for medical purposes) any listed substance in any manner other
 than a totally enclosed manner. `Totally enclosed' means that during the
 lifetime of the good in question not more than 5 per centum of the original
 charge or volume of such substance will be released during the course of
 ordinary and customary use of such good, including repairs or disposal.
 (2) No person shall manufacture, process, distribute in commerce,
 or otherwise use (except for medical purposes) a listed substance in a
 totally enclosed manner without--
 (A) installing on such device a servicing aperture that will allow service
 and repair of such good with release of only de minimis amounts of such
 substance,
 (B) assuring the availability and actual use of servicing equipment
 adequate to assure the achievement of no more than a de minimis release
 of such substance.
 (b) DISPOSAL- Effective January 1, 1991:
 (1) A substance listed pursuant to this Act shall be deemed to meet the
 requirements of section 3001 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
 (2) A substance listed pursuant to this Act shall be disposed of only
 through incineration or other means that assures 99 per centum destruction
 of such substance.
 (3) Any appliance, machine, or other good containing a listed substance
 in bulk (including refrigerators and air conditioners) shall be accepted
 for disposal only by persons licensed to accept such goods and shall be
 disposed of only after such substance has been removed from confinement
 and destroyed pursuant to the requirements of this Act. Unless and until
 regulations establishing a program for approving, licensing, and assuring
 the financial responsibility of persons to accept goods containing such
 substances are promulgated, only governmental entities, or their agents,
 contractors or employees, are authorized to accept such goods.
 (4) No listed substance shall be vented into the atmosphere or otherwise
 released in a fashion that permits it to enter the environment in other
 than de minimus quantities.
 (5) Any product in which a listed substance has been incorporated so as to
 constitute an inherent element of such product, including rigid and soft
 foams, shall be disposed of only through incineration or other means that
 result in not less than 99 per centum destruction.
 (c) For purposes of this section a `de minimis' amount is 0.050 per centum
 of the total charge of such substance or five pounds, whichever is less,
 released during a period of twelve months.
SEC. 13. SAFE ALTERNATIVE POLICY.
 (a) POLICY- The substances listed in section 5 of this Act shall, to the
 maximum extent practicable, be replaced by chemicals, product substitutes,
 or alternative manufacturing processes that reduce overall risks to public
 health and the environment.
 (b) REVIEWS AND REPORT- The Administrator shall initiate, not less than
 thirty days after the date of enactment of this Act, a review of relevant
 professional, technical, and scientific sources that may contain information
 concerning chemicals, product substitutes, or alternative manufacturing
 processes that are potential replacements for the substances listed in
 section 5 of this Act. The Administrator shall report interim finding to
 the Congress no later than six months after the date of enactment of this
 Act. A final report shall be published no later than one year after the
 date of enactment of this Act.
 (c) REPORT FINDINGS- The report required under section (b) shall include
 the Administrator's findings with regard to--
 (1) the identity of potential replacement chemicals; product substitutes,
 or alternative production processes;
 (2) a chemical profile or an abstract that describes each replacement
 chemical, product substitute, or alternative production process identified
 pursuant to paragraph 1, and any health or environmental hazards, including
 the potential for contributing to the greenhouse effect and stratospheric
 ozone depletion; and
 (3) the earliest date by which each replacement chemical, product substitute,
 or alternative production process identified pursuant to paragraph 1 could
 be made available for commercial use.
 (d) ADDITIONAL MEASURES- The Administrator shall require all producers
 of replacement chemicals for the substances listed in section 5 of this
 Act to provide the Environmental Protection Agency with all published
 and unpublished health and safety studies on such replacement chemicals,
 and shall require all such producers to notify the Environmental Protection
 Agency at least sixty days before such replacement chemicals are introduced
 for commercial use.
 (e) ANNUAL UPDATING- The Administrator shall update the report required
 by section (b), on an annual basis.
SEC. 14. FEDERAL ENFORCEMENT.
 (a) COMPLIANCE ORDERS-
 (1) Whenever on the basis of any information the Administrator determines
 that any person has violated or is in violation of any requirement of this
 Act, the Administrator may issue an order assessing a civil penalty for
 any past or current violation, requiring compliance immediately or within
 a specified time period, or both, or the Administrator may commence, in
 the United States district court in the district in which the violation
 occurred, a civil action for appropriate relief, including a preliminary
 or permanent injunction.
 (2) Any order issued pursuant to this subsection may include a suspension
 or revocation of any permit issued by the Administrator under this Act and
 shall state with reasonable specificity the nature of the violation. Any
 penalty assessed in the order shall not exceed $25,000 for each violation of
 a requirement of this Act. In assessing such a penalty the Administrator
 shall take into account the seriousness of the violation and any good
 faith efforts to comply with applicable requirements.
 (b) PUBLIC HEARING- Any order issued under this section shall become final
 unless, no later than thirty days after the order is served, the person
 or persons named therein request a public hearing. Upon such request the
 Administrator shall promptly conduct a public hearing. In connection with any
 proceeding under this section the Administrator may issue subpoenas for the
 attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant papers,
 books, and documents, and may promulgate rules for discovery procedures.
 (c) VIOLATION OF COMPLIANCE ORDERS- If a violator fails to take corrective
 action within the time specified in a compliance order, the Administrator may
 assess a civil penalty of not more than $25,000 for each day of continued
 noncompliance with the order and the Administrator may suspend or revoke
 any permit issued to the violator under this Act.
 (d) CRIMINAL PENALTIES- Any person who--
 (1) knowingly exceeds the production limits under section 7 or section 9;
 (2) knowingly introduces into interstate commerce a consumer product that
 is in violation of section 5, 6, or 9;
 (3) knowingly imports a substance listed under subsection (a) of section
 5, a product containing such substance, or a product manufactured with a
 process that uses such a substance, in violation of section 7;
 (4) knowingly introduces into interstate commerce a substance or product
 in violation of section 8;
 (5) knowingly omits material information or makes any false material
 statement or representation in any application, record, report, permit,
 or other document filed, maintained, or used for purposes of compliance
 with this Act;
 (6) knowingly produces, transports, distributes, or uses consumer products
 containing a substance listed under section 5, or a product manufactured
 with a process that uses such a substance; or
 (7) knowingly destroys, alters, conceals, or fails to file any record,
 application, report, or other document required to be maintained or filed
 for purposes of compliance with this Act
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine in accordance with title 18 of
the United States Code for each day of a violation, or imprisonment not to
exceed two years, or both. If conviction is for a violation committed after a
first conviction of such person under this paragraph, the maximum applicable
punishment shall be doubled with respect to both fine and imprisonment.
 (e) VIOLATIONS- Each day of violation of any requirement of this Act shall,
 for purposes of this section, constitute a separate violation.
SEC. 15. JUDICIAL REVIEW OF FINAL REGULATIONS AND CERTAIN PETITIONS.
 Any judicial review of any final action of the Administrator pursuant to
 this Act shall be in accordance with sections 701 through 706 of title 5
 of the United States Code, except that--
 (1) a petition for review of any final action of the Administrator may
 be filed by any interested person in the Circuit Court of Appeals of
 the United States for the Federal judicial district in which such person
 resides or transacts business, and such petition shall be filed within
 the ninety day period beginning on the date of such filed action or after
 such period if such petition is for review based solely on grounds arising
 after such period;
 (2) action of the Administrator with respect to which review could have
 been obtained under this subsection shall not be subject to judicial review
 in civil or criminal proceedings for enforcement; and
 (3) if a party seeking review under this Act applies to the court for
 leave to adduce additional evidence, and shows to the satisfaction of
 the court that the information is material and that there were reasonable
 grounds for the failure to adduce such evidence in the proceeding before the
 Administrator, the court may order such additional evidence (and evidence in
 rebuttal thereof) to be taken before the Administrator, and to be adduced
 upon the hearing in such manner and upon such terms and conditions as the
 court may deem proper; the Administrator may modify administrative findings
 as to the facts, or make new findings, by reason of the additional evidence
 so taken, and shall file with the court such modified or new findings and
 the Administrator's recommendation, if any, for the modification or setting
 aside of the original administrative order, with the return of such evidence.
SEC. 16. CITIZEN SUITS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b) or (c) of this section,
 any person may commence a civil action on his own behalf--
 (1) against any person (including the United States and any other
 governmental instrumentality or agency, to the extent permitted by the
 eleventh amendment to the Constitution) who is alleged to be in violation
 of any permit, regulation, condition, requirement, prohibition, or order
 which has become effective pursuant to this Act; or
 (2) against the Administrator where there is alleged a failure of the
 Administrator to perform any act or duty under this Act which is not
 discretionary with the Administrator.
Any action under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be brought in the
United States district court for the district in which the alleged violation
occurred. Any action brought under paragraph (2) of this subsection may
be brought in the United States district court for the district in which
the alleged violation occurred or the District Court of the District of
Columbia. The district court shall have jurisdiction, without regard to
the amount in controversy or the citizenship of the parties, to enforce the
permit, regulation, condition, requirement, prohibition, or order, referred
to in paragraph (1), to order such person to take such other action as may
be necessary, or both, or to order the Secretary to perform the act or duty
referred to in paragraph (2), as the case may be, and to apply any appropriate
civil penalties under section 13.
 (b) ACTIONS PROHIBITED- No action may be commenced under subsection (a)(1)
 of this section--
 (1) prior to sixty days after the plaintiff has given notice of the
 violation to--
 (A) the Administrator; and
 (B) to any alleged violator of such permit, regulation, condition,
 requirement, prohibition, or order; or
 (2) if the Administrator has commenced and is diligently prosecuting a civil
 or criminal action in a court of the United States to require a compliance
 with such permit, regulation, condition, requirement, prohibition, or order.
In any action under subsection (a)(1), any person may intervene as a matter
of right. Any action respecting a violation under this Act may be brought
under this section only in the judicial district in which such alleged
violation occurs.
 (c) NOTICE- No action may be commenced under paragraph (a)(2) of this
 section prior to sixty days after the plaintiff has given notice to the
 Secretary that he will commence such action. Notice under this subsection
 shall be given in such manner as the Secretary shall prescribe by regulation.
 (d) INTERVENTION- In any action under this section the Administrator,
 if not a party, may intervene as a matter of right.
 (e) COSTS- The court, in issuing any final order in any action brought
 pursuant to this section or section 14, may award costs of litigation
 (including reasonable attorney and expert witness fees) to the prevailing
 or substantially prevailing party, whenever the court determines such an
 award is appropriate. The court may, if a temporary restraining order or
 preliminary injunction is sought, require the filing of a bond or equivalent
 security in accordance with Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
 (f) OTHER RIGHTS PRESERVED- Nothing in this section shall restrict any
 right which any person (or class of persons) may have under any statute
 or common law to seek enforcement of any standard or requirement or to
 seek any other relief (including relief against the Administrator).
SEC. 17. SEPARABILITY.
 If any provision of this Act, or the application of any provision of this
 Act to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the application of such
 provision to other persons or circumstances, and the remainder of this Act,
 shall not be affected thereby.
SEC. 18. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.
 (a) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to alter or affect the authority
 of the Administrator under the Clean Air Act or the Toxic Substances
 Control Act or to affect the authority of any other department, agency,
 or instrumentality of the United States under any provision of law to
 promulgate or enforce any requirement respecting control of any substance,
 practice, process, or activity for purposes of protecting the statosphere
 or ozone in the statosphere.
 (b) Nothing in this Act shall preclude or deny any State or political
 subdivision thereof from adopting or enforcing any requirement respecting
 the control of any substances, practice, process, or activity for the
 purposes of protecting the stratosphere or ozone in the statosphere.
SEC. 19. AUTHORITY OF ADMINISTRATION.
 The Administrator is authorized to prescribe such regulations as are
 necessary to carry out this Act.