[Congressional Bills 117th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 8152 Reported in House (RH)]

<DOC>

 Union Calendar No. 488
117th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 H. R. 8152

 [Report No. 117-669]

 To provide consumers with foundational data privacy rights, create 
 strong oversight mechanisms, and establish meaningful enforcement.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 June 21, 2022

 Mr. Pallone (for himself, Mrs. Rodgers of Washington, Ms. Schakowsky, 
and Mr. Bilirakis) introduced the following bill; which was referred to 
 the Committee on Energy and Commerce

 December 30, 2022

 Reported with an amendment, committed to the Committee of the Whole 
 House on the State of the Union, and ordered to be printed
 [Strike out all after the enacting clause and insert the part printed 
 in italic]
 [For text of introduced bill, see copy of bill as introduced on June 
 21, 2022]

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To provide consumers with foundational data privacy rights, create 
 strong oversight mechanisms, and establish meaningful enforcement.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``American Data 
Privacy and Protection Act''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Definitions.

 TITLE I--DUTY OF LOYALTY

Sec. 101. Data minimization.
Sec. 102. Loyalty duties.
Sec. 103. Privacy by design.
Sec. 104. Loyalty to individuals with respect to pricing.

 TITLE II--CONSUMER DATA RIGHTS

Sec. 201. Consumer awareness.
Sec. 202. Transparency.
Sec. 203. Individual data ownership and control.
Sec. 204. Right to consent and object.
Sec. 205. Data protections for children and minors.
Sec. 206. Third-party collecting entities.
Sec. 207. Civil rights and algorithms.
Sec. 208. Data security and protection of covered data.
Sec. 209. Small business protections.
Sec. 210. Unified opt-out mechanisms.

 TITLE III--CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY

Sec. 301. Executive responsibility.
Sec. 302. Service providers and third parties.
Sec. 303. Technical compliance programs.
Sec. 304. Commission approved compliance guidelines.
Sec. 305. Digital content forgeries.

 TITLE IV--ENFORCEMENT, APPLICABILITY, AND MISCELLANEOUS

Sec. 401. Enforcement by the Federal Trade Commission.
Sec. 402. Enforcement by States.
Sec. 403. Enforcement by persons.
Sec. 404. Relationship to Federal and State laws.
Sec. 405. Severability.
Sec. 406. COPPA.
Sec. 407. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 408. Effective date.

SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) Affirmative express consent.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``affirmative express 
 consent'' means an affirmative act by an individual 
 that clearly communicates the individual's freely 
 given, specific, and unambiguous authorization for an 
 act or practice after having been informed, in response 
 to a specific request from a covered entity that meets 
 the requirements of subparagraph (B).
 (B) Request requirements.--The requirements of this 
 subparagraph with respect to a request from a covered 
 entity to an individual are the following:
 (i) The request is provided to the 
 individual in a clear and conspicuous 
 standalone disclosure made through the primary 
 medium used to offer the covered entity's 
 product or service, or only if the product or 
 service is not offered in a medium that permits 
 the making of the request under this paragraph, 
 another medium regularly used in conjunction 
 with the covered entity's product or service.
 (ii) The request includes a description of 
 the processing purpose for which the 
 individual's consent is sought and--
 (I) clearly states the specific 
 categories of covered data that the 
 covered entity shall collect, process, 
 and transfer necessary to effectuate 
 the processing purpose; and
 (II) includes a prominent heading 
 and is written in easy-to-understand 
 language that would enable a reasonable 
 individual to identify and understand 
 the processing purpose for which 
 consent is sought and the covered data 
 to be collected, processed, or 
 transferred by the covered entity for 
 such processing purpose.
 (iii) The request clearly explains the 
 individual's applicable rights related to 
 consent.
 (iv) The request is made in a manner 
 reasonably accessible to and usable by 
 individuals with disabilities.
 (v) The request is made available to the 
 individual in each covered language in which 
 the covered entity provides a product or 
 service for which authorization is sought.
 (vi) The option to refuse consent shall be 
 at least as prominent as the option to accept, 
 and the option to refuse consent shall take the 
 same number of steps or fewer as the option to 
 accept.
 (vii) Processing or transferring any 
 covered data collected pursuant to affirmative 
 express consent for a different processing 
 purpose than that for which affirmative express 
 consent was obtained shall require affirmative 
 express consent for the subsequent processing 
 purpose.
 (C) Express consent required.--A covered entity may 
 not infer that an individual has provided affirmative 
 express consent to an act or practice from the inaction 
 of the individual or the individual's continued use of 
 a service or product provided by the covered entity.
 (D) Pretextual consent prohibited.--A covered 
 entity may not obtain or attempt to obtain the 
 affirmative express consent of an individual through--
 (i) the use of any false, fictitious, 
 fraudulent, or materially misleading statement 
 or representation; or
 (ii) the design, modification, or 
 manipulation of any user interface with the 
 purpose or substantial effect of obscuring, 
 subverting, or impairing a reasonable 
 individual's autonomy, decision making, or 
 choice to provide such consent or any covered 
 data.
 (2) Authentication.--The term ``authentication'' means the 
 process of verifying an individual or entity for security 
 purposes.
 (3) Biometric information.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``biometric information'' 
 means any covered data generated from the technological 
 processing of an individual's unique biological, 
 physical, or physiological characteristics that is 
 linked or reasonably linkable to an individual, 
 including--
 (i) fingerprints;
 (ii) voice prints;
 (iii) iris or retina scans;
 (iv) facial or hand mapping, geometry, or 
 templates; or
 (v) gait or personally identifying physical 
 movements.
 (B) Exclusion.--The term ``biometric information'' 
 does not include--
 (i) a digital or physical photograph;
 (ii) an audio or video recording; or
 (iii) data generated from a digital or 
 physical photograph, or an audio or video 
 recording, that cannot be used to identify an 
 individual.
 (4) Collect; collection.--The terms ``collect'' and 
 ``collection'' mean buying, renting, gathering, obtaining, 
 receiving, accessing, or otherwise acquiring covered data by 
 any means.
 (5) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Federal 
 Trade Commission.
 (6) Control.--The term ``control'' means, with respect to 
 an entity--
 (A) ownership of, or the power to vote, more than 
 50 percent of the outstanding shares of any class of 
 voting security of the entity;
 (B) control over the election of a majority of the 
 directors of the entity (or of individuals exercising 
 similar functions); or
 (C) the power to exercise a controlling influence 
 over the management of the entity.
 (7) Covered algorithm.--The term ``covered algorithm'' 
 means a computational process that uses machine learning, 
 natural language processing, artificial intelligence 
 techniques, or other computational processing techniques of 
 similar or greater complexity and that makes a decision or 
 facilitates human decision-making with respect to covered data, 
 including to determine the provision of products or services or 
 to rank, order, promote, recommend, amplify, or similarly 
 determine the delivery or display of information to an 
 individual.
 (8) Covered data.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``covered data'' means 
 information that identifies or is linked or reasonably 
 linkable, alone or in combination with other 
 information, to an individual or a device that 
 identifies or is linked or reasonably linkable to an 
 individual, and may include derived data and unique 
 persistent identifiers.
 (B) Exclusions.--The term ``covered data'' does not 
 include--
 (i) de-identified data;
 (ii) employee data;
 (iii) publicly available information; or
 (iv) inferences made exclusively from 
 multiple independent sources of publicly 
 available information that do not reveal 
 sensitive covered data with respect to an 
 individual.
 (C) Employee data defined.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (B), the term ``employee data'' means--
 (i) information relating to a job applicant 
 collected by a covered entity acting as a 
 prospective employer of such job applicant in 
 the course of the application, or hiring 
 process, if such information is collected, 
 processed, or transferred by the prospective 
 employer solely for purposes related to the 
 employee's status as a current or former job 
 applicant of such employer;
 (ii) information processed by an employer 
 relating to an employee who is acting in a 
 professional capacity for the employer, 
 provided that such information is collected, 
 processed, or transferred solely for purposes 
 related to such employee's professional 
 activities on behalf of the employer;
 (iii) the business contact information of 
 an employee, including the employee's name, 
 position or title, business telephone number, 
 business address, or business email address 
 that is provided to an employer by an employee 
 who is acting in a professional capacity, if 
 such information is collected, processed, or 
 transferred solely for purposes related to such 
 employee's professional activities on behalf of 
 the employer;
 (iv) emergency contact information 
 collected by an employer that relates to an 
 employee of that employer, if such information 
 is collected, processed, or transferred solely 
 for the purpose of having an emergency contact 
 on file for the employee and for processing or 
 transferring such information in case of an 
 emergency; or
 (v) information relating to an employee (or 
 a spouse, dependent, other covered family 
 member, or beneficiary of such employee) that 
 is necessary for the employer to collect, 
 process, or transfer solely for the purpose of 
 administering benefits to which such employee 
 (or spouse, dependent, other covered family 
 member, or beneficiary of such employee) is 
 entitled on the basis of the employee's 
 position with that employer.
 (9) Covered entity.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``covered entity''--
 (i) means any entity or any person, other 
 than an individual acting in a non-commercial 
 context, that alone or jointly with others 
 determines the purposes and means of 
 collecting, processing, or transferring covered 
 data and--
 (I) is subject to the Federal Trade 
 Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.);
 (II) is a common carrier subject to 
 the Communications Act of 1934 (47 
 U.S.C. 151 et seq.) and all Acts 
 amendatory thereof and supplementary 
 thereto; or
 (III) is an organization not 
 organized to carry on business for its 
 own profit or that of its members; and
 (ii) includes any entity or person that 
 controls, is controlled by, or is under common 
 control with the covered entity.
 (B) Exclusions.--The term ``covered entity'' does 
 not include--
 (i) a Federal, State, Tribal, territorial, 
 or local government entity such as a body, 
 authority, board, bureau, commission, district, 
 agency, or political subdivision of the Federal 
 Government or a State, Tribal, territorial, or 
 local government;
 (ii) a person or an entity that is 
 collecting, processing, or transferring covered 
 data on behalf of a Federal, State, Tribal, 
 territorial, or local government entity, in so 
 far as such person or entity is acting as a 
 service provider to the government entity; or
 (iii) an entity that serves as a 
 congressionally designated nonprofit, national 
 resource center, and clearinghouse to provide 
 assistance to victims, families, child-serving 
 professionals, and the general public on 
 missing and exploited children issues.
 (C) Non-application to service providers.--An 
 entity shall not be considered to be a covered entity 
 for purposes of this Act in so far as the entity is 
 acting as a service provider (as defined in paragraph 
 (29)).
 (10) Covered language.--The term ``covered language'' means 
 the ten languages with the most users in the United States, 
 according to the most recent United States Census.
 (11) Covered minor.--The term ``covered minor'' means an 
 individual under the age of 17.
 (12) De-identified data.--The term ``de-identified data'' 
 means information that does not identify and is not linked or 
 reasonably linkable to a distinct individual or a device, 
 regardless of whether the information is aggregated, and if the 
 covered entity or service provider--
 (A) takes reasonable technical measures to ensure 
 that the information cannot, at any point, be used to 
 re-identify any individual or device that identifies or 
 is linked or reasonably linkable to an individual;
 (B) publicly commits in a clear and conspicuous 
 manner--
 (i) to process and transfer the information 
 solely in a de-identified form without any 
 reasonable means for re-identification; and
 (ii) to not attempt to re-identify the 
 information with any individual or device that 
 identifies or is linked or reasonably linkable 
 to an individual; and
 (C) contractually obligates any person or entity 
 that receives the information from the covered entity 
 or service provider--
 (i) to comply with all of the provisions of 
 this paragraph with respect to the information; 
 and
 (ii) to require that such contractual 
 obligations be included contractually in all 
 subsequent instances for which the data may be 
 received.
 (13) Derived data.--The term ``derived data'' means covered 
 data that is created by the derivation of information, data, 
 assumptions, correlations, inferences, predictions, or 
 conclusions from facts, evidence, or another source of 
 information or data about an individual or an individual's 
 device.
 (14) Device.--The term ``device'' means any electronic 
 equipment capable of collecting, processing, or transferring 
 covered data that is used by one or more individuals.
 (15) Employee.--The term ``employee'' means an individual 
 who is an employee, director, officer, staff member individual 
 working as an independent contractor that is not a service 
 provider, trainee, volunteer, or intern of an employer, 
 regardless of whether such individual is paid, unpaid, or 
 employed on a temporary basis.
 (16) Executive agency.--The ``Executive agency'' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 105 of title 5, United 
 States Code.
 (17) First party advertising or marketing.--The term 
 ``first party advertising or marketing'' means advertising or 
 marketing conducted by a first party either through direct 
 communications with a user such as direct mail, email, or text 
 message communications, or advertising or marketing conducted 
 entirely within the first-party context, such as in a physical 
 location operated by the first party, or on a web site or app 
 operated by the first party.
 (18) Genetic information.--The term ``genetic information'' 
 means any covered data, regardless of its format, that concerns 
 an individual's genetic characteristics, including--
 (A) raw sequence data that results from the 
 sequencing of the complete, or a portion of the, 
 extracted deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) of an individual; 
 or
 (B) genotypic and phenotypic information that 
 results from analyzing raw sequence data described in 
 subparagraph (A).
 (19) Individual.--The term ``individual'' means a natural 
 person residing in the United States.
 (20) Knowledge.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``knowledge'' means--
 (i) with respect to a covered entity that 
 is a covered high-impact social media company, 
 the entity knew or should have known the 
 individual was a covered minor;
 (ii) with respect to a covered entity or 
 service provider that is a large data holder, 
 and otherwise is not a covered high-impact 
 social media company, that the covered entity 
 knew or acted in willful disregard of the fact 
 that the individual was a covered minor; and
 (iii) with respect to a covered entity or 
 service provider that does not meet the 
 requirements of clause (i) or (ii), actual 
 knowledge.
 (B) Covered high-impact social media company.--For 
 purposes of this paragraph, the term ``covered high-
 impact social media company'' means a covered entity 
 that provides any internet-accessible platform where--
 (i) such covered entity generates 
 $3,000,000,000 or more in annual revenue;
 (ii) such platform has 300,000,000 or more 
 monthly active users for not fewer than 3 of 
 the preceding 12 months on the online product 
 or service of such covered entity; and
 (iii) such platform constitutes an online 
 product or service that is primarily used by 
 users to access or share, user-generated 
 content.
 (21) Large data holder.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``large data holder'' 
 means a covered entity or service provider that, in the 
 most recent calendar year--
 (i) had annual gross revenues of 
 $250,000,000 or more; and
 (ii) collected, processed, or transferred--
 (I) the covered data of more than 
 5,000,000 individuals or devices that 
 identify or are linked or reasonably 
 linkable to 1 or more individuals, 
 excluding covered data collected and 
 processed solely for the purpose of 
 initiating, rendering, billing for, 
 finalizing, completing, or otherwise 
 collecting payment for a requested 
 product or service; and
 (II) the sensitive covered data of 
 more than 200,000 individuals or 
 devices that identify or are linked or 
 reasonably linkable to 1 or more 
 individuals.
 (B) Exclusions.--The term ``large data holder'' 
 does not include any instance in which the covered 
 entity or service provider would qualify as a large 
 data holder solely on the basis of collecting or 
 processing--
 (i) personal email addresses;
 (ii) personal telephone numbers; or
 (iii) log-in information of an individual 
 or device to allow the individual or device to 
 log in to an account administered by the 
 covered entity or service provider.
 (C) Revenue.--For purposes of determining whether 
 any covered entity or service provider is a large data 
 holder, the term ``revenue'', with respect to any 
 covered entity or service provider that is not 
 organized to carry on business for its own profit or 
 that of its members--
 (i) means the gross receipts the covered 
 entity or service provider received, in 
 whatever form, from all sources, without 
 subtracting any costs or expenses; and
 (ii) includes contributions, gifts, grants, 
 dues or other assessments, income from 
 investments, and proceeds from the sale of real 
 or personal property.
 (22) Market research.--The term ``market research'' means 
 the collection, processing, or transfer of covered data as 
 reasonably necessary and proportionate to investigate the 
 market for or marketing of products, services, or ideas, where 
 the covered data is not--
 (A) integrated into any product or service;
 (B) otherwise used to contact any individual or 
 individual's device; or
 (C) used to advertise or market to any individual 
 or individual's device.
 (23) Material.--The term ``material'' means, with respect 
 to an act, practice, or representation of a covered entity 
 (including a representation made by the covered entity in a 
 privacy policy or similar disclosure to individuals) involving 
 the collection, processing, or transfer of covered data, that 
 such act, practice, or representation is likely to affect a 
 reasonable individual's decision or conduct regarding a product 
 or service.
 (24) Precise geolocation information.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``precise geolocation 
 information'' means information that is derived from a 
 device or technology that reveals the past or present 
 physical location of an individual or device that 
 identifies or is linked or reasonably linkable to 1 or 
 more individuals, with sufficient precision to identify 
 street level location information of an individual or 
 device or the location of an individual or device 
 within a range of 1,850 feet or less.
 (B) Exclusion.--The term ``precise geolocation 
 information'' does not include geolocation information 
 identifiable or derived solely from the visual content 
 of a legally obtained image, including the location of 
 the device that captured such image.
 (25) Process.--The term ``process'' means to conduct or 
 direct any operation or set of operations performed on covered 
 data, including analyzing, organizing, structuring, retaining, 
 storing, using, or otherwise handling covered data.
 (26) Processing purpose.--The term ``processing purpose'' 
 means a reason for which a covered entity or service provider 
 collects, processes, or transfers covered data that is specific 
 and granular enough for a reasonable individual to understand 
 the material facts of how and why the covered entity or service 
 provider collects, processes, or transfers the covered data.
 (27) Publicly available information.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``publicly available 
 information'' means any information that a covered 
 entity or service provider has a reasonable basis to 
 believe has been lawfully made available to the general 
 public from--
 (i) Federal, State, or local government 
 records, if the covered entity collects, 
 processes, and transfers such information in 
 accordance with any restrictions or terms of 
 use placed on the information by the relevant 
 government entity;
 (ii) widely distributed media;
 (iii) a website or online service made 
 available to all members of the public, for 
 free or for a fee, including where all members 
 of the public, for free or for a fee, can log 
 in to the website or online service;
 (iv) a disclosure that has been made to the 
 general public as required by Federal, State, 
 or local law; or
 (v) the visual observation of the physical 
 presence of an individual or a device in a 
 public place, not including data collected by a 
 device in the individual's possession.
 (B) Clarifications; limitations.--
 (i) Available to all members of the 
 public.--For purposes of this paragraph, 
 information from a website or online service is 
 not available to all members of the public if 
 the individual who made the information 
 available via the website or online service has 
 restricted the information to a specific 
 audience.
 (ii) Other limitations.--The term 
 ``publicly available information'' does not 
 include--
 (I) any obscene visual depiction 
 (as defined in section 1460 of title 
 18, United States Code);
 (II) any inference made exclusively 
 from multiple independent sources of 
 publicly available information that 
 reveals sensitive covered data with 
 respect to an individual;
 (III) biometric information;
 (IV) publicly available information 
 that has been combined with covered 
 data;
 (V) genetic information, unless 
 otherwise made available by the 
 individual to whom the information 
 pertains as described in clause (ii) or 
 (iii) of subparagraph (A); or
 (VI) intimate images known to be 
 nonconsensual.
 (28) Sensitive covered data.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``sensitive covered 
 data'' means the following types of covered data:
 (i) A government-issued identifier, such as 
 a Social Security number, passport number, or 
 driver's license number, that is not required 
 by law to be displayed in public.
 (ii) Any information that describes or 
 reveals the past, present, or future physical 
 health, mental health, disability, diagnosis, 
 or healthcare condition or treatment of an 
 individual.
 (iii) A financial account number, debit 
 card number, credit card number, or information 
 that describes or reveals the income level or 
 bank account balances of an individual, except 
 that the last four digits of a debit or credit 
 card number shall not be deemed sensitive 
 covered data.
 (iv) Biometric information.
 (v) Genetic information.
 (vi) Precise geolocation information.
 (vii) An individual's private 
 communications such as voicemails, emails, 
 texts, direct messages, or mail, or information 
 identifying the parties to such communications, 
 voice communications, video communications, and 
 any information that pertains to the 
 transmission of such communications, including 
 telephone numbers called, telephone numbers 
 from which calls were placed, the time calls 
 were made, call duration, and location 
 information of the parties to the call, unless 
 the covered entity or a service provider acting 
 on behalf of the covered entity is the sender 
 or an intended recipient of the communication. 
 Communications are not private for purposes of 
 this clause if such communications are made 
 from or to a device provided by an employer to 
 an employee insofar as such employer provides 
 conspicuous notice that such employer may 
 access such communications.
 (viii) Account or device log-in 
 credentials, or security or access codes for an 
 account or device.
 (ix) Information identifying the sexual 
 behavior of an individual in a manner 
 inconsistent with the individual's reasonable 
 expectation regarding the collection, 
 processing, or transfer of such information.
 (x) Calendar information, address book 
 information, phone or text logs, photos, audio 
 recordings, or videos, maintained for private 
 use by an individual, regardless of whether 
 such information is stored on the individual's 
 device or is accessible from that device and is 
 backed up in a separate location. Such 
 information is not sensitive for purposes of 
 this paragraph if such information is sent from 
 or to a device provided by an employer to an 
 employee insofar as such employer provides 
 conspicuous notice that it may access such 
 information.
 (xi) A photograph, film, video recording, 
 or other similar medium that shows the naked or 
 undergarment-clad private area of an 
 individual.
 (xii) Information revealing the video 
 content requested or selected by an individual 
 collected by a covered entity that is not a 
 provider of a service described in section 
 102(4). This clause does not include covered 
 data used solely for transfers for independent 
 video measurement.
 (xiii) Information about an individual when 
 the covered entity or service provider has 
 knowledge that the individual is a covered 
 minor.
 (xiv) An individual's race, color, 
 ethnicity, religion, or union membership.
 (xv) Information identifying an 
 individual's online activities over time and 
 across third party websites or online services.
 (xvi) Any other covered data collected, 
 processed, or transferred for the purpose of 
 identifying the types of covered data listed in 
 clauses (i) through (xv).
 (B) Rulemaking.--The Commission may commence a 
 rulemaking pursuant to section 553 of title 5, United 
 States Code, to include in the definition of 
 ``sensitive covered data'' any other type of covered 
 data that may require a similar level of protection as 
 the types of covered data listed in clauses (i) through 
 (xvi) of subparagraph (A) as a result of any new method 
 of collecting, processing, or transferring covered 
 data.
 (29) Service provider.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``service provider'' 
 means a person or entity that--
 (i) collects, processes, or transfers 
 covered data on behalf of, and at the direction 
 of, a covered entity or a Federal, State, 
 Tribal, territorial, or local government 
 entity; and
 (ii) receives covered data from or on 
 behalf of a covered entity or a Federal, State, 
 Tribal, territorial, or local government 
 entity.
 (B) Treatment with respect to service provider 
 data.--A service provider that receives service 
 provider data from another service provider as 
 permitted under this Act shall be treated as a service 
 provider under this Act with respect to such data.
 (30) Service provider data.--The term ``service provider 
 data'' means covered data that is collected or processed by or 
 has been transferred to a service provider by or on behalf of a 
 covered entity, a Federal, State, Tribal, territorial, or local 
 government entity, or another service provider for the purpose 
 of allowing the service provider to whom such covered data is 
 transferred to perform a service or function on behalf of, and 
 at the direction of, such covered entity or Federal, State, 
 Tribal, territorial, or local government entity.
 (31) State.--The term ``State'' means any of the 50 States, 
 the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the 
 Virgin Islands of the United States, Guam, American Samoa, or 
 the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
 (32) State privacy authority.--The term ``State privacy 
 authority'' means--
 (A) the chief consumer protection officer of a 
 State; or
 (B) a State consumer protection agency with 
 expertise in data protection, including the California 
 Privacy Protection Agency.
 (33) Substantial privacy risk.--The term ``substantial 
 privacy risk'' means the collection, processing, or transfer of 
 covered data in a manner that may result in any reasonably 
 foreseeable substantial physical injury, economic injury, 
 highly offensive intrusion into the privacy expectations of a 
 reasonable individual under the circumstances, or 
 discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, national 
 origin, sex, or disability.
 (34) Targeted advertising.--The term ``targeted 
 advertising''--
 (A) means presenting to an individual or device 
 identified by a unique identifier, or groups of 
 individuals or devices identified by unique 
 identifiers, an online advertisement that is selected 
 based on known or predicted preferences, 
 characteristics, or interests associated with the 
 individual or a device identified by a unique 
 identifier; and
 (B) does not include--
 (i) advertising or marketing to an 
 individual or an individual's device in 
 response to the individual's specific request 
 for information or feedback;
 (ii) contextual advertising, which is when 
 an advertisement is displayed based on the 
 content in which the advertisement appears and 
 does not vary based on who is viewing the 
 advertisement; or
 (iii) processing covered data solely for 
 measuring or reporting advertising or content, 
 performance, reach, or frequency, including 
 independent measurement.
 (35) Third party.--The term ``third party''--
 (A) means any person or entity, including a covered 
 entity, that--
 (i) collects, processes, or transfers 
 covered data that the person or entity did not 
 collect directly from the individual linked or 
 linkable to such covered data; and
 (ii) is not a service provider with respect 
 to such data; and
 (B) does not include a person or entity that 
 collects covered data from another entity if the 2 
 entities are related by common ownership or corporate 
 control, but only if a reasonable consumer's reasonable 
 expectation would be that such entities share 
 information.
 (36) Third-party collecting entity.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``third-party collecting 
 entity''--
 (i) means a covered entity whose principal 
 source of revenue is derived from processing or 
 transferring covered data that the covered 
 entity did not collect directly from the 
 individuals linked or linkable to the covered 
 data; and
 (ii) does not include a covered entity 
 insofar as such entity processes employee data 
 collected by and received from a third party 
 concerning any individual who is an employee of 
 the third party for the sole purpose of such 
 third party providing benefits to the employee.
 (B) Principal source of revenue defined.--For 
 purposes of this paragraph, the term ``principal source 
 of revenue'' means, for the prior 12-month period, 
 either--
 (i) more than 50 percent of all revenue of 
 the covered entity; or
 (ii) obtaining revenue from processing or 
 transferring the covered data of more than 
 5,000,000 individuals that the covered entity 
 did not collect directly from the individuals 
 linked or linkable to the covered data.
 (C) Non-application to service providers.--An 
 entity may not be considered to be a third-party 
 collecting entity for purposes of this Act if the 
 entity is acting as a service provider.
 (37) Third party data.--The term ``third party data'' means 
 covered data that has been transferred to a third party.
 (38) Transfer.--The term ``transfer'' means to disclose, 
 release, disseminate, make available, license, rent, or share 
 covered data orally, in writing, electronically, or by any 
 other means.
 (39) Unique persistent identifier.--The term ``unique 
 identifier''--
 (A) means an identifier to the extent that such 
 identifier is reasonably linkable to an individual or 
 device that identifies or is linked or reasonably 
 linkable to 1 or more individuals, including a device 
 identifier, Internet Protocol address, cookie, beacon, 
 pixel tag, mobile ad identifier, or similar technology, 
 customer number, unique pseudonym, user alias, 
 telephone number, or other form of persistent or 
 probabilistic identifier that is linked or reasonably 
 linkable to an individual or device; and
 (B) does not include an identifier assigned by a 
 covered entity for the specific purpose of giving 
 effect to an individual's exercise of affirmative 
 express consent or opt-outs of the collection, 
 processing, and transfer of covered data pursuant to 
 section 204 or otherwise limiting the collection, 
 processing, or transfer of such information.
 (40) Widely distributed media.--The term ``widely 
 distributed media'' means information that is available to the 
 general public, including information from a telephone book or 
 online directory, a television, internet, or radio program, the 
 news media, or an internet site that is available to the 
 general public on an unrestricted basis, but does not include 
 an obscene visual depiction (as defined in section 1460 of 
 title 18, United States Code).

 TITLE I--DUTY OF LOYALTY

SEC. 101. DATA MINIMIZATION.

 (a) In General.--A covered entity may not collect, process, or 
transfer covered data unless the collection, processing, or transfer is 
limited to what is reasonably necessary and proportionate to--
 (1) provide or maintain a specific product or service 
 requested by the individual to whom the data pertains; or
 (2) effect a purpose permitted under subsection (b).
 (b) Permissible Purposes.--A covered entity may collect, process, 
or transfer covered data for any of the following purposes if the 
collection, processing, or transfer is limited to what is reasonably 
necessary and proportionate to such purpose:
 (1) To initiate, manage, or complete a transaction or 
 fulfill an order for specific products or services requested by 
 an individual, including any associated routine administrative, 
 operational, and account-servicing activity such as billing, 
 shipping, delivery, storage, and accounting.
 (2) With respect to covered data previously collected in 
 accordance with this Act, notwithstanding this exception--
 (A) to process such data as necessary to perform 
 system maintenance or diagnostics;
 (B) to develop, maintain, repair, or enhance a 
 product or service for which such data was collected;
 (C) to conduct internal research or analytics to 
 improve a product or service for which such data was 
 collected;
 (D) to perform inventory management or reasonable 
 network management;
 (E) to protect against spam; or
 (F) to debug or repair errors that impair the 
 functionality of a service or product for which such 
 data was collected.
 (3) To authenticate users of a product or service.
 (4) To fulfill a product or service warranty.
 (5) To prevent, detect, protect against, or respond to a 
 security incident. For purposes of this paragraph, security is 
 defined as network security and physical security and life 
 safety, including an intrusion or trespass, medical alerts, 
 fire alarms, and access control security.
 (6) To prevent, detect, protect against, or respond to 
 fraud, harassment, or illegal activity. For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the term ``illegal activity'' means a violation of a 
 Federal, State, or local law punishable as a felony or 
 misdemeanor that can directly harm.
 (7) To comply with a legal obligation imposed by Federal, 
 Tribal, local, or State law, or to investigate, establish, 
 prepare for, exercise, or defend legal claims involving the 
 covered entity or service provider.
 (8) To prevent an individual, or group of individuals, from 
 suffering harm where the covered entity or service provider 
 believes in good faith that the individual, or group of 
 individuals, is at risk of death, serious physical injury, or 
 other serious health risk.
 (9) To effectuate a product recall pursuant to Federal or 
 State law.
 (10)(A) To conduct a public or peer-reviewed scientific, 
 historical, or statistical research project that--
 (i) is in the public interest; and
 (ii) adheres to all relevant laws and regulations 
 governing such research, including regulations for the 
 protection of human subjects, or is excluded from 
 criteria of the institutional review board.
 (B) Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of 
 this Act, the Commission should issue guidelines to help 
 covered entities ensure the privacy of affected users and the 
 security of covered data, particularly as data is being 
 transferred to and stored by researchers. Such guidelines 
 should consider risks as they pertain to projects using covered 
 data with special considerations for projects that are exempt 
 under part 46 of title 45, Code of Federal Regulations (or any 
 successor regulation) or are excluded from the criteria for 
 institutional review board review.
 (11) To deliver a communication that is not an 
 advertisement to an individual, if the communication is 
 reasonably anticipated by the individual within the context of 
 the individual's interactions with the covered entity.
 (12) To deliver a communication at the direction of an 
 individual between such individual and one or more individuals 
 or entities.
 (13) To transfer assets to a third party in the context of 
 a merger, acquisition, bankruptcy, or similar transaction when 
 the third party assumes control, in whole or in part, of the 
 covered entity's assets, only if the covered entity, in a 
 reasonable time prior to such transfer, provides each affected 
 individual with--
 (A) a notice describing such transfer, including 
 the name of the entity or entities receiving the 
 individual's covered data and their privacy policies as 
 described in section 202; and
 (B) a reasonable opportunity to withdraw any 
 previously given consents in accordance with the 
 requirements of affirmative express consent under this 
 Act related to the individual's covered data and a 
 reasonable opportunity to request the deletion of the 
 individual's covered data, as described in section 203.
 (14) To ensure the data security and integrity of covered 
 data, as described in section 208.
 (15) With respect to covered data previously collected in 
 accordance with this Act, a service provider acting at the 
 direction of a government entity, or a service provided to a 
 government entity by a covered entity, and only insofar as 
 authorized by statute, to prevent, detect, protect against or 
 respond to a public safety incident, including trespass, 
 natural disaster, or national security incident. This paragraph 
 does not permit, however, the transfer of covered data for 
 payment or other valuable consideration to a government entity.
 (16) With respect to covered data collected in accordance 
 with this Act, notwithstanding this exception, to process such 
 data as necessary to provide first party advertising or 
 marketing of products or services provided by the covered 
 entity for individuals who are not-covered minors.
 (17) With respect to covered data previously collected in 
 accordance with this Act, notwithstanding this exception and 
 provided such collection, processing, and transferring 
 otherwise complies with the requirements of this Act, including 
 section 204(c), to provide targeted advertising.
 (c) Guidance.--The Commission shall issue guidance regarding what 
is reasonably necessary and proportionate to comply with this section. 
Such guidance shall take into consideration--
 (1) the size of, and the nature, scope, and complexity of 
 the activities engaged in by, the covered entity, including 
 whether the covered entity is a large data holder, nonprofit 
 organization, covered entity meeting the requirements of 
 section 209, third party, or third-party collecting entity;
 (2) the sensitivity of covered data collected, processed, 
 or transferred by the covered entity;
 (3) the volume of covered data collected, processed, or 
 transferred by the covered entity; and
 (4) the number of individuals and devices to which the 
 covered data collected, processed, or transferred by the 
 covered entity relates.
 (d) Deceptive Marketing of a Product or Service.--A covered entity 
or service provider may not engage in deceptive advertising or 
marketing with respect to a product or service offered to an 
individual.
 (e) Journalism.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to limit or 
diminish First Amendment freedoms guaranteed under the Constitution.

SEC. 102. LOYALTY DUTIES.

 Notwithstanding section 101 and unless an exception applies, with 
respect to covered data, a covered entity or service provider may not--
 (1) collect, process, or transfer a Social Security number, 
 except when necessary to facilitate an extension of credit, 
 authentication, fraud and identity fraud detection and 
 prevention, the payment or collection of taxes, the enforcement 
 of a contract between parties, or the prevention, 
 investigation, or prosecution of fraud or illegal activity, or 
 as otherwise required by Federal, State, or local law;
 (2) collect or process sensitive covered data, except where 
 such collection or processing is strictly necessary to provide 
 or maintain a specific product or service requested by the 
 individual to whom the covered data pertains, or is strictly 
 necessary to effect a purpose enumerated in paragraphs (1) 
 through (12) and (14) through (15) of section 101(b);
 (3) transfer an individual's sensitive covered data to a 
 third party, unless--
 (A) the transfer is made pursuant to the 
 affirmative express consent of the individual;
 (B) the transfer is necessary to comply with a 
 legal obligation imposed by Federal, State, Tribal, or 
 local law, or to establish, exercise, or defend legal 
 claims;
 (C) the transfer is necessary to prevent an 
 individual from imminent injury where the covered 
 entity believes in good faith that the individual is at 
 risk of death, serious physical injury, or serious 
 health risk;
 (D) with respect to covered data collected in 
 accordance with this Act, notwithstanding this 
 exception, a service provider acting at the direction 
 of a government entity, or a service provided to a 
 government entity by a covered entity, and only insofar 
 as authorized by statute, the transfer is necessary to 
 prevent, detect, protect against or respond to a public 
 safety incident including trespass, natural disaster, 
 or national security incident. This paragraph does not 
 permit, however, the transfer of covered data for 
 payment or other valuable consideration to a government 
 entity;
 (E) in the case of the transfer of a password, the 
 transfer is necessary to use a designated password 
 manager or is to a covered entity for the exclusive 
 purpose of identifying passwords that are being re-used 
 across sites or accounts;
 (F) in the case of the transfer of genetic 
 information, the transfer is necessary to perform a 
 medical diagnosis or medical treatment specifically 
 requested by an individual, or to conduct medical 
 research in accordance with conditions of section 
 101(b)(10); or
 (G) to transfer assets in the manner described in 
 paragraph (13) of section 101(b); or
 (4) in the case of a provider of broadcast television 
 service, cable service, satellite service, streaming media 
 service, or other video programming service described in 
 section 713(h)(2) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 
 613(h)(2)), transfer to an unaffiliated third party covered 
 data that reveals the video content or services requested or 
 selected by an individual from such service, except with the 
 affirmative express consent of the individual or pursuant to 
 one of the permissible purposes enumerated in paragraphs (1) 
 through (15) of section 101(b).

SEC. 103. PRIVACY BY DESIGN.

 (a) Policies, Practices, and Procedures.--A covered entity and a 
service provider shall establish, implement, and maintain reasonable 
policies, practices, and procedures that reflect the role of the 
covered entity or service provider in the collection, processing, and 
transferring of covered data and that--
 (1) consider applicable Federal laws, rules, or regulations 
 related to covered data the covered entity or service provider 
 collects, processes, or transfers;
 (2) identify, assess, and mitigate privacy risks related to 
 covered minors (including, if applicable, with respect to a 
 covered entity that is not an entity meeting the requirements 
 of section 209, in a manner that considers the developmental 
 needs of different age ranges of covered minors) to result in 
 reasonably necessary and proportionate residual risk to covered 
 minors;
 (3) mitigate privacy risks, including substantial privacy 
 risks, related to the products and services of the covered 
 entity or the service provider, including in the design, 
 development, and implementation of such products and services, 
 taking into account the role of the covered entity or service 
 provider and the information available to it; and
 (4) implement reasonable training and safeguards within the 
 covered entity and service provider to promote compliance with 
 all privacy laws applicable to covered data the covered entity 
 collects, processes, or transfers or covered data the service 
 provider collects, processes, or transfers on behalf of the 
 covered entity and mitigate privacy risks, including 
 substantial privacy risks, taking into account the role of the 
 covered entity or service provider and the information 
 available to it.
 (b) Factors to Consider.--The policies, practices, and procedures 
established by a covered entity and a service provider under subsection 
(a), shall correspond with, as applicable--
 (1) the size of the covered entity or the service provider 
 and the nature, scope, and complexity of the activities engaged 
 in by the covered entity or service provider, including whether 
 the covered entity or service provider is a large data holder, 
 nonprofit organization, entity meeting the requirements of 
 section 209, third party, or third-party collecting entity, 
 taking into account the role of the covered entity or service 
 provider and the information available to it;
 (2) the sensitivity of the covered data collected, 
 processed, or transferred by the covered entity or service 
 provider;
 (3) the volume of covered data collected, processed, or 
 transferred by the covered entity or service provider;
 (4) the number of individuals and devices to which the 
 covered data collected, processed, or transferred by the 
 covered entity or service provider relates; and
 (5) the cost of implementing such policies, practices, and 
 procedures in relation to the risks and nature of the covered 
 data.
 (c) Commission Guidance.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Commission shall issue guidance as to what 
constitutes reasonable policies, practices, and procedures as required 
by this section. The Commission shall consider unique circumstances 
applicable to nonprofit organizations, to entities meeting the 
requirements of section 209, and to service providers.

SEC. 104. LOYALTY TO INDIVIDUALS WITH RESPECT TO PRICING.

 (a) Retaliation Through Service or Pricing Prohibited.--A covered 
entity may not retaliate against an individual for exercising any of 
the rights guaranteed by the Act, or any regulations promulgated under 
this Act, including denying goods or services, charging different 
prices or rates for goods or services, or providing a different level 
of quality of goods or services.
 (b) Rules of Construction.--Nothing in subsection (a) may be 
construed to--
 (1) prohibit the relation of the price of a service or the 
 level of service provided to an individual to the provision, by 
 the individual, of financial information that is necessarily 
 collected and processed only for the purpose of initiating, 
 rendering, billing for, or collecting payment for a service or 
 product requested by the individual;
 (2) prohibit a covered entity from offering a different 
 price, rate, level, quality or selection of goods or services 
 to an individual, including offering goods or services for no 
 fee, if the offering is in connection with an individual's 
 voluntary participation in a bona fide loyalty program;
 (3) require a covered entity to provide a bona fide loyalty 
 program that would require the covered entity to collect, 
 process, or transfer covered data that the covered entity 
 otherwise would not collect, process, or transfer;
 (4) prohibit a covered entity from offering a financial 
 incentive or other consideration to an individual for 
 participation in market research;
 (5) prohibit a covered entity from offering different types 
 of pricing or functionalities with respect to a product or 
 service based on an individual's exercise of a right under 
 section 203(a)(3); or
 (6) prohibit a covered entity from declining to provide a 
 product or service insofar as the collection and processing of 
 covered data is strictly necessary for such product or service.
 (c) Bona Fide Loyalty Program Defined.--For purposes of this 
section, the term ``bona fide loyalty program'' includes rewards, 
premium features, discount or club card programs.

 TITLE II--CONSUMER DATA RIGHTS

SEC. 201. CONSUMER AWARENESS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Commission shall publish, on the public website of the 
Commission, a webpage that describes each provision, right, obligation, 
and requirement of this Act, listed separately for individuals and for 
covered entities and service providers, and the remedies, exemptions, 
and protections associated with this Act, in plain and concise language 
and in an easy-to-understand manner.
 (b) Updates.--The Commission shall update the information published 
under subsection (a) on a quarterly basis as necessitated by any change 
in law, regulation, guidance, or judicial decisions.
 (c) Accessibility.--The Commission shall publish the information 
required to be published under subsection (a) in the ten languages with 
the most users in the United States, according to the most recent 
United States Census.

SEC. 202. TRANSPARENCY.

 (a) In General.--Each covered entity shall make publicly available, 
in a clear, conspicuous, not misleading, and easy-to-read and readily 
accessible manner, a privacy policy that provides a detailed and 
accurate representation of the data collection, processing, and 
transfer activities of the covered entity.
 (b) Content of Privacy Policy.--A covered entity or service 
provider shall have a privacy policy that includes, at a minimum, the 
following:
 (1) The identity and the contact information of--
 (A) the covered entity or service provider to which 
 the privacy policy applies (including the covered 
 entity's or service provider's points of contact and 
 generic electronic mail addresses, as applicable for 
 privacy and data security inquiries); and
 (B) any other entity within the same corporate 
 structure as the covered entity or service provider to 
 which covered data is transferred by the covered 
 entity.
 (2) The categories of covered data the covered entity or 
 service provider collects or processes.
 (3) The processing purposes for each category of covered 
 data the covered entity or service provider collects or 
 processes.
 (4) Whether the covered entity or service provider 
 transfers covered data and, if so, each category of service 
 provider and third party to which the covered entity or service 
 provider transfers covered data, the name of each third-party 
 collecting entity to which the covered entity or service 
 provider transfers covered data, and the purposes for which 
 such data is transferred to such categories of service 
 providers and third parties or third-party collecting entities, 
 except for a transfer to a governmental entity pursuant to a 
 court order or law that prohibits the covered entity or service 
 provider from disclosing such transfer, except for transfers to 
 governmental entities pursuant to a court order or law that 
 prohibits the covered entity from disclosing the transfer.
 (5) The length of time the covered entity or service 
 provider intends to retain each category of covered data, 
 including sensitive covered data, or, if it is not possible to 
 identify that timeframe, the criteria used to determine the 
 length of time the covered entity or service provider intends 
 to retain categories of covered data.
 (6) A prominent description of how an individual can 
 exercise the rights described in this Act.
 (7) A general description of the covered entity's or 
 service provider's data security practices.
 (8) The effective date of the privacy policy.
 (9) Whether or not any covered data collected by the 
 covered entity or service provider is transferred to, processed 
 in, stored in, or otherwise accessible to the People's Republic 
 of China, Russia, Iran, or North Korea.
 (c) Languages.--The privacy policy required under subsection (a) 
shall be made available to the public in each covered language in which 
the covered entity or service provider--
 (1) provides a product or service that is subject to the 
 privacy policy; or
 (2) carries out activities related to such product or 
 service.
 (d) Accessibility.--The covered entity or service provider shall 
also provide the disclosures under this section in a manner that is 
reasonably accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities.
 (e) Material Changes.--
 (1) Affirmative express consent.--If a covered entity makes 
 a material change to its privacy policy or practices, the 
 covered entity shall notify each individual affected by such 
 material change before implementing the material change with 
 respect to any prospectively collected covered data and, except 
 as provided in paragraphs (1) through (15) of section 101(b), 
 provide a reasonable opportunity for each individual to 
 withdraw consent to any further materially different 
 collection, processing, or transfer of previously collected 
 covered data under the changed policy.
 (2) Notification.--The covered entity shall take all 
 reasonable electronic measures to provide direct notification 
 regarding material changes to the privacy policy to each 
 affected individual, in each covered language in which the 
 privacy policy is made available, and taking into account 
 available technology and the nature of the relationship.
 (3) Clarification.--Nothing in this section may be 
 construed to affect the requirements for covered entities under 
 section 102 or 204.
 (4) Log of material changes.--Each large data holder shall 
 retain copies of previous versions of its privacy policy for at 
 least 10 years beginning after the date of enactment of this 
 Act and publish them on its website. Such large data holder 
 shall make publicly available, in a clear, conspicuous, and 
 readily accessible manner, a log describing the date and nature 
 of each material change to its privacy policy over the past 10 
 years. The descriptions shall be sufficient for a reasonable 
 individual to understand the material effect of each material 
 change. The obligations in this paragraph shall not apply to 
 any previous versions of a large data holder's privacy policy, 
 or any material changes to such policy, that precede the date 
 of enactment of this Act.
 (f) Short-form Notice to Consumers by Large Data Holders.--
 (1) In general.--In addition to the privacy policy required 
 under subsection (a), a large data holder that is a covered 
 entity shall provide a short-form notice of its covered data 
 practices in a manner that is--
 (A) concise, clear, conspicuous, and not 
 misleading;
 (B) readily accessible to the individual, based on 
 what is reasonably anticipated within the context of 
 the relationship between the individual and the large 
 data holder;
 (C) inclusive of an overview of individual rights 
 and disclosures to reasonably draw attention to data 
 practices that may reasonably be unexpected to a 
 reasonable person or that involve sensitive covered 
 data; and
 (D) no more than 500 words in length.
 (2) Rulemaking.--The Commission shall issue a rule pursuant 
 to section 553 of title 5, United States Code, establishing the 
 minimum data disclosures necessary for the short-form notice 
 required under paragraph (1), which shall not exceed the 
 content requirements in subsection (b) and shall include 
 templates or models of short-form notices.

SEC. 203. INDIVIDUAL DATA OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL.

 (a) Access to, and Correction, Deletion, and Portability of, 
Covered Data.--In accordance with subsections (b) and (c), a covered 
entity shall provide an individual, after receiving a verified request 
from the individual, with the right to--
 (1) access--
 (A) in a human-readable format that a reasonable 
 individual can understand and download from the 
 internet, the covered data (except covered data in a 
 back-up or archival system) of the individual making 
 the request that is collected, processed, or 
 transferred by the covered entity or any service 
 provider of the covered entity within the 24 months 
 preceding the request;
 (B) the categories of any third party, if 
 applicable, and an option for consumers to obtain the 
 names of any such third party as well as and the 
 categories of any service providers to whom the covered 
 entity has transferred for consideration the covered 
 data of the individual, as well as the categories of 
 sources from which the covered data was collected; and
 (C) a description of the purpose for which the 
 covered entity transferred the covered data of the 
 individual to a third party or service provider;
 (2) correct any verifiable substantial inaccuracy or 
 substantially incomplete information with respect to the 
 covered data of the individual that is processed by the covered 
 entity and instruct the covered entity to make reasonable 
 efforts to notify all third parties or service providers to 
 which the covered entity transferred such covered data of the 
 corrected information;
 (3) delete covered data of the individual that is processed 
 by the covered entity and instruct the covered entity to make 
 reasonable efforts to notify all third parties or service 
 provider to which the covered entity transferred such covered 
 data of the individual's deletion request; and
 (4) to the extent technically feasible, export to the 
 individual or directly to another entity the covered data of 
 the individual that is processed by the covered entity, 
 including inferences linked or reasonably linkable to the 
 individual but not including other derived data, without 
 licensing restrictions that limit such transfers in--
 (A) a human-readable format that a reasonable 
 individual can understand and download from the 
 internet; and
 (B) a portable, structured, interoperable, and 
 machine-readable format.
 (b) Individual Autonomy.--A covered entity may not condition, 
effectively condition, attempt to condition, or attempt to effectively 
condition the exercise of a right described in subsection (a) through--
 (1) the use of any false, fictitious, fraudulent, or 
 materially misleading statement or representation; or
 (2) the design, modification, or manipulation of any user 
 interface with the purpose or substantial effect of obscuring, 
 subverting, or impairing a reasonable individual's autonomy, 
 decision making, or choice to exercise such right.
 (c) Timing.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to subsections (d) and (e), each 
 request under subsection (a) shall be completed by any--
 (A) large data holder within 45 days of such 
 request from an individual, unless it is demonstrably 
 impracticable or impracticably costly to verify such 
 individual;
 (B) covered entity that is not a large data holder 
 or a covered entity meeting the requirements of section 
 209 within 60 days of such request from an individual, 
 unless it is demonstrably impracticable or 
 impracticably costly to verify such individual; or
 (C) covered entity meeting the requirements of 
 section 209 within 90 days of such request from an 
 individual, unless it is demonstrably impracticable or 
 impracticably costly to verify such individual.
 (2) Extension.--A response period set forth in this 
 subsection may be extended once by 45 additional days when 
 reasonably necessary, considering the complexity and number of 
 the individual's requests, so long as the covered entity 
 informs the individual of any such extension within the initial 
 45-day response period, together with the reason for the 
 extension.
 (d) Frequency and Cost of Access.--A covered entity--
 (1) shall provide an individual with the opportunity to 
 exercise each of the rights described in subsection (a); and
 (2) with respect to--
 (A) the first 2 times that an individual exercises 
 any right described in subsection (a) in any 12-month 
 period, shall allow the individual to exercise such 
 right free of charge; and
 (B) any time beyond the initial 2 times described 
 in subparagraph (A), may allow the individual to 
 exercise such right for a reasonable fee for each 
 request.
 (e) Verification and Exceptions.--
 (1) Required exceptions.--A covered entity may not permit 
 an individual to exercise a right described in subsection (a), 
 in whole or in part, if the covered entity--
 (A) cannot reasonably verify that the individual 
 making the request to exercise the right is the 
 individual whose covered data is the subject of the 
 request or an individual authorized to make such a 
 request on the individual's behalf;
 (B) reasonably believes that the request is made to 
 interfere with a contract between the covered entity 
 and another individual;
 (C) determines that the exercise of the right would 
 require access to or correction of another individual's 
 sensitive covered data;
 (D) reasonably believes that the exercise of the 
 right would require the covered entity to engage in an 
 unfair or deceptive practice under section 5 of the 
 Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45); or
 (E) reasonably believes that the request is made to 
 further fraud, support criminal activity, or the 
 exercise of the right presents a data security threat.
 (2) Additional information.--If a covered entity cannot 
 reasonably verify that a request to exercise a right described 
 in subsection (a) is made by the individual whose covered data 
 is the subject of the request (or an individual authorized to 
 make such a request on the individual's behalf), the covered 
 entity--
 (A) may request that the individual making the 
 request to exercise the right provide any additional 
 information necessary for the sole purpose of verifying 
 the identity of the individual; and
 (B) may not process or transfer such additional 
 information for any other purpose.
 (3) Permissive exceptions.--
 (A) In general.--A covered entity may decline, with 
 adequate explanation to the individual, to comply with 
 a request to exercise a right described in subsection 
 (a), in whole or in part, that would--
 (i) require the covered entity to retain 
 any covered data collected for a single, one-
 time transaction, if such covered data is not 
 processed or transferred by the covered entity 
 for any purpose other than completing such 
 transaction;
 (ii) be demonstrably impracticable or 
 prohibitively costly to comply with, and the 
 covered entity shall provide a description to 
 the requestor detailing the inability to comply 
 with the request;
 (iii) require the covered entity to attempt 
 to re-identify de-identified data;
 (iv) require the covered entity to maintain 
 covered data in an identifiable form or 
 collect, retain, or access any data in order to 
 be capable of associating a verified individual 
 request with covered data of such individual;
 (v) result in the release of trade secrets 
 or other privileged or confidential business 
 information;
 (vi) require the covered entity to correct 
 any covered data that cannot be reasonably 
 verified as being inaccurate or incomplete;
 (vii) interfere with law enforcement, 
 judicial proceedings, investigations, or 
 reasonable efforts to guard against, detect, 
 prevent, or investigate fraudulent, malicious, 
 or unlawful activity, or enforce valid 
 contracts;
 (viii) violate Federal or State law or the 
 rights and freedoms of another individual, 
 including under the Constitution of the United 
 States;
 (ix) prevent a covered entity from being 
 able to maintain a confidential record of 
 deletion requests, maintained solely for the 
 purpose of preventing covered data of an 
 individual from being recollected after the 
 individual submitted a deletion request and 
 requested that the covered entity no longer 
 collect, process, or transfer such data;
 (x) fall within an exception enumerated in 
 the regulations promulgated by the Commission 
 pursuant to subparagraph (D); or
 (xi) with respect to requests for 
 deletion--
 (I) unreasonably interfere with the 
 provision of products or services by 
 the covered entity to another person it 
 currently serves;
 (II) delete covered data that 
 relates to a public figure and for 
 which the requesting individual has no 
 reasonable expectation of privacy;
 (III) delete covered data 
 reasonably necessary to perform a 
 contract between the covered entity and 
 the individual;
 (IV) delete covered data that the 
 covered entity needs to retain in order 
 to comply with professional ethical 
 obligations;
 (V) delete covered data that the 
 covered entity reasonably believes may 
 be evidence of unlawful activity or an 
 abuse of the covered entity's products 
 or services; or
 (VI) for private elementary and 
 secondary schools as defined by State 
 law and private institutions of higher 
 education as defined by title I of the 
 Higher Education Act of 1965, delete 
 covered data that would unreasonably 
 interfere with the provision of 
 education services by or the ordinary 
 operation of the school or institution.
 (B) Partial compliance.--In a circumstance that 
 would allow a denial pursuant to subparagraph (A), a 
 covered entity shall partially comply with the 
 remainder of the request if it is possible and not 
 unduly burdensome to do so.
 (C) Number of requests.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A)(ii), the receipt of a large number of 
 verified requests, on its own, may not be considered to 
 render compliance with a request demonstrably 
 impracticable.
 (D) Further exceptions.--The Commission may, by 
 regulation as described in subsection (g), establish 
 additional permissive exceptions necessary to protect 
 the rights of individuals, alleviate undue burdens on 
 covered entities, prevent unjust or unreasonable 
 outcomes from the exercise of access, correction, 
 deletion, or portability rights, or as otherwise 
 necessary to fulfill the purposes of this section. In 
 establishing such exceptions, the Commission should 
 consider any relevant changes in technology, means for 
 protecting privacy and other rights, and beneficial 
 uses of covered data by covered entities.
 (f) Large Data Holder Metrics Reporting.--A large data holder that 
is a covered entity shall, for each calendar year in which it was a 
large data holder, do the following:
 (1) Compile the following metrics for the prior calendar 
 year:
 (A) The number of verified access requests under 
 subsection (a)(1).
 (B) The number of verified deletion requests under 
 subsection (a)(3).
 (C) The number of requests to opt-out of covered 
 data transfers under section 204(b).
 (D) The number of requests to opt-out of targeted 
 advertising under section 204(c).
 (E) The number of requests in each of subparagraphs 
 (A) through (D) that such large data holder (i) 
 complied with in whole or in part and (ii) denied.
 (F) The median or mean number of days within which 
 such large data holder substantively responded to the 
 requests in each of subparagraphs (A) through (D).
 (2) Disclose by July 1 of each applicable calendar year the 
 information compiled in paragraph (1) within such large data 
 holder's privacy policy required under section 202 or on the 
 publicly accessible website of such large data holder that is 
 accessible from a hyperlink included in the privacy policy.
 (g) Regulations.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Commission shall promulgate regulations, 
pursuant to section 553 of title 5, United States Code, as necessary to 
establish processes by which covered entities are to comply with the 
provisions of this section. Such regulations shall take into 
consideration--
 (1) the size of, and the nature, scope, and complexity of 
 the activities engaged in by the covered entity, including 
 whether the covered entity is a large data holder, nonprofit 
 organization, covered entity meeting the requirements of 
 section 209, third party, or third-party collecting entity;
 (2) the sensitivity of covered data collected, processed, 
 or transferred by the covered entity;
 (3) the volume of covered data collected, processed, or 
 transferred by the covered entity;
 (4) the number of individuals and devices to which the 
 covered data collected, processed, or transferred by the 
 covered entity relates; and
 (5) after consulting the National Institute of Standards 
 and Technology, standards for ensuring the deletion of covered 
 data under this Act where appropriate.
 (h) Accessibility.--A covered entity shall facilitate the ability 
of individuals to make requests under subsection (a) in any covered 
language in which the covered entity provides a product or service. The 
mechanisms by which a covered entity enables individuals to make 
requests under subsection (a) shall be readily accessible and usable by 
with individuals with disabilities.

SEC. 204. RIGHT TO CONSENT AND OBJECT.

 (a) Withdrawal of Consent.--A covered entity shall provide an 
individual with a clear and conspicuous, easy-to-execute means to 
withdraw any affirmative express consent previously provided by the 
individual that is as easy to execute by a reasonable individual as the 
means to provide consent, with respect to the processing or transfer of 
the covered data of the individual.
 (b) Right to Opt Out of Covered Data Transfers.--
 (1) In general.--A covered entity--
 (A) may not transfer or direct the transfer of the 
 covered data of an individual to a third party if the 
 individual objects to the transfer; and
 (B) shall allow an individual to object to such a 
 transfer through an opt-out mechanism, as described in 
 section 210.
 (2) Exception.--Except as provided in section 206(b)(3)(C), 
 a covered entity need not allow an individual to opt out of the 
 collection, processing, or transfer of covered data made 
 pursuant to the exceptions in paragraphs (1) through (15) of 
 section 101(b).
 (c) Right to Opt Out of Targeted Advertising.--
 (1) A covered entity or service provider that directly 
 delivers a targeted advertisement shall--
 (A) prior to engaging in targeted advertising to an 
 individual or device and at all times thereafter, 
 provide such individual with a clear and conspicuous 
 means to opt out of targeted advertising;
 (B) abide by any opt-out designation by an 
 individual with respect to targeted advertising and 
 notify the covered entity that directed the service 
 provider to deliver the targeted advertisement of the 
 opt-out decision; and
 (C) allow an individual to make an opt-out 
 designation with respect to targeted advertising 
 through an opt-out mechanism, as described in section 
 210.
 (2) A covered entity or service provider that receives an 
 opt-out notification pursuant to paragraph (1)(B) or this 
 paragraph shall abide by such opt-out designations by an 
 individual and notify any other person that directed the 
 covered entity or service provider to serve, deliver, or 
 otherwise handle the advertisement of the opt-out decision.
 (d) Individual Autonomy.--A covered entity may not condition, 
effectively condition, attempt to condition, or attempt to effectively 
condition the exercise of any individual right under this section 
through--
 (1) the use of any false, fictitious, fraudulent, or 
 materially misleading statement or representation; or
 (2) the design, modification, or manipulation of any user 
 interface with the purpose or substantial effect of obscuring, 
 subverting, or impairing a reasonable individual's autonomy, 
 decision making, or choice to exercise any such right.

SEC. 205. DATA PROTECTIONS FOR CHILDREN AND MINORS.

 (a) Prohibition on Targeted Advertising to Children and Minors.--A 
covered entity may not engage in targeted advertising to any individual 
if the covered entity has knowledge that the individual is a covered 
minor.
 (b) Data Transfer Requirements Related to Covered Minors.--
 (1) In general.--A covered entity may not transfer or 
 direct the transfer of the covered data of a covered minor to a 
 third party if the covered entity--
 (A) has knowledge that the individual is a covered 
 minor; and
 (B) has not obtained affirmative express consent 
 from the covered minor or the covered minor's parent or 
 guardian.
 (2) Exception.--A covered entity or service provider may 
 collect, process, or transfer covered data of an individual the 
 covered entity or service provider knows is under the age of 18 
 solely in order to submit information relating to child 
 victimization to law enforcement or to the nonprofit, national 
 resource center and clearinghouse congressionally designated to 
 provide assistance to victims, families, child-serving 
 professionals, and the general public on missing and exploited 
 children issues.
 (c) Youth Privacy and Marketing Division.--
 (1) Establishment.--There is established within the 
 Commission in the privacy bureau established in this Act, a 
 division to be known as the ``Youth Privacy and Marketing 
 Division'' (in this section referred to as the ``Division'').
 (2) Director.--The Division shall be headed by a Director, 
 who shall be appointed by the Chair of the Commission.
 (3) Duties.--The Division shall be responsible for 
 assisting the Commission in addressing, as it relates to this 
 Act--
 (A) the privacy of children and minors; and
 (B) marketing directed at children and minors.
 (4) Staff.--The Director of the Division shall hire 
 adequate staff to carry out the duties described in paragraph 
 (3), including by hiring individuals who are experts in data 
 protection, digital advertising, data analytics, and youth 
 development.
 (5) Reports.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Commission 
 shall submit to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Energy and 
 Commerce of the House of Representatives a report that 
 includes--
 (A) a description of the work of the Division 
 regarding emerging concerns relating to youth privacy 
 and marketing practices; and
 (B) an assessment of how effectively the Division 
 has, during the period for which the report is 
 submitted, assisted the Commission to address youth 
 privacy and marketing practices.
 (6) Publication.--Not later than 10 days after the date on 
 which a report is submitted under paragraph (5), the Commission 
 shall publish the report on its website.
 (d) Report by the Inspector General.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, and biennially thereafter, the Inspector 
 General of the Commission shall submit to the Commission and to 
 the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the 
 Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
 Representatives a report regarding the safe harbor provisions 
 in section 1304 of the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act 
 of 1998 (15 U.S.C. 6503), which shall include--
 (A) an analysis of whether the safe harbor 
 provisions are--
 (i) operating fairly and effectively; and
 (ii) effectively protecting the interests 
 of children and minors; and
 (B) any proposal or recommendation for policy 
 changes that would improve the effectiveness of the 
 safe harbor provisions.
 (2) Publication.--Not later than 10 days after the date on 
 which a report is submitted under paragraph (1), the Commission 
 shall publish the report on the website of the Commission.

SEC. 206. THIRD-PARTY COLLECTING ENTITIES.

 (a) Notice.--Each third-party collecting entity shall place a 
clear, conspicuous, not misleading, and readily accessible notice on 
the website or mobile application of the third-party collecting entity 
(if the third-party collecting entity maintains such a website or 
mobile application) that--
 (1) notifies individuals that the entity is a third-party 
 collecting entity using specific language that the Commission 
 shall develop through rulemaking under section 553 of title 5, 
 United States Code;
 (2) includes a link to the website established under 
 subsection (b)(3); and
 (3) is reasonably accessible to and usable by individuals 
 with disabilities.
 (b) Third-party Collecting Entity Registration.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than January 31 of each calendar 
 year that follows a calendar year during which a covered entity 
 acted as a third-party collecting entity and processed covered 
 data pertaining to more than 5,000 individuals or devices that 
 identify or are linked or reasonably linkable to an individual, 
 such covered entity shall register with the Commission in 
 accordance with this subsection.
 (2) Registration requirements.--In registering with the 
 Commission as required under paragraph (1), a third-party 
 collecting entity shall do the following:
 (A) Pay to the Commission a registration fee of 
 $100.
 (B) Provide the Commission with the following 
 information:
 (i) The legal name and primary physical, 
 email, and internet addresses of the third-
 party collecting entity.
 (ii) A description of the categories of 
 covered data the third-party collecting entity 
 processes and transfers.
 (iii) The contact information of the third-
 party collecting entity, including a contact 
 person, a telephone number, an e-mail address, 
 a website, and a physical mailing address.
 (iv) A link to a website through which an 
 individual may easily exercise the rights 
 provided under this subsection.
 (3) Third-party collecting entity registry.--The Commission 
 shall establish and maintain on a website a searchable, 
 publicly available, central registry of third-party collecting 
 entities that are registered with the Commission under this 
 subsection that includes the following:
 (A) A listing of all registered third-party 
 collecting entities and a search feature that allows 
 members of the public to identify individual third-
 party collecting entities.
 (B) For each registered third-party collecting 
 entity, the information provided under paragraph 
 (2)(B).
 (C)(i) A ``Do Not Collect'' registry link and 
 mechanism by which an individual may, easily submit a 
 request to all registered third-party collecting 
 entities that are not consumer reporting agencies (as 
 defined in section 603(f) of the Fair Credit Reporting 
 Act (15 U.S.C. 1681a(f))), and to the extent such 
 third-party collecting entities are not acting as 
 consumer reporting agencies (as so defined), to--
 (I) delete all covered data related to such 
 individual that the third-party collecting 
 entity did not collect from such individual 
 directly or when acting as a service provider; 
 and
 (II) ensure that the third-party collecting 
 entity no longer collects covered data related 
 to such individual without the affirmative 
 express consent of such individual, except 
 insofar as the third-party collecting entity is 
 acting as a service provider.
 (ii) Each third-party collecting entity that 
 receives such a request from an individual shall delete 
 all the covered data of the individual not later than 
 30 days after the request is received by the third-
 party collecting entity.
 (iii) Notwithstanding the provisions of clauses (i) 
 and (ii), a third-party collecting entity may decline 
 to fulfill a ``Do Not Collect'' request from an 
 individual who it has actual knowledge has been 
 convicted of a crime related to the abduction or sexual 
 exploitation of a child, and the data the entity is 
 collecting is necessary to effectuate the purposes of a 
 national or State-run sex offender registry or the 
 congressionally designated entity that serves as the 
 nonprofit national resource center and clearinghouse to 
 provide assistance to victims, families, child-serving 
 professionals, and the general public on missing and 
 exploited children issues.
 (c) Penalties.--
 (1) In general.--A third-party collecting entity that fails 
 to register or provide the notice as required under this 
 section shall be liable for--
 (A) a civil penalty of $100 for each day the third-
 party collecting entity fails to register or provide 
 notice as required under this section, not to exceed a 
 total of $10,000 for any year; and
 (B) an amount equal to the registration fees due 
 under paragraph (2)(A) of subsection (b) for each year 
 that the third-party collecting entity failed to 
 register as required under paragraph (1) of such 
 subsection.
 (2) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this subsection shall 
 be construed as altering, limiting, or affecting any 
 enforcement authorities or remedies under this Act.

SEC. 207. CIVIL RIGHTS AND ALGORITHMS.

 (a) Civil Rights Protections.--
 (1) In general.--A covered entity or a service provider may 
 not collect, process, or transfer covered data in a manner that 
 discriminates in or otherwise makes unavailable the equal 
 enjoyment of goods or services on the basis of race, color, 
 religion, national origin, sex, or disability.
 (2) Exceptions.--This subsection shall not apply to--
 (A) the collection, processing, or transfer of 
 covered data for the purpose of--
 (i) a covered entity's or a service 
 provider's self-testing to prevent or mitigate 
 unlawful discrimination; or
 (ii) diversifying an applicant, 
 participant, or customer pool; or
 (B) any private club or group not open to the 
 public, as described in section 201(e) of the Civil 
 Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000a(e)).
 (b) FTC Enforcement Assistance.--
 (1) In general.--Whenever the Commission obtains 
 information that a covered entity or service provider may have 
 collected, processed, or transferred covered data in violation 
 of subsection (a), the Commission shall transmit such 
 information as allowable under Federal law to any Executive 
 agency with authority to initiate enforcement actions or 
 proceedings relating to such violation.
 (2) Annual report.--Not later than 3 years after the date 
 of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the 
 Commission shall submit to Congress a report that includes a 
 summary of--
 (A) the types of information the Commission 
 transmitted to Executive agencies under paragraph (1) 
 during the previous 1-year period; and
 (B) how such information relates to Federal civil 
 rights laws.
 (3) Technical assistance.--In transmitting information 
 under paragraph (1), the Commission may consult and coordinate 
 with, and provide technical and investigative assistance, as 
 appropriate, to such Executive agency.
 (4) Cooperation with other agencies.--The Commission may 
 implement this subsection by executing agreements or memoranda 
 of understanding with the appropriate Executive agencies.
 (c) Covered Algorithm Impact and Evaluation.--
 (1) Covered algorithm impact assessment.--
 (A) Impact assessment.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of law, not later than 2 years after the date 
 of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, a 
 large data holder that uses a covered algorithm in a 
 manner that poses a consequential risk of harm to an 
 individual or group of individuals, and uses such 
 covered algorithm solely or in part, to collect, 
 process, or transfer covered data shall conduct an 
 impact assessment of such algorithm in accordance with 
 subparagraph (B).
 (B) Impact assessment scope.--The impact assessment 
 required under subparagraph (A) shall provide the 
 following:
 (i) A detailed description of the design 
 process and methodologies of the covered 
 algorithm.
 (ii) A statement of the purpose and 
 proposed uses of the covered algorithm.
 (iii) A detailed description of the data 
 used by the covered algorithm, including the 
 specific categories of data that will be 
 processed as input and any data used to train 
 the model that the covered algorithm relies on, 
 if applicable.
 (iv) A description of the outputs produced 
 by the covered algorithm.
 (v) An assessment of the necessity and 
 proportionality of the covered algorithm in 
 relation to its stated purpose.
 (vi) A detailed description of steps the 
 large data holder has taken or will take to 
 mitigate potential harms from the covered 
 algorithm to an individual or group of 
 individuals, including related to--
 (I) covered minors;
 (II) making or facilitating 
 advertising for, or determining access 
 to, or restrictions on the use of 
 housing, education, employment, 
 healthcare, insurance, or credit 
 opportunities;
 (III) determining access to, or 
 restrictions on the use of, any place 
 of public accommodation, particularly 
 as such harms relate to the protected 
 characteristics of individuals, 
 including race, color, religion, 
 national origin, sex, or disability;
 (IV) disparate impact on the basis 
 of individuals' race, color, religion, 
 national origin, sex, or disability 
 status; or
 (V) disparate impact on the basis 
 of individuals' political party 
 registration status.
 (2) Algorithm design evaluation.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of law, not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, a covered entity or service provider 
 that knowingly develops a covered algorithm that is designed 
 to, solely or in part, to collect, process, or transfer covered 
 data in furtherance of a consequential decision shall prior to 
 deploying the covered algorithm in interstate commerce evaluate 
 the design, structure, and inputs of the covered algorithm, 
 including any training data used to develop the covered 
 algorithm, to reduce the risk of the potential harms identified 
 under paragraph (1)(B).
 (3) Other considerations.--
 (A) Focus.--In complying with paragraphs (1) and 
 (2), a covered entity and a service provider may focus 
 the impact assessment or evaluation on any covered 
 algorithm, or portions of a covered algorithm, that 
 will be put to use and may reasonably contribute to the 
 risk of the potential harms identified under paragraph 
 (1)(B).
 (B) Availability.--
 (i) In general.--A covered entity and a 
 service provider--
 (I) shall, not later than 30 days 
 after completing an impact assessment 
 or evaluation, submit the impact 
 assessment or evaluation conducted 
 under paragraph (1) or (2) to the 
 Commission;
 (II) shall, upon request, make such 
 impact assessment and evaluation 
 available to Congress; and
 (III) may make a summary of such 
 impact assessment and evaluation 
 publicly available in a place that is 
 easily accessible to individuals.
 (ii) Trade secrets.--Covered entities and 
 service providers may redact and segregate any 
 trade secret (as defined in section 1839 of 
 title 18, United States Code) or other 
 confidential or proprietary information from 
 public disclosure under this subparagraph and 
 the Commission shall abide by its obligations 
 under section 6(f) of the Federal Trade 
 Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 46(f)) in regard to 
 such information.
 (C) Enforcement.--The Commission may not use any 
 information obtained solely and exclusively through a 
 covered entity or a service provider's disclosure of 
 information to the Commission in compliance with this 
 section for any purpose other than enforcing this Act 
 with the exception of enforcing consent orders, 
 including the study and report provisions in paragraph 
 (6). This subparagraph does not preclude the Commission 
 from providing this information to Congress in response 
 to a subpoena.
 (4) Guidance.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Commission shall, in consultation 
 with the Secretary of Commerce, or their respective designees, 
 publish guidance regarding compliance with this section.
 (5) Rulemaking and exemption.--The Commission shall have 
 authority under section 553 of title 5, United States Code, to 
 promulgate regulations as necessary to establish processes by 
 which a large data holder--
 (A) shall submit an impact assessment to the 
 Commission under paragraph (3)(B)(i)(I); and
 (B) may exclude from this subsection any covered 
 algorithm that presents low or minimal consequential 
 risk of harm to an individual or group of individuals.
 (6) Study and report.--
 (A) Study.--The Commission, in consultation with 
 the Secretary of Commerce or the Secretary's designee, 
 shall conduct a study, to review any impact assessment 
 or evaluation submitted under this subsection. Such 
 study shall include an examination of--
 (i) best practices for the assessment and 
 evaluation of covered algorithms; and
 (ii) methods to reduce the risk of harm to 
 individuals that may be related to the use of 
 covered algorithms.
 (B) Report.--
 (i) Initial report.--Not later than 3 years 
 after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
 Commission, in consultation with the Secretary 
 of Commerce or the Secretary's designee, shall 
 submit to Congress a report containing the 
 results of the study conducted under 
 subparagraph (A), together with recommendations 
 for such legislation and administrative action 
 as the Commission determines appropriate.
 (ii) Additional reports.--Not later than 3 
 years after submission of the initial report 
 under clause (i), and as the Commission 
 determines necessary thereafter, the Commission 
 shall submit to Congress an updated version of 
 such report.

SEC. 208. DATA SECURITY AND PROTECTION OF COVERED DATA.

 (a) Establishment of Data Security Practices.--
 (1) In general.--A covered entity or service provider shall 
 establish, implement, and maintain reasonable administrative, 
 technical, and physical data security practices and procedures 
 to protect and secure covered data against unauthorized access 
 and acquisition.
 (2) Considerations.--The reasonable administrative, 
 technical, and physical data security practices required under 
 paragraph (1) shall be appropriate to--
 (A) the size and complexity of the covered entity 
 or service provider;
 (B) the nature and scope of the covered entity or 
 the service provider's collecting, processing, or 
 transferring of covered data;
 (C) the volume and nature of the covered data 
 collected, processed, or transferred by the covered 
 entity or service provider;
 (D) the sensitivity of the covered data collected, 
 processed, or transferred;
 (E) the current state of the art (and limitations 
 thereof) in administrative, technical, and physical 
 safeguards for protecting such covered data; and
 (F) the cost of available tools to improve security 
 and reduce vulnerabilities to unauthorized access and 
 acquisition of such covered data in relation to the 
 risks and nature of the covered data.
 (b) Specific Requirements.--The data security practices of the 
covered entity and of the service provider required under subsection 
(a) shall include, for each respective entity's own system or systems, 
at a minimum, the following practices:
 (1) Assess vulnerabilities.--Identifying and assessing any 
 material internal and external risk to, and vulnerability in, 
 the security of each system maintained by the covered entity 
 that collects, processes, or transfers covered data, or service 
 provider that collects, processes, or transfers covered data on 
 behalf of the covered entity, including unauthorized access to 
 or risks to such covered data, human vulnerabilities, access 
 rights, and the use of service providers. With respect to large 
 data holders, such activities shall include a plan to receive 
 and reasonably respond to unsolicited reports of 
 vulnerabilities by any entity or individual and by performing a 
 reasonable investigation of such reports.
 (2) Preventive and corrective action.--Taking preventive 
 and corrective action designed to mitigate reasonably 
 foreseeable risks or vulnerabilities to covered data identified 
 by the covered entity or service provider, consistent with the 
 nature of such risk or vulnerability and the entity's role in 
 collecting, processing, or transferring the data. Such action 
 may include implementing administrative, technical, or physical 
 safeguards or changes to data security practices or the 
 architecture, installation, or implementation of network or 
 operating software, among other actions.
 (3) Evaluation of preventive and corrective action.--
 Evaluating and making reasonable adjustments to the action 
 described in paragraph (2) in light of any material changes in 
 technology, internal or external threats to covered data, and 
 the covered entity or service provider's own changing business 
 arrangements or operations.
 (4) Information retention and disposal.--Disposing of 
 covered data in accordance with a retention schedule that shall 
 require the deletion of covered data when such data is required 
 to be deleted by law or is no longer necessary for the purpose 
 for which the data was collected, processed, or transferred, 
 unless an individual has provided affirmative express consent 
 to such retention. Such disposal shall include destroying, 
 permanently erasing, or otherwise modifying the covered data to 
 make such data permanently unreadable or indecipherable and 
 unrecoverable to ensure ongoing compliance with this section. 
 Service providers shall establish practices to delete or return 
 covered data to a covered entity as requested at the end of the 
 provision of services unless retention of the covered data is 
 required by law, consistent with section 302(a)(6).
 (5) Training.--Training each employee with access to 
 covered data on how to safeguard covered data and updating such 
 training as necessary.
 (6) Designation.--Designating an officer, employee, or 
 employees to maintain and implement such practices.
 (7) Incident response.--Implementing procedures to detect, 
 respond to, or recover from security incidents, including 
 breaches.
 (c) Regulations.--The Commission may promulgate, in accordance with 
section 553 of title 5, United States Code, technology-neutral 
regulations to establish processes for complying with this section. The 
Commission shall consult with the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology in establishing such processes.

SEC. 209. SMALL BUSINESS PROTECTIONS.

 (a) Establishment of Exemption.--Any covered entity or service 
provider that can establish that it met the requirements described in 
subsection (b) for the period of the 3 preceding calendar years (or for 
the period during which the covered entity or service provider has been 
in existence if such period is less than 3 years) shall--
 (1) be exempt from compliance with section 203(a)(4), 
 paragraphs (1) through (3) and (5) through (7) of section 
 208(b), and section 301(c); and
 (2) at the covered entity's sole discretion, have the 
 option of complying with section 203(a)(2) by, after receiving 
 a verified request from an individual to correct covered data 
 of the individual under such section, deleting such covered 
 data in its entirety instead of making the requested 
 correction.
 (b) Exemption Requirements.--The requirements of this subsection 
are, with respect to a covered entity or a service provider, the 
following:
 (1) The covered entity or service provider's average annual 
 gross revenues during the period did not exceed $41,000,000.
 (2) The covered entity or service provider, on average, did 
 not annually collect or process the covered data of more than 
 200,000 individuals during the period beyond the purpose of 
 initiating, rendering, billing for, finalizing, completing, or 
 otherwise collecting payment for a requested service or 
 product, so long as all covered data for such purpose was 
 deleted or de-identified within 90 days, except when necessary 
 to investigate fraud or as consistent with a covered entity's 
 return policy.
 (3) The covered entity or service provider did not derive 
 more than 50 percent of its revenue from transferring covered 
 data during any year (or part of a year if the covered entity 
 has been in existence for less than 1 year) that occurs during 
 the period.
 (c) Revenue Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term 
``revenue'' as it relates to any covered entity or service provider 
that is not organized to carry on business for its own profit or that 
of its members, means the gross receipts the covered entity or service 
provider received in whatever form from all sources without subtracting 
any costs or expenses, and includes contributions, gifts, grants, dues 
or other assessments, income from investments, or proceeds from the 
sale of real or personal property.

SEC. 210. UNIFIED OPT-OUT MECHANISMS.

 (a) In General.--For the rights established under subsection (b) of 
section 204, subsection (c) of section 204 (except as provided for 
under section 101(b)(16)), and section 206(b)(3)(C), following public 
notice and opportunity to comment and not later than 18 months after 
the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall establish or 
recognize one or more acceptable privacy protective, centralized 
mechanisms, including global privacy signals such as browser or device 
privacy settings, other tools offered by covered entities or service 
providers, and registries of identifiers, for individuals to exercise 
all such rights through a single interface for a covered entity or 
service provider to utilize to allow an individual to make such opt out 
designations with respect to covered data related to such individual.
 (b) Requirements.--Any such centralized opt-out mechanism shall--
 (1) require covered entities or service providers acting on 
 behalf of covered entities to inform individuals about the 
 centralized opt-out choice;
 (2) not be required to be the default setting, but may be 
 the default setting provided that in all cases the mechanism 
 clearly represents the individual's affirmative, freely given, 
 and unambiguous choice to opt out;
 (3) be consumer-friendly, clearly described, and easy-to-
 use by a reasonable individual;
 (4) permit the covered entity or service provider acting on 
 behalf of a covered entity to have an authentication process 
 the covered entity or service provider acting on behalf of a 
 covered entity may use to determine if the mechanism represents 
 a legitimate request to opt out;
 (5) be provided in any covered language in which the 
 covered entity provides products or services subject to the 
 opt-out; and
 (6) be provided in a manner that is reasonably accessible 
 to and usable by individuals with disabilities.

 TITLE III--CORPORATE ACCOUNTABILITY

SEC. 301. EXECUTIVE RESPONSIBILITY.

 (a) In General.--Beginning 1 year after the date of enactment of 
this Act, an executive officer of a large data holder shall annually 
certify, in good faith, to the Commission, in a manner specified by the 
Commission by regulation under section 553 of title 5, United States 
Code, that the entity maintains--
 (1) internal controls reasonably designed to comply with 
 this Act; and
 (2) internal reporting structures to ensure that such 
 certifying executive officer is involved in and responsible for 
 the decisions that impact the compliance by the large data 
 holder with this Act.
 (b) Requirements.--A certification submitted under subsection (a) 
shall be based on a review of the effectiveness of the internal 
controls and reporting structures of the large data holder that is 
conducted by the certifying executive officer not more than 90 days 
before the submission of the certification. A certification submitted 
under subsection (a) is made in good faith if the certifying officer 
had, after a reasonable investigation, reasonable ground to believe and 
did believe, at the time that certification was submitted, that the 
statements therein were true and that there was no omission to state a 
material fact required to be stated therein or necessary to make the 
statements therein not misleading.
 (c) Designation of Privacy and Data Security Officer.--
 (1) In general.--A covered entity or service provider that 
 have more than 15 employees, shall designate--
 (A) 1 or more qualified employees as privacy 
 officers; and
 (B) 1 or more qualified employees (in addition to 
 any employee designated under subparagraph (A)) as data 
 security officers.
 (2) Requirements for officers.--An employee who is 
 designated by a covered entity or a service provider as a 
 privacy officer or a data security officer pursuant to 
 paragraph (1) shall, at a minimum--
 (A) implement a data privacy program and data 
 security program to safeguard the privacy and security 
 of covered data in compliance with the requirements of 
 this Act; and
 (B) facilitate the covered entity or service 
 provider's ongoing compliance with this Act.
 (3) Additional requirements for large data holders.--A 
 large data holder shall designate at least 1 of the officers 
 described in paragraph (1) to report directly to the highest 
 official at the large data holder as a privacy protection 
 officer who shall, in addition to the requirements in paragraph 
 (2), either directly or through a supervised designee or 
 designees--
 (A) establish processes to periodically review and 
 update the privacy and security policies, practices, 
 and procedures of the large data holder, as necessary;
 (B) conduct biennial and comprehensive audits to 
 ensure the policies, practices, and procedures of the 
 large data holder ensure the large data holder is in 
 compliance with this Act and ensure such audits are 
 accessible to the Commission upon request;
 (C) develop a program to educate and train 
 employees about compliance requirements of this Act;
 (D) maintain updated, accurate, clear, and 
 understandable records of all material privacy and data 
 security practices undertaken by the large data holder; 
 and
 (E) serve as the point of contact between the large 
 data holder and enforcement authorities.
 (d) Large Data Holder Privacy Impact Assessments.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act or 1 year after the date on which a 
 covered entity first meets the definition of large data holder, 
 whichever is earlier, and biennially thereafter, each covered 
 entity that is a large data holder shall conduct a privacy 
 impact assessment that weighs the benefits of the large data 
 holder's covered data collecting, processing, and transfer 
 practices against the potential adverse consequences of such 
 practices, including substantial privacy risks, to individual 
 privacy.
 (2) Assessment requirements.--A privacy impact assessment 
 required under paragraph (1) shall be--
 (A) reasonable and appropriate in scope given--
 (i) the nature of the covered data 
 collected, processed, and transferred by the 
 large data holder;
 (ii) the volume of the covered data 
 collected, processed, and transferred by the 
 large data holder; and
 (iii) the potential material risks posed to 
 the privacy of individuals by the collecting, 
 processing, and transfer of covered data by the 
 large data holder;
 (B) documented in written form and maintained by 
 the large data holder unless rendered out of date by a 
 subsequent assessment conducted under paragraph (1); 
 and
 (C) approved by the privacy protection officer 
 designated in subsection (c)(3) of the large data 
 holder, as applicable.
 (3) Additional factors to include in assessment.--In 
 assessing the privacy risks, including substantial privacy 
 risks, the large data holder must include reviews of the means 
 by which technologies, including blockchain and distributed 
 ledger technologies and other emerging technologies, are used 
 to secure covered data.
 (e) Other Privacy Impact Assessments.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act and biennially thereafter, each covered 
 entity that is not large data holder and does not meet the 
 requirements for covered entities under section 209 shall 
 conduct a privacy impact assessment. Such assessment shall 
 weigh the benefits of the covered entity's covered data 
 collecting, processing, and transfer practices that may cause a 
 substantial privacy risk against the potential material adverse 
 consequences of such practices to individual privacy.
 (2) Assessment requirements.--A privacy impact assessment 
 required under paragraph (1) shall be--
 (A) reasonable and appropriate in scope given--
 (i) the nature of the covered data 
 collected, processed, and transferred by the 
 covered entity;
 (ii) the volume of the covered data 
 collected, processed, and transferred by the 
 covered entity; and
 (iii) the potential risks posed to the 
 privacy of individuals by the collecting, 
 processing, and transfer of covered data by the 
 covered entity; and
 (B) documented in written form and maintained by 
 the covered entity unless rendered out of date by a 
 subsequent assessment conducted under paragraph (1).
 (3) Additional factors to include in assessment.--In 
 assessing the privacy risks, including substantial privacy 
 risks, the covered entity may include reviews of the means by 
 which technologies, including blockchain and distributed ledger 
 technologies and other emerging technologies, are used to 
 secure covered data.

SEC. 302. SERVICE PROVIDERS AND THIRD PARTIES.

 (a) Service Providers.--A service provider--
 (1) shall adhere to the instructions of a covered entity 
 and only collect, process, and transfer service provider data 
 to the extent necessary and proportionate to provide a service 
 requested by the covered entity, as set out in the contract 
 required by subsection (b), and this paragraph does not require 
 a service provider to collect, process, or transfer covered 
 data if the service provider would not otherwise do so;
 (2) may not collect, process, or transfer service provider 
 data if the service provider has actual knowledge that a 
 covered entity violated this Act with respect to such data;
 (3) shall assist a covered entity in responding to a 
 request made by an individual under section 203 or 204, by 
 either--
 (A) providing appropriate technical and 
 organizational measures, taking into account the nature 
 of the processing and the information reasonably 
 available to the service provider, for the covered 
 entity to comply with such request for service provider 
 data; or
 (B) fulfilling a request by a covered entity to 
 execute an individual rights request that the covered 
 entity has determined should be complied with, by 
 either--
 (i) complying with the request pursuant to 
 the covered entity's instructions; or
 (ii) providing written verification to the 
 covered entity that it does not hold covered 
 data related to the request, that complying 
 with the request would be inconsistent with its 
 legal obligations, or that the request falls 
 within an exception to section 203 or 204;
 (4) may engage another service provider for purposes of 
 processing service provider data on behalf of a covered entity 
 only after providing that covered entity with notice and 
 pursuant to a written contract that requires such other service 
 provider to satisfy the obligations of the service provider 
 with respect to such service provider data, including that the 
 other service provider be treated as a service provider under 
 this Act;
 (5) shall, upon the reasonable request of the covered 
 entity, make available to the covered entity information 
 necessary to demonstrate the compliance of the service provider 
 with the requirements of this Act, which may include making 
 available a report of an independent assessment arranged by the 
 service provider on terms agreed to by the service provider and 
 the covered entity, providing information necessary to enable 
 the covered entity to conduct and document a privacy impact 
 assessment required by subsection (d) or (e) of section 301, 
 and making available the report required under section 
 207(c)(2);
 (6) shall, at the covered entity's direction, delete or 
 return all covered data to the covered entity as requested at 
 the end of the provision of services, unless retention of the 
 covered data is required by law;
 (7) shall develop, implement, and maintain reasonable 
 administrative, technical, and physical safeguards that are 
 designed to protect the security and confidentiality of covered 
 data the service provider processes consistent with section 
 208; and
 (8) shall allow and cooperate with, reasonable assessments 
 by the covered entity or the covered entity's designated 
 assessor; alternatively, the service provider may arrange for a 
 qualified and independent assessor to conduct an assessment of 
 the service provider's policies and technical and 
 organizational measures in support of the obligations under 
 this Act using an appropriate and accepted control standard or 
 framework and assessment procedure for such assessments. The 
 service provider shall provide a report of such assessment to 
 the covered entity upon request.
 (b) Contracts Between Covered Entities and Service Providers.--
 (1) Requirements.--A person or entity may only act as a 
 service provider pursuant to a written contract between the 
 covered entity and the service provider, or a written contract 
 between one service provider and a second service provider as 
 described under subsection (a)(4), if the contract--
 (A) sets forth the data processing procedures of 
 the service provider with respect to collection, 
 processing, or transfer performed on behalf of the 
 covered entity or service provider;
 (B) clearly sets forth--
 (i) instructions for collecting, 
 processing, or transferring data;
 (ii) the nature and purpose of collecting, 
 processing, or transferring;
 (iii) the type of data subject to 
 collecting, processing, or transferring;
 (iv) the duration of processing; and
 (v) the rights and obligations of both 
 parties, including a method by which the 
 service provider shall notify the covered 
 entity of material changes to its privacy 
 practices;
 (C) does not relieve a covered entity or a service 
 provider of any requirement or liability imposed on 
 such covered entity or service provider under this Act; 
 and
 (D) prohibits--
 (i) collecting, processing, or transferring 
 covered data in contravention to subsection 
 (a); and
 (ii) combining service provider data with 
 covered data which the service provider 
 receives from or on behalf of another person or 
 persons or collects from the interaction of the 
 service provider with an individual, provided 
 that such combining is not necessary to 
 effectuate a purpose described in paragraphs 
 (1) through (15) of section 101(b) and is 
 otherwise permitted under the contract required 
 by this subsection.
 (2) Contract terms.--Each service provider shall retain 
 copies of previous contracts entered into in compliance with 
 this subsection with each covered entity to which it provides 
 requested products or services.
 (c) Relationship Between Covered Entities and Service Providers.--
 (1) Determining whether a person is acting as a covered 
 entity or service provider with respect to a specific 
 processing of covered data is a fact-based determination that 
 depends upon the context in which such data is processed.
 (2) A person that is not limited in its processing of 
 covered data pursuant to the instructions of a covered entity, 
 or that fails to adhere to such instructions, is a covered 
 entity and not a service provider with respect to a specific 
 processing of covered data. A service provider that continues 
 to adhere to the instructions of a covered entity with respect 
 to a specific processing of covered data remains a service 
 provider. If a service provider begins, alone or jointly with 
 others, determining the purposes and means of the processing of 
 covered data, it is a covered entity and not a service provider 
 with respect to the processing of such data.
 (3) A covered entity that transfers covered data to a 
 service provider or a service provider that transfers covered 
 data to a covered entity or another service provider, in 
 compliance with the requirements of this Act, is not liable for 
 a violation of this Act by the service provider or covered 
 entity to whom such covered data was transferred, if at the 
 time of transferring such covered data, the covered entity or 
 service provider did not have actual knowledge that the service 
 provider or covered entity would violate this Act.
 (4) A covered entity or service provider that receives 
 covered data in compliance with the requirements of this Act is 
 not in violation of this Act as a result of a violation by a 
 covered entity or service provider from which such data was 
 received.
 (d) Third Parties.--A third party--
 (1) shall not process third party data for a processing 
 purpose other than, in the case of sensitive covered data, the 
 processing purpose for which the individual gave affirmative 
 express consent or to effect a purpose enumerated in paragraph 
 (1), (3), or (5) of section 101(b) and, in the case of non-
 sensitive data, the processing purpose for which the covered 
 entity made a disclosure pursuant to section 202(b)(4); and
 (2) for purposes of paragraph (1), may reasonably rely on 
 representations made by the covered entity that transferred the 
 third party data if the third party conducts reasonable due 
 diligence on the representations of the covered entity and 
 finds those representations to be credible.
 (e) Additional Obligations on Covered Entities.--
 (1) In general.--A covered entity or service provider shall 
 exercise reasonable due diligence in--
 (A) selecting a service provider; and
 (B) deciding to transfer covered data to a third 
 party.
 (2) Guidance.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Commission shall publish guidance 
 regarding compliance with this subsection, taking into 
 consideration the burdens on large data holders, covered 
 entities who are not large data holders, and covered entities 
 meeting the requirements of section 209.
 (f) Rule of Construction.--Solely for the purposes of this section, 
the requirements for service providers to contract with, assist, and 
follow the instructions of covered entities shall be read to include 
requirements to contract with, assist, and follow the instructions of a 
government entity if the service provider is providing a service to a 
government entity.

SEC. 303. TECHNICAL COMPLIANCE PROGRAMS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Commission shall promulgate regulations under section 
553 of title 5, United States Code, to establish a process for the 
proposal and approval of technical compliance programs under this 
section used by a covered entity to collect, process, or transfer 
covered data.
 (b) Scope of Programs.--The technical compliance programs 
established under this section shall, with respect to a technology, 
product, service, or method used by a covered entity to collect, 
process, or transfer covered data--
 (1) establish publicly available guidelines for compliance 
 with this Act; and
 (2) meet or exceed the requirements of this Act.
 (c) Approval Process.--
 (1) In general.--Any request for approval, amendment, or 
 repeal of a technical compliance program may be submitted to 
 the Commission by any person, including a covered entity, a 
 representative of a covered entity, an association of covered 
 entities, or a public interest group or organization. Within 90 
 days after the request is made, the Commission shall publish 
 the request and provide an opportunity for public comment on 
 the proposal.
 (2) Expedited response to requests.--Beginning 1 year after 
 the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall act 
 upon a request for the proposal and approval of a technical 
 compliance program not later than 1 year after the filing of 
 the request, and shall set forth publicly in writing the 
 conclusions of the Commission with regard to such request.
 (d) Right to Appeal.--Final action by the Commission on a request 
for approval, amendment, or repeal of a technical compliance program, 
or the failure to act within the 1-year period after a request for 
approval, amendment, or repeal of a technical compliance program is 
made under subsection (c), may be appealed to a Federal district court 
of the United States of appropriate jurisdiction as provided for in 
section 702 of title 5, United States Code.
 (e) Effect on Enforcement.--
 (1) In general.--Prior to commencing an investigation or 
 enforcement action against any covered entity under this Act, 
 the Commission and State attorney general shall consider the 
 covered entity's history of compliance with any technical 
 compliance program approved under this section and any action 
 taken by the covered entity to remedy noncompliance with such 
 program. If such enforcement action described in section 403 is 
 brought, the covered entity's history of compliance with any 
 technical compliance program approved under this section and 
 any action taken by the covered entity to remedy noncompliance 
 with such program shall be taken into consideration when 
 determining liability or a penalty. The covered entity's 
 history of compliance with any technical compliance program 
 shall not affect any burden of proof or the weight given to 
 evidence in an enforcement or judicial proceeding.
 (2) Commission authority.--Approval of a technical 
 compliance program shall not limit the authority of the 
 Commission, including the Commission's authority to commence an 
 investigation or enforcement action against any covered entity 
 under this Act or any other Act.
 (3) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this subsection shall 
 provide any individual, class of individuals, or person with 
 any right to seek discovery of any non-public Commission 
 deliberation or activity or impose any pleading requirement on 
 the Commission if the Commission brings an enforcement action 
 of any kind.

SEC. 304. COMMISSION APPROVED COMPLIANCE GUIDELINES.

 (a) Application for Compliance Guideline Approval.--
 (1) In general.--A covered entity that is not a third-party 
 collecting entity and meets the requirements of section 209, or 
 a group of such covered entities, may apply to the Commission 
 for approval of 1 or more sets of compliance guidelines 
 governing the collection, processing, and transfer of covered 
 data by the covered entity or group of covered entities.
 (2) Application requirements.--Such application shall 
 include--
 (A) a description of how the proposed guidelines 
 will meet or exceed the requirements of this Act;
 (B) a description of the entities or activities the 
 proposed set of compliance guidelines is designed to 
 cover;
 (C) a list of the covered entities that meet the 
 requirements of section 209 and are not third-party 
 collecting entities, if any are known at the time of 
 application, that intend to adhere to the compliance 
 guidelines; and
 (D) a description of how such covered entities will 
 be independently assessed for adherence to such 
 compliance guidelines, including the independent 
 organization not associated with any of the covered 
 entities that may participate in guidelines that will 
 administer such guidelines.
 (3) Commission review.--
 (A) Initial approval.--
 (i) Public comment period.--Within 90 days 
 after the receipt of proposed guidelines 
 submitted pursuant to paragraph (2), the 
 Commission shall publish the application and 
 provide an opportunity for public comment on 
 such compliance guidelines.
 (ii) Approval.--The Commission shall 
 approve an application regarding proposed 
 guidelines under paragraph (2) if the applicant 
 demonstrates that the compliance guidelines--
 (I) meet or exceed requirements of 
 this Act;
 (II) provide for the regular review 
 and validation by an independent 
 organization not associated with any of 
 the covered entities that may 
 participate in the guidelines and that 
 is approved by the Commission to 
 conduct such reviews of the compliance 
 guidelines of the covered entity or 
 entities to ensure that the covered 
 entity or entities continue to meet or 
 exceed the requirements of this Act; 
 and
 (III) include a means of 
 enforcement if a covered entity does 
 not meet or exceed the requirements in 
 the guidelines, which may include 
 referral to the Commission for 
 enforcement consistent with section 401 
 or referral to the appropriate State 
 attorney general for enforcement 
 consistent with section 402.
 (iii) Timeline.--Within 1 year after 
 receiving an application regarding proposed 
 guidelines under paragraph (2), the Commission 
 shall issue a determination approving or 
 denying the application and providing its 
 reasons for approving or denying such 
 application.
 (B) Approval of modifications.--
 (i) In general.--If the independent 
 organization administering a set of guidelines 
 makes material changes to guidelines previously 
 approved by the Commission, the independent 
 organization shall submit the updated 
 guidelines to the Commission for approval. As 
 soon as feasible, the Commission shall publish 
 the updated guidelines and provide an 
 opportunity for public comment.
 (ii) Timeline.--The Commission shall 
 approve or deny any material change to the 
 guidelines within 1 year after receipt of the 
 submission for approval.
 (b) Withdrawal of Approval.--If at any time the Commission 
determines that the guidelines previously approved no longer meet the 
requirements of this Act or a regulation promulgated under this Act or 
that compliance with the approved guidelines is insufficiently enforced 
by the independent organization administering the guidelines, the 
Commission shall notify the covered entities or group of such entities 
and the independent organization of the determination of the Commission 
to withdraw approval of such guidelines and the basis for doing so. 
Within180 days after receipt of such notice, the covered entity or 
group of such entities and the independent organization may cure any 
alleged deficiency with the guidelines or the enforcement of such 
guidelines and submit each proposed cure to the Commission. If the 
Commission determines that such cures eliminate the alleged deficiency 
in the guidelines, then the Commission may not withdraw approval of 
such guidelines on the basis of such determination.
 (c) Deemed Compliance.--A covered entity that is eligible to 
participate under subsection (a)(1) and participates in guidelines 
approved under this section shall be deemed in compliance with the 
relevant provisions of this Act if such covered entity is in compliance 
with such guidelines.

SEC. 305. DIGITAL CONTENT FORGERIES.

 (a) Reports.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of 
this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary of Commerce or the 
Secretary's designee shall publish a report regarding digital content 
forgeries.
 (b) Requirements.--Each report under subsection (a) shall include 
the following:
 (1) A definition of digital content forgeries along with 
 accompanying explanatory materials.
 (2) A description of the common sources of digital content 
 forgeries in the United States and commercial sources of 
 digital content forgery technologies.
 (3) An assessment of the uses, applications, and harms of 
 digital content forgeries.
 (4) An analysis of the methods and standards available to 
 identify digital content forgeries as well as a description of 
 the commercial technological counter-measures that are, or 
 could be, used to address concerns with digital content 
 forgeries, which may include the provision of warnings to 
 viewers of suspect content.
 (5) A description of the types of digital content 
 forgeries, including those used to commit fraud, cause harm, or 
 violate any provision of law.
 (6) Any other information determined appropriate by the 
 Secretary of Commerce or the Secretary's designee.

 TITLE IV--ENFORCEMENT, APPLICABILITY, AND MISCELLANEOUS

SEC. 401. ENFORCEMENT BY THE FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION.

 (a) Bureau of Privacy.--
 (1) In general.--The Commission shall establish within the 
 Commission a new bureau to be known as the ``Bureau of 
 Privacy'', which shall be of similar structure, size, 
 organization, and authority as the existing bureaus within the 
 Commission related to consumer protection and competition.
 (2) Mission.--The mission of the Bureau established under 
 paragraph (1) shall be to assist the Commission in carrying out 
 the duties of the Commission under this Act and related duties 
 under other provisions of law.
 (3) Timeline.--The Bureau required to be established under 
 paragraph (1) shall be established, staffed, and fully 
 operational not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
 of this Act.
 (b) Office of Business Mentorship.--The Director of the Bureau 
established under subsection (a)(1) shall establish within the Bureau 
an office to be known as the ``Office of Business Mentorship'' to 
provide guidance and education to covered entities and service 
providers regarding compliance with this Act. Covered entities or 
service providers may request advice from the Commission or the Office 
with respect to a course of action that the covered entity or service 
provider proposes to pursue and that may relate to the requirements of 
this Act.
 (c) Enforcement by the Federal Trade Commission.--
 (1) Unfair or deceptive acts or practices.--A violation of 
 this Act or a regulation promulgated under this Act shall be 
 treated as a violation of a rule defining an unfair or 
 deceptive act or practice prescribed under section 18(a)(1)(B) 
 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 57a(a)(1)(B)).
 (2) Powers of the commission.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in paragraphs 
 (3), (4), and (5), the Commission shall enforce this 
 Act and the regulations promulgated under this Act in 
 the same manner, by the same means, and with the same 
 jurisdiction, powers, and duties as though all 
 applicable terms and provisions of the Federal Trade 
 Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.) were incorporated 
 into and made a part of this Act.
 (B) Privileges and immunities.--Any person who 
 violates this Act or a regulation promulgated under 
 this Act shall be subject to the penalties and entitled 
 to the privileges and immunities provided in the 
 Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.).
 (3) Limiting certain actions unrelated to this act.--If the 
 Commission brings a civil action alleging that an act or 
 practice violates this Act or a regulation promulgated under 
 this Act, the Commission may not seek a cease and desist order 
 against the same defendant under section 5(b) of the Federal 
 Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45(b)) to stop that same act or 
 practice on the grounds that such act or practice constitutes 
 an unfair or deceptive act or practice.
 (4) Common carriers and nonprofit organizations.--
 Notwithstanding any jurisdictional limitation of the Commission 
 with respect to consumer protection or privacy, the Commission 
 shall enforce this Act and the regulations promulgated under 
 this Act, in the same manner provided in paragraphs (1), (2), 
 (3), and (5), with respect to common carriers subject to the 
 Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 151 et seq.) and all Acts 
 amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto and organizations 
 not organized to carry on business for their own profit or that 
 of their members.
 (5) Privacy and security victims relief fund.--
 (A) Establishment.--There is established in the 
 Treasury of the United States a separate fund to be 
 known as the ``Privacy and Security Victims Relief 
 Fund'' in this paragraph referred to as the ``Victims 
 Relief Fund'').
 (B) Deposits.--Notwithstanding section 3302 of 
 title 31, United States Code, in any judicial or 
 administrative action to enforce this Act or a 
 regulation promulgated under this Act, the amount of 
 any civil penalty obtained against a covered entity or 
 service provider, or any other monetary relief ordered 
 to be paid by a covered entity or service provider to 
 provide redress, payment, compensation, or other relief 
 to individuals that cannot be located or the payment of 
 which would otherwise not be practicable, shall be 
 deposited into the Victims Relief Fund.
 (C) Use of funds.--
 (i) Use by commission.--Amounts in the 
 Victims Relief Fund shall be available to the 
 Commission, without fiscal year limitation, to 
 provide redress, payment, compensation, or 
 other monetary relief to individuals affected 
 by an act or practice for which relief has been 
 obtained under this Act.
 (ii) Other permissible uses.--To the extent 
 that the individuals described in clause (i) 
 cannot be located or such redress, payments, 
 compensation, or other monetary relief are 
 otherwise not practicable, the Commission may 
 use such funds for the purpose of--
 (I) funding the activities of the 
 Office of Business Mentorship 
 established under subsection (b); or
 (II) engaging in technological 
 research that the Commission considers 
 necessary to enforce or administer this 
 Act.

SEC. 402. ENFORCEMENT BY STATES.

 (a) Civil Action.--In any case in which the attorney general or 
State Privacy Authority of a State has reason to believe that an 
interest of the residents of that State has been, may be, or is 
adversely affected by a violation of this Act or a regulation 
promulgated under this Act by a covered entity or service provider, the 
attorney general or State Privacy Authority may bring a civil action in 
the name of the State, or as parens patriae on behalf of the residents 
of the State. Any such action shall be brought exclusively in an 
appropriate Federal district court of the United States to--
 (1) enjoin such act or practice;
 (2) enforce compliance with this Act or such regulation;
 (3) obtain damages, civil penalties, restitution, or other 
 compensation on behalf of the residents of such State; or
 (4) obtain reasonable attorneys' fees and other litigation 
 costs reasonably incurred.
 (b) Rights of the Commission.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 attorney general or State Privacy Authority of a State shall 
 notify the Commission in writing prior to initiating a civil 
 action under subsection (a). Such notification shall include a 
 copy of the complaint to be filed to initiate such action. Upon 
 receiving such notification, the Commission may intervene in 
 such action as a matter of right pursuant to the Federal Rules 
 of Civil Procedure.
 (2) Feasibility.--If the notification required by paragraph 
 (1) is not feasible, the attorney general or State Privacy 
 Authority shall notify the Commission immediately after 
 initiating the civil action.
 (c) Actions by the Commission.--In any case in which a civil action 
is instituted by or on behalf of the Commission for violation of this 
Act or a regulation promulgated under this Act, no attorney general or 
State Privacy Authority of a State may, during the pendency of such 
action, institute a civil action against any defendant named in the 
complaint in the action instituted by or on behalf of the Commission 
for a violation of this Act or a regulation promulgated under this Act 
that is alleged in such complaint, if such complaint alleges such 
violation affected the residents of such State or individuals 
nationwide. If the Commission brings a civil action against a covered 
entity or service provider for a violation of this Act or a regulation 
promulgated under this Act that affects the interests of the residents 
of a State, the attorney general or State Privacy Authority of such 
State may intervene in such action as a matter of right pursuant to the 
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
 (d) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section may be construed 
to prevent the attorney general or State Privacy Authority of a State 
from exercising the powers conferred on the attorney general or State 
Privacy Authority to conduct investigations, to administer oaths or 
affirmations, or to compel the attendance of witnesses or the 
production of documentary or other evidence.
 (e) Preservation of State Powers.--Except as provided in subsection 
(c), nothing in this section may be construed as altering, limiting, or 
affecting the authority of the attorney general or State Privacy 
Authority of a State to--
 (1) bring an action or other regulatory proceeding arising 
 solely under the law in effect in the State that is preempted 
 by this Act or under another applicable Federal law; or
 (2) exercise the powers conferred on the attorney general 
 or State Privacy Authority by the laws of the State, including 
 the ability to conduct investigations, administer oaths or 
 affirmations, or compel the attendance of witnesses or the 
 production of documentary or other evidence.

SEC. 403. ENFORCEMENT BY PERSONS.

 (a) Enforcement by Persons.--
 (1) In general.--Beginning on the date that is 2 years 
 after the date on which this Act takes effect, any person or 
 class of persons for a violation of this Act or a regulation 
 promulgated under this Act by a covered entity or service 
 provider may bring a civil action against such entity in any 
 Federal court of competent jurisdiction.
 (2) Relief.--In a civil action brought under paragraph (1) 
 in which a plaintiff prevails, the court may award the 
 plaintiff--
 (A) an amount equal to the sum of any compensatory 
 damages;
 (B) injunctive relief;
 (C) declaratory relief; and
 (D) reasonable attorney's fees and litigation 
 costs.
 (3) Rights of the commission and state attorneys general.--
 (A) In general.--Prior to a person bringing a civil 
 action under paragraph (1), such person shall notify 
 the Commission and the attorney general of the State 
 where such person resides in writing that such person 
 intends to bring a civil action under such paragraph. 
 Upon receiving such notice, the Commission and State 
 attorney general shall each or jointly make a 
 determination and respond to such person not later than 
 60 days after receiving such notice, as to whether they 
 will intervene in such action pursuant to the Federal 
 Rules of Civil Procedure. If a state attorney general 
 does intervene, they shall only be heard with respect 
 to the interests of the residents of their State
 (B) Retained authority.--Subparagraph (A) may not 
 be construed to limit the authority of the Commission 
 or any applicable State attorney general or State 
 Privacy Authority to later commence a proceeding or 
 civil action or intervene by motion if the Commission 
 or State attorney general or State Privacy Authority 
 does not commence a proceeding or civil action within 
 the 60-day period.
 (C) Bad faith.--Any written communication from 
 counsel for an aggrieved party to a covered entity or 
 service provider requesting a monetary payment from 
 that covered entity or service provider regarding a 
 specific claim described in a letter sent pursuant to 
 subsection (d), not including filings in court 
 proceedings, arbitrations, mediations, judgment 
 collection processes, or other communications related 
 to previously initiated litigation or arbitrations, 
 shall be considered to have been sent in bad faith and 
 shall be unlawful as defined in this Act, if the 
 written communication was sent prior to the date that 
 is 60 days after either a State attorney general or the 
 Commission has received the notice required under 
 subparagraph (A).
 (4) FTC study.--Beginning on the date that is 5 years after 
 the date of enactment of this Act and every 5 years thereafter, 
 the Commission's Bureau of Economics and Bureau of Privacy 
 shall assist the Commission in conducting a study to determine 
 the economic impacts in the United States of demand letters 
 sent pursuant to this section and the scope of the rights of a 
 person under this section to bring forth civil actions against 
 covered entities and service providers. Such study shall 
 include the following:
 (A) The impact on insurance rates in the United 
 States.
 (B) The impact on the ability of covered entities 
 to offer new products or services.
 (C) The impact on the creation and growth of new 
 startup companies, including new technology companies.
 (D) Any emerging risks, benefits, and long-term 
 trends in relevant marketplaces, supply chains, and 
 labor availability.
 (E) The impact on reducing, preventing, or 
 remediating harms to individuals, including from fraud, 
 identity theft, spam, discrimination, defective 
 products, and violations of rights.
 (F) The impact on the volume and severity of data 
 security incidents, and the ability to respond to data 
 security incidents.
 (G) Other intangible direct and indirect costs and 
 benefits to individuals.
 (5) Report to congress.--Not later than 5 years after the 
 first day on which persons and classes of persons are able to 
 bring civil actions under this subsection, and annually 
 thereafter, the Commission shall submit to the Committee on 
 Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives and the 
 Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the 
 Senate a report that contains the results of the study 
 conducted under paragraph (4).
 (b) Arbitration Agreements and Pre-dispute Joint Action Waivers.--
 (1) Pre-dispute arbitration agreements.--
 (A) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no 
 pre-dispute arbitration agreement with respect to an 
 individual under the age of 18 is enforceable with 
 regard to a dispute arising under this Act.
 (B) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no 
 pre-dispute arbitration agreement is enforceable with 
 regard to a dispute arising under this Act concerning a 
 claim related to gender or partner-based violence or 
 physical harm.
 (2) Pre-dispute joint-action waivers.--Notwithstanding any 
 other provision of law, no pre-dispute joint-action waiver with 
 respect to an individual under the age of 18 is enforceable 
 with regard to a dispute arising under this Act.
 (3) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection:
 (A) Pre-dispute arbitration agreement.--The term 
 ``pre-dispute arbitration agreement'' means any 
 agreement to arbitrate a dispute that has not arisen at 
 the time of the making of the agreement.
 (B) Pre-dispute joint-action waiver.--The term 
 ``pre-dispute joint-action waiver'' means an agreement, 
 whether or not part of a pre-dispute arbitration 
 agreement, that would prohibit or waive the right of 1 
 of the parties to the agreement to participate in a 
 joint, class, or collective action in a judicial, 
 arbitral, administrative, or other related forum, 
 concerning a dispute that has not yet arisen at the 
 time of the making of the agreement.
 (c) Right to Cure.--
 (1) Notice.--Subject to paragraph (3), with respect to a 
 claim under this section for--
 (A) injunctive relief; or
 (B) an action against a covered entity or service 
 provider that meets the requirements of section 209 of 
 this Act, such claim may be brought by a person or 
 class of persons if--prior to asserting such claim--the 
 person or class or persons provides to the covered 
 entity or service provider 45 days' written notice 
 identifying the specific provisions of this Act the 
 person or class of persons alleges have been or are 
 being violated.
 (2) Effect of cure.--Subject to paragraph (3), in the event 
 a cure is possible, if within the 45 days the covered entity or 
 service provider demonstrates to the court that it has cured 
 the noticed violation or violations and provides the person or 
 class of persons an express written statement that the 
 violation or violations has been cured and that no further 
 violations shall occur, a claim for injunctive relief shall not 
 be permitted and may be reasonably dismissed.
 (3) Rule of construction.--The notice described in 
 paragraph (1) and the reasonable dismissal in paragraph (2) 
 shall not apply more than once to any alleged underlying 
 violation by the same covered entity.
 (d) Demand Letter.--If a person or a identified members of a class 
of persons represented by counsel in regard to an alleged violation or 
violations of the Act and has correspondence sent to a covered entity 
or service provider by counsel alleging a violation or violations of 
the provisions of this Act and requests a monetary payment, such 
correspondence shall include the following language: ``Please visit the 
website of the Federal Trade Commission for a general description of 
your rights under the American Data Privacy and Protection Act'' 
followed by a hyperlink to the webpage of the Commission required under 
section 201. If such correspondence does not include such language and 
hyperlink, a civil action brought under this section by such person or 
identified members of the class of persons represented by counsel may 
be dismissed without prejudice and shall not be reinstated until such 
person or persons has complied with this subsection.
 (e) Applicability.--
 (1) In general.--This section shall only apply to a claim 
 alleging a violation of section 102, 104, 202, 203, 204, 
 205(a), 205(b), 206(b)(3)(C), 207(a), 208(a), or 302, or a 
 regulation promulgated under any such section.
 (2) Exception.--This section shall not apply to any claim 
 against a covered entity that has less than $25,000,000 per 
 year in revenue, collects, processes, or transfers the covered 
 data of fewer than 50,000 individuals, and derives less than 50 
 percent of its revenue from transferring covered data.

SEC. 404. RELATIONSHIP TO FEDERAL AND STATE LAWS.

 (a) Federal Law Preservation.--
 (1) In general.--Nothing in this Act or a regulation 
 promulgated under this Act may be construed to limit--
 (A) the authority of the Commission, or any other 
 Executive agency, under any other provision of law;
 (B) any requirement for a common carrier subject to 
 section 64.2011 of title 47, Code of Federal 
 Regulations (or any successor regulation) regarding 
 information security breaches; or
 (C) any other provision of Federal law, except as 
 otherwise provided in this Act.
 (2) Antitrust savings clause.--
 (A) Full application of the antitrust law.--Nothing 
 in this Act may be construed to modify, impair or 
 supersede the operation of the antitrust law or any 
 other provision of law.
 (B) No immunity from the antitrust law.--Nothing in 
 the regulatory regime adopted by this Act shall be 
 construed as operating to limit any law deterring 
 anticompetitive conduct or diminishing the need for 
 full application of the antitrust law. Nothing in this 
 Act explicitly or implicitly precludes the application 
 of the antitrust law.
 (C) Definition of antitrust law.--For purposes of 
 this section, the term antitrust law has the same 
 meaning as in subsection (a) of the first section of 
 the Clayton Act (15 U.S.C. 12), except that such term 
 includes section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act 
 (15 U.S.C. 45) to the extent that such section 5 
 applies to unfair methods of competition.
 (3) Applicability of other privacy requirements.--A covered 
 entity that is required to comply with title V of the Gramm-
 Leach-Bliley Act (15 U.S.C. 6801 et seq.), the Health 
 Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (42 
 U.S.C. 17931 et seq.), part C of title XI of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320d et seq.), the Fair Credit 
 Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681 et seq.), the Family Educational 
 Rights and Privacy Act (20 U.S.C. 1232g; part 99 of title 34, 
 Code of Federal Regulations) to the extent such covered entity 
 is a school as defined in 20 U.S.C. 1232g(a)(3) or 34 C.F.R. 
 99.1(a), section 444 of the General Education Provisions Act 
 (commonly known as the ``Family Educational Rights and Privacy 
 Act of 1974'') (20 U.S.C. 1232g) and part 99 of title 34, Code 
 of Federal Regulations (or any successor regulation), the 
 Confidentiality of Alcohol and Drug Abuse Patient Records at 42 
 U.S.C. 290dd-2 and its implementing regulations at 42 CFR part 
 2, the Genetic Information Non-discrimination Act (GINA), or 
 the regulations promulgated pursuant to section 264(c) of the 
 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (42 
 U.S.C. 1320d-2 note), and is in compliance with the data 
 privacy requirements of such regulations, part, title, or Act 
 (as applicable), shall be deemed to be in compliance with the 
 related requirements of this Act, except for section 208, 
 solely and exclusively with respect to data subject to the 
 requirements of such regulations, part, title, or Act. Not 
 later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
 Commission shall issue guidance describing the implementation 
 of this paragraph.
 (4) Applicability of other data security requirements.--A 
 covered entity that is required to comply with title V of the 
 Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (15 U.S.C. 6801 et seq.), the Health 
 Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (42 
 U.S.C. 17931 et seq.), part C of title XI of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320d et seq.), or the regulations 
 promulgated pursuant to section 264(c) of the Health Insurance 
 Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (42 U.S.C. 1320d-2 
 note), and is in compliance with the information security 
 requirements of such regulations, part, title, or Act (as 
 applicable), shall be deemed to be in compliance with the 
 requirements of section 208, solely and exclusively with 
 respect to data subject to the requirements of such 
 regulations, part, title, or Act. Not later than 1 year after 
 the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall issue 
 guidance describing the implementation of this paragraph.
 (b) Preemption of State Laws.--
 (1) In general.--No State or political subdivision of a 
 State may adopt, maintain, enforce, prescribe, or continue in 
 effect any law, regulation, rule, standard, requirement, or 
 other provision having the force and effect of law of any 
 State, or political subdivision of a State, covered by the 
 provisions of this Act, or a rule, regulation, or requirement 
 promulgated under this Act.
 (2) State law preservation.--Paragraph (1) may not be 
 construed to preempt, displace, or supplant the following State 
 laws, rules, regulations, or requirements:
 (A) Consumer protection laws of general 
 applicability, such as laws regulating deceptive, 
 unfair, or unconscionable practices, except that the 
 fact of a violation of this Act or a regulation 
 promulgated under this Act may not be pleaded as an 
 element of any violation of such a law.
 (B) Civil rights laws.
 (C) Provisions of laws, in so far as, that govern 
 the privacy rights or other protections of employees, 
 employee information, students, or student information.
 (D) Laws that address notification requirements in 
 the event of a data breach.
 (E) Contract or tort law.
 (F) Criminal laws.
 (G) Civil laws governing fraud, theft (including 
 identity theft), unauthorized access to information or 
 electronic devices, unauthorized use of information, 
 malicious behavior, or similar provisions of law.
 (H) Civil laws regarding cyberstalking, 
 cyberbullying, nonconsensual pornography, sexual 
 harassment, child abuse material, child pornography, 
 child abduction or attempted child abduction, coercion 
 or enticement of a child for sexual activity, or child 
 sex trafficking.
 (I) Public safety or sector specific laws unrelated 
 to privacy or security.
 (J) Provisions of law, insofar as such provisions 
 address public records, criminal justice information 
 systems, arrest records, mug shots, conviction records, 
 or non-conviction records.
 (K) Provisions of law, insofar as such provisions 
 address banking records, financial records, tax 
 records, Social Security numbers, credit cards, 
 consumer and credit reporting and investigations, 
 credit repair, credit clinics, or check-cashing 
 services.
 (L) Provisions of law, insofar as such provisions 
 address facial recognition or facial recognition 
 technologies, electronic surveillance, wiretapping, or 
 telephone monitoring.
 (M) The Biometric Information Privacy Act (740 ICLS 
 14 et seq.) and the Genetic Information Privacy Act 
 (410 ILCS 513 et seq.).
 (N) Provisions of laws, in so far as, such 
 provisions to address unsolicited email or text 
 messages, telephone solicitation, or caller 
 identification.
 (O) Provisions of laws, in so far as, such 
 provisions address health information, medical 
 information, medical records, HIV status, or HIV 
 testing.
 (P) Provisions of laws, in so far as, such 
 provisions pertain to public health activities, 
 reporting, data, or services.
 (Q) Provisions of law, insofar as such provisions 
 address the confidentiality of library records.
 (R) Section 1798.150 of the California Civil Code 
 (as amended on November 3, 2020 by initiative 
 Proposition 24, Section 16).
 (S) Laws pertaining to the use of encryption as a 
 means of providing data security.
 (3) CPPA enforcement.--Notwithstanding any other provisions 
 of law, the California Privacy Protection Agency established 
 under 1798.199.10(a) of the California Privacy Rights Act may 
 enforce this Act, in the same manner, it would otherwise 
 enforce the California Consumer Privacy Act, Section 1798.1050 
 et. seq.
 (4) Nonapplication of fcc privacy laws and regulations to 
 certain covered entities.--Notwithstanding any other provision 
 of law, sections 222, 338(i), and 631 of the Communications Act 
 of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 222; 338(i); 551), and any regulations and 
 orders promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission 
 under any such section, do not apply to any covered entity with 
 respect to the collection, processing, transfer, or security of 
 covered data or its equivalent, and the related privacy and 
 data security activities of a covered entity that would 
 otherwise be regulated under such sections shall be governed 
 exclusively by the provisions of this Act, except for--
 (A) any emergency services, as defined in section 7 
 of the Wireless Communications and Public Safety Act of 
 1999 (47 U.S.C. 615b);
 (B) subsections (b) and (g) of section 222 of the 
 Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 222); and
 (C) any obligation of an international treaty 
 related to the exchange of traffic implemented and 
 enforced by the Federal Communications Commission.
 (c) Preservation of Common Law or Statutory Causes of Action for 
Civil Relief.--Nothing in this Act, nor any amendment, standard, rule, 
requirement, assessment, or regulation promulgated under this Act, may 
be construed to preempt, displace, or supplant any Federal or State 
common law rights or remedies, or any statute creating a remedy for 
civil relief, including any cause of action for personal injury, 
wrongful death, property damage, or other financial, physical, 
reputational, or psychological injury based in negligence, strict 
liability, products liability, failure to warn, an objectively 
offensive intrusion into the private affairs or concerns of the 
individual, or any other legal theory of liability under any Federal or 
State common law, or any State statutory law.

SEC. 405. SEVERABILITY.

 If any provision of this Act, or the application thereof to any 
person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of this Act, and 
the application of such provision to other persons not similarly 
situated or to other circumstances, shall not be affected by the 
invalidation.

SEC. 406. COPPA.

 (a) In General.--Nothing in this Act may be construed to relieve or 
change any obligation that a covered entity or other person may have 
under the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998 (15 U.S.C. 
6501 et seq.).
 (b) Updated Regulations.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Commission shall amend its rules issued 
pursuant to the regulations promulgated by the Commission under the 
Children's Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998 (15 U.S.C. 6501 et 
seq.) to make reference to the additional requirements placed on 
covered entities under this Act, in addition to the requirements under 
the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998 that may already 
apply to certain covered entities.

SEC. 407. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 There are authorized to be appropriated to the Commission such sums 
as may be necessary to carry out this Act.

SEC. 408. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This Act shall take effect on the date that is 180 days after the 
date of enactment of this Act.
 Union Calendar No. 488

117th CONGRESS

 2d Session

 H. R. 8152

 [Report No. 117-669]

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To provide consumers with foundational data privacy rights, create 
 strong oversight mechanisms, and establish meaningful enforcement.

_______________________________________________________________________

 December 30, 2022

 Reported with an amendment, committed to the Committee of the Whole 
 House on the State of the Union, and ordered to be printed