HR 4905 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 4905
To amend the Solid Waste Disposal Act to regulate the disposal of waste
associated with the exploration, development, and production of crude oil
and natural gas, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
April 9, 1992
Mr. ECKART introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Solid Waste Disposal Act to regulate the disposal of waste
associated with the exploration, development, and production of crude oil
and natural gas, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Oil and Natural Gas
 Exploration and Production Waste Management Improvement Act of 1991'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents for this Act is as follows:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Sec. 1. Short title and table of contents.
Sec. 2. Amendments to Solid Waste Disposal Act.
Sec. 3. Waste designation.
Sec. 4. Oily waste characteristic.
Sec. 5. Ban on dust suppression.
Sec. 6. State authorization for produced water, drilling fluids, and
radioactive waste.
Sec. 7. Enforcement authorities for produced water, drilling fluids, and
radioactive waste.
Sec. 8. Management of produced water.
Sec. 9. Management of drilling fluids.
Sec. 10. Management of radioactive waste from oil and gas production.
Sec. 11. Interim status for certain facilities.
Sec. 12. Research, development, and demonstration.
SEC. 2. AMENDMENTS TO SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL ACT.
 Except as otherwise specifically provided, whenever in this Act a section
 or other provision of law is amended or repealed, such amendment or repeal
 shall be considered to be made to that section or other provision of the
 Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.).
SEC. 3. WASTE DESIGNATION.
 Section 3001(b)(2) is amended to read as follows:
 `(2)(A) Effective January 1, 1994, wastes associated with the exploration,
 development, or production of crude oil or natural gas shall be subject
 to the provisions of this subtitle, including paragraph (1) of this
 subsection. For the purposes of this subtitle, associated wastes shall
 include those wastes identified by the Administrator as previously exempt
 from hazardous waste regulation in the July 6, 1988, Federal Register,
 except for produced water and drilling fluids.
 `(B) Notwithstanding paragraph (1) of this subsection, produced water
 shall be managed in accordance with section 3021. For the purposes of
 this subtitle, produced water shall mean the water brought up from the
 hydrocarbon strata (for disposal or enhanced recovery purposes) during the
 extraction of oil and gas, and may include formation water, injection water,
 and any chemicals added downhole or during the oil-water separation process.
 `(C) Notwithstanding paragraph (1) of this subsection, drilling fluids
 shall be managed in accordance with section 3022. For the purposes of
 this subtitle, drilling fluids shall mean the fluids employed during the
 drilling process to clean and condition the hole and to counterbalance
 formation pressure, and the cuttings from the geologic formations.
 `(D) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1) of this section,
 wastes from the exploration, development, and production of geothermal
 energy shall not be subject to the provisions of this subtitle, unless the
 Administrator determines regulation of such wastes under this subtitle is
 necessary to protect human health and the environment.'
SEC. 4. OILY WASTE CHARACTERISTIC.
 Section 3001(g) is amended by inserting the following after the period at
 the end of the subsection: `Not later than 18 months after the enactment
 of the Oil and Natural Gas Exploration and Production Waste Management
 Improvement Act of 1991, the Administrator shall promulgate changes to the
 toxicity characteristic leaching procedure that are necessary to ensure
 that it accurately predicts the leaching potential of wastes containing
 significant concentrations of oil or grease.'.
SEC. 5. BAN ON DUST SUPPRESSION.
 Section 3004(1) is amended by inserting after the second comma: `or the
 use of produced water,'.
SEC. 6. STATE AUTHORIZATION FOR PRODUCED WATER, DRILLING FLUIDS, AND
RADIOACTIVE WASTE.
 Section 3006 is amended by adding the following new subsections after
 subsection (h):
 `(i) STATE PROGRAMS FOR PRODUCED WATER, DRILLING FLUIDS AND RADIOACTIVE
 WASTE- (1) In the case of produced water, drilling fluids and radioactive
 waste from the exploration, development, or production of crude oil or
 natural gas, the provisions of this section regarding State programs
 shall apply in the same manner and to the same extent as such provisions
 apply to hazardous waste identified or listed under this subtitle, except
 that a State may be authorized to administer and enforce this portion
 of the program only. The Administrator shall assist authorized States by
 cooperating with such States to improve the qualifications and training
 of State program personnel.
 `(2) In addition to paragraph (1) of this subsection, any State which
 seeks to obtain or retain authorization to administer and enforce a
 regulatory program for produced water, drilling fluids, and radioactive
 waste from the exploration, development, or production of crude oil or
 natural gas shall also establish and maintain a program to identify,
 evaluate, and remediate sites (including areawide sites of contamination)
 containing such wastes that may not be adequately addressed through the
 application of requirements promulgated pursuant to this subtitle or
 comparable State authorities. These sites shall include, but need not be
 limited to, facilities at which such wastes are no longer actively managed,
 but shall not include sites solely involving the underground injection of
 such wastes. Such program shall provide for--
 `(A) the identification of sites in the State no later than 30 months after
 the enactment of this section through one or more of the following methods:
 `(i) Requiring notification from the owner or operator of any site where
 such wastes were treated, stored, or disposed as to the location of the
 site, the type and amount of such wastes at the site, how the site was
 closed upon completion of waste management activities, and any known,
 suspected, or likely release of such wastes at the site.
 `(ii) Reviewing records regarding the location of historical drilling and
 production activities, conducting surveys of a representative portion of
 these areas, and extrapolating the results of the surveys to the State as
 a whole.
 `(iii) Utilizing aerial reconnaissance or satellite imagery, where sites
 can be identified with these methods.
 `(iv) Utilizing other comparable investigatory techniques approved by the
 Administrator, after an opportunity for public notice and comment, that will
 identify unregulated sites to the extent such information can be obtained.
 `(B) The submission of a report to the Administrator containing the number,
 types, and locations of the unregulated sites identified or extrapolated
 under subparagraph (A) no later than 36 months from the enactment of this
 section. Not later than 42 months after the enactment of this section,
 the Administrator shall establish a public accessible data base containing
 the information on unregulated sites compiled pursuant to this subsection,
 and shall submit a Report to Congress summarizing the information submitted
 by the States.
 `(C) The evaluation and remediation of the sites as may be necessary to
 protect human health and the environment. Beginning on the date 48 months
 after the enactment of this section, the State shall ensure that at least
 10 percent of the sites are evaluated each year, and shall ensure remedial
 action is undertaken at sites warranting remediation within 24 months of
 the completion of the site evaluation. The State shall undertake these
 activities using one or more of the following methods:
 `(i) Corrective action or comparable authorities applicable to the owner
 or operator of a site.
 `(ii) A State fund financed by a fee on drilling or production activities,
 or on the issuance of permits for regulated sites.
 `(D) The formation of an advisory committee on the investigation
 and remediation of unregulated sites consisting of equal numbers of
 representatives from industry, State government, and environmental groups.
 `(3) The Administrator shall review each authorized State every 2 years to
 determine whether the program is in compliance with this subsection. Such
 determination shall be published in the Federal Register, after notice
 and opportunity for public comment.
 `(4) In an unauthorized State, the Administrator shall conduct the activities
 required of an unauthorized State in this subsection, and shall collect
 permit fees in accordance with subsection (j) of this section to carry
 out those activities.
 `(j) STATE PROGRAM SUPPORT- (1) The Administrator shall promulgate within 12
 months of the date of enactment of this subsection regulations establishing
 that the owner or operator of any facility that is required to obtain an
 operating or postclosure permit under this subtitle pay an annual fee,
 or the equivalent over some period, sufficient to cover all reasonable
 (direct and indirect) costs required to develop and administer the permit
 program requirements of this subtitle, including the reasonable costs of
 each of the following:
 `(A) Reviewing and acting upon any application for such a permit.
 `(B) Implementing and enforcing the terms and conditions of any such permit,
 including but not limited to corrective action terms and conditions (but
 not including any court costs associated with any enforcement action).
 `(C) Waste sampling, analyses, demonstrations and environmental monitoring.
 `(D) Preparing generally applicable regulations or guidance.
 `(E) Implementing and enforcing interim status requirements including but
 not limited to corrective action orders (but not including any court costs
 associated with any enforcement action).
 `(2) The Administrator shall not authorize a State program under this
 section, or allow a State program to retain authorization under this section,
 unless the State demonstrates that it will collect, in the aggregate, an
 amount the Administrator determines, after notice and opportunity for public
 comment, adequately reflects the reasonable costs of the permit program.
 `(3) The Administrator shall review each authorized State program at least
 every 2 years to determine whether the program is in compliance with this
 subsection. Such determination shall be published in the Federal Register,
 after notice and opportunity for public comment.
 `(4) If the Administrator determines that the fee provisions of a
 State program do not meet the requirements of this subsection, or if the
 Administrator determines that the State is not adequately administering or
 enforcing an approved fee program, the Administrator may, in addition to
 taking any other action authorized under this subtitle, collect reasonable
 fees from the owner or operator of the facilities identified in paragraph
 (1) of this subsection. Such fees shall be designed solely to cover the
 Administrator's costs of administering the provisions of the permit program
 promulgated by the Administrator.
 `(5) In addition to any other penalties which arise under Federal or State
 law, any owner or operator that fails to pay fees lawfully imposed by the
 Administrator under this paragraph shall pay a penalty of 50 percent of
 the fee amount, plus interest on the fee amount computed in accordance
 with section 6621(a)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to
 computation of interest on underpayment of Federal taxes).
 `(6) Any fees, penalties, and interest collected by the Administrator
 under this subsection shall be deposited in a special fund in the United
 States Treasury for licensing and other services, which hereafter shall be
 available for appropriation, to remain available until expended, subject
 to appropriation, to carry out the Administrator's activities for which
 the fees were collected. Any fee required to be collected by a State or
 local agency under this subsection shall be utilized solely to cover all
 reasonable (direct and indirect) costs required to support the permit
 program as set forth in paragraph (1) of this subsection.'.
SEC. 7. ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITIES FOR PRODUCED WATER, DRILLING FLUIDS, AND
RADIOACTIVE WASTE.
 (a) CRIMINAL PENALTIES- Section 3008(d)(4) is amended by inserting before the
 parenthesis the following: `produced water, drilling fluids or radioactive
 waste from the exploration, development, or production of crude oil or
 natural gas'.
 (b) CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR UNLAWFUL STORAGE, TREATMENT, TRANSPORTATION-
 Section 3008(d)(7) is amended by revising the text prior to subparagraph
 (A) to read as follows:
 `(7) knowingly stores, treats, transports, or causes to be transported,
 disposes of, or otherwise handles any used oil not identified or listed as
 a hazardous waste, produced water, drilling fluids or radioactive waste from
 the exploration, development, or production of crude oil or natural gas'.
 (c) KNOWING ENDANGERMENT- Section 3008(e) is amended by inserting the
 following after `subtitle' in the first place it appears: `, produced water,
 drilling fluids, radioactive waste from oil and gas production, or'.
 (d) CITIZEN SUITS- Section 7002(a)(1)(A) is amended by inserting `authorized
 State or Federal' before `permit'.
SEC. 8. MANAGEMENT OF PRODUCED WATER.
 Subtitle C is further amended by adding at the end the following new section:
`SEC. 3021. MANAGEMENT OF PRODUCED WATER.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding the other provisions of this subtitle,
 the management of produced water shall be subject to the provisions of this
 section. Not later than 18 months after the enactment of this section,
 the Administrator shall promulgate regulations governing the management
 of produced water as may be necessary to protect human health and the
 environment. Such regulations shall include, but not be limited to each
 of the following:
 `(1) The requirements of subsection (b) of this section, and other design,
 construction, operating, and location standards applicable to surface
 impoundments and tanks that may receive produced water.
 `(2) Closure requirements applicable to surface impoundments and tanks,
 and postclosure requirements applicable to surface impoundments, in which
 produced water is placed or maintained on or after the date of the enactment
 of this section.
 `(3) Corrective action requirements applicable to surface impoundments in
 which produced water is placed or maintained on or after the enactment of
 this section, including compliance with section 3004(u) and section 3004(v).
 `(4) Financial assurances for closure, postclosure care, and corrective
 action.
 `(5) Wildlife protection requirements that provide for cover or containment
 of surface impoundments or tanks to prevent access by birds and other animals
 where the produced water contains contaminants at levels harmful to wildlife.
 `(6) Waste tracking requirements.
 `(b) SURFACE IMPOUNDMENTS- (1) Each new surface impoundment receiving
 produced water shall meet the applicable requirements of section
 3004(o)(1)(A) and section 3004(o)(4), or section 3004(o)(2).
 `(2) Each existing surface impoundment receiving produced water shall meet
 the requirements of section 3004(o)(1)(A) or section 3004(o)(2), except if
 the surface impoundment meets the requirements of sections 3005(j)(2)-(4). In
 the case of any surface impoundment excluded by sections 3005(j)(2)-(4)
 which is subsequently determined to be leaking, the Administrator shall
 require compliance with section 3004(o)(1)(A) or section 3004(o)(2) unless
 the Administrator determines such compliance is not necessary to protect
 human health and the environment. The effective date of this paragraph shall
 be January 1, 1995, for each surface impoundment receiving or containing
 produced water from other than a stripper well property, and January 1,
 1997, for each surface impoundment receiving or containing produced water
 from a stripper well property only. For the purposes of this paragraph,
 a `stripper well property' is defined as--
 `(A) property within the meaning of the June 1979 energy regulations
 (within the meaning of section 4996(b)(7) of the Internal Revenue Code of
 1986, as in effect before the repeal of such section); and
 `(B) natural gas stripper well property, as defined in section 108(b)
 of the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978 (15 U.S.C. 3318(b)).
 `(c) SURFACE WATER DISCHARGES- Effective January 1, 1994, the discharge
 of produced water to surface water, for beneficial uses or otherwise,
 shall be prohibited except as provided in a permit issued pursuant to the
 Water Pollution Control Act that contains effective discharge limitations
 for at least the organic, radioactive, and chloride constituents of the
 produced water.
 `(d) PERMIT-BY-RULE- The regulations promulgated pursuant to subsection
 (a) of this section shall require a permit for the treatment, storage,
 or disposal of produced water, except such regulations may provide for a
 permit-by-rule for fully enclosed tanks.'.
SEC. 9. MANAGEMENT OF DRILLING FLUIDS.
 Subtitle C is further amended by adding the following new section after
 section 3021.
`SEC. 3022. MANAGEMENT OF DRILLING FLUIDS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding the other provision of this subtitle, the
 management of drilling fluids shall be subject to the provisions of this
 section. Not later than 18 months after the enactment of this section,
 the Administrator shall promulgate regulations governing the management
 of drilling fluids as may be necessary to protect human health and the
 environment. Such regulations shall include, but not be limited to each
 of the following:
 `(1) Registration with the Administrator or an authorized State in advance
 of drilling activity using a form approved by the Administrator or the
 authorized State that includes, at a minimum, information on the types and
 quantities of drilling fluids to be managed at the facility, a description of
 how the drilling fluids will be managed, and other information as required
 by the Administrator.
 `(2) The requirements of subsection (b) and other design, construction,
 operating, monitoring, and location standards for the units in which
 drilling fluids may be managed.
 `(3) Closure and postclosure procedures and standards that provide,
 at a minimum, for the closure of onsite disposal units within 6 months
 of completion of drilling operations, and certification by the owner or
 operator and an independent registered professional of proper closure
 accompanied by supporting documentation and sampling data.
 `(4) Waste tracking requirements.
 `(5) Financial assurances as may be necessary or desirable for closure,
 postclosure care, and corrective action.
 `(6) Wildlife protection requirements that provide for cover or containment
 of surface impoundments or tanks to prevent access by birds and other animals
 where the produced water contains contaminants at levels harmful to wildlife.
 `(b) LAND DISPOSAL- (1) Effective January 1, 1994, drilling fluids may be
 disposed at the drilling site in units only if--
 `(A) the fluids are tested and do not exhibit a hazardous waste
 characteristic;
 `(B) the records containing the test data are retained for at least 5
 years at a location specified by the Administrator;
 `(C) the disposal units meet the design, construction, operating,
 monitoring, wildlife protection, and location standards promulgated by
 the Administrator; and
 `(D) the units are properly closed within 6 months of the completion of
 drilling operations at the site.
 `(2) Effective January 1, 1994, drilling fluids exhibiting a hazardous waste
 characteristic may be disposed at an offsite facility only if the facility
 has obtained a permit under section 3005 (or is in interim status) and meets
 the applicable standards of this subtitle. The Administrator shall promulgate
 regulations that include testing of drilling fluids, records retention,
 and other requirements necessary to ensure compliance with this paragraph.
 `(c) PERMITS- The regulations promulgated pursuant to subsection (a) of this
 section shall require a permit for the treatment, storage, or disposal of
 drilling fluids, except such regulations may provide for a permit-by-rule
 for onsite facilities and offsite treatment and storage facilities.
 `(d) LAND DISPOSAL DEFINED- For the purposes of this section, the term
 `land disposal' shall be defined as in section 3004(k) of this subtitle.'.
SEC. 10. MANAGEMENT OR RADIOACTIVE WASTE FROM OIL AND GAS PRODUCTION.
 Subtitle C is amended by adding the following new section after section 3022:
`SEC. 3023. MANAGEMENT OF RADIOACTIVE WASTE FROM OIL AND GAS PRODUCTION.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Not later than 18 months after the enactment of this
 section, the Administrator shall promulgate regulations as may be necessary
 to protect human health and the environment from the risks associated with
 radioactivity in waste from the exploration, development, or production
 of crude oil or natural gas, including but not limited to scale deposits
 in tubulars and equipment, and soil contamination by the cleaning of
 scale deposits.
 `(b) STANDARDS- Regulations promulgated under this section shall, at a
 minimum, provide for each of the following:
 `(1) Notification to EPA or an authorized State by persons that are
 engaged or have been engaged in the processing, use, storage, transfer,
 or disposal of radioactive waste from the exploration, development, or
 production of crude oil or natural gas of the location of such activities.
 `(2) Requirements to survey sites where such waste is or has been processed,
 used, stored, transferred, or disposed, and equipment that is or has been
 employed to handle such waste, by qualified persons using specified sampling
 procedures and equipment approved by the Administrator.
 `(3) Reporting of survey results certified by qualified persons and the
 property owner, and procedures for sampling data verification to be employed
 by EPA or an authorized State.
 `(4) Limitations on the release of facilities and equipment contaminated
 with such waste for unrestricted and other uses.
 `(5) Limitations on the transfer of property contaminated with such waste
 for unrestricted and other uses.
 `(6) Worker protection standards.
 `(7) Management standards for the treatment, storage, and disposal of such
 waste, including records maintenance, waste tracking, design, operating,
 financial assurance, closure, postclosure and corrective action requirements.
 `(c) TRANSFER OF EQUIPMENT OR PROPERTY- (1) Until the regulations required
 under subsection (a) of this section are promulgated, and in effect in a
 particular State, no person shall transfer land for unrestricted use where
 the concentration of radium-226 in soil averaged over any 100 square meters
 exceeds the background level by more than 5 picocuries per gram averaged
 over the first 15 centimeters of soil below the surface, or 15 picocuries
 per gram averaged over 15 centimeters thick layers of soil more than 15
 centimeters below the surface.
 `(2) Until the regulations required under subsection (a) of this section
 are promulgated, no person shall transfer facilities or equipment for
 unrestricted use where the maximum radiation exposure level from such
 facilities or equipment exceeds 50 microroentgens per hour, including
 background, at any accessible point.
 `(d) CORRECTIVE ACTION- The Administrator is authorized to require the owner
 or operator of equipment, a facility, or property to undertake corrective
 action with respect to any release of radioactive waste from the exploration,
 development, or production of crude oil or natural gas into the environment
 as may be necessary to protect human health and the environment.
 `(e) PERMIT-BY-RULE- The regulations promulgated pursuant to subsection
 (a) of this section shall require a license for the treatment, storage
 or disposal of such waste, except the regulations may provide for a
 permit-by-rule for the storage of waste in fully enclosed tanks and
 containers.'.
SEC. 11. INTERIM STATUS FOR CERTAIN FACILITIES.
 Subtitle C is amended by adding the following new section after section 3023:
`SEC. 3024. INTERIM STATUS FOR FACILITIES MANAGING PRODUCED WATER, DRILLING
FLUIDS, OR RADIOACTIVE WASTE FROM OIL OR GAS EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Any person who owns or operates a facility required to
 have a permit under section 3021, 3022, or 3023 of this subtitle but not
 required to obtain a permit under section 3005 of this subtitle, and which
 is in existence on the date of enactment of this section, shall be treated
 as having been issued such permit until such time as final disposition
 of such application is made, unless the Administrator or other plaintiff
 proves that final disposition of such application has not been made because
 of the failure of the applicant to furnish information reasonably required
 or requested in order to process the application. This subsection shall
 not apply to any facility which has been previously denied a permit under
 this section or whose authorization to operate under State or local law
 has previously been terminated, or to a facility not in compliance with
 applicable State and local requirements on the date of enactment of this
 section.
 `(b) INTERIM STATUS CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDERS- (1) The Administrator or
 authorized State may require the owner or operator of a facility with
 interim status pursuant to this section to undertake corrective action with
 respect to any release of produced water, drilling fluids, or radioactive
 waste from oil and gas production as may be necessary to protect human
 health and the environment. The Administrator or authorized State may
 issue corrective action orders to carry out this responsibility. The
 Administrator or authorized State may also commence a civil action in the
 United States district court in the district in which the facility is located
 for appropriate relief, including a temporary or permanent injunction.
 `(2) Any order issued under this subsection may include a suspension or
 revocation to operate under this section, and shall state with reasonable
 specificity the nature of the required corrective action, and shall
 specify a time for compliance. If any person named in an order fails to
 comply with the order, the Administrator or authorized State may assess,
 and such person shall be liable to the United States or the authorized
 State for, a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $25,000 for each
 day of noncompliance with the order.'.
SEC. 12. RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEMONSTRATION.
 Section 8002 is amended by adding the following new subsections at the
 end thereof:
 `(t) REDUCING TOXICITY OF PRODUCED WATER AND OTHER DRILLING WASTES-
 The Administrator, in consultation with the Secretary of Energy and the
 Office of Technology Assessment, is authorized and directed to carry out a
 program of research, evaluation, testing, development, and demonstration
 of technologies which may be utilized to reduce the toxicity of produced
 water and other wastes from the exploration, development, or production
 of crude oil or natural gas.
 `(u) INVESTIGATION OF CLASS II INJECTION WELLS- The Administrator, in
 consultation with the United States Geological Survey, shall conduct a
 field investigation of Class II underground injection wells. Such field
 investigation shall include, at a minimum, the use of visual and other
 downhole investigation techniques, and ambient monitoring, to determine
 the fate and transport of produced water and other wastes injected into
 Class II wells. To assist in the investigation, the Administrator shall
 compile and evaluate a comprehensive inventory of underground injection well
 failures. The inventory shall be compiled within 12 months of the enactment
 of this subsection, and the field investigation shall commence within 18
 months of the enactment of this subsection. The field investigation shall
 be completed within 3 years of its initiation, and the results shall be
 submitted to the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the United
 States Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the United States
 House of Representatives.