S 1260 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1260
To facilitate the objective of a national background check on handgun buyers.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
June 11, 1991
Mr. MITCHELL (for himself, Mr. KOHL, and Mr. GORE) introduced the following
bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on the Judiciary
A BILL
To facilitate the objective of a national background check on handgun buyers.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act'.
SEC. 2. WAITING PERIOD REQUIRED BEFORE PURCHASE OF HANDGUN.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 922 of title 18, United States Code, is amended
 by adding at the end the following:
 `(s)(1) It shall be unlawful for any licensed importer, licensed
 manufacturer, or licensed dealer to sell, deliver, or transfer a handgun
 to an individual who is not licensed under section 923, unless--
 `(A) after the most recent proposal of such transfer by the transferee--
 `(i) the transferor has--
 `(I) received from the transferee a statement of the transferee containing
 the information described in paragraph (2);
 `(II) verified the identification of the transferee by examining the
 identification document presented; and
 `(III) within one day after the transferee furnishes the statement,
 provided a copy of the statement to the chief law enforcement officer of
 the place of residence of the transferee; and
 `(ii)(I) seven days have elapsed from the date the transferee furnished
 the statement, and the transferor has not received information from the
 chief law enforcement officer that receipt or possession of the handgun
 by the transferee would be in violation of Federal, State, or local law; or
 `(II) the transferor has received notice from the chief law enforcement
 officer that the officer has no information indicating that receipt or
 possession of the handgun by the transferee would violate Federal, State,
 or local law;
 `(B) the transferee has presented to the transferor a written statement,
 issued by the chief law enforcement officer of the place of residence of
 the transferee during the 10-day period ending on the date of the most
 recent proposal of such transfer by the transferee, which states that the
 transferee requires access to a handgun because of a threat to the life
 of the transferee or of any member of the household of the transferee;
 `(C)(i) the transferee has presented to the transferor a permit which--
 `(I) allows the transferee to possess a handgun; and
 `(II) was issued not more than five years earlier by the State in which
 the transfer is to take place; and
 `(ii) the law of the State provides that such a permit is to be issued only
 after an authorized government official has verified that the information
 available to such official does not indicate that possession of a handgun
 by the transferee would be in violation of law;
 `(D) the law of the State--
 `(i) prohibits any licensed importer, licensed manufacturer, or licensed
 dealer from transferring a handgun to an individual who is not licensed
 under section 923, before at least 7 days have elapsed from the date of
 the transferee proposes such transfer; or
 `(ii) requires that, before any licensed importer, licensed manufacturer,
 or licensed dealer completes the transfer of a handgun to an individual who
 is not licensed under section 923, an authorized government official verify
 that the information available to such official does not indicate that
 possession of a handgun by the transferee would be in violation of law; or
 `(E) the transferor has received a report from any system of felon
 identification established by the Attorney General pursuant to section
 6213(a) of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988, that available information
 does not indicate that possession or receipt of a handgun by the transferee
 would violate Federal, State, or local law.
 `(2) The statement referred to in paragraph (1)(A)(i)(I) shall contain only--
 `(A) the name, address, and date of birth appearing on a valid identification
 document (as defined in section 1028(d)(1)) of the transferee containing
 a photograph of the transferee and a description of the identification used;
 `(B) a statement that the transferee--
 `(i) is not under indictment for, and has not been convicted in any court
 of, a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding 1 year;
 `(ii) is not a fugitive from justice;
 `(iii) is not an unlawful user of or addicted to any controlled substance
 (as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act);
 `(iv) has not been adjudicated as a mental defective or been committed to
 a mental institution;
 `(v) is not an alien who is illegally or unlawfully in the United States;
 `(vi) has not been discharged from the Armed Forces under dishonorable
 conditions; and
 `(vii) is not a person who, having been a citizen of the United States,
 has renounced such citizenship;
 `(C) the date the statement is made; and
 `(D) notice that the transferee intends to obtain a handgun from the
 transferor.
 `(3) Any transferor of a handgun who, after such transfer, receives a
 report from a chief law enforcement officer containing information that
 receipt or possession of the handgun by the transferee violates Federal,
 State, or local law shall immediately communicate all information the
 transferor has about the transfer and the transferee to--
 `(A) the chief law enforcement officer of the place of business of the
 transferor; and
 `(B) the chief law enforcement officer of the place of residence of the
 transferee.
 `(4) Any transferor who receives information, not otherwise available to
 the public, in a report under this subsection shall not disclose such
 information except to the transferee, to law enforcement authorities,
 or pursuant to the direction of a court of law.
 `(5)(A) Any transferor who sells, delivers, or otherwise transfers a handgun
 to a transferee shall retain the copy of the statement of the transferee
 with respect to the handgun transaction, and shall retain evidence that
 the transferor has complied with paragraph (1)(A)(i)(III) with respect to
 the statement.
 `(B) Unless the chief law enforcement officer to whom a copy of the
 statement is sent determines that a transaction would violate Federal,
 State, or local law, the officer shall, within 30 days after the date the
 transferee made such statement, destroy such copy and any record containing
 information derived from such statement.
 `(6) For purposes of this subsection, the term `chief law enforcement
 officer' means the chief of police, the sheriff, or an equivalent officer,
 or the designee of any such individual.
 `(7) This subsection shall not apply to the sale of a firearm in the
 circumstances described in subsection (c).
 `(8) The Secretary shall take necessary actions to assure that the
 provisions of this subsection are published and disseminated to dealers
 and to the public.
 `(9) A chief law enforcement officer shall not be liable to any person,
 for action taken by the officer to ascertain whether a proposed transferee
 of a handgun has a criminal record or whether there is any other legal
 impediment to the transferee's receiving a handgun, under any Federal, State,
 or local law except a law that specifically provides for such liability.'.
 (b) HANDGUN DEFINED- Section 921(a) of title 18, United States Code,
 is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(29) The term `handgun' means--
 `(A) a firearm which has a short stock and is designed to be held and
 fired by the use of a single hand; and
 `(B) any combination of parts from which a firearm described in subparagraph
 (A) can be assembled.'.
 (c) PENALTY- Section 924(a) of such title is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking `(2) or (3)' and inserting `(2), (3),
 or (4)'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 `(4) Whoever knowingly violates section 922(s) shall be fined not more
 than $1,000, imprisoned for not more than one year, or both.'.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 conduct engaged in 90 or more days after the date of the enactment of
 this Act.
SEC. 3. GRANTS FOR THE IMPROVEMENT OF CRIMINAL RECORDS AND TO DEFRAY THE
COSTS OF BACKGROUND CHECKS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Attorney General shall, subject to appropriations,
 make a grant to an eligible State to be used--
 (1) for the creation of a computerized criminal history record system or
 improvement of an existing system; and
 (2) to defray the costs to State and local law enforcement agencies of
 conducting background checks on prospective handgun purchasers.
 (b) ELIGIBLE STATES- An eligible State under subsection (a) is one that--
 (1) participates in, or makes arrangements to begin participating in by the
 end of 1993, the Interstate Identification Index operated by the Federal
 Bureau of Investigation;
 (2) makes arrangements to achieve, by the end of 1995, at least 80 percent
 currency of case dispositions in computerized criminal history files for
 all cases in which there has been an entry of activity within 5 years
 prior to the date of enactment of this Act and thereafter; and
 (3) in the case of a State other than a State described in section
 922(s)(1)(D) of title 18, United States Code, establishes, by the end of
 1993, procedures under which State and local law enforcement officers to whom
 statements are provided pursuant to section 922(c)(2) or 922(s)(1)(A)(i)(III)
 of title 18, United States Code, are required to make a reasonable effort
 to ascertain whether a proposed transferee of a handgun has a criminal
 record or whether there is any other legal impediment to the transferee's
 receiving a handgun, using whatever Federal, State and local recordkeeping
 systems are readily available for the purpose.
 (c) ALLOCATION- Funds appropriated for grants under subsection (a) shall
 be allocated as follows:
 (1) 50 percent of such funds shall be allocated among the States in
 accordance with their respective populations.
 (2) 50 percent of such funds shall be allocated among the States at the
 discretion of the Attorney General.
 (d) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 for grants under subsection (a) a total of $40,000,000 for fiscal year
 1992 and all fiscal years thereafter.