S 1565 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1565
To amend the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 to ensure fair treatment of airline
employees in connection with route transfers.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
July 26 (legislative day, JULY 8), 1991
Mr. GRAHAM (for himself and Mr. D'AMATO) introduced the following bill;
which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation
A BILL
To amend the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 to ensure fair treatment of airline
employees in connection with route transfers.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. EMPLOYEE CONSIDERATIONS IN AIRLINE ROUTE TRANSFERS.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) Title IV of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 is amended by adding at
 the end of section 401(h) the following new paragraph:
 `(4) EMPLOYEE CONSIDERATIONS- (i) If a certificate transfer is approved,
 the air carrier to which the route authority is being transferred shall
 hire in each class or craft, no less than the number of employees from
 the air carrier transferring the certificate, in order of seniority, which
 the Secretary determines in the order approving the transfer are required
 to appropriately operate the certificate authority being transferred. The
 hired employees shall be afforded the seniority integration protections
 specified in Tiger International Seaboard Acquisition Case, CAB Docket 33712.
 `(ii) On complaint by any employee or by the representative of any group
 of the employees affected by a transaction specified in subparagraph (i),
 the United States District Court for the district in which the complainant
 resides or has its principal place of business or for the District of
 Columbia, shall order the air carrier or carriers acquiring the route
 authority, or other persons, to provide the seniority integration protections
 specified in that paragraph. The pendency of a representation dispute before
 the National Mediation Board shall not deprive the court of jurisdiction. The
 court may assess against the surviving air carrier or carriers, reasonable
 attorneys' fees and other litigation costs reasonably incurred in any case
 under the section in which the complainant has substantially prevailed.'.
 (b) DUTY TO HIRE PROTECTED EMPLOYEES- Section 43 of the Airline Deregulation
 Act of 1978 is amended by deleting in subsection (d)(1) thereof the number
 `10' and inserting in place thereof the number `17'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsections (a) shall apply
 with respect to any application filed with the Secretary of Transportation
 requesting approval of a transfer in whole or in part of any certificate
 on or after July 26, 1991.