HR 4532 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 4532
To amend the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act to require new
standards for corporate average fuel economy, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
April 18, 1990
Mrs. BOXER (for herself, Mr. STARK, and Ms. SCHNEIDER) introduced the
following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act to require new
standards for corporate average fuel economy, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; REFERENCE.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Motor Vehicle Fuel Efficiency
 Act of 1990'.
 (b) REFERENCE- Whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in
 terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the
 reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision
 of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds the following:
 (1) Improved efficiency in the consumption of petroleum is vitally important,
 not only because the worldwide supply is finite, but because the increasing
 dependence of the United States on oil is not in the Nation's best interest
 and adversely affects the trade balance.
 (2) The light duty vehicle fleet is a significant user of oil, accounting
 for about 39 percent of United States oil consumption.
 (3) Improvements in vehicle fuel efficiency between 1973 and 1987 amounted
 to a savings of one million eight hundred thousand barrels of oil per
 day and a savings to drivers of close to $30,000,000,000. Conversely,
 the rollback of the corporate average fuel economy (CAFE) standard for
 the 1989 model year, from 27.5 miles per gallon to 26.5 miles per gallon,
 is expected to result in increased consumption of nine hundred million
 gallons of fuel over the life of the vehicles.
 (4) Emissions of carbon dioxide, including those from the light duty
 vehicle fleet, contribute substantially to increased retention of heat in
 the Earth's atmosphere and may cause long-term global warming and disruption
 of climate-dependent activities.
 (5) The United States, with only 5 percent of the world's population, is
 responsible for 20 percent of world carbon dioxide emissions. United States
 carbon dioxide emissions from gasoline alone are greater than the carbon
 dioxide emissions from all sources in each of the following countries and
 areas of the world: Latin America, Japan, the Middle East, West Germany,
 South and Southeast Asia, the United Kingdom, Africa, and France.
 (6) The transportation sector is responsible for 31 percent of carbon
 dioxide emissions in the United States. Each gallon of gasoline burned
 results in the emission of 19.7 pounds of carbon dioxide.
 (7) The rollback of the corporate average fuel economy standard under the
 Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act for the 1989 model year
 is projected to result in nine million tons of additional carbon dioxide
 emissions during the life of the vehicles involved.
 (8) Increased numbers of vehicles and vehicle miles traveled in the United
 States will necessitate a 3 percent annual increase in fuel efficiency
 merely to hold future carbon dioxide emissions at current levels. Therefore,
 substantial improvements in vehicle fuel efficiency will be needed to
 reduce these emissions.
 (9) The corporate average fuel economy standards under the Motor Vehicle
 Information and Cost Savings Act and the successful response of automobile
 manufacturers to those standards have been very effective in increasing
 vehicle fuel efficiency, resulting in a doubling of the passenger car fleet
 fuel economy between 1975 and the present. However, current law does not
 require improvement above a standard of 27.5 miles per gallon which became
 effective in 1985.
 (10) Light trucks were an insignificant part of the passenger vehicle
 market when corporate average fuel economy standards were enacted in
 1975, and have not been subjected to strict, legislatively established,
 corporate average fuel economy standards. As a result, there have been
 few major technological changes related to fuel efficiency in the standard
 size light trucks since 1982, and fuel economy in some light truck models
 has actually declined between 1982 and 1986. Light trucks have become
 increasingly popular for passenger use, and such vehicles now account for
 approximately one-third of new passenger vehicle sales.
 (11) The Department of Energy has stated that increased fuel efficiency is
 possible utilizing currently available technology and without significant
 changes in the size mix or performance of the fleet. Using conventional
 technologies, it is estimated that the fuel economy of the domestic new
 car fleet could reach thirty-nine miles per gallon by 2000.
 (12) Over the long term, by utilizing technology currently in production
 or in prototype, additional increases in fleet fuel economy are achievable,
 as high as sixty miles per gallon in the next decade.
 (13) Gasoline prices currently are lower in real dollars then they have
 been since the early 1970's. Since there is at least some correlation
 between gasoline prices and consumer demand for fuel efficient vehicles,
 it is unlikely that the market alone will achieve significant improvement
 in fuel economy.
 (14) An increase in fuel efficiency in the light duty vehicle fleet of 20
 percent by 1995 and 60 percent by 2001 would save 3.3 million barrels of
 oil per day and 450 million tons of carbon dioxide per year by 2005.
SEC. 3. AVERAGE FUEL ECONOMY STANDARDS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 502(a) (15 U.S.C. 2002(a)) is amended by striking:
`1985 and thereafter
27.5.'
and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
`1985 through 1994
27.5
 1995 and thereafter
As provided in accordance with section 514.
 (b) AMENDMENT- Section 502(a)(4) (15 U.S.C. 2002(a)(4)) is amended by
 striking `The Secretary' and inserting in lieu thereof `Except in the case
 of standards established by section 514 and 515, the Secretary'.
SEC. 4. LIGHT TRUCKS.
 Section 502(b) (15 U.S.C. 2002(b)) is amended by inserting `and which ends
 before model year 1995' immediately after `after the date of enactment of
 this title'.
SEC. 5. EXEMPTIONS FOR LIMITED PRODUCTION.
 Section 502(c)(1) (15 U.S.C. 2002(c)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by striking out `passenger' each place it appears;
 (2) by inserting `or subsection (b) or section 514 or 515' immediately
 before the period at the end of the first sentence; and
 (3) by inserting `subsection (b) or sections 514 and 515' immediately before
 `is more stringent'.
SEC. 6. EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
 Section 502(g)(1) (15 U.S.C. 2002(g)(1)) is amended by inserting `or section
 514 or 515' immediately before the period at the end of the first sentence.
SEC. 7. CONSULTATION.
 Section 502(i) is amended (15 U.S.C. 2002(i)) by inserting `or sections
 514 and 515' immediately before the period in the first sentence.
SEC. 8. NOTIFICATION.
 Section 502(j) (15 U.S.C. 2002(j)) is amended by inserting `or sections
 514 and 515' immediately before `or any modification'.
SEC. 9. NEW STANDARDS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title V (15 U.S.C. 2001 et seq.) is amended by adding at
 the end of the following new sections:
`PASSENGER AUTOMOBILES
 `SEC. 514. The average fuel economy for passenger automobiles manufactured
 by any manufacturer in model year 1995 and each model year thereafter shall
 not be less than the number of miles per gallon established for such model
 year pursuant to the following:
`Model year:
--
`1995 through 2000
For each such manufacturer, the average fuel economy required shall be an
amount determined by the Secretary to be equal to the average fuel economy
achieved by that manufacturer for passenger automobiles in model year 1988,
plus an amount equal to 20 percent (as measured in miles per gallon) of such
average fuel economy achieved for model year 1988; except that such standard
shall not be less than 27.5 miles per gallon and shall not exceed forty-five
miles per gallon.
`2001 and thereafter
For each such manufacturer, the average fuel economy required shall be an
amount determined by the Secretary to be equal to the average fuel economy
achieved by that manufacturer for passenger automobiles in model year 1988,
plus an amount equal to 60 percent (as measured in miles per gallon) of such
average fuel economy achieved for model year 1988; until such standard is
modified under section 516; except that such standard shall not be less than
27.5 miles per gallon and shall not exceed fifty miles per gallon.
`AUTOMOBILES OTHER THAN PASSENGER AUTOMOBILES
 `SEC. 515. Commencing with model year 1995 and each model year thereafter,
 the average fuel economy for passenger automobiles other than passenger
 automobiles manufactured by any manufacturer in any such model year shall
 not be less than the number of miles per gallon established for such model
 year pursuant to the following:
`Model year:
--
`1995 through 2000
For each such manufacturer, the average fuel economy required shall be an
amount determined by the Secretary to be equal to the average fuel economy
achieved by that manufacturer for light trucks in model year 1988, plus an
amount equal to 20 percent (as measured in miles per gallon) of such average
fuel economy achieved for model year 1988; except that such standard shall
not be less than twenty miles per gallon and shall not exceed thirty-five
miles per gallon.
`200l and thereafter
For each such manufacturer, the average fuel economy required shall be an
amount determined by the Secretary to be equal to the average fuel economy
achieved by that manufacturer in model 1988, plus an amount equal to 60 percent
(as measured in miles per gallon) of such average fuel economy achieved for
model year 1988; until such standard is modified under section 516; except
that such standard shall not be less than twenty miles per gallon and shall
not exceed forty miles per gallon.
`MODIFICATIONS OF STANDARDS
 `SEC. 516. (a) The Secretary of Transportation shall provide for a review
 to be undertaken by the National Academy of Sciences, in consultation
 with vehicle manufacturers, representatives of environmental and consumer
 groups, appropriate State and local officials, and representatives of
 labor, of the current state of research and development in light truck
 fuel economy and passenger automobile fuel economy and an assessment of
 the remaining potential for improving the fuel efficiency and reducing
 the energy consumption of passenger automobiles and light trucks. The
 assessment shall include all aspects of vehicle design, including engines,
 drive train, component parts, auto body, tires, and any other aspect
 contributing to the reduction of energy consumption. The National Academy
 shall, not later than two years after the date of enactment of this Act,
 submit a report to the Congress and the Secretary of Transportation on the
 results of the review and assessment and in the report recommend research
 and development priorities that could result in the commercialization of
 fuel economy technology through the early years of the next century. The
 National Academy shall update the report every three years, beginning not
 later than five years after the date of enactment of this Act, and shall
 submit each updated report to Congress and the Secretary of Transportation.
 `(b) As used in this section, the terms `passenger automobile' and `light
 truck' have the meaning given those terms under section 501.
 `(c) Using the most recent National Academy of Sciences study described
 in this section, the Secretary of Transportation shall, not later than
 January 1, 1996, initiate a rulemaking procedure to establish a schedule
 for increasing the average fuel economy standards for passenger cars and
 nonpassenger cars for model years 2002 through 2006.
 `(d) In increasing the average fuel economy during a rulemaking proceeding
 under this section, the Secretary shall weigh equally each factor listed in
 section 502(e) and the need to reduce carbon dioxide emissions. In evaluating
 the economic practicability of the standard, the Secretary shall consider--
 `(1) the total projected amount of energy savings likely to result directly
 from the imposition of the standard;
 `(2) the total projected amount of reduction in carbon dioxide emissions
 and the economic impact of such reduction;
 `(3) the economic impact of the standard on the manufacturers and on the
 consumers of the vehicles subject to such standard (including but not
 limited to the economic benefits to consumers associated with the gasoline
 savings accrued over the vehicle's operating lifetime);
 `(4) any lessening of the utility or the performance of the vehicles likely
 to result from the imposition of the standard;
 `(5) the impact of any lessening of competition or any change in foreign
 trade that is likely to result from the imposition of the standard;
 `(6) the total projected amount of reduction in carbon dioxide emissions
 and the economic impact of such reduction; and
 `(7) other factors the Secretary considers relevant.'.
SEC. 10. MODIFICATIONS TO FUEL ECONOMY TESTING.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 503(d) (15 U.S.C. 2003(d)) is amended--
 (1) in the second sentence of paragraph (1), by striking `(weighted 55
 percent urban cycle, and 45 percent highway cycle),' and inserting in
 lieu thereof the following: `except that such test procedures shall also
 conform to the requirements in paragraph (4) of this section';
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 `(4) To provide more representative results, the following changes shall
 be made to the testing and calculation procedures in paragraph (1):
 `(A) The urban cycle shall be weighted 65 percent and the highway cycle
 weighted 35 percent.
 `(B) The ambient testing temperatures shall be 50 degrees Fahrenheit.
 `(C) The average speed on the highway cycle shall be increased to 60 miles
 per hour.'.
 (b) FUEL ECONOMY VALUE- Section 506 (15 U.S.C. 2006) is amended by adding
 at the end the following:
 `(f) The labels required in this section shall contain fuel economy values
 specific to the automobile's particular vehicle configuration (as defined
 in 40 CFR part 600) where that vehicle configuration is less than the fuel
 economy standard applicable to the vehicle's manufacturer.'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 all model years (as defined in title V of the Motor Vehicle Information
 and Cost Savings Act) commencing after January 1, 1993.
SEC. 11. FUEL ECONOMY TESTING.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency
 shall conduct a study on the accuracy of fuel economy testing of passenger
 automobiles by the Administrator performed in accordance with procedures
 in effect as of the date of enactment of this Act, as compared to the
 actual performance of such automobiles when driven by average drivers
 under average driving conditions in the United States. In the course of
 such study, the Administrator shall, for each model type and year--
 (1) measure the fuel economy of a sampling of production passenger
 automobiles during the first month of manufacture for sale; and
 (2) repeat, over a period of years to be determined by the Secretary of
 Transportation, the measurements and calculations under section 503(d)(1)
 (15 U.S.C. 2003(d)(1)), for purposes of monitoring automobile performance
 in use to determine the extent, if any, of decline in fuel economy after
 such use.
To the maximum extent practicable, the Administrator shall, in carrying
out measurements under paragraphs (1) and (2), simulate average drivers and
average driving conditions in the United States.
 (b) REPORT- The Administrator shall, within twelve months after the date
 of enactment of this Act and annually thereafter, submit to the Committee
 on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee
 on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives a report on the
 results of the study required by subsection (a). The report shall include--
 (1) a comparison between (A) fuel economy measured, for each model in the
 applicable model year, through testing procedures in effect as of the date
 of enactment of this Act and (B) fuel economy measured in accordance with
 subsection (a)(1) of this section;
 (2) a statement on any decline in fuel economy determined through repeat
 measurements and calculations under subsection (a)(2) of this section; and
 (3) any recommendations for legislative or other action.
 (c) DEFINITION- As used in this section, the term `production passenger
 automobile' means a passenger automobile manufactured for sale.
SEC. 12. EXPLANATORY BOOKLET DISTRIBUTED BY SECRETARY OF ENERGY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- (1) Paragraph (1) of section 506(b) (15 U.S.C. 2006(b))
 is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: `The Secretary
 of Energy shall distribute no less than one hundred booklets each year
 to each dealer and shall distribute as many in addition to one hundred
 booklets as are reasonably requested by dealers from time to time.'.
 (2) The amendment made by paragraph (1) of this subsection shall apply
 to the twelve-month period beginning on the first day of the first month
 after the date of enactment of this Act and corresponding twelve-month
 periods thereafter.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 506(e) (15 U.S.C. 2006(e)) is amended
 by striking `Federal Energy Administrator' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `Secretary of Energy'.
SEC. 13. REPEATED VIOLATIONS OF AVERAGE FUEL ECONOMY STANDARD.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 508(b)(1) (15 U.S.C. 2008(b)(1)) is amended by
 adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 `(C) Any civil penalty assessed under this subsection for a violation
 of section 507(a) (1) or (2) in model year 1995 or thereafter against a
 manufacturer shall be doubled if--
 `(i) the manufacturer violated section 507(a) (1) or (2) in the two model
 years immediately preceding the model year involved in the assessment; and
 `(ii) during each of such preceding years and the year involved in the
 assessment, the applicable average fuel economy standard exceeded the
 average fuel economy of the vehicles manufactured by such manufacturer by
 five-tenths of a mile per gallon or more.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 507(a)(1) (15 U.S.C. 2007(a)(1)) is
 amended by inserting `including sections 514 and 515,' immediately after
 `section 502(b)),'.