B37 2-1-89 [OC's]
S 308 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 308
To authorize certain securities for bank holding companies and to authorize
additional powers for safe bank holding companies.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
January 31 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. DODD introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
A BILL
To authorize certain securities for bank holding companies and to authorize
additional powers for safe bank holding companies.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Financial Modernization
 and Safe Bank Act'.
 (b) Table of Contents-
TITLE I--QUALIFIED AFFILIATES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES
Sec. 101. Authorization for bank holding companies to acquire qualified
affiliates.
Sec. 102. Definition of qualified affiliate.
Sec. 103. Ninety-one day rule for qualified affiliate applications.
Sec. 104. Effect on State laws prohibiting the affiliation of banks and
certain companies.
Sec. 105. Amendment to the Federal Reserve Act.
Sec. 106. Certain affiliations of FDIC-insured banks.
Sec. 107. Authorization for national banks to underwrite municipal revenue
bonds, sponsor unit investment trusts, and distribute investment company
securities.
Sec. 108. Amendments to the International Banking Act of 1978.
Sec. 109. Diversified financial holding companies.
Sec. 110. Study of the national payments system.
Sec. 111. Congressional vote on whether to permit qualified affiliates to
underwrite equity securities.
TITLE II--EXPEDITED PROCEDURES
Sec. 201. Expedited procedures for forming a bank holding company.
Sec. 202. Expedited procedures for bank holding companies to seek approval
to engage in nonbanking activities.
Sec. 203. Reduction of post-approval waiting period for bank holding company
acquisitions.
Sec. 204. Reduction of post-approval waiting period for bank mergers.
Sec. 205. Amendments to the Depository Institution Management Interlocks Act.
Sec. 206. Bankers' banks.
TITLE III--SAFE BANK HOLDING COMPANIES
Sec. 301. Short title.
Sec. 302. Safe bank holding companies.
Sec. 303. Repeal of section 5(f).
Sec. 304. Deposit insurance.
Sec. 305. Effect on State laws.
Sec. 306. Regulations.
TITLE I--QUALIFIED AFFILIATES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES
SEC. 101. AUTHORIZATION FOR BANK HOLDING COMPANIES TO ACQUIRE QUALIFIED
AFFILIATES.
 Section 4(c) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1843(c))
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(15)(A) QUALIFIED AFFILIATES- Notwithstanding any provision of the Banking
 Act of 1933 (other than section 21 of that Act), shares of a qualified
 affiliate which may, in accordance with this paragraph, do one or more of
 the following:
 `(i) Engage in underwriting, distributing, or dealing in securities of
 any type.
 `(ii) Engage in securities brokerage, private placement, investment advisory,
 or other securities activities.
 `(iii) Engage in, or acquire the shares of a company engaged in, any
 activity that is not described in clause (i) or (ii) of this subparagraph,
 if another provision of this section permits a bank holding company or
 subsidiary thereof to engage in that activity or acquire those shares, and--
 `(I) the Board permits the bank holding company to engage in that activity
 or acquire those shares through the qualified affiliate, or
 `(II) that provision permits the bank holding company or a subsidiary
 thereof to engage in that activity or acquire those shares without the
 Board's approval.
 `(B) APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS-
 `(i) Except as provided in subparagraph (D)(ii) of this paragraph, a
 bank holding company shall not directly or indirectly acquire or retain
 shares of a qualified affiliate under this paragraph without complying
 with this subparagraph.
 `(ii) The following provisions shall apply during the 4 years following
 the date of enactment of the Financial Modernization and Safe Bank Act.
 `(I) A bank holding company shall not acquire or retain shares of a qualified
 affiliate pursuant to this paragraph without the Board's prior approval.
 `(II) In acting on an application under this paragraph, the Board shall
 apply the criteria specified in this subparagraph, in subparagraphs (C)
 and (D)(i) of this paragraph, and in paragraph (8)(B)(iv) of this subsection.
 `(III) The Board shall not approve an application under this paragraph
 unless the Board is satisfied that the bank holding company possesses
 the managerial resources to conduct the securities activities safely and
 soundly. In making that determination, the Board shall take into account the
 experience of management and its record of successfully managing the bank
 holding company or enterprises engaged in activities that are the same as
 or similar to those authorized for qualified affiliates under this paragraph.
 `(iii) Beginning 4 years after the date of enactment of the Financial
 Modernization and Safe Bank Act, a bank holding company seeking to acquire or
 retain shares pursuant to this paragraph shall comply with paragraph (8)(B)
 of this subsection. In making a determination under that paragraph, the
 Board shall apply the criteria specified in clause (iv) of that paragraph
 and in subparagraphs (C) and (D)(i) of this paragraph.
 `(C) CONCENTRATION OF RESOURCES-
 `(i) The Board shall disapprove any acquisition pursuant to this paragraph
 that would result in the affiliation of--
 `(I) a bank holding company or bank that has, or had on average during
 any of the 8 calendar quarters preceding the date of the application,
 total assets of more than $30,000,000,000, with
 `(II) an investment banking organization that has, or had on average during
 any of the 8 calendar quarters preceding the date of the application,
 total assets of more than $15,000,000,000.
 `(ii) The dollar limitations in clause (i) of this subparagraph shall
 be adjusted annually after December 31, 1989, by the annual percentage
 increase in the Consumer Price Index as described in paragraph (8)(C)
 of this subsection.
 `(D) INVESTMENT IN A QUALIFIED AFFILIATE-
 `(i) A bank holding company shall not acquire control of a qualified
 affiliate pursuant to this paragraph if the acquisition would reduce the
 bank holding company's capital below the minimum level established by the
 Board for bank holding companies.
 `(ii) A bank holding company that has acquired control of a qualified
 affiliate pursuant to this paragraph shall not directly or indirectly
 make any additional equity investment in the qualified affiliate unless
 it gives the Board prior written notice of the proposed investment and--
 `(I) the Board issues a written statement of its intent not to disapprove
 the notice; or
 `(II) the Board does not disapprove the notice within 30 days after the
 notice is filed.
 `(iii) The Board may disapprove a notice filed under clause (ii) if the
 Board finds that the investment would reduce the bank holding company's
 capital below the minimum level established by the Board or would otherwise
 be unsafe or unsound or inconsistent with the bank holding company's
 obligation to serve as a source of strength to its subsidiary banks.
 `(E) CAPITAL STANDARDS- (i) In determining whether a bank holding company
 complies with the capital requirements or guidelines established by the
 Board for bank holding companies--
 `(I) the bank holding company's capital and total assets shall each be
 reduced by an amount equal to the amount of the bank holding company's
 equity investment in any qualified affiliate, and by an amount equal to
 the amount of any extensions of credit by the bank holding company to
 any qualified affiliate that are considered capital for purposes of any
 capital requirement applicable to the qualified affiliate,
 `(II) the assets and liabilities of the qualified affiliate shall not be
 consolidated with those of the bank holding company, and
 `(III) the bank holding company's total assets and total liabilities shall
 each be reduced by an amount equal to the amount of the bank holding
 company's extensions of credit to any qualified affiliate, excluding
 extensions of credit described in subclause (I).
 `(ii) Clause (i) of this subparagraph does not apply to the extent that
 the Board determines by order that an item described in that clause relates
 to activities that are not described in clause (i) or (ii) of subparagraph
 (A) of this paragraph.
 `(F) LIMITATIONS ON QUALIFIED AFFILIATES AND THEIR AFFILIATES-
 `(i) No bank or insured institution affiliated with a qualified affiliate
 shall, directly or indirectly--
 `(I) extend credit in any manner to the qualified affiliate or a subsidiary
 thereof,
 `(II) purchase for its own account financial assets of the qualified
 affiliate or a subsidiary thereof,
 `(III) issue a guarantee, acceptance, or letter of credit, including an
 endorsement or a standby letter of credit, for the benefit of the qualified
 affiliate or a subsidiary thereof, or
 `(IV) extend credit in any manner to any investment company advised by or
 the shares of which are distributed by the qualified affiliate.
 `(ii) Clause (i)(I) of this subparagraph does not apply to any extension
 of credit by a bank or insured institution made to acquire or sell any
 securities of the United States or its agencies or securities on which
 the principal and interest are fully guaranteed by the United States or
 its agencies if--
 `(I) the extension of credit is to be repaid on the same calendar day,
 `(II) the extension of credit is incidental to the clearing of transactions
 in those securities through that bank or insured institution, and
 `(III) both the principal of and the interest on the extension of credit
 are fully secured by securities of the United States or its agencies or
 securities on which the principal and interest are fully guaranteed by
 the United States or its agencies.
 `(iii) No bank or insured institution affiliated with a qualified affiliate
 shall directly or indirectly extend credit, or issue or enter into a
 standby letter of credit, asset purchase agreement, indemnity, guarantee,
 insurance, or other facility, for the purpose of enhancing the marketability
 of a securities issue underwritten or distributed by the qualified affiliate.
 `(iv) No bank holding company or subsidiary thereof (other than a qualified
 affiliate) shall knowingly extend or arrange for the extension of credit,
 directly or indirectly, secured by or for the purpose of purchasing any
 security while, or for 30 days after, that security is the subject of a
 distribution in which a qualified affiliate of that bank holding company
 participates as an underwriter or a member of a selling group.
 `(v) No bank or insured institution affiliated with a qualified affiliate
 shall, directly or indirectly, extend credit to an issuer of securities
 underwritten by the qualified affiliate for the purpose of paying
 the principal of those securities or interest or dividends on those
 securities. Nothing in this clause prohibits an extension of credit for a
 documented purpose (other than paying principal, interest, or dividends)
 if the timing, maturity, and other terms of the credit, taken as a whole,
 are substantially different from those of the underwritten securities.
 `(vi)(I) No officer or director of a qualified affiliate shall serve at
 the same time as an officer or director of any affiliated bank or insured
 institution.
 `(II) Notwithstanding subclause (I) of this clause, an officer or director of
 a qualified affiliate may serve at the same time as an officer or director
 of an affiliated bank or insured institution if the qualified affiliate
 and the affiliated bank or insured institution are subsidiaries of a bank
 holding company that has total banking assets of not more than $500,000,000.
 `(III) The dollar limitation in subclause (II) of this clause shall be
 adjusted annually after December 31, 1989, by the annual percentage increase
 in the Consumer Price Index as described in paragraph (8)(C) of this section.
 `(IV) The Board may, by order or by regulation, grant exemptions from
 subclause (I) of this clause. In determining whether to grant such
 exemptions, the Board shall consider the size of the bank holding companies,
 banks, and qualified affiliates involved, any burdens that may be imposed
 by subclause (I), the safety and soundness of the banks and qualified
 affiliates, and other appropriate factors, including unfair competition
 or the improper exchange of nonpublic customer information.
 `(vii) Pursuant to regulations issued by the Board, a qualified affiliate
 shall prominently disclose in writing to each of its customers--
 `(I) that the qualified affiliate is not a bank or insured institution
 and is separate from any affiliated bank or insured institution; and
 `(II) that securities sold, offered, or recommended by the qualified
 affiliate are not deposits, are not insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation or the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, are
 not guaranteed by an affiliated bank or insured institution, and are not
 otherwise an obligation of such a bank or insured institution.
 `(viii) No bank, insured institution, or subsidiary thereof shall express
 an opinion on the value of, or the advisability of purchasing or selling,
 securities underwritten, distributed, or dealt in by an affiliated qualified
 affiliate unless the bank, insured institution, or subsidiary discloses to
 the customer that the qualified affiliate is underwriting, distributing,
 or dealing in the securities.
 `(ix) No bank, insured institution, or subsidiary thereof shall disclose
 to an affiliated qualified affiliate, nor shall a qualified affiliate
 disclose to an affiliated bank, insured institution, or subsidiary
 thereof, any nonpublic customer information (including an evaluation of
 the creditworthiness of an issuer or other customer of that bank, insured
 institution, subsidiary, or qualified affiliate) without the consent of
 that customer.
 `(x) A qualified affiliate shall not underwrite or distribute securities
 secured by or representing an interest in mortgages or other obligations
 originated by an affiliated bank, insured institution, or subsidiary
 thereof unless those securities--
 `(I) are rated by an unaffiliated, nationally recognized statistical
 rating organization;
 `(II) are issued or guaranteed by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation,
 the Federal National Mortgage Association, or the Government National
 Mortgage Association; or
 `(III) represent interests in securities described in subclause (II)
 of this clause;
 `(xi) Each appropriate Federal banking agency shall establish a program for--
 `(I) enforcing compliance with this paragraph by banks or insured
 institutions under its supervision; and
 `(II) responding to any complaints from customers about inappropriate
 cross-marketing of securities products or inadequate disclosure.
 `(xii) The authority granted to the Federal banking agencies by this
 paragraph shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other
 authority provided by Federal law.
 `(G) QUALIFIED AFFILIATES APPROVED UNDER PARAGRAPH (8)-
 `(i) Effective after the expiration of 180 days after the date of enactment
 of this paragraph, no bank holding company may engage in, or retain the
 shares of any company engaged in, activities of the type described in
 subparagraph (A)(i) of this paragraph on the basis of the Board's approval
 of an application under paragraph (8) of this subsection--
 `(I) unless the bank holding company obtains the Board's approval to retain
 the shares of that company pursuant to this paragraph; or
 `(II) except to the extent that those activities are specifically
 authorized by statute for a national bank and involve securities that are
 expressly described in that statute, or that a regulation promulgated by
 the Comptroller of the Currency pursuant to that statute before November
 18, 1987, expressly describes as being authorized for a national bank to
 underwrite or deal in.
 `(ii) The Board shall, after the date of enactment of this paragraph,
 disapprove any notice by a bank holding company under paragraph (8) of
 this subsection to engage in, or acquire the shares of a company engaged
 in, any activity that is described in subparagraph (A)(i), except to the
 extent that the activity is described in clause (i)(II) of this subparagraph.
 `(H) ACTIVITIES PERMITTED FOR BANK AFFILIATES- A bank holding company that
 acquires control of a qualified affiliate under this paragraph shall not,
 after one year from the date of that acquisition, permit a bank or insured
 institution that it controls or any subsidiary thereof to engage, directly
 or indirectly, in the United States--
 `(i) in activities described in subparagraph (A)(i) (except to the extent
 that those activities are described in subparagraph (G)(i)(II)); or
 `(ii) in underwriting or distributing securities backed by or representing
 an interest in mortgages or other obligations originated or purchased by
 the bank or its affiliates.
 `(I) Compliance with risk-based capital standards-
 `(i) Notwithstanding subparagraph (A) of this paragraph, a qualified
 affiliate shall not commence any of the following activities unless each
 of its affiliated banks is in compliance with any applicable risk-based
 capital standards issued by the appropriate Federal banking agency:
 `(I) underwriting, distributing, or dealing in unsecured corporate debt
 securities that at the time of issuance have a maturity of one year or
 more; or
 `(II) underwriting, distributing, or dealing in equity securities other
 than those issued by an investment company registered under the Investment
 Company Act of 1940.
 `(ii) A bank is in compliance with the capital standards described in clause
 (i) if that bank is in compliance with a schedule for achieving compliance
 with those standards prescribed by the appropriate Federal banking agency.
 `(J) DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION- For purposes of this paragraph:
 `(i) A branch or agency of a foreign bank or a commercial lending
 company controlled by a foreign bank (as the terms `agency', `branch',
 `commercial lending company', and `foreign bank' are defined in section
 1 of the International Banking Act of 1978, shall be considered a bank.
 `(ii)(I) In the case of any bank holding company that controls a depository
 institution described in section 19(b)(1)(A)(vii) of the Federal Reserve
 Act and a qualified affiliate, any company that owns any interest in or
 participates in the activities of that bank holding company or depository
 institution, and any subsidiary of any such company, shall be treated as
 a bank or insured institution subsidiary of that bank holding company.
 `(II) Subclause (I) of this clause shall not apply with respect to any bank,
 and any affiliate of that bank, if the aggregate amount of the interests
 held by that bank and all affiliates of that bank in a bank holding company
 or depository institution described in subclause (I) do not exceed 5 percent
 of all interests in that bank holding company or depository institution.
 `(iii) The term `appropriate Federal banking agency' means the agencies
 referred to in section 3(q) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act with
 respect to banks referred to in that section and the Federal Home Loan Bank
 Board (acting directly or through the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance
 Corporation) with respect to insured institutions.
 `(iv) The terms `deal in' and `dealing in' do not include purchasing or
 selling securities for the account of another person.
 `(v) The term `securities' does not include insurance and the term
 `securities activities' does not include insurance activities.
 `(K) PHASE-IN OF OR SEPARATE CONGRESSIONAL VOTE ON CERTAIN SECURITIES
 ACTIVITIES- Notwithstanding subparagraph (A) of this paragraph, a qualified
 affiliate shall not--
 `(i) engage before 180 days after the date of enactment of the Financial
 Modernization and Safe Bank Act, in underwriting, distributing, or
 dealing in--
 `(I) unsecured corporate debt securities that at the time of issuance have
 a maturity of one year or more, or
 `(II) securities issued by an investment company registered under the
 Investment Company Act of 1940; or
 `(ii) engage in underwriting, distributing, or dealing in equity securities,
 other than those issued by an investment company registered under the
 Investment Company Act of 1940, except as authorized pursuant to a joint
 resolution pursuant to section 111 of the Financial Modernization and Safe
 Bank Act.'.
SEC. 102. DEFINITION OF QUALIFIED AFFILIATE.
 Section 2 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1841) is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(n) QUALIFIED AFFILIATE- The term `qualified affiliate' means any company
 that is engaged in the United States pursuant to section 4(c)(15)(A)
 of this Act in one or more of the activities described in that section.'.
SEC. 103. NINETY-ONE DAY RULE FOR QUALIFIED AFFILIATE APPLICATIONS.
 (a) NINETY-ONE DAY RULE- Section 4(c) of the Bank Holding Company Act
 of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1843(c)) is amended by striking out `paragraph (8)'
 in the penultimate sentence and inserting in lieu thereof `paragraph (15)'.
 (b) SUNSET PROVISION- The penultimate sentence of section 4(c) of the
 Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (as amended by this Act) is repealed,
 effective 4 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 104. EFFECT ON STATE LAWS PROHIBITING THE AFFILIATION OF BANKS AND
CERTAIN COMPANIES.
 Section 7 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1846) is
 amended by inserting before the final period the following: `, except that
 no State may prohibit the affiliation of a bank or bank holding company with
 a qualified affiliate solely because the qualified affiliate is engaged
 in activities described in clause (i) or (ii) of section 4(c)(15)(A)
 of this Act'.
SEC. 105. AMENDMENT TO THE FEDERAL RESERVE ACT.
 Section 23B(b)(1)(B) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 371c-1(b)(1)(B))
 is amended by inserting `and for 30 days thereafter' after `during the
 existence of any underwriting or selling syndicate'.
SEC. 106. AFFILIATIONS OF FDIC-INSURED BANKS.
 (a) AFFILIATIONS- Section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12
 U.S.C. 1843), as amended by section 109(b) and section 302 of this Act,
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(k) CERTAIN AFFILIATIONS OF FDIC-INSURED BANKS-
 `(1) GENERAL RULE- Except as provided in subsection (c)(15) of this
 section, an insured bank (as that term is defined in section 3(h) of the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act) shall not be an affiliate of any company
 that directly or indirectly acts in the United States as an underwriter
 or dealer of any security, other than a security that a national bank is
 specifically authorized by statute to underwrite or deal in and--
 `(A) that is expressly described in that statute; or
 `(B) that a regulation promulgated by the Comptroller of the Currency
 pursuant to that statute before November 18, 1987, expressly describes as
 being authorized for a national bank to underwrite or deal in.
 `(2) EXCEPTIONS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- This subsection does not apply to--
 `(i) an insured bank that is described in subparagraph (D), (H), or (I)
 of section 2(c)(2); or
 `(ii) a foreign bank, as defined in section 1(b)(7) of the International
 Banking Act of 1978 solely because it has an insured branch in the United
 States.
 `(B) CREDIT CARD BANKS- This subsection and sections 20 and 32 of the Banking
 Act of 1933 do not apply to any bank that is described in section 2(c)(2)(F).
 `(3) GRANDFATHER PROVISION- This subsection does not prohibit--
 `(A) the continuation of any affiliation that existed on March 5, 1987; or
 `(B) any affiliation by an insured bank that has an affiliation that would
 be prohibited if it were not covered by subparagraph (A) of this paragraph.
 `(4) TRANSITION RULE- An affiliation that became unlawful as a result of the
 enactment of the Competitive Equality Amendments of 1987, or that becomes
 unlawful as a result of the enactment of the Financial Modernization and
 Safe Bank Act, may continue until August 10, 1989.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Clause (i) of section 408(m)(1)(A) of the
 National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1730a(m)(1)(A)) is amended by inserting
 after `clause (iii) of this subparagraph,' the following: `and in section
 4(k) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956,'.
 (c) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- Section 18(j)(4)(A) of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1828(j)(4)(A)) is amended by striking `or any provision of
 section 20 of the Banking Act of 1933' and inserting `or any provision of
 paragraph (6) of this subsection'.
 (d) LIMITATIONS ON CERTAIN ACTIVITIES INVOLVING MUNICIPAL REVENUE BONDS-
 Section 18(j) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1828(j))
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(6) LIMITATIONS ON CERTAIN ACTIVITIES INVOLVING CERTAIN MUNICIPAL
 SECURITIES-
 `(A) UNDERWRITING OR DISTRIBUTION BY AFFILIATE OF INSURED BANK- No affiliate
 of an insured bank shall underwrite or distribute securities described
 in subparagraph (C) of this paragraph unless that insured bank, as well
 as any affiliated insured institution (as defined in section 408(a)(1)
 of the National Housing Act), complies with section 4(c)(15)(F)(iii)
 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 in the same manner and to the
 same extent as if the insured bank were a bank and the affiliate were a
 qualified affiliate for purposes of section 4(c)(15)(F)(iii).
 `(B) UNDERWRITING OR DISTRIBUTION BY INSURED BANK- An insured bank that
 underwrites or distributes securities described in subparagraph (C) of
 this paragraph shall not take any action with respect to those securities
 that would violate subparagraph (A) of this paragraph if those securities
 were underwritten or distributed by an affiliate of the insured bank.
 `(C) CERTAIN MUNICIPAL SECURITIES DESCRIBED- Securities are described in
 this subparagraph for purposes of this paragraph if--
 `(i) a national bank could underwrite those securities only pursuant to the
 sentence of paragraph Seventh of section 5136 of the Revised Statutes that
 refers to an obligation issued by or on behalf of or guaranteed by a State,
 territory, or possession of the United States, or any political subdivision
 thereof, the District of Columbia, or any agency or instrumentality of
 any of the foregoing; and
 `(ii) no State, territory, or possession of the United States, political
 subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia pledges its full faith and
 credit for payment of the entire principal of and interest on the securities.
 `(D) DEFINITION OF `AFFILIATE'- For purposes of this paragraph, the term
 `affiliate' has the meaning given to that term in section 2(k) of the Bank
 Holding Company Act of 1956.'.
SEC. 107. AUTHORIZATION FOR NATIONAL BANKS TO UNDERWRITE MUNICIPAL REVENUE
BONDS, SPONSOR UNIT INVESTMENT TRUSTS, AND DISTRIBUTE INVESTMENT COMPANY
SECURITIES.
 (a) AUTHORIZATION- Paragraph Seventh of section 5136 of the Revised Statutes
 (12 U.S.C. 24) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `The limitations and restrictions contained in this paragraph as to dealing
 in, underwriting, and purchasing for its own account, securities shall not
 apply to an obligation issued by or on behalf of or guaranteed by a State,
 territory, or possession of the United States, or any political subdivision
 thereof, the District of Columbia, or any agency or instrumentality of any
 of the foregoing. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, such limitations
 and restrictions shall apply to a private activity bond (as defined in
 section 141 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) unless--
 `(1) a State, territory, or possession of the United States or political
 subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia, pledges its full faith and
 credit for payment of the entire principal of and interest on such bond; or
 `(2) the interest on such bond is excluded from gross income under
 section 103(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, and the issuer,
 or the governmental unit on behalf of which such bond was issued, is the
 sole owner, for Federal income tax purposes, of the facility to be financed
 from the proceeds of such bond.
For purposes of the foregoing sentence, any bond described in section
1312(c)(2) of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 to which section 141(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 does not apply (by reason of section 1311,
1312, or 1313 of that Act), shall not be treated as a private activity bond.
 `If the association is not an affiliate of a qualified affiliate (as the
 terms `affiliate' and `qualified affiliate' are defined in section 2 of the
 Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 the limitations and restrictions contained
 in this paragraph as to dealing in, underwriting, and purchasing for its
 own account, securities shall not apply to--
 `(1) the securities of unit investment trusts holding only securities that
 the association is specifically authorized by statute to underwrite and
 that are expressly described in that authorizing statute, or expressly
 described as being authorized for a national bank to underwrite in a
 regulation promulgated before November 18, 1987, by the Comptroller of
 the Currency pursuant to that authorizing statute, and
 `(2) the distribution of securities issued by investment companies that are
 not sponsored, managed, or controlled by the association or any affiliate
 of the association.'.
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- The sixth sentence of paragraph Seventh of section
 5136 of the Revised Statutes of the United States (12 U.S.C. 24) is amended
 by striking out `or general obligations of any State or of any political
 subdivision thereof,'.
SEC. 108. AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL BANKING ACT OF 1978.
 (a) RESTRICTIONS ON UNITED STATES BANKING ACTIVITIES OF LARGE FOREIGN
 BANKS THAT ACQUIRE LARGE INVESTMENT BANKING ORGANIZATIONS WITH UNITED
 STATES OFFICES- Section 8 of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12
 U.S.C. 3106) is amended by redesignating subsection (e) as subsection (g)
 and by inserting after subsection (d) the following new subsection:
 `(e)(1) No foreign bank described in paragraph (2) of this subsection,
 and no foreign bank controlled by a foreign company described in paragraph
 (2), shall--
 `(A) acquire or retain control of a bank,
 `(B) establish or maintain a branch or agency in a State, or
 `(C) acquire or retain control of a commercial lending company organized
 under State law.
 `(2) A foreign bank or foreign company controlling a foreign bank is
 described in this paragraph for purposes of paragraph (1) if--
 `(A) the foreign bank or foreign company became an affiliate of an investment
 banking organization (as that term is used in section 4(c)(15)(C)(i)(II)
 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956) after the date of enactment of
 the Financial Modernization and Safe Bank Act;
 `(B) section 4(c)(15)(C) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 would
 have required the Board to disapprove the transaction that resulted in
 the affiliation if the foreign bank or foreign company had been a bank
 holding company at the time of the transaction;
 `(C) the affiliation has not been terminated; and
 `(D) the investment banking organization maintains an office or subsidiary
 in a State.'.
 (b) RESTRICTIONS ON UNITED STATES INVESTMENT BANKING ACTIVITIES OF LARGE
 FOREIGN INVESTMENT BANKING ORGANIZATIONS THAT ACQUIRE LARGE BANK HOLDING
 COMPANIES OR BANKS- Section 8 of the International Banking Act of 1978
 (12 U.S.C. 3106) is amended by inserting after subsection (e) (as added
 by subsection (a)) the following:
 `(f)(1) No foreign investment banking organization (including any of its
 subsidiaries or affiliates) described in paragraph (2) shall acquire or
 retain control of a qualified affiliate.
 `(2) A foreign investment banking organization (including any of its
 subsidiaries or affiliates) is described in this paragraph for the purposes
 of paragraph (1) if--
 `(A) the foreign investment banking organization became an affiliate of a
 bank holding company or bank after the date of enactment of the Financial
 Modernization and Safe Bank Act;
 `(B) section 4(c)(15)(C) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 would
 have required the Board to disapprove the transaction that resulted in
 the affiliation if the foreign investment banking organization had been
 required to file an application or notice under section 4(c)(15); and
 `(C) the affiliation has not been terminated.'.
 (c) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- Section 1(b)(13) of the International Banking Act
 of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3101(13)) is amended by inserting `affiliate,' after
 `(13) the terms' and by inserting `qualified affiliate' after `control,'.
SEC. 109. DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL HOLDING COMPANIES.
 (a) DEFINITION- Section 2 of the Bank Holding Company Act (12 U.S.C. 1841)
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(o) DIVERSIFIED FINANCIAL HOLDING COMPANY- For purposes of this Act,
 the term `diversified financial holding company' means a company that
 directly or indirectly controls any bank and that is described in each of
 the following paragraphs:
 `(1) ENGAGES ONLY IN FINANCIAL ACTIVITIES- The company engages only in
 activities that are--
 `(A) permissible for bank holding companies under section 4 of this Act; or
 `(B) permissible under section 4(i)(4).
 `(2) 80-PERCENT TEST- On average during the preceding calendar year,
 the company devoted 80 percent or more of its consolidated assets to
 activities that are permissible under paragraph (8), (13), (14), or (15)
 of section 4(c) of this Act, excluding--
 `(A) activities conducted by any entity described in subparagraph (A) or
 (B) of paragraph (3) of this subsection; and
 `(B) insurance activities that are permissible under section 4(c)(13),
 to the extent that those activities exceed 10 percent of the company's
 consolidated assets.
 `(3) LIMIT ON FDIC-INSURED BANKS, FSLIC-INSURED INSTITUTIONS, AND
 SUBSIDIARIES THEREOF AS PERCENTAGE OF ASSETS- On average during the
 preceding calendar year, 20 percent or less of the company's consolidated
 assets consisted of the following entities in aggregate:
 `(A) insured banks (as defined in section 3(h) of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Act) and any subsidiaries thereof; and
 `(B) insured institutions and any subsidiaries thereof.
 `(4) GLOBAL LIMIT ON DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS AND THEIR SUBSIDIARIES AS
 PERCENTAGE OF ASSETS- On average during the preceding calendar year,
 40 percent or less of the company's consolidated assets consisted of the
 following entities in aggregate:
 `(A) insured banks and uninsured banks (as defined in section 3(h) of the
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act) and any subsidiaries thereof;
 `(B) insured institutions and any subsidiaries thereof, and uninsured
 institutions (as defined in section 408(a)(1)(B) of the National Housing
 Act) and any subsidiaries thereof;
 `(C) foreign banks (as defined in section 1(b)(7) of the International
 Banking Act of 1978) and any subsidiaries thereof; and
 `(D) other depository institutions, whether or not in the United States,
 and any subsidiaries thereof.
 `(5) ELECTION- The company has filed with the Board a written notice of
 its intent to be treated as a diversified financial holding company.'.
 (b) IN GENERAL- Section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12
 U.S.C. 1843), as amended by section 106(a) and section 302 of this Act,
 is amended by inserting after subsection (h) the following new subsection:
 `(i) Diversified Financial Holding Companies-
 `(1) STATUS- A diversified financial holding company shall not be considered
 a bank holding company.
 `(2) APPLICABLE LAW- Except as provided in paragraph (4) or (6) of this
 subsection, a diversified financial holding company shall be subject to
 any provision of Federal law relating to bank holding companies in the
 same manner and to the same extent as if it were a bank holding company.
 `(3) Intermediate holding companies-
 `(A) A subsidiary of a diversified financial holding company is not a bank
 holding company because it controls a bank.
 `(B) If a subsidiary of a diversified financial holding company controls
 a bank, that subsidiary shall be subject to any provision of Federal law
 relating to bank holding companies in the same manner and to the same
 extent as if it were a bank holding company, except to the extent that
 the diversified financial holding company is not subject to that provision.
 `(4) AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE TO ENGAGE IN NONCONFORMING FINANCIAL ACTIVITIES-
 Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a diversified financial
 holding company may engage in, or acquire or retain direct or indirect
 ownership or control of shares of any company engaged in, any activity
 described in paragraph (5) of this subsection (other than an activity
 described in subsection (c)(15)(A)(i) of this section) in which the
 diversified financial holding company was lawfully engaged in the United
 States, directly or through a subsidiary, as of February 1, 1989.
 `(5) DEFINITION OF FINANCIAL ACTIVITIES- The following activities are
 described in this paragraph for purposes of paragraph (4) of this subsection:
 `(A) insurance underwriting activities;
 `(B) insurance agency activities;
 `(C) real estate brokerage activities;
 `(D) real estate investment and development activities;
 `(E) travel agency activities; and
 `(F) any other activities that the Board has determined to be financial.
 `(6) Exemption from examination and capital requirements-
 `(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B) of this paragraph, a diversified
 financial holding company, and any subsidiary (other than a bank) of that
 bank holding company, shall not be subject to inspection or examination
 or to reporting or capital requirements established by the Board under
 this Act or the International Lending Supervision Act of 1983.
 `(B) The Board may examine or require reports of any company that has filed
 a notice under section 2(o)(5) of this Act, and any nonbank subsidiary
 thereof, in order to--
 `(i) determine whether that company is a diversified financial holding
 company;
 `(ii) assure compliance by that company or nonbank subsidiary with the
 provisions of this Act, the Bank Holding Company Act Amendments of 1970,
 and sections 23A and 23B of the Federal Reserve Act; or
 `(iii) assure that the safety and soundness of that company's subsidiary
 banks are not threatened by the activities or condition of that company
 or its nonbank subsidiaries whenever the Board determines that emergency
 conditions exist requiring such assurance.
 `(7) RESTRICTIONS ON JOINT MARKETING- No subsidiary bank of a diversified
 financial holding company shall--
 `(A) offer or market products or services of an affiliate that are not
 permissible for bank holding companies to provide under subsection (c)(8)
 or (c)(15) of this section, or
 `(B) permit its products or services to be offered or marketed in connection
 with products or services of an affiliate that are not permissible for
 bank holding companies to provide under subsection (c)(8) or (c)(15).
 `(8) RESTRICTIONS ON LENDING TO AFFILIATES ENGAGED IN NONCONFORMING
 ACTIVITIES- If a company engages in any activity pursuant to paragraph (4)
 of this subsection, subsection (c)(15)(F)(i) of this section shall apply
 with respect to that company in the same manner and to the same extent as
 if the company were a qualified affiliate.
 `(9) Divestiture of subsidiary banks-
 `(A) If a company that has filed a notice under section 2(o)(5) of this Act
 fails to maintain the capital of each of its subsidiary banks at or above
 the level established for that bank by the appropriate Federal banking
 agency, the Board shall notify the company of the capital deficiency and
 provide the company 30 days in which to restore the capital of the bank
 to the level required by the appropriate Federal banking agency.
 `(B) If the Board determines that the company is unable to restore the
 capital of its subsidiary bank to the required level, the Board may issue
 an order requiring the company to terminate its ownership or control of
 the bank within 180 days of the date of the order.'.
SEC. 110. STUDY OF THE NATIONAL PAYMENTS SYSTEM.
 (a) FINDING- It is the finding of Congress that the continued smooth and
 efficient functioning of the large-dollar payments system of the United
 States is essential to the growth and stability of the economy of the
 United States and other nations and that the recent growth in the volume
 of payments due to new technology and changes in the financial services
 industry suggest that consideration of the mechanism by which large-dollar
 payments in the United States are made is necessary.
 (b) STUDY- The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is hereby
 directed to study and prepare a report on the steps necessary to ensure
 the integrity and reliability of large-dollar payments systems in the
 United States, including the current status of the mechanism by which
 large-dollar payments are made in the United States and the steps that
 appear necessary or advisable to strengthen the reliability and safety and
 soundness of that mechanism over time. Such report shall be transmitted
 to Congress within one year of the enactment of this Act.
 (c) CONSULTATION- The Board is directed to consult with the providers of
 large-dollar payment services, the users of such services, the vendors
 of equipment used in the provisions of such services, and appropriate
 regulatory authorities.
SEC. 111. CONGRESSIONAL VOTE ON WHETHER TO PERMIT QUALIFIED AFFILIATES TO
UNDERWRITE EQUITY SECURITIES.
 (a) DEFINITION AND SUBMISSION OF JOINT RESOLUTION-
 (1) JOINT RESOLUTION DEFINED- For purposes of this section, a joint
 resolution means a joint resolution introduced pursuant to the procedures
 described in this section--
 (A) the matter after the resolving clause of which is as follows:
`That section 4(c)(15)(K) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 is
repealed.';
 (B) which does not have a preamble; and
 (C) the title of which is `Joint Resolution pursuant to the Financial
 Modernization and Safe Bank Act'.
 (2) SUBMISSION TO THE CONGRESS- On the first day of the first session
 of the 102d Congress, the Secretary of the Treasury shall submit the
 joint resolution to the Congress, together with a specific legislative
 recommendation on whether or not qualified affiliates should be permitted to
 underwrite, distribute, and deal in equity securities. The recommendation
 shall be prepared by the Secretary of the Treasury in consultation with
 the Comptroller General of the United States, the Securities and Exchange
 Commission, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Comptroller of the Currency, and shall
 be limited solely to the issue of whether the powers prohibited under section
 4(c)(15)(K)(ii) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 shall be authorized.
 (b) PROCEDURE FOR HANDLING JOINT RESOLUTION-
 (1) Within 30 days of the date of submission by the Secretary of the
 Treasury, such joint resolution as defined in subsection (a) of this section
 shall be introduced (by request) in the House by the Speaker of the House
 for himself and the minority leader of the House or by Members of the House
 designated by the Speaker and the minority leader, and shall be introduced
 (by request) by the majority leader of the Senate for himself and the
 minority leader of the Senate or by Members of the Senate designated by
 the majority leader and the minority leader.
 (2) Such joint resolution introduced in the House of Representatives shall
 be referred to the appropriate Committee or Committees, and such joint
 resolution introduced in the Senate shall be referred to the Committee on
 Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
 (3) If any Committee of either House to which the joint resolution has been
 referred has not reported the joint resolution at the end of 30 days after
 its referral, the Committee shall be discharged from further consideration
 of the joint resolution or of any other joint resolution introduced with
 respect to the same matter.
 (4) Not later than 90 calendar days after the first day of session of the
 102d Congress, it shall be in order to move to proceed to the consideration
 of such joint resolution.
 (5)(A) A motion in the House of Representatives to proceed to the
 consideration of such joint resolution shall be highly privileged and not
 debatable. An amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor shall it
 be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed
 to or disagreed to.
 (B) Debate in the House of Representatives on such joint resolution shall
 be limited to not more than 20 hours, which shall be divided equally between
 those favoring and those opposing the joint resolution. A motion to further
 limit debate shall not be debatable. No amendment to, or motion to recommit,
 the joint resolution shall be in order. It shall not be in order to move
 to reconsider the vote by which the resolution is agreed to or disagreed to.
 (C) Motions to postpone made in the House of Representatives with respect
 to the consideration of such joint resolution and motions to proceed to
 the consideration of other business shall be decided without debate.
 (D) All appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application
 of the Rules of the House of Representatives to the procedure relating to
 such joint resolution shall be decided without debate.
 (E) Except to the extent specifically provided in the preceding
 provisions of this paragraph, consideration of such joint resolution
 in the House of Representatives shall be governed by the Rules of the
 House of Representatives applicable to other joint resolutions in similar
 circumstances.
 (6)(A) A motion in the Senate to proceed to the consideration of such
 joint resolution shall be privileged. An amendment to the motion shall
 not be in order, nor shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote
 by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
 (B) Debate in the Senate on such joint resolution and on all debatable
 motions and appeals in connection therewith shall be limited to not
 more than 20 hours, to be equally divided between, and controlled by,
 the majority leader and the minority leader or their designees.
 (C) Debate in the Senate on any debatable motion or appeal in connection
 with such joint resolution shall be limited to not more than one hour, to
 be equally divided between, and controlled by, the mover and the manager
 of such joint resolution, except that in the event the manager of the joint
 resolution is in favor of any such motion or appeal, the time in opposition
 shall be controlled by the minority leader or his designee. Such leaders,
 or either of them, may, from time under their control on the passage of
 such joint resolution, allot additional time to any Senator during the
 consideration of any debatable motion or appeal.
 (D) A motion in the Senate to further limit debate on a resolution, debatable
 motion, or appeal is not debatable. No amendment to, or motion to recommit,
 the joint resolution is in order in the Senate.
 (7) In the case of a joint resolution described in subsection (a), if
 prior to the passage by one House of a joint resolution of that House,
 that House received the joint resolution with respect to the same matter
 from the other House, then--
 (A) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if the joint resolution
 had been received from the other House; but
 (B) the vote on final passage shall be on the joint resolution of the
 other House.
 (8) The vote on passage of the joint resolution in each House shall occur
 on or before April 1, 1991.
TITLE II--EXPEDITED PROCEDURES
SEC. 201. EXPEDITED PROCEDURES FOR FORMING A BANK HOLDING COMPANY.
 Section 3(a) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1842(a))
 is amended--
 (1) by striking out `or (B)' and inserting in lieu thereof `(B)',
 (2) by inserting before the period at the end of the second sentence
 the following: `; or (C) with 30 days prior notification to the Board,
 the acquisition by a company of control of a bank in a reorganization
 in which a person or group of persons exchange their shares of the bank
 for shares of a newly formed bank holding company and receive, after the
 reorganization, substantially the same proportional share interest in the
 holding company as they held in the bank except for changes in shareholders'
 interests resulting from the exercise of dissenting shareholders' rights
 under State or Federal law if, immediately following the acquisition,
 the bank holding company meets the capital and other financial standards
 prescribed by the Board by regulation for such a bank holding company and
 the holding company does not engage in any activities other than those
 of banking or managing and controlling banks. In promulgating regulations
 pursuant to this subsection, the Board shall not require more capital for the
 subsidiary bank immediately following the reorganization than is required for
 a similarly sized bank that is not a subsidiary of a bank holding company'.
SEC. 202. EXPEDITED PROCEDURES FOR BANK HOLDING COMPANIES TO SEEK APPROVAL
TO ENGAGE IN NONBANKING ACTIVITIES.
 Paragraph (8) of section 4(c) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956
 (12 U.S.C. 1843(c)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraphs (C), (D), and
 (E) as subclauses (I) and (II), respectively;
 (2) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) through (G), and any cross references
 thereto as clauses (i) through (vii), respectively; and
 (3) by striking out all that precedes `purposes of this subsection it is
 not' and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
 `(8)(A) ACTIVITIES CLOSELY RELATED TO BANKING- In accordance with the
 limitations and requirements contained in subparagraphs (B) and (C) of this
 paragraph, shares of any company whose activities the Board has determined
 (by order or regulation) to be so closely related to banking or managing
 or controlling banks as to be a proper incident thereto, after taking into
 account technological or other innovations in the provision of banking or
 banking-related services.
 `(B) NOTICE REQUIREMENTS-
 `(i) No bank holding company shall engage in any activity or acquire the
 shares of a company pursuant to this paragraph, either de novo or by an
 acquisition in whole or in part of a going concern, unless the Board has
 been given 60 days prior written notice of that proposal and, within that
 period, the Board has not issued an order--
 `(I) disapproving the proposal, or
 `(II) extending the time period in accordance with clause (iii) below.
 `(ii)(I) An acquisition may be made prior to the expiration of the
 disapproval period if the Board issues a written statement of its intent
 not to disapprove the proposal.
 `(II) The Board shall publish in the Federal Register notice of receipt of
 a notice under this paragraph involving insurance and provide a reasonable
 period for public comment. The Board shall issue an order involving any
 such notice.
 `(III) No notice under this paragraph is required for a bank holding
 company to establish de novo an office to engage in any activity previously
 authorized for that bank holding company under this paragraph or to change
 the location of an office engaged in that activity.
 `(iii) The notice submitted to the Board shall contain such information
 as the Board shall prescribe by regulation or by specific request in
 connection with a particular notice, except that the Board may require
 only such information as may be relevant to the nature and scope of
 the proposed activity and to the Board's evaluation of the notice under
 the criteria specified in clause (iv). If the Board requires additional
 relevant information beyond that provided in the notice, the Board may by
 order extend the time period provided in clause (i) of this subparagraph
 until it has received that information, and the activity that is the
 subject of the notice may be commenced within 60 days of the date of that
 receipt unless the Board issues a disapproval order as provided in clause
 (i). Such an extension order is reviewable under section 9 of this Act.
 `(iv) In determining whether to disapprove a notice under this paragraph,
 the Board shall consider whether the performance of the activity described
 in the notice by a bank holding company or subsidiary thereof can reasonably
 be expected to produce benefits to the public, such as greater convenience,
 increased competition, or gains in efficiency, that outweigh possible
 adverse effects, such as undue concentration of resources, decreased or
 unfair competition, conflicts of interest, or unsound banking practices. In
 orders and regulations under this paragraph, the Board may differentiate
 between activities commenced de novo and activities commenced by the
 acquisition, in whole or in part, of a going concern.
 `(v) The Board shall by order set forth the reasons for any disapproval
 or determination not to disapprove a notice under this paragraph.
 `(C) INSURANCE ACTIVITIES NOT CLOSELY RELATED TO BANKING- For'.
SEC. 203. REDUCTION OF POST-APPROVAL WAITING PERIOD FOR BANK HOLDING COMPANY
ACQUISITIONS.
 Section 11(b)(1) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12
 U.S.C. 1849(b)(1)) is amended by adding before the period at the end of
 the fourth sentence thereof the following: `or if no adverse comment has
 been received regarding section 4(c)(8)(C) or section 4(j) of this Act,
 such shorter period of time as may be prescribed by the Board with the
 concurrence of the Attorney General, but in no event less than 5 days'.
SEC. 204. REDUCTION OF POST-APPROVAL WAITING PERIOD FOR BANK MERGERS.
 Section 18(c)(6) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1828(c)(6))
 is amended by inserting before the period at the end of the last sentence
 thereof the following: `or such shorter period of time as may be prescribed
 by the agency with the concurrence of the Attorney General, but in no
 event less than 5 days'.
SEC. 205. AMENDMENTS TO THE DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION MANAGEMENT INTERLOCKS ACT.
 (a) AFFILIATION THRESHOLD- Section 202(3)(B) of the Depository Institution
 Management Interlocks Act (12 U.S.C. 3201(3)(B)) is amended by striking
 `50' both places it appears and inserting `25'.
 (b) EXCLUSION OF ADVISORY AND HONORARY DIRECTORS- Section 202(4) of the
 Depository Institution Management Interlocks Act (12 U.S.C. 3201(4)) is
 amended by inserting after `(including an advisory or honorary director'
 the following: `, except in the case of a depository institution with
 total assets of less than $100,000,000'.
 (c) EXCEPTION FOR FAILED OR FAILING INSTITUTION- Section 205 of the
 Depository Institution Management Interlocks Act (12 U.S.C. 3204) is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(7) A depository institution or a depository holding company that--
 `(A) closes or is in danger of closing, as defined by the principal
 Federal supervisory agency charged by section 207 of this title with the
 administration and enforcement of this title, and
 `(B) is acquired by another depository institution or depository holding
 company,
for a period of 5 years after the date of acquisition of the institution or
company that is closed or is in danger of closing.'.
 (d) Limited Exception for Diversified Savings and Loan Holding Companies-
 (1) Section 202 of the Depository Institution Management Interlocks Act
 (12 U.S.C. 3202) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(6) the term `primary Federal supervisor' shall mean, with respect to
 any entity subject to this Act, the agency authorized by section 209 of
 this Act to issue rules or regulations carrying out this title.'.
 (2) Section 205 of the Depository Institution Management Interlocks Act
 (12 U.S.C. 3204) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(8) A diversified savings and loan holding company (as defined in section
 408 of the National Housing Act), with respect to the service of a director
 of a nonaffiliated depository institution or depository holding company
 (including a savings and loan holding company) as a director of the
 diversified savings and loan holding company. The director may begin the
 dual service allowed by this paragraph upon the expiration of 60 days after
 notice of the proposed dual service by the diversified savings and loan
 holding company to its primary Federal supervisor and to the primary Federal
 supervisor of the nonaffiliated depository institution or depository holding
 company if prior to the expiration of that 60-day period, neither primary
 Federal supervisor disapproves the proposed dual service. Either primary
 Federal supervisor may disapprove the proposed dual service if it finds that
 (A) the dual service would result in a monopoly or substantial lessening
 of competition in financial services in any part of the United States;
 (B) the dual service would lead to substantial conflicts of interest or
 unsafe and unsound practices; (C) in the primary metropolitan statistical
 area in which the diversified savings and loan holding company's subsidiary
 depository institution is located, there is substantial competition between
 that subsidiary depository institution and the nonaffiliated depository
 institution or a depository institution subsidiary of the nonaffiliated
 depository holding company; or (D) the applying company neglects, fails,
 or refuses to furnish all the information required by either primary Federal
 supervisor. Either primary Federal supervisor may require that a permitted
 dual service be terminated if there occurs a change in circumstance that
 would have provided a basis for disapproving the dual service when it was
 originally proposed.'.
 (e) EXTENSION OF GRANDFATHER CLAUSE- Subsections (a) and (b) of section 206
 of the Depository Institution Management Interlocks Act (12 U.S.C. 3205)
 are each amended by striking `ten years' and inserting `15 years'.
SEC. 206. BANKERS' BANKS.
 (a) BANKERS' BANKS AND BANK HOLDING COMPANIES-
 (1) Paragraph Seventh of section 5136 of the Revised Statutes (12
 U.S.C. 24) is amended by inserting `or their holding companies' after
 `is owned exclusively (except to the extent directors qualifying shares
 are required by law) by depository institutions'.
 (2) Section 5169 of the Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 27) is amended by
 inserting--
 (A) `, directly or through a holding company,' after `which is owned', and
 (B) `or their holding companies' after `other depository institutions'
 each place it appears in paragraph (b)(1).
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT ON BANKERS' BANKS AND DEPOSIT INSURANCE- Section
 3(e) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1842(e)) is
 amended by striking `bank described in the last sentence of section 2(c)'
 and inserting `a bankers' bank as described in section 5169 of the Revised
 Statutes (12 U.S.C. 27)'.
 (c) LIMIT ON LOANS SECURED BY SECURITIES- Section 11(m) of the Federal
 Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 248(m)) is amended by striking `10 percentum'
 in each place it appears and inserting in lieu thereof `15 percent'.
 (d) BANKERS' BANKS SERVING MINORITY BANKS- Section 5169(b) of the Revised
 Statutes (12 U.S.C. 27(b)) is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new paragraph:
 `(3) BANKERS' BANKS SERVING MINORITY BANKS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding the limitation contained in paragraph
 (1) with respect to ownership, a bank organized under such paragraph to
 serve the needs of minority banks or bank holding companies which control
 minority banks, and any holding company which controls a bank organized
 under such paragraph, may accept capital investments in such bank or
 holding company by companies which are not depository institutions or
 depository institution holding companies if such investment does not give
 such company the right to vote or exercise control, directly or indirectly,
 over such bank or holding company.
 `(B) MINORITY BANK- The term `minority bank' means any depository institution
 described in clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of section 19(b)(1)(A) of the
 Federal Reserve Act--
 `(i) more than 50 percent of the ownership or control of which is held by
 minority individuals; and
 `(ii) more than 50 percent of the net profit or loss of which accrues to
 minority individuals.
 `(C) MINORITY- The term `minority' means any Black American, Native American,
 Hispanic American, or Asian American.'.
 (e) SECTION 3(e) OF THE BANK HOLDING COMPANY ACT OF 1956- Section 3(e)
 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1842(e)) is amended by
 striking out `bank described in the last sentence of section 2(c)' and
 inserting in lieu thereof `depository institution described in section
 19(b)(1)(A)(vii) of the Federal Reserve Act'.
 (f) SECTION 5136 OF THE REVISED STATUTES- Paragraph Seventh of section 5136
 of the Revised Statutes (12 U.S.C. 24) (as amended by section 206(a)(1)
 of this Act) is amended by striking out `shares required by law)' and
 inserting in lieu thereof `shares required by law or capital investments
 which are permitted under section 5169(b)(3)(A) of chapter 2 of this title)'.
TITLE III--SAFE BANK HOLDING COMPANIES
SEC. 301. SHORT TITLE.
 This title may be cited as the `Safe Bank Holding Company Act'.
SEC. 302. SAFE BANK HOLDING COMPANIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 4 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12
 U.S.C. 1843) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(j) SAFE BANK HOLDING COMPANIES-
 `(1) AUTHORIZED- Notwithstanding any other provision of this section,
 a company (including a company described in section 5(f) of this Act)
 which has or acquires a bank subsidiary that is described in paragraph (2)
 of this subsection and that is otherwise in compliance with this subsection
 may hold shares of any company without regard to the prohibitions otherwise
 contained in this section.
 `(2) DESCRIBED- For the purpose of paragraph (1), a bank is described in
 this paragraph if--
 `(A) it is an insured bank within the meaning of section 3 of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Act;
 `(B) it does not accept deposits from any of its nonbank affiliates;
 `(C) it reports its assets and liabilities at market value for purposes
 of complying with the applicable securities laws and the regulations of
 the appropriate Federal banking agency; and
 `(D) it maintains investments in an aggregate amount equal to its insured
 deposits in the following:
 `(i) Obligations of the United States Government.
 `(ii) Obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United
 States Government.
 `(iii) Obligations of United States Government agencies.
 `(iv) Obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by United States
 Government agencies.
 `(v) Obligations issued by the Government National Mortgage Association,
 the Federal National Mortgage Association, the Student Loan Marketing
 Association, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, or any other
 federally sponsored instrumentality specified in regulations of the Federal
 Deposit Insurance Corporation.
 `(vi) Investment grade asset-backed securities, corporate debt instruments,
 and obligations issued by State and local governments, as defined in
 regulations of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
 `(vii) Any other security or other obligation that involves comparable
 marketability and liquidity as those described in clauses (i) through
 (vi), as expressly described in any regulation of the Federal Deposit
 Insurance Corporation.
 `(3) ELECTION AND PHASE-IN OF INVESTMENT REQUIREMENTS- A company, including
 a company described in section 5(f) of this Act, may elect to qualify for
 the purpose of this subsection by transmitting a notice of such election to
 the Board. Such election shall be effective immediately. Each bank owned
 by such company shall have 5 years from the date of such election for
 such bank's investments to fully comply with the requirements of paragraph
 (2). If a bank fails at any time to comply with the scheduled phase-in of
 investment requirements of the preceding sentence, the Board shall notify
 the company that it is not in compliance with such requirements, provide
 a period (not to exceed 60 days) for the company to achieve compliance,
 and, unless compliance is achieved within such period, issue an order
 requiring the company to divest all shares held in violation of the
 provisions of this section. Each bank owned by such company shall comply
 with the following schedule:
--Percent of investments which
--meet the requirements of
--paragraph (2)
 Not later than:
--Not less than:
1 year from the date of such election
--20%
2 years from the date of such election
--40%
3 years from the date of such election
--60%
4 years from the date of such election
--80%
5 years from the date of such election
--100%
 `(4) CAPITAL REQUIREMENTS-
 `(A) In order to qualify under this subsection, a company and its bank
 subsidiaries must comply with the applicable capital standards established
 by regulation for such company and its bank subsidiaries by the appropriate
 Federal banking agency. In establishing such standards, the appropriate
 Federal banking agency shall take into account the safety and marketability
 of the bank's assets.
 `(B) A company is in compliance with the capital standards described in
 subparagraph (A) if such company is in compliance with the schedule for
 achieving compliance with those standards prescribed by the appropriate
 Federal banking agency.
 `(C) If a company fails to maintain the capital standards established
 pursuant to this paragraph, the Board shall notify the company of the
 capital deficiency and provide the company 30 days in which to restore
 capital to the required level.
 `(D) If the Board determines that the company is unable to restore its
 capital or the capital of any of its subsidiaries to the level required, the
 Board shall issue an order requiring the company to terminate its ownership
 or control of such subsidiary within 180 days of the date of the order
 and shall notify the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation of its action.
 `(5) LENDING PROHIBITIONS- To qualify under this subsection, a bank shall
 comply with the restrictions applicable to banks under clauses (i) through
 (v) of section 4(c)(15)(F) with respect to each affiliate. For the purpose
 of this paragraph, an affiliate shall be treated as a `qualified affiliate'
 within the meaning of such section 4(c)(15)(F).'.
 (b) LIMITATION ON ACTIVITIES CONSIDERED CLOSELY RELATED TO BANKING- Section
 4(c)(8)(A) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1843(c)(8)(A)),
 as amended by section 202 of this Act, is amended by adding at the end
 the following new sentence: `For purposes of this paragraph, no activity
 shall be considered to be so closely related to banking or managing or
 controlling banks as to be a proper incident thereto, unless such an
 activity was determined on or before January 1, 1989, by the Board to be
 so closely related to banking or managing or controlling banks as to be
 a proper incident thereto.'.
SEC. 303. REPEAL OF SECTION 5(f).
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 5(f) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956
 (12 U.S.C. 1844(f)) is repealed.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- Paragraph (1) shall take effect upon the expiration
 of 5 years and 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 304. DEPOSIT INSURANCE.
 (a) ASSESSMENT BASE- Section 7(b)(4)(A) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act
 (12 U.S.C. 1817(b)(4)(A)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `The assessment base of a bank described in section 4(j)(2) of the Bank
 Holding Company Act of 1956 may be set at an amount lower than that
 determined under the preceding sentence.'.
 (b) RECEIVERSHIP- Section 11 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12
 U.S.C. 1821) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(k) RECEIVERSHIP OF `SAFE BANKS'- Whenever the Corporation has received a
 notice under section 4(j)(4)(D) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 and
 determines that a bank which is subject to such order has a capital-to-asset
 ratio lower than 2 percent, it shall close such bank, and shall take such
 action as is otherwise authorized under this Act with respect to such
 bank. Any net proceeds available following the sale or liquidation of a
 bank under this subsection shall be paid to the bank's shareholders.'.
SEC. 305. EFFECT ON STATE LAWS.
 Section 4 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1828) is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(d) No State may authorize a State insured bank to engage in any activity,
 unless--
 `(1) such activity is an activity that a national bank is authorized by
 statute to engage in,
 `(2) such activity is an activity in which such State insured bank was
 authorized to engage in on January 25, 1989, or
 `(3) such bank has deposits of $250 million or less.'.
SEC. 306. REGULATIONS.
 Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Board of
 Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Corporation, in consultation with the Comptroller of the Currency, and
 the Securities and Exchange Commission, and after providing public notice
 and opportunity for comment, shall prescribe regulations to carry out the
 provisions of this title.