[Congressional Bills 103th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]
[H.R. 200 Introduced in House (IH)]

103d CONGRESS
 2d Session
 H. R. 200

 To establish the framework for a health care system that will bring 
about universal access to affordable, quality health care by containing 
 the growth in health care costs through a national health budget, 
 managed competition, and other means, by improving access to and 
 simplifying the administration of health insurance, by deterring and 
 prosecuting health care fraud and abuse, by expanding benefits under 
 the medicare program, by expanding eligibility and increasing payment 
 levels under the medicaid program, and by making health insurance 
 available to all children.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 January 5, 1993

Mr. Stark introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to 
 the Committees on Ways and Means, Energy and Commerce, and Education 
 and Labor

 January 26, 1994

 Additional sponsors: Mr. Blackwell, and Mr. Romero-Barcelo

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To establish the framework for a health care system that will bring 
about universal access to affordable, quality health care by containing 
 the growth in health care costs through a national health budget, 
 managed competition, and other means, by improving access to and 
 simplifying the administration of health insurance, by deterring and 
 prosecuting health care fraud and abuse, by expanding benefits under 
 the medicare program, by expanding eligibility and increasing payment 
 levels under the medicaid program, and by making health insurance 
 available to all children.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Health Care Cost 
Containment and Reform Act of 1993''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. General definitions.
 TITLE I--COST CONTAINMENT

 Subtitle A--National Health Budget

Sec. 101. National health expenditure budget.
Sec. 102. Classes of health care services.
Sec. 103. Allocation of health budget by class of service.
Sec. 104. Adjustments for changes in medicare benefits.
Sec. 105. National health expenditures reporting system.
 Subtitle B--State Provider Payment Control Systems

Sec. 121. State provider payment rates.
Sec. 122. General conditions for State provider payment control 
 systems.
Sec. 123. Control of aggregate expenditures requirement for State 
 systems.
Sec. 124. Treatment of States failing to control aggregate 
 expenditures.
Sec. 125. Termination of approval of State system.
 Subtitle C--Maximum Payment Rates for Services Not Subject to State 
 Provider Payment Control Systems or Provided by Staff or Group Model 
 Health Maintenance Organizations

Sec. 140. Exemption for services subject to approved State provider 
 payment control systems or provided by 
 staff or group model health maintenance 
 organizations.
 Part 1--Establishment and Application of Maximum Payment Rates (Other 
 Than Under Medicare Program)

Sec. 141. Process.
Sec. 142. Payment methodology; relation to budget allocation.
Sec. 143. General application and enforcement of maximum payment rates.
Sec. 144. Limitation on payment rates under medicaid.
 Part 2--Methodologies for Determining Maximum Rates (Other Than Under 
 Medicare Program)

Sec. 151. Basis for maximum rates of payment for inpatient hospital 
 services.
Sec. 152. Basis for maximum payment rate for class of physicians' 
 services and other professional medical 
 services.
Sec. 153. Basis for other maximum payment rates for services using 
 certain medicare payment methodologies.
Sec. 154. Other services.
Sec. 155. Development of prospectively-determined payment 
 methodologies.
 Part 3--Medicare Payment Adjustments

Sec. 161. Conforming medicare payment rates to medicare health 
 expenditure allocations.
Sec. 162. Adjustments to medicare payments for graduate medical 
 education.
 TITLE II--MANAGED CARE AND MANAGED COMPETITION

 Subtitle A--Managed Care

Sec. 201. Authorization for managed care systems to pay less than 
 maximum payment rates.
Sec. 202. Staff and group model health maintenance organizations exempt 
 from maximum payment rates.
Sec. 203. Repeal of sunset of dual choice requirement.
Sec. 204. Multiple choice of health maintenance organizations.
Sec. 205. Federal assistance for establishment and initial operation of 
 staff and group model HMOs.
Sec. 206. Preemption of ``any willing provider'' State laws.
Sec. 207. Adjustment in medicare capitation payments to account for 
 regional variations in application of 
 secondary payor provisions.
Sec. 208. GAO study of expansion of health maintenance organizations.
 Subtitle B--Managed Competition

 Part 1--Establishment of National HPPC Program

Sec. 221. Establishment of program; grants to States.
Sec. 222. Establishment of HPPCs; designation of HPPC areas.
Sec. 223. Organization and operation of HPPCs.
Sec. 224. Agreements with employers.
Sec. 225. Agreements with qualified health plans (QHPs).
Sec. 226. Enrolling individuals in qualified health plans through a 
 HPPC.
Sec. 227. Coordination among HPPCs.
Sec. 228. Definitions.
 Part 2--Requirements for Qualified Health Plans

Sec. 251. Approval process; qualifications.
Sec. 252. Benefit packages.
 Subtitle C--National Patient Outcomes and Enrollee Satisfaction Data 
 Reporting Program

Sec. 271. National patient outcomes program.
Sec. 272. Enrollee health plan satisfaction.
Sec. 273. Research and demonstration.
 Subtitle D--Study of Universal Health Insurance Coverage and Cost 
 Containment

Sec. 291. Study.
 TITLE III--HEALTH SYSTEMS REFORM

 Subtitle A--Health Insurance Reform

Sec. 301. Excise tax on premiums received on health insurance policies 
 which do not meet certain requirements.
Sec. 302. Health benefit plan standards.
 ``TITLE XXI--HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN STANDARDS

 ``Sec. 2101. Standards and requirements for health benefit 
 plans.
 ``Sec. 2102. Establishment of standards.
 ``Sec. 2103. Requirements applicable to all health benefit 
 plans.
 ``Sec. 2104. Standards applicable only to insured health 
 benefit plans.
 ``Sec. 2105. Payment of commissions.
 ``Sec. 2106. Insurance requirement for multiple employer 
 welfare arrangements.
 ``Sec. 2107. Nonapplication in Puerto Rico and the territories.
 ``Sec. 2108. Definitions.
Sec. 303. Assuring continuation of access to college and university 
 health benefit plans by graduating 
 students.
 Subtitle B--Administrative Simplification

Sec. 321. Requirement for uniform health claims cards.
Sec. 322. Requirement for entitlement verification system.
Sec. 323. Requirements for uniform claims and electronic claims data 
 set.
Sec. 324. Electronic medical records and reporting.
Sec. 325. Uniform hospital cost reporting.
Sec. 326. Definitions.
 Subtitle C--Fraud and Abuse

 Part 1--National Health Care Fraud Control Program

Sec. 341. All-payer fraud and abuse control program.
Sec. 342. Application of Federal health anti-fraud and abuse sanctions 
 to all fraud and abuse against any health 
 benefit plan.
Sec. 343. Prohibition against offering inducements to individuals 
 enrolled under or employed by programs or 
 plans.
Sec. 344. Intermediate sanctions for medicare health maintenance 
 organizations.
 Part 2--Ban on Improper Physician Referrals

Sec. 351. Application of medicare ban on self-referrals to all payors.
Sec. 352. Extension of self-referral ban to additional specified 
 services.
Sec. 353. Changes in exceptions and other provisions relating to 
 compensation arrangements.
Sec. 354. Effective dates.
 Subtitle D--Other Provisions

Sec. 361. Malpractice reform.
 TITLE IV--EXPANSIONS OF HEALTH BENEFITS AND OTHER HEALTH INITIATIVES

 Subtitle A--Medicaid Benefit Improvements

Sec. 401. Floor on medicaid payment levels for inpatient hospital 
 services and physicians' services.
Sec. 402. Medicaid eligibility expansion.
Sec. 403. Full Federal payment for increased costs.
 Subtitle B--Expansion of Medicare Benefits

 Part 1--Preventive Benefits

Sec. 411. Annual screening mammography.
Sec. 412. Coverage of colorectal screening.
Sec. 413. Coverage of certain immunizations.
Sec. 414. Coverage of well-child care.
Sec. 415. Demonstration projects for coverage of other preventive 
 services.
 Part 2--Coverage of Prescription Drugs

Sec. 421. Coverage of outpatient prescription drugs.
Sec. 422. Establishment of Prescription Drug Payment Review Commission.
Sec. 423. Coverage of prescription drugs for qualified medicare 
 beneficiaries and qualified disabled and 
 working individuals.
 Part 3--Qualified Medicare Beneficiary Enrollment

Sec. 431. Qualified medicare beneficiary enrollment.
 Subtitle C--Health Insurance Deduction for the Self-Employed

Sec. 441. Deduction for health insurance costs of self-employed 
 individuals made permanent and increased.
 Subtitle D--Health Insurance Program for Children

Sec. 451. Health insurance for children.
 ``TITLE XXII--HEALTH INSURANCE FOR CHILDREN

 ``Sec. 2200. Establishment of program of health insurance for 
 children.
 ``Part A--Eligibility and Enrollment

 ``Sec. 2201. Eligibility.
 ``Sec. 2202. Enrollment periods.
 ``Sec. 2203. Employment-based enrollment.
 ``Sec. 2204. Coverage period.
 ``Part B--Benefits; Payments for Benefits

 ``Sec. 2211. Scope of benefits.
 ``Sec. 2212. Exclusions.
 ``Sec. 2213. Payments for benefits.
 ``Part C--Premiums; Trust Fund

 ``Sec. 2231. Amount of premiums.
 ``Sec. 2232. Payment of premiums.
 ``Sec. 2233. Children's Health Insurance Trust Fund.
 ``Part D--General Provisions

 ``Sec. 2251. Incorporation of certain medicare provisions.
 ``Sec. 2252. Incorporation of peer review provisions and fraud 
 and abuse provisions.

SEC. 2. GENERAL DEFINITIONS.

 (a) In General.--In this Act (except as otherwise provided):
 (1) Applicable commission.--The term ``applicable 
 Commission'' means--
 (A) with respect to services included in a class of 
 services furnished by a hospital, other institutional 
 provider, or home health provider, the Prospective 
 Payment Assessment Commission,
 (B) with respect to prescription drugs on or after 
 January 1, 1995, the Prescription Drug Payment Review 
 Commission (established under section 1847 of the 
 Social Security Act, as added by section 422 of this 
 Act), and
 (C) with respect to health care services not 
 described in subparagraphs (A) and (B), the Physician 
 Payment Review Commission.
 (2) Class of services.--The term ``class'' means, with 
 respect to health care services, a class established under 
 section 102.
 (3) Health care services.--The term ``health care 
 services'' means the items and services described in section 
 102(a)(2) or included in health care services under section 
 102(a)(3), but does not include items and services described in 
 section 102(a)(4).
 (4) Medicare program; medicare beneficiary.--(A) The term 
 ``medicare program'' means the programs established under parts 
 A and B of title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
 (B) The term ``medicare beneficiary'' means an individual 
 entitled to benefits under part A or B, or both, of the 
 medicare program.
 (5) Medicaid program.--The term ``medicaid program'' means 
 any State plan approved under title XIX of the Social Security 
 Act and includes a State program operating under a waiver under 
 section 1115 of such Act.
 (6) National health care expenditure budget.--The term 
 ``national health care expenditure budget'' means such a budget 
 established under section 101.
 (7) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (8) State.--The term ``State'' means the 50 States and the 
 District of Columbia.
 (9) United states.--The term ``United States'' means the 50 
 States and the District of Columbia.
 (b) Term Used in Titles I and II.--In titles I and II:
 (1) Health maintenance organization.--The term ``health 
 maintenance organization'' means an eligible organization with 
 a contract under section 1876 of the Social Security Act or a 
 qualified health maintenance organization (as defined in 
 section 1310(d) of the Public Health Service Act).
 (2) Staff or group model health maintenance organization.--
 The term ``staff or group model health maintenance 
 organization'' means a health maintenance organization (as 
 defined in paragraph (1)) for which 90 percent of the services 
 of physicians are provided through members of the staff of the 
 organization or through a medical group (or groups).

 TITLE I--COST CONTAINMENT

 Subtitle A--National Health Budget

SEC. 101. NATIONAL HEALTH EXPENDITURE BUDGET.

 (a) Establishment.--
 (1) In general.--For each calendar year (beginning with 
 1995), there is established a national health expenditure 
 budget equal to the sum of--
 (A) the medicare health expenditure budget (under 
 paragraph (2)), and
 (B) the nonmedicare health expenditure budget 
 (under such paragraph).
 (2) Amount.--Subject to section 104--
 (A) 1995.--The total amount of the medicare and 
 nonmedicare health expenditure budgets for 1995 is 
 equal to the respective medicare and nonmedicare budget 
 baselines (determined under paragraphs (1) and (2), 
 respectively, of subsection (b) for 1994) multiplied by 
 the applicable adjustment factor (specified under 
 subsection (c)) for 1995.
 (B) Subsequent years.--The total amount of each 
 such budget for each year after 1995 is equal to the 
 respective budget determined under this paragraph for 
 the previous year multiplied by the applicable 
 adjustment factor (specified under subsection (c)) for 
 the year involved.
 (3) Publication.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services shall publish in the Federal Register and report to 
 the Congress, by not later than April 1 before each year, the 
 amounts of the national health expenditure budget, of the 
 medicare health expenditure budget, and of the nonmedicare 
 health expenditure budget for the year.
 (b) Budget Baselines.--
 (1) Medicare budget baseline.--The Secretary shall compute 
 a medicare budget baseline under this paragraph for 1994 as 
 follows:
 (A) 1993 actual expenditures.--The Secretary shall 
 determine (on the basis of the best data available) the 
 amount of the aggregate medicare expenditures (as 
 defined in subsection (d)(1)) during 1993.
 (B) Projection for 1994.--The Secretary shall 
 increase such amount by the Secretary's estimate of the 
 percentage increase in the aggregate medicare 
 expenditures between the midpoint of 1993 and the 
 midpoint of 1994.
 (2) Nonmedicare budget baseline.--The Secretary shall 
 compute a nonmedicare budget baseline under this paragraph for 
 1994 as follows:
 (A) 1993 actual expenditures.--The Secretary shall 
 determine (on the basis of the best data available) the 
 amount of the aggregate nonmedicare expenditures (as 
 defined in subsection (d)(2)) for health care services 
 during 1993.
 (B) Projection for 1994.--The Secretary shall 
 increase such amount by the Secretary's estimate of the 
 percentage increase in the aggregate nonmedicare 
 expenditures for such services between the midpoint of 
 1993 and the midpoint of 1994.
 (c) Applicable Adjustment Factor.--The applicable adjustment factor 
under this subsection for each year is 1 plus the sum (expressed as a 
fraction) of--
 (1) the average annual percentage increase in the gross 
 domestic product (in current dollars, as published by the 
 Secretary of Commerce) during the 5-year period ending with the 
 second previous year; plus
 (2)(A) for 1995, 3.5 percentage points,
 (B) for 1996, 2.5 percentage points,
 (C) for 1997, 1.5 percentage points,
 (D) for 1998, 0.5 percentage point, and
 (E) for each year thereafter, 0 percentage points.
 (d) Aggregate Medicare and Nonmedicare Expenditures Defined.--
 (1) Aggregate medicare expenditures.--In this Act, the term 
 ``aggregate medicare expenditures'' means, with respect to 
 health care services or a class of services, expenditures made 
 under the medicare program with respect to the provision of 
 such services or class of services, and also includes receipts 
 of providers with respect to amounts payable as deductibles, 
 coinsurance, or other amounts for which the beneficiary is 
 liable with respect to items and services covered under such 
 program provided to a medicare beneficiary, and including 
 payments made under a contract under section 1833(a)(1) or 
 section 1876 of the Social Security Act (other than the portion 
 of such payments that is attributable to administrative costs).
 (2) Aggregate nonmedicare expenditures.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to the succeeding 
 provisions of this paragraph, in this Act, the term 
 ``aggregate nonmedicare expenditures'' means, with 
 respect to health care services or a class of services, 
 receipts of providers in the United States with respect 
 to the provision of such services or class of services, 
 excluding aggregate medicare expenditures with respect 
 to such services or class of services.
 (B) Inclusion of all payors.--Except as provided in 
 paragraph (3), the amount of aggregate nonmedicare 
 expenditures shall be determined without regard to the 
 source of payment and shall include (as specified by 
 the Secretary) direct patient expenditures as well as 
 payments made by third party payors (including 
 Government health programs).
 (3) Exclusions.--In computing aggregate nonmedicare 
 expenditures, there shall be excluded, as specified by the 
 Secretary--
 (A) nonoperating revenues (such as interest);
 (B) receipts attributable to personal comfort and 
 convenience items described in section 102(a)(5);
 (C) direct payments from the Federal Government, 
 from State government, from units of local government 
 for research to the extent unrelated (and not 
 attributable) to the provision of health care services;
 (D) receipts attributable to the program for the 
 provision of hospital care and medical services by the 
 Department of Veterans' Affairs under chapter 17 of 
 title 38, United States Code;
 (E) payments made to health care facilities and 
 providers of the Department of Defense and of the 
 Indian Health Service; and
 (F) such other receipts unrelated to the provision 
 of health care services as the Secretary specifies.

SEC. 102. CLASSES OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES.

 (a) Establishment of Classes.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) Specified services.--
 (i) In general.--Subject to subparagraph 
 (B)(ii), in the case of items and services 
 specified in a subparagraph under paragraph 
 (2), all of the items and services described in 
 that subparagraph shall be considered to be a 
 ``separate'' class of health care services.
 (ii) Overlapping services.--Except as the 
 Secretary may provide, items and services 
 specified in a subparagraph of paragraph (2) 
 shall be considered to be excluded from the 
 subsequent subparagraphs of that paragraph.
 (B) Other items and services.--
 (i) In general.--In the case of items and 
 services included as health care services under 
 paragraph (3), the Secretary shall group such 
 items and services into such class or classes 
 of health care services as may be appropriate.
 (ii) Inclusion in classes of specified 
 health care services.--In carrying out clause 
 (i), the Secretary may include an item or 
 service described in paragraph (3) within a 
 class of services established under 
 subparagraph (A).
 (2) Specified health care services.--Subject to paragraph 
 (4), the items and services specified in this paragraph are as 
 follows:
 (A) Inpatient hospital services, other than mental 
 health services.
 (B) Outpatient hospital services and ambulatory 
 facility services (including renal dialysis facility 
 services), other than mental health services.
 (C) Diagnostic testing services (including clinical 
 laboratory services and x-ray services).
 (D) Physicians' services and other professional 
 medical services, other than mental health services.
 (E) Home health services and hospice care.
 (F) Rehabilitation services, such as physical 
 therapy, occupational and speech therapy.
 (G) Durable medical equipment and supplies.
 (H) Prescription drugs and biologicals and insulin.
 (I) Nursing facility services, including skilled 
 nursing facility services and intermediate care 
 facility services, other than mental health services.
 (J) Mental health services.
 (3) Additional items and services.--Subject to paragraph 
 (4), the Secretary shall specify additional items and services 
 (not described in paragraph (2)) for which payment is generally 
 made under a private or public health plan.
 (4) Exclusions.--The following items and services shall not 
 be considered to be health care services and shall not be 
 included in a class of services under paragraph (1):
 (A) Over-the-counter medications and medical 
 equipment and devices, not provided pursuant to a 
 prescription.
 (B) Homemaker and home health aide services and 
 personal care services, and other services described in 
 section 1915(c)(4)(B), section 1929(a), or section 
 1930(a) of the Social Security Act.
 (C) Intermediate care facility and other custodial 
 services for the mentally retarded.
 (D) Inpatient mental health services of a custodial 
 nature.
 (5) Exclusion of institutional charges for personal comfort 
 and convenience items.--Payments received (and amounts charged) 
 by a facility which are attributable to items (such as private 
 rooms, telephones, and television rentals) provided for the 
 personal comfort and convenience of patients shall not be 
 counted as receipts (nor subject to limitations on amounts that 
 may be charged) for purposes of this title.
 (b) Publication.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall publish--
 (A) by not later than April 1, 1994, proposed 
 regulations defining the health care services and 
 establishing the classes of services under this 
 section, and
 (B) by not later than June 1, 1994, final 
 regulations defining the health care services and 
 establishing such classes.
 (2) Items included in regulations.--In such regulations, 
 the Secretary shall define--
 (A) the class or classes to be established under 
 subsection (a)(1),
 (B) the services to be included within each class, 
 and
 (C) the methods and sources of data for computing, 
 for purposes of this title, aggregate medicare and 
 nonmedicare expenditures for services within the class.
 (3) Changes.--
 (A) No changes authorized.--After the Secretary has 
 established classes of services under paragraph (1)(B), 
 the Secretary may not change such classes (or the 
 services included in such classes), except in the case 
 of services not previously classified. Any such 
 services not previously classified shall be classified 
 within one of the classes previously established.
 (B) Recommended changes.--If the Secretary 
 determines that a change in the classification 
 established under this section may be appropriate, the 
 Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report 
 proposing such change. The Secretary shall include in 
 the report an explanation of--
 (i) the rationale for such change, and
 (ii) the impact of such change on the total 
 aggregate medicare and non-medicare 
 expenditures permitted for classes of services 
 that would be affected by the change.
 (4) Commission reports.--
 (A) Initial reports.--With respect to the 
 establishment of classes of services under this 
 section, each applicable Commission (as defined in 
 section 2(a)(1))--
 (i) by not later than March 1, 1994, shall 
 report its recommendations to the Secretary and 
 Congress concerning such classes, and
 (ii) by not later than May 1, 1994, shall 
 report to the Secretary and the Congress its 
 comments concerning the classification proposed 
 by the Secretary under paragraph (1)(A).
 (B) Periodic reports.--Each applicable Commission 
 shall periodically report to Congress on changes in the 
 system of classification under this section that should 
 be made to promote the more efficient provision of 
 medically appropriate health care services.

SEC. 103. ALLOCATION OF HEALTH BUDGET BY CLASS OF SERVICE.

 (a) Allocation.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall allocate the medicare 
 and nonmedicare health expenditure budgets under section 101 
 for a year among classes of services specified under section 
 102.
 (2) Proportional allocation based on historical projected 
 expenditures.--Subject to section 104--
 (A) Medicare health expenditure budget.--The 
 percent of the medicare health expenditure budget 
 allocated to each class for a year shall be equal to 
 the quotient (expressed as a percentage) of--
 (i) the historical projected medicare 
 expenditures for the class for the year (as 
 determined under subsection (b)(1)), divided by
 (ii) the sum of such historical projected 
 medicare expenditures for all the classes for 
 the year.
 (B) Nonmedicare health expenditure budget.--The 
 percent of the nonmedicare health expenditure budget 
 allocated to each class for a year shall be equal to 
 the quotient (expressed as a percentage) of--
 (i) the historical projected nonmedicare 
 expenditures for the class for the year (as 
 determined under subsection (b)(2)), divided by
 (ii) the sum of such historical projected 
 nonmedicare expenditures for all the classes 
 for the year.
 (3) Publication.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary shall, in 
 conjunction with the publication of budgets under 
 section 101(a)(3) for a year and by not later than 
 April 1 before the year, publish in the Federal 
 Register and report to the Congress the allocation of 
 the budgets among the classes of services under this 
 subsection.
 (B) Exception for 1995.--For 1995, the Secretary 
 shall publish and report the allocation of the budgets 
 among the classes of services under this subsection not 
 later than August 1, 1994.
 (b) Historical Projected Expenditures.--
 (1) Medicare.--
 (A) Determination.--For purposes of subsection 
 (a)--
 (i) For 1994.--The historical projected 
 medicare expenditures for a class of services 
 for 1994 is equal to the portion of the amount 
 of aggregate medicare expenditures during 1993 
 (as determined under section 101(b)(1)(A)) 
 which is attributable to the class of services, 
 multiplied by the medicare trend factor 
 (described in subparagraph (B)) for the class 
 for 1994.
 (ii) Subsequent years.--The historical 
 projected medicare expenditures for a class of 
 services for a year after 1994 is equal to the 
 amount of the allocation for the class under 
 subsection (a)(2)(A) (taking into account any 
 adjustment under section 104) for the preceding 
 year multiplied by the medicare trend factor 
 (described in subparagraph (B)) for the class 
 for the year involved.
 (B) Medicare trend factor.--In subparagraph (A), 
 subject to section 104(b)(2), the ``medicare trend 
 factor'', for a class of services, is 1 plus the 
 average annual rate of increase in aggregate medicare 
 expenditures for the class of services during the 5-
 year period ending with 1993.
 (2) Nonmedicare.--
 (A) Determination.--For purposes of subsection 
 (a)--
 (i) For 1994.--The historical projected 
 nonmedicare expenditures for a class of 
 services for 1994 is equal to the portion of 
 the amount of aggregate nonmedicare 
 expenditures during 1993 (as determined under 
 section 101(b)(2)(A)) which is attributable to 
 the class of services, multiplied by the 
 nonmedicare trend factor (described in 
 subparagraph (B)) for the class for 1994.
 (ii) Subsequent years.--The historical 
 projected nonmedicare expenditures for a class 
 of services for a year after 1994 is equal to 
 the amount of the allocation for the class 
 under subsection (a)(2)(B) (taking into account 
 any adjustment under section 104) for the 
 preceding year multiplied by the medicare trend 
 factor (described in subparagraph (B)) for the 
 class for the year involved.
 (B) Nonmedicare trend factor.--In subparagraph (A), 
 subject to section 104(b)(2), the ``nonmedicare trend 
 factor'', for a class of services, is 1 plus the 
 average annual rate of increase in aggregate 
 nonmedicare expenditures for the class of services 
 during the 5-year period ending with 1993.
 (3) Publication of trend factors.--The Secretary shall 
 publish, by not later than August 1, 1994, the medicare and 
 nonmedicare trend factors for the different classes of 
 services.
 (c) Review and Changes in Allocation.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) No administrative authority to change.--Except 
 as specifically provided in section 104 or by law 
 enacted after the enactment of this Act, the Secretary 
 has no authority to change the allocation or trend 
 factors from the allocation and trend factors provided 
 under this section.
 (B) Recommended changes.--If the Secretary 
 determines that a change in the allocation of a budget 
 among classes is appropriate, the Secretary shall 
 submit to the Congress a report proposing such change. 
 The Secretary shall include in the report an 
 explanation of--
 (i) the rationale for such change, and
 (ii) the impact of such change on the total 
 aggregate medicare and nonmedicare expenditures 
 permitted for classes of services that would be 
 affected by the change.
 (2) Commission review.--Each applicable Commission shall 
 annually review and report to Congress, in its report submitted 
 under section 102(b)(4), on the effect of the trend factors 
 used in the allocation of the budgets among classes of 
 services. Such report shall include such recommendations for 
 appropriate adjustments in the trend factors as the applicable 
 Commission considers appropriate to properly take into account 
 at least--
 (A) changes in health care technology,
 (B) changes in the patterns and practices relating 
 to health care delivery found to be appropriate,
 (C) changes in the distribution of health care 
 services, and
 (D) the special health care needs of underserved 
 rural and inner city populations.

SEC. 104. ADJUSTMENTS FOR CHANGES IN MEDICARE BENEFITS.

 (a) In General.--With respect to a change in coverage under the 
medicare program provided in title IV of this Act that is effective in 
a year and results in an increase in expenditures for a class of 
services under the medicare program--
 (1) the Secretary shall--
 (A) increase the medicare health expenditure budget 
 under section 101 in the year by the amount (estimated 
 by the Secretary) of such increase in expenditures, and
 (B) decrease the nonmedicare health expenditure 
 budget under section 101 in the year by such amount; 
 and
 (2) the Secretary shall--
 (A) increase the amount allocated under section 
 103(a) to the class of services under the medicare 
 health expenditure budget for that year by such amount, 
 and
 (B) decrease the amount allocated under section 
 103(a) to the class of services under the nonmedicare 
 health expenditure budget for that year by such amount.
 (b) Subsequent Years.--If the Secretary makes a change in a budget 
or allocation in a particular year under subsection (a) with respect to 
a class of services--
 (1) the budgets and allocations for subsequent years shall 
 be computed based upon the changes made in the budget or 
 allocations for the particular year, and
 (2) the Secretary may adjust the medicare trend factor 
 (under section 103(b)(1)(B)) and nonmedicare trends factor 
 (under section 103(b)(2)(B)) applied to such class of services 
 in subsequent years to the extent appropriate to reflect any 
 difference between the trend factor otherwise applicable for 
 the class and the annual rate of increase in aggregate medicare 
 and nonmedicare expenditures for the services affected by the 
 change.

SEC. 105. NATIONAL HEALTH EXPENDITURES REPORTING SYSTEM.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall establish a national health 
expenditures reporting system (in this section referred to as the 
``system'') for purposes of--
 (1) establishing the national health expenditures budget,
 (2) allocating the health budgets among classes of 
 services,
 (3) determining maximum payment rates,
 (4) monitoring of State provider payment control systems, 
 and
 (5) otherwise carrying out this title.
 (b) Information Reporting.--
 (1) By provider.--Under the system, providers of health 
 care services shall report (beginning not later than January 1, 
 1995) such information relating to the provision of health care 
 services (including the volume and receipts for such services) 
 in such form and manner (including the use of electronic 
 transmission), by such classification, and at such periodic 
 intervals, as the Secretary shall specify in regulation.
 (2) Use of reporting mechanisms.--To the maximum extent 
 practicable and appropriate, reporting under such system shall 
 be done through reporting mechanisms (such as uniform hospital 
 reports provided under section 325) and using data bases 
 otherwise in use.
 (3) Use of surveys.--The Secretary may, where appropriate, 
 provide for the collection of information under the system 
 through surveys of a sample of health care providers or with 
 respect to a sample of information with respect to such 
 providers.
 (4) Confidentiality.--Information gathered pursuant to the 
 authority provided under this section shall not be disclosed in 
 a manner that identifies individual providers of services.
 (5) Transition.--Before January 1, 1995, for purposes of 
 this title, the Secretary may use such other data collection 
 and estimation techniques as may be appropriate for purposes 
 described in subsection (a).
 (c) Enforcement.--If a provider of health services is required, 
under the system under this section, to report information and refuses, 
after being requested by the Secretary, to provide the information 
required, or deliberately provides information that is false, the 
Secretary may impose a civil money penalty of not to exceed $10,000 for 
each such refusal or provision of false information. The provisions of 
section 1128A of the Social Security Act (other than subsections (a) 
and (b)) shall apply to civil money penalties under the previous 
sentence in the same manner as such provisions apply to a penalty or 
proceeding under section 1128A(a) of such Act.
 (d) Inclusion of Health Maintenance Organizations.--In this 
section, the term ``provider of health care services'' includes health 
maintenance organizations.

 Subtitle B--State Provider Payment Control Systems

SEC. 121. STATE PROVIDER PAYMENT RATES.

 (a) In General.--In the case of a State with a State provider 
payment control system (in this subtitle referred to as a ``State 
system'') approved under this section--
 (1) the payment rates provided under such system shall 
 apply to services covered under the system and furnished in the 
 State, and
 (2) pursuant to section 140(a), maximum payment rates shall 
 not be established or applied to such services under subtitle 
 C.
 (b) Process.--
 (1) Application.--The Secretary may not approve a State 
 system under this section unless the State submits to the 
 Secretary an application in such form and manner as the 
 Secretary may require and containing the information and 
 assurance required under this subtitle, together with any other 
 information and assurance as the Secretary may require.
 (2) Response.--The Secretary shall be deemed to have 
 approved the application of a State under paragraph (1) for a 
 State system unless the Secretary, within 90 days after the 
 date the State submits the application to the Secretary, either 
 denies such application in writing or informs the State in 
 writing with respect to any additional information or 
 assurances needed to make a final determination with respect to 
 the application. After the date the Secretary receives such 
 additional information and assurances, the application shall be 
 deemed to be approved unless the Secretary, within 90 days of 
 such date, denies the application.
 (3) Deemed approval of certain systems.--
 (A) In general.--In the case of a hospital 
 reimbursement control system approved under section 
 1886(c)(4) of the Social Security Act or described in 
 section 1814(b)(3) of such Act and used for payment of 
 hospital services in the State under the medicare 
 program, the system is deemed to be a State system 
 approved under this section with respect to payment for 
 hospital services.
 (B) Termination.--Insofar as subparagraph (A) 
 applies to a State system, the continuation of the 
 approval of the system is conditioned upon the system's 
 compliance with the requirements of section 123(a).
 (4) Effect of approval.--The approval of a State system 
 under this section shall be deemed to constitute the approval 
 by the Secretary of a waiver of such requirements relating to 
 the determination of payment amounts under the medicare and 
 medicaid programs as may be necessary to implement such system.
 (c) Conditions for Approval.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall approve the 
 application of a State with respect to a State system only if 
 the Secretary determines that the conditions for approval 
 described in sections 122 and 123 are met.
 (2) Limitation on disapproval.--The Secretary cannot deny 
 the application of a State for a State system on the ground 
 that the methodology used under the system to control payments 
 for inpatient hospital services is based on a payment 
 methodology other than on the basis of a diagnosis-related 
 group.
 (d) Termination of Approval.--The Secretary shall terminate 
approval of a State system in accordance with section 125 if--
 (1) the Secretary determines that the system no longer 
 meets the requirements of section 122(b)(1) (relating to all 
 payors), section 122(b)(3)(B) (relating to limitation on 
 differentials for medicaid services), or section 122(e) 
 (relating to certain requirements for hospitals); or
 (2) the Secretary has reason to believe that the assurances 
 described in any of the following sections are not being (or 
 will not be) met:
 (A) Section 122(b)(2) (relating to equitable 
 treatment of all payors).
 (B) Section 122(f) (relating to special 
 requirements for hospital admissions and exclusions).
 (C) Section 123 (relating to limiting aggregate 
 expenditures).

SEC. 122. GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR STATE PROVIDER PAYMENT CONTROL 
 SYSTEMS.

 (a) Application to Classes of Services.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the system 
 applies to--
 (A) inpatient hospital services (including services 
 of exempt hospitals (as defined in section 151(f)(2)) 
 statewide;
 (B) inpatient and outpatient hospital services 
 (including services of exempt hospitals (as so defined) 
 statewide;
 (C) physicians services statewide; or
 (D) such inpatient and outpatient hospital services 
 and physicians services statewide.
 (2) Additional classes.--The system may apply to services 
 in a class of services in addition to services described in 
 paragraph (1) only if the system applies to all services within 
 such class of services.
 (b) Application to All Payors; Equitable Treatment.--
 (1) Application to all payors.--The system applies to 
 substantially all payors (including the medicare program and 
 the medicaid program in the State) for services to which the 
 system applies.
 (2) Equitable treatment.--The Secretary has been provided 
 satisfactory assurances as to the equitable treatment of all 
 payors (including the medicare and medicaid programs and other 
 Federal and State programs) under the system.
 (3) Payment rate differentials permitted.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), a 
 State may provide for payment rates for services 
 furnished under the medicaid program that are different 
 from the payment rates for services for which payment 
 is made by other payors.
 (B) Limitation on differentials for services under 
 medicaid.--The ratio of the average rate of payment for 
 services under the medicaid program to such average 
 rate of payment for the same services by health benefit 
 plans (other than the medicare and medicaid programs) 
 may not be less than the ratio of the average of the 
 rates of payment within the class of services for which 
 payment is provided under the medicaid program to such 
 average rate of payment under other health benefit 
 plans (other than the medicare and medicaid programs) 
 during the most recent year before the implementation 
 of the State system, as determined by the Secretary.
 (4) Separate rate negotiations permitted for health 
 maintenance organizations.--A State may provide that a health 
 maintenance organization (as defined in section 2(b)) may 
 negotiate directly with providers of services covered under the 
 system with respect to the organization's rate of payment for 
 such services.
 (5) Minimum payment rates.--Under the State system, the 
 State may provide that the amount of payment for any service 
 within a class of services under the system may not be less 
 than a minimum payment rate established by the State for the 
 services.
 (c) Operation.--The system is operated directly by the State or by 
a State agency or other public authority.
 (d) Reports Required.--Providers of services covered under the 
system must make such reports as the Secretary may require in order to 
monitor assurances provided under section 123 and make determinations 
under section 124.
 (e) Assurances of Continued Access.--The State must provide the 
Secretary with satisfactory assurances that operation of the system 
will not result in any change in hospital admission practices or the 
provision of other services which result in--
 (1) a significant reduction in the proportion of patients 
 (receiving services covered under the system) who have no 
 third-party coverage and who are unable to pay for such 
 services,
 (2) a significant reduction in the proportion of 
 individuals provided services for which payment is (or is 
 likely to be) less than the anticipated charges or costs of 
 such services, or
 (3) the refusal to provide services to individuals who 
 would be expected to require unusually costly or prolonged 
 treatment for reasons other than those related to the 
 appropriateness of the care available from the provider.
 (f) Special Requirements for Hospital Admissions and Exclusions.--
If the system applies to payment for hospital services, the system 
requires hospitals to which the system applies to meet the requirement 
of section 1866(a)(1)(G) of the Social Security Act with respect to the 
medicare program and the system provides for the exclusion of certain 
costs in accordance with section 1862(a)(14) of such Act (except for 
such waivers thereof as the Secretary provides by regulation).

SEC. 123. CONTROL OF AGGREGATE EXPENDITURES REQUIREMENT FOR STATE 
 SYSTEMS.

 (a) Assurances Required.--
 (1) In general.--A State system may not be approved until 
 the Secretary has been provided satisfactory assurances that 
 under the system, during a 3-year period (the first such period 
 beginning with the first month in which this section applies to 
 that system in the State)--
 (A) the sum of the aggregate medicare and 
 nonmedicare expenditures (as defined in section 101(d)) 
 for the class (or classes) of services covered under 
 the system will not exceed the applicable total limit 
 specified in paragraph (2); and
 (B) the aggregate medicare expenditures for such 
 class (or classes) under the system will not exceed the 
 applicable medicare limit specified in paragraph (3).
 (2) Applicable total limit.--The applicable total limit 
 specified in this paragraph is the total of the maximum amount 
 of payments that would be payable in the State for the covered 
 class (or classes) of services if the State system were not in 
 effect.
 (3) Applicable medicare limit.--The applicable medicare 
 limit specified in this paragraph is the total of the maximum 
 amount of payments that would be payable in the State for the 
 covered class (or classes) of services under the medicare 
 program if the State system were not in effect.
 (4) Special rule for expenditures for hmos.--In determining 
 aggregate expenditures for purposes of subparagraphs (A) and 
 (B) of paragraph (1), the Secretary shall exclude expenditures 
 for services of staff or group model health maintenance 
 organizations if the State system provides that such 
 organizations may negotiate directly with providers of services 
 covered under the system with respect to the organization's 
 rate of payment for such services and, in determining the 
 applicable limits under paragraphs (2) and (3), the Secretary 
 shall exclude payments for services of such organizations.
 (b) Annual Determination by Secretary.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall annually determine 
 whether a State system met the assurances required under 
 subsection (a) for the most recent 3-year period for which the 
 State system was in effect.
 (2) Aggregation.--The Secretary may not determine under 
 paragraph (1) that--
 (A) aggregate medicare and nonmedicare expenditures 
 under a State system exceeded the applicable total 
 limit for a 3-year period unless the Secretary 
 determines that, for all classes of services covered 
 under the system, aggregate medicare and nonmedicare 
 expenditures in the State exceeded such limit for all 
 such classes, and
 (B) aggregate medicare expenditures under a State 
 system exceeded the applicable medicare limit for a 3-
 year period unless the Secretary determines that, for 
 all classes of services covered under the system, 
 aggregate medicare expenditures in the State exceeded 
 the applicable medicare limit for all such classes.
 (c) Use of Medicare Savings.--
 (1) In general.--If the Secretary determines that a State 
 system under this subtitle has resulted in medicare savings 
 over a period of 3 consecutive years, in the 4th year there 
 shall be paid to the State an amount equal to the medicare 
 savings in the first year of such 3-year period. Such payments 
 shall be made from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund or 
 the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund in such 
 amounts as reflects the medicare savings attributable to the 
 respective Trust Fund in such first year.
 (2) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) The term ``medicare spending'' means, with 
 respect to a State in a year, aggregate medicare 
 expenditures incurred under the medicare program in the 
 State in the year.
 (B) The term ``baseline medicare spending'' means, 
 with respect to a State in a year, the amount of 
 aggregate medicare expenditures that the Secretary 
 estimates would have been incurred under the medicare 
 program in the State in the year if this subtitle did 
 not apply in the State.
 (C) The term ``medicare savings'' means, with 
 respect to a State in a year, the amount by which the 
 baseline medicare spending for the State in the year 
 exceeds the medicare spending for the State in the 
 year.

SEC. 124. TREATMENT OF STATES FAILING TO CONTROL AGGREGATE EXPENDITURES

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall terminate the State system (in 
accordance with section 125) or impose a sanction described in 
subsection (b) on a State if the Secretary determines that, with 
respect to a State system under this subtitle for a 3-year period--
 (1) the aggregate medicare and nonmedicare expenditures (as 
 defined in section 101(d)) for the class (or classes) of 
 services covered under the system exceeded the applicable total 
 limit specified in section 123(a)(2); or
 (2) the aggregate medicare expenditures for the class (or 
 classes) of services covered under the system exceeded the 
 applicable medicare limit specified in section 123(a)(3).
 (b) Sanctions.--The sanctions described in this subsection are as 
follows:
 (1) In the case of a determination under subsection (a)(1), 
 a reduction in the aggregate nonmedicare expenditures otherwise 
 applicable for the class (or classes) of services covered under 
 the system for the following year (or for the following 3-year 
 period, if the Secretary determines that a reduction for such 
 period is appropriate in the case of a State) in an amount 
 equal to--
 (A) the amount by which the aggregate medicare and 
 nonmedicare expenditures for the class (or classes) for 
 the preceding 3-year period exceeded the applicable 
 total limit, less
 (B) the amount of any reduction under paragraph 
 (2).
 (2) In the case of a determination under subsection (a)(2), 
 a reduction in the aggregate medicare expenditures otherwise 
 applicable for the class (or classes) of services covered under 
 the system for the following year (or for the following 3-year 
 period, if the Secretary determines that a reduction for such 
 period is appropriate in the case of a State) in an amount 
 equal to the amount by which the aggregate medicare 
 expenditures for the class (or classes) for the preceding 3-
 year period exceeded the applicable medicare limit.
 (c) Notice.--The Secretary may not impose any sanction against a 
State under subsection (b) unless the Secretary has provided the State 
with notice of the Secretary's determination under subsection (a) and 
intent to impose the sanction under subsection (b).

SEC. 125. TERMINATION OF APPROVAL OF STATE SYSTEM.

 (a) Process Requirements.--
 (1) Notice.--The Secretary may terminate the approval of a 
 State system under this subtitle only after the expiration of a 
 90-day period beginning on the date the Secretary informs the 
 State of the Secretary's intention to terminate such approval, 
 unless, during such 90-day period, the State requests a hearing 
 with the Secretary.
 (2) Hearing.--If the State requests a hearing during the 
 90-day period described in paragraph (1), the Secretary shall 
 conduct a hearing during which the State may present evidence 
 showing that the Secretary should not terminate the approval of 
 its system. If the Secretary decides to reject such evidence, 
 the Secretary shall terminate the approval of the State's 
 system beginning with the first day of the first month that 
 begins after the Secretary's decision.
 (3) Judicial review prohibited.--There shall be no 
 administrative or judicial review of a decision by the 
 Secretary to terminate the approval of a State system under 
 this subsection.
 (b) Effect of Termination on Payment Rates Applicable to Services 
in State.--
 (1) In general.--If the Secretary terminates the approval 
 of a State system under this section, the maximum payment rates 
 applicable to services within the class (or classes) of 
 services covered under the State system shall be the maximum 
 payment rates otherwise applicable to services within the class 
 (or classes) under subtitle C, subject to the adjustment 
 described in paragraph (2).
 (2) Recapture of excess spending.--
 (A) Medicare.--The Secretary shall modify the 
 percentage payment adjustment applied under section 161 
 to services within the class (or classes) of services 
 that were covered under a State system for which 
 approval was terminated under this section by such 
 factor as the Secretary determines necessary to 
 decrease the amount of aggregate medicare expenditures 
 that would otherwise be made for services provided in 
 the State by the amount by which aggregate medicare 
 expenditures for such class (or classes) of services 
 exceeded the applicable medicare limit specified in 
 section 123(a)(3) for the preceding year.
 (B) Nonmedicare.--The Secretary shall reduce the 
 maximum payment rates applicable under part 1 of 
 subtitle C to services within the class (or classes) of 
 services that were covered under a State system for 
 which approval was terminated under this section by 
 such factor as the Secretary determines necessary to 
 decrease the amount of aggregate nonmedicare 
 expenditures that would otherwise be made for services 
 provided in the State by--
 (i) the amount by which aggregate medicare 
 and nonmedicare expenditures for such class (or 
 classes) of services exceeded the applicable 
 total limit specified in section 123(a)(2) for 
 the preceding year, less
 (ii) the amount of any decrease in 
 aggregate medicare expenditures in the State 
 provided under subparagraph (A).

 Subtitle C--Maximum Payment Rates for Services Not Subject to State 
 Provider Payment Control Systems or Provided by Staff or Group Model 
 Health Maintenance Organizations

SEC. 140. EXEMPTION FOR SERVICES SUBJECT TO APPROVED STATE PROVIDER 
 PAYMENT CONTROL SYSTEMS OR PROVIDED BY STAFF OR GROUP 
 MODEL HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS.

 (a) Approved State Provider Payment Control Systems.--In the case 
of services furnished in a State and to which the State provider 
payment control system (approved by the Secretary under section 121) 
applies--
 (1) the Secretary shall not propose, establish, or apply 
 maximum payment rates to such services under part 1 of this 
 subtitle, and
 (2) the adjustments on payments rates for such services 
 made under the medicare program under section 161 shall not 
 apply.
 (b) Services Provided by Staff or Group Model Health Maintenance 
Organizations.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the maximum 
 payment rates established under part 1 shall not apply to 
 charges or payments for services furnished to individuals who 
 are enrolled in a staff or group model health maintenance 
 organization (as defined in section 2(b)(2)) with respect to 
 health care services covered under the subscriber agreement.
 (2) Continued application to out-of-area coverage and 
 emergency services.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to services 
 described in section 1876(c)(4)(B) of the Social Security Act.
 (3) Indirect application under medicare program.--Nothing 
 in this subsection shall be construed as affecting the payment 
 of amounts to health maintenance organizations under the 
 medicare program under a risk-sharing contract under section 
 1876 of the Social Security Act. However, adjustments in 
 payment rates under section 161 may affect the computation of 
 the average adjusted per capita cost under such section.

 Part 1--Establishment and Application of Maximum Payment Rates (Other 
 than Under Medicare Program)

SEC. 141. PROCESS.

 (a) Publication of Rates.--Subject to section 140, the Secretary 
shall cause to have published in the Federal Register--
 (1) not later than April 1 of each year (or not later than 
 September 1, 1994, in the case of rates for 1995), proposed 
 maximum payment rates under this subtitle for the following 
 year for public comment, and
 (2) during the last 15 days of October of each year (or not 
 later than December 1, 1994, in the case of rates for 1995), 
 after such consideration of public comment on the proposed 
 rates, the maximum payment rates under this subtitle for the 
 following year.
 (b) Items Included in Publications.--The Secretary shall include in 
the publications referred to in subsection (a)--
 (1) a description of the payment methodology used in the 
 establishment of maximum payment rates; and
 (2) in the case of a publication under subsection (a)(2), 
 the extent that the rates differ from the applicable 
 Commission's recommendations under subsection (c), an 
 explanation of the Secretary's grounds for not following such 
 recommendations.
 (c) Reports of Commissions.--With respect to the establishment of 
maximum payment rates for services under this subtitle, the applicable 
Commission, not later than June 1 of each year, shall report its 
recommendations to the Secretary and Congress concerning such rates for 
the following year. Each such report may include such other 
recommendations relating to the operation of this subtitle as the 
Commission considers appropriate.
 (d) Payment Rate Defined.--In this subtitle, the term ``payment 
rate'' means, with respect to health care services for which amounts 
are payable under a plan or program, the rate of payment provided for 
under the plan or program and including cost-sharing (including 
deductibles, coinsurance, and extra billing amounts) applicable under 
the plan or program with respect to the services.

SEC. 142. PAYMENT METHODOLOGY; RELATION TO BUDGET ALLOCATION.

 (a) Payment Methodology.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish maximum 
 payment rates under this subtitle consistent with the payment 
 rate methodology specified under part 2.
 (2) Treatment of services within a class.--Nothing in this 
 title shall be construed as requiring that maximum payment 
 rates established under this subtitle for different health care 
 services within a class of services be the same or determined 
 under the same methodology.
 (b) Relation to Overall Limit on Expenditures for Classes of 
Services.--
 (1) In general.--The maximum payment rates for a year shall 
 be established under this subtitle in a manner so that, as 
 applied under section 143--
 (A) the aggregate nonmedicare expenditures for all 
 the services within each class subject to such rates, 
 is equal to
 (B) the allocation to the class for the year under 
 section 102 with respect to the nonmedicare health 
 expenditure budget (less the amount of the reduction in 
 the allocation provided under paragraph (2)).
 (2) Removal of portion of allocation attributable to state 
 provider payment control systems or staff or group model health 
 maintenance organizations.--For purposes of paragraph (1)(B), 
 the allocation to a class of services for a year shall be 
 reduced by the product of--
 (A) such allocation, and
 (B) the proportion of such allocation that the 
 Secretary estimates is attributable to services exempt 
 under section 140 from the establishment or application 
 of maximum payment rates under this part.

SEC. 143. GENERAL APPLICATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF MAXIMUM PAYMENT RATES.

 (a) Limits on Charges.--Subject to section 140--
 (1) In general.--In the case of a provider that provides 
 health care services to an individual for which a maximum 
 payment rate is established under this subtitle--
 (A) the provider may not charge (i) an amount in 
 excess of such rate or (ii) on a payment basis other 
 than the payment basis established for such services 
 under part 2;
 (B) the provider may not collect for such services 
 an amount in excess of such rate; and
 (C) the individual and other entities, including a 
 health benefit plan, are not liable collectively for 
 payment of any amount that exceeds such rate.
 (2) Relation to medicare program.--This subsection shall 
 not apply to services furnished to an individual who is 
 entitled to benefits with respect to such services under the 
 medicare program.
 (b) Enforcement Through Civil Money Penalties.--
 (1) Improper charges.--If a provider imposes a charge in 
 violation of subsection (a)(1)(A), the provider is subject to 
 civil money penalty in an amount not to exceed $100 for each 
 such charge.
 (2) Improper collection.--If a provider collects excess 
 amounts in violation of subsection (a)(1)(B) and does not 
 refund such excess amounts within 30 days of date on which the 
 provider is notified that the provider collected excess amount, 
 the provider is subject to a civil money penalty in an amount 
 equal to three times the amount of such excess which has not 
 been so refunded or, if greater, $500.
 (3) Process.--The provisions of section 1128A of the Social 
 Security Act (other subsections (a) and (b)) shall apply to a 
 civil money penalty under this subsection in the same manner as 
 such provisions apply to a penalty or proceeding under section 
 1128A(a) of such Act.
 (4) Deposit of penalties in anti-fraud and abuse trust 
 fund.--Any civil money penalties collected under this 
 subsection shall be paid into the Anti-Fraud and Abuse Trust 
 Fund established under section 341(b).

SEC. 144. LIMITATION ON PAYMENT RATES UNDER MEDICAID.

 (a) In General.--Subject to subsection (b), notwithstanding any 
other provision of law, payment may not be made under section 
1903(a)(1) of the Social Security Act to a State for amounts expended 
as medical assistance for health care services for which maximum 
payment rates are established under this part, to the extent that the 
rate of payment for such services exceeds the maximum payment rate so 
established.
 (b) Application of Medicaid Payment Floors.--Subsection (a) shall 
not apply to the extent payment rates do not exceed the applicable 
minimum payment rates required to be provided under section 401 or 
under section 1902(a)(13)(G) of the Social Security Act.

 Part 2--Methodologies for Determining Maximum Rates (Other than Under 
 Medicare Program)

SEC. 151. BASIS FOR MAXIMUM RATES OF PAYMENT FOR INPATIENT HOSPITAL 
 SERVICES.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to additions under subsection (d) 
 and to other adjustments under subsection (e), the maximum 
 payment rate established under this subtitle for a service 
 within the class of services consisting of inpatient hospital 
 services that is provided by a hospital (as defined in 
 paragraph (2)) during a year shall be equal to the product of--
 (A) the standardized amount applicable to the 
 hospital, as established in accordance with subsection 
 (b); and
 (B) the weighting factor assigned to the service 
 (as determined in accordance with subsection (c)).
 (2) Hospital defined.--In this section, the term 
 ``hospital'' does not include an exempt hospital (as defined in 
 subsection (f)).
 (b) Establishment of Standardized Amounts.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a 
 standardized amount under subsection (a) for hospitals located 
 in a large urban area and for other hospitals for a year by 
 standardizing the hospital's average cost per discharge (based 
 on the hospital's allowed operating receipts, as determined 
 under paragraph (2)) in accordance with paragraph (3). For 
 purposes of the preceding sentence, a hospital is located in a 
 ``large urban area'' if the hospital is treated as being 
 located in a large urban area under section 1886(d) of the 
 Social Security Act for purposes of the medicare program.
 (2) Allowed operating receipts defined.--
 (A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1) and 
 except as provided in subparagraph (B), a hospital's 
 ``allowed operating receipts'' means the total of all 
 receipts of the hospital (without regard to the source) 
 attributable to routine operating costs, ancillary 
 service operating costs, and special care unit 
 operating costs with respect to inpatient hospital 
 services, as determined on an average per admission or 
 per discharge basis (as determined by the Secretary), 
 during 1993, increased by the Secretary's estimate of 
 the percentage increase in such receipts between the 
 midpoint of 1993 and the midpoint of 1994.
 (B) Exclusions.--In determining a hospital's 
 allowed operating receipts under subparagraph (A), the 
 Secretary shall exclude the following:
 (i) Receipts attributable to services for 
 which payment was made to the hospital under 
 the medicare program.
 (ii) The value of the costs of services 
 which are treated as bad debt or charity care 
 (as defined by the Secretary) for purposes of 
 the hospital's cost reports.
 (iii) The value of the costs of services 
 furnished under the medicaid program which are 
 in excess of the payment received from such 
 program by the hospital.
 (C) Certain outpatient receipts included.--In 
 determining a hospital's allowed operating receipts 
 under subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall include all 
 receipts attributable to services that are provided by 
 the hospital (or by an entity wholly owned or operated 
 by the hospital) to a patient during the 3 days 
 immediately preceding the date of the patient's 
 admission if such services are diagnostic services 
 (including clinical diagnostic laboratory tests) or are 
 other services related to the admission (as defined by 
 the Secretary).
 (3) Process for standardizing amounts.--The Secretary shall 
 standardize the average per discharge amount for each hospital 
 for a year by--
 (A) adjusting for variations among hospitals by 
 area in the average hospital wage level, using the area 
 wage level applied for hospitals under the medicare 
 program under section 1886(d)(3)(E) of the Social 
 Security Act;
 (B) adjusting for variations in case mix among 
 hospitals;
 (C) excluding an estimate of the additional 
 payments to be made for outliers, using the amounts 
 paid to hospitals for outliers under the medicare 
 program under section 1886(d)(5)(A) of such Act (except 
 that the Secretary may apply different amounts if the 
 Secretary finds that such different amounts more 
 accurately reflect outliers for services furnished to 
 individuals who are not medicare beneficiaries);
 (D) adjusting for variations among hospitals by 
 area in input prices other than wages and wage-related 
 costs;
 (E) excluding an estimate of indirect medical 
 education costs, using the indirect medical education 
 adjustment applied for hospitals under the medicare 
 program under section 1886(d)(5)(B) of such Act;
 (F) excluding an estimate of direct graduate 
 medical education costs; and
 (G) excluding an estimate of capital-related costs.
 (c) Establishment of Diagnosis-Related Groups and Weighting 
Factors.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) Diagnosis-related groups.--For purposes of this 
 section, the Secretary shall establish a classification 
 of inpatient hospital discharges by diagnosis-related 
 groups and a methodology for classifying specific 
 hospital discharges within these groups.
 (B) Weighting factors.--For each diagnosis-related 
 group established under subparagraph (A), the Secretary 
 shall assign an appropriate weighting factor which 
 reflects the relative hospital resources used with 
 respect to discharges classified within that group 
 compared to discharges classified within other groups.
 (C) Use of medicare groups and factors.--In 
 establishing diagnosis-related groups and assigning 
 weighting factors for such groups under this paragraph, 
 the Secretary shall use the diagnosis-related groups 
 and weighting factors used under the medicare program 
 under section 1886(d)(4) of the Social Security Act, 
 except to the extent that the Secretary must establish 
 diagnosis-related groups in addition to the groups 
 under such program, or adjust such weighting factors, 
 to take into account the application of payment rates 
 under this section to inpatient hospital services 
 furnished to individuals who are not medicare 
 beneficiaries.
 (2) Standard benefit package.--The diagnosis-related groups 
 and the weighting factors assigned to such groups shall be 
 based upon a standard benefit package consisting of the 
 standard inpatient hospital services provided under health 
 benefit plans (other than the medicare program and the medicaid 
 program), as determined by the Secretary on the basis of a 
 survey of such plans.
 (3) Adjustment for variations from standard benefit 
 package.--The Secretary shall establish a table of adjustment 
 factors to adjust the weighting factors to reflect the 
 actuarial differences between the value of the coverage under 
 the standard benefit package described in paragraph (2) and the 
 value of the services provided under health benefit plans that 
 vary from the services provided under the standard benefit 
 package.
 (d) Increases to Maximum Payment Rates.--
 (1) Costs of direct graduate medical education.--In the 
 case of a hospital that has incurred costs for direct graduate 
 medical education during a year, the Secretary shall increase 
 the maximum payment rate otherwise applicable under this 
 section to inpatient services furnished by the hospital, 
 consistent with the methodology used to make payments to 
 hospitals under the medicare program for such costs under 
 section 1886(h) of the Social Security Act.
 (2) Adjustment for indirect medical education.--The 
 Secretary shall increase the maximum payment rate otherwise 
 applicable under this section for a hospital for to take into 
 account indirect costs of medical education incurred by a 
 hospital, in accordance with the methodology used to adjust 
 payments to hospitals under the medicare program for such costs 
 under section 1886(d)(5)(B) of the Social Security Act.
 (3) Adjustment for outliers.--The Secretary shall increase 
 the maximum payment rate otherwise applicable under this 
 section for a hospital--
 (A) for length of stay outliers for discharges in a 
 diagnosis-related group (as determined by the Secretary 
 in accordance with the criteria used to adjust payments 
 to hospitals under the medicare program for such 
 outliers under section 1886(d)(5)(A)(i) of the Social 
 Security Act); and
 (B) for cost outliers for any discharges in a 
 diagnosis-related group (as determined by the Secretary 
 in accordance with the criteria used to adjust payments 
 to hospitals under the medicare program for such 
 outliers under section 1886(d)(5)(A)(ii) of the Social 
 Security Act).
 (4) Uncompensated care adjustment.--The Secretary shall 
 increase the maximum payment rate otherwise applicable under 
 this section for a hospital to take into account the costs 
 incurred by a hospital in providing services described in 
 clause (ii) or (iii) of subsection (b)(2)(B).
 (e) Other Adjustments.--
 (1) Needs of certain facilities.--The Secretary may adjust 
 the maximum payment rates otherwise determined under this 
 section in such manner and to such extent as the Secretary 
 considers appropriate to take into account the needs of--
 (A) regional and national referral centers 
 described in section 1886(d)(5)(C) of the Social 
 Security Act;
 (B) sole community hospitals described in section 
 1886(d)(5)(D) of such Act; and
 (C) essential access hospitals designated by the 
 Secretary under section 1820(i)(1) of such Act.
 (2) Payments for transferred patients.--The Secretary shall 
 provide for an adjustment to the maximum payment rates under 
 this section to take into account inpatient hospital services 
 provided to patients transferred to (or from) the hospital, in 
 accordance with the standards used to determine such 
 adjustments under the medicare program.
 (3) Payments for capital.--Payments to hospitals for 
 capital and capital-related costs shall be determined in the 
 same manner as payments for capital and capital-related costs 
 are made under section 1886(g) of the Social Security Act, 
 adjusted to take into account the portion of such costs for 
 which the hospital receives payment from health benefit plans 
 (other than the medicare and medicaid programs).
 (f) Maximum Payment Rates for Exempt Hospitals.--
 (1) Hospital-specific, per admission amount.--In the case 
 of an exempt hospital (as defined in paragraph (2)), the 
 maximum payment rate for inpatient hospital services provided 
 by the hospital shall be determined on a per admission basis, 
 based on the allowable operating receipts of the hospital 
 (determined in the same manner as such receipts are determined 
 for other hospitals under subsection (b)).
 (2) Exempt hospital.--The term ``exempt hospital'' means--
 (A) a psychiatric hospital (as defined in section 
 1861(f) of the Social Security Act), including a 
 psychiatric unit of a hospital which is a distinct part 
 of the hospital (as defined by the Secretary);
 (B) a rehabilitation hospital (as defined by the 
 Secretary), including a rehabilitation unit of a 
 hospital which is a distinct part of the hospital (as 
 defined by the Secretary);
 (C) a hospital whose inpatients are predominantly 
 individuals under 18 years of age;
 (D) a hospital which has an average inpatient 
 length of stay (as determined by the Secretary) of 
 greater than 25 days; or
 (E) a hospital that the Secretary has classified, 
 at any time on or before December 31, 1992, for 
 purposes of applying exceptions and adjustments to 
 payment amounts under section 1886(d) of such Act, as a 
 hospital involved extensively in treatment for or 
 research on cancer.

SEC. 152. BASIS FOR MAXIMUM PAYMENT RATE FOR CLASS OF PHYSICIANS' 
 SERVICES AND OTHER PROFESSIONAL MEDICAL SERVICES.

 (a) Use of Relative Value Fee Schedule.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to subsection (b), the maximum 
 payment rates established under this subtitle for a service 
 within the class of services consisting of physicians' services 
 and other professional medical services during a year shall be 
 equal to the product of--
 (A) the relative value for the service applied 
 under section 1848(b) of the Social Security Act;
 (B) an applicable conversion factor (determined by 
 the Secretary in an amount consistent with the 
 requirements of section 142(b)); and
 (C) the geographic adjustment factor applied under 
 section 1848(b) of the Social Security Act.
 (b) New Procedure Codes and Relative Value Units.--In applying 
subsection (a) in the case of services for which relative value units 
have not been established under section 1848 of the Social Security 
Act, the Secretary shall establish relative value units in the same 
manner as if payment for such services were made under the medicare 
program.
 (c) Publication of Definitions, Relative Value Units, and Payment 
Policies.--The Secretary shall provide for publication of such 
definitions, relative value units (established under subsection (b)), 
and payment policies as may be necessary for payors to apply the 
maximum payment rates established under this section.

SEC. 153. BASIS FOR OTHER MAXIMUM PAYMENT RATES FOR SERVICES USING 
 CERTAIN MEDICARE PAYMENT METHODOLOGIES.

 The maximum payment rates established under this subtitle for 
services for any of the following classes of services shall be 
determined using the applicable payment methodologies under the 
medicare program as follows:
 (1) In the case of facility services described in section 
 1832(a)(2)(F) of the Social Security Act furnished in 
 connection with a surgical procedure specified pursuant to 
 section 1833(i)(1)(A) of such Act and furnished to an 
 individual in an ambulatory surgical center described in such 
 section, the methodology described in section 1833(i)(2) of 
 such Act.
 (2) For the class of diagnostic testing services described 
 in section 102(a)(2)(C)--
 (A) in the case of clinical laboratory services, 
 the methodology described in sections 1833(a)(2)(D) and 
 1833(h) of such Act, and
 (B) in the case of other diagnostic services, the 
 applicable methodology under part B of title XVIII of 
 such Act.
 (3) In the case of an item of durable medical equipment 
 (described in section 1834(a)(13) of such Act), the methodology 
 described in section 1834(a)(1) of such Act.
 (4) In the case of prosthetic devices and orthotics and 
 prosthetics, the methodology described in section 1834(h)(1)(A) 
 of such Act.
 (5) In the case of psychologists and clinical social 
 workers, the methodologies described in section 1833(a)(1)(L) 
 and 1833(a)(1)(F), respectively.
 (6) For prescription drugs, the methodology described in 
 section 1834(e) of such Act.
 (7) For renal dialysis services, home dialysis supplies and 
 equipment (as defined in section 1881(b)(8) of such Act), and 
 self-care home dialysis support services (as defined in section 
 1881(b)(9) of such Act), the methodology described in section 
 1881(b) of such Act.
 (8) For any other service within a class of services for 
 which the amount of payment made under part B of the medicare 
 program is determined on the basis of reasonable or prevailing 
 charge, the methodology used for payment for such service under 
 such part.

SEC. 154. OTHER SERVICES.

 In the case of services within a class of services for which a 
methodology for establishing maximum payment rates is not otherwise 
provided pursuant to the preceding provisions of this subtitle, the 
Secretary shall establish an appropriate methodology for establishing 
such rates, taking into account the payment methodology or 
methodologies in use under the medicare program or other health benefit 
plans.

SEC. 155. DEVELOPMENT OF PROSPECTIVELY-DETERMINED PAYMENT 
 METHODOLOGIES.

 (a) Development of Prospective Payment Methodologies for All 
Classes of Services.--
 (1) Proposal.--The Secretary shall develop proposals to 
 establish a methodology for each class of services (or services 
 within such a class) for which payment rates are not specified 
 in sections 151 through 153 and are not determined on a 
 prospective basis pursuant to this subtitle under which payment 
 rates for such services shall be determined on a prospectively-
 determined basis.
 (2) Report.--Not later than 3 years after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit the proposals 
 developed under paragraph (1) to the Committee on Ways and 
 Means and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
 Representatives, the Committee on Finance of the Senate.
 (b) Adjustment to Prospective Methodology for Children's 
Hospitals.--If any methodology is implemented to determine the amount 
of payments for the operating costs of inpatient hospital services 
under the medicare program on the basis of prospectively-determined 
rates for hospitals whose inpatients are predominantly individuals 
under 18 years of age, the Secretary shall assure that payments under 
such methodology shall--
 (1) be made on a hospital-specific basis;
 (2) be based on the resource requirements of the population 
 receiving services from such hospitals; and
 (3) be determined by using pediatric-specific inpatient 
 data.

 Part 3--Medicare Payment Adjustments

SEC. 161. CONFORMING MEDICARE PAYMENT RATES TO MEDICARE HEALTH 
 EXPENDITURE ALLOCATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law 
(including the amendments made by title IV of this Act), but subject to 
section 140(a)(2), the Secretary shall adjust the payment rate or 
allowance (or, in the absence of such a rate, payment amount) otherwise 
applied under the medicare program (and any maximum charge limits or 
payment limits imposed under such program) for any health care service 
in a class of services by the percentage payment adjustment specified 
by the Secretary under subsection (b) for the class for the year 
involved.
 (b) Percentage Payment Adjustment Computed.--Subject to section 
125(b)(2)(A), at the same time as the Secretary establishes maximum 
payment rates under part 1, the Secretary shall compute and publish, 
for each class of services for each year, such percentage payment 
adjustment as the Secretary determines to be necessary to assure that--
 (1) aggregate medicare expenditures for such class of 
 services for the year subject to such adjustment, does not 
 exceed
 (2) the allocation (under section 103(a)(2)(A)) of 
 aggregate medicare expenditures attributable to such class for 
 the year less the product of such allocation and the proportion 
 of such allocation that the Secretary estimates is attributable 
 to services exempt under section 140 from the establishment or 
 application of maximum payment rates under part 1.
 (c) Publications.--In publishing payment rates under the medicare 
program, the Secretary shall take into account any percentage payment 
adjustment applied under this section.

SEC. 162. ADJUSTMENTS TO MEDICARE PAYMENTS FOR GRADUATE MEDICAL 
 EDUCATION.

 (a) Determination of Full-Time-Equivalent Residents During Initial 
Residency Period.--
 (1) Emphasis on primary care.--Paragraph (4)(C)(ii) of 
 section 1886(h) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395ww(h)) is amended by striking ``is 1.00,'' and inserting 
 the following: ``is--
 ``(I) 1.1, in the case of a 
 resident who is a primary care resident 
 (as defined in paragraph (5)(H)),
 ``(II) 1.0, in the case of a 
 resident who is not a primary care 
 resident and who specializes in 
 internal medicine or pediatrics,
 ``(III) .9, in the case of a 
 resident who is not described in 
 subclause (I) or (II) and who is in the 
 initial 3 years of the residency 
 period, or
 ``(IV) .8, in the case of a 
 resident not described in subclause 
 (I), (II), or (III),''.
 (2) Primary care resident defined.--Paragraph (5) of such 
 section is amended--
 (A) by redesignating subparagraph (H) as 
 subparagraph (I), and
 (B) by inserting after subparagraph (G) the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(H) Primary care resident.--The term `primary 
 care resident' means (in accordance with criteria 
 established by the Secretary) a resident being trained 
 in a distinct program of family practice medicine, 
 general practice, general internal medicine, or general 
 pediatrics.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1993.

 TITLE II--MANAGED CARE AND MANAGED COMPETITION

 Subtitle A--Managed Care

SEC. 201. AUTHORIZATION FOR MANAGED CARE SYSTEMS TO PAY LESS THAN 
 MAXIMUM PAYMENT RATES.

 Nothing in this Act shall be construed as preventing managed care 
systems from negotiating with providers payment rates that are less 
than the maximum payment rates established under title I.

SEC. 202. STAFF AND GROUP MODEL HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS EXEMPT 
 FROM MAXIMUM PAYMENT RATES.

 Pursuant to section 140(b), the maximum payment rates established 
under part 1 of subtitle C of title I shall not apply to charges or 
payments for services furnished to individuals who are enrolled in a 
staff or group model health maintenance organization (as defined in 
section 2(b)(2)) with respect to health care services covered under the 
subscriber agreement.

SEC. 203. REPEAL OF SUNSET OF DUAL CHOICE REQUIREMENT.

 Effective upon the enactment of this Act, section 7(b) of the 
Health Maintenance Organization Amendments of 1988 (Public Law 100-517) 
is repealed and the provisions of section 1310 of the Public Health 
Service Act shall be effective as if such section 7(b) had not been 
enacted.

SEC. 204. MULTIPLE CHOICE OF HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 1310(a) of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 300e-9(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(3) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as limiting the 
option of membership to a limited number of organizations.''.
 (b) Distribution of Materials.--Paragraph (1) of such section is 
amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Each such 
health benefit plan shall make available, to each individual eligible 
to enroll with a qualified health maintenance organization under such 
an option, such marketing materials as the organization provides to the 
plan.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 205. FEDERAL ASSISTANCE FOR ESTABLISHMENT AND INITIAL OPERATION OF 
 STAFF AND GROUP MODEL HMOS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall provide for grants for the 
establishment and initial operation of staff or group model health 
maintenance organizations.
 (b) Purposes.--Funds provided under this section may be used for 
purposes specified by the Secretary, which shall include--
 (1) surveys of the prospective market for such 
 organizations to determine the feasibility of operating such an 
 organization in the service area,
 (2) activities relating to initial enrollment of 
 individuals,
 (3) working capital during the startup period,
 (4) recruitment of physicians and other health personnel, 
 and
 (5) acquisition of building and equipment.
 (c) Application Process.--No grant may be provided under this 
section unless--
 (1) an application therefore has been submitted (in such 
 form and manner and containing such information, as the 
 Secretary specifies) to and approved by the Secretary, and
 (2) the Secretary determines that sufficient planning for 
 the organization's establishment has been conducted by the 
 applicant and the feasibility of establishing and operating the 
 organization has been established by the applicant.
 (d) Period of Grant.--Grants under this section shall be for a 
period of 1 year but may be renewed for 2 additional periods of 1 year 
each.
 (e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated $25,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1994 through 1998 to 
carry out this section.

SEC. 206. PREEMPTION OF STATE LAWS RESTRICTING HEALTH MAINTENANCE 
 ORGANIZATIONS.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Preemption.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), any 
 provision of State law that restricts the ability of a health 
 maintenance organization to negotiate reimbursement rates with 
 providers or to contract selectively with one provider or a 
 limited number of providers is hereby preempted and may not be 
 enforced.
 (2) Exception for states with provider payment control 
 systems.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to a provision of State 
 law that restricts the ability of a health maintenance 
 organization to negotiate reimbursement rates with providers if 
 the State has a State provider payment control system approved 
 under section 121.
 (b) Effective Date.--Subsection (a) shall take effect on January 1, 
1994.

SEC. 207. ADJUSTMENT IN MEDICARE CAPITATION PAYMENTS TO ACCOUNT FOR 
 REGIONAL VARIATIONS IN APPLICATION OF SECONDARY PAYOR 
 PROVISIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 1876(a)(4) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395mm(a)(4)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
sentence: ``In establishing the adjusted average per capita cost for a 
geographic area, the Secretary shall take into account the differences 
between the proportion of individuals in the area with respect to whom 
there is a group health plan that is a primary payor (within the 
meaning of section 1862(b)(2)(A)) compared to the proportion of all 
such individuals with respect to whom there is such a group health 
plan.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to contracts entered into for years beginning with 1995.

SEC. 208. GAO STUDY OF EXPANSION OF HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS.

 (a) Study.--The Comptroller General shall conduct a study of 
additional measures that may be taken to encourage the development and 
expansion of health maintenance organizations.
 (b) Report.--By not later than 18 months after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall submit a report to 
Congress on the study conducted under subsection (a) and shall include 
in the report such recommendations as may be appropriate.

 Subtitle B--Managed Competition

 Part 1--Establishment of National Health Plan Purchasing Cooperative 
 Program

SEC. 221. ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM; GRANTS TO STATES.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall establish a program for the 
establishment and operation of health plan purchasing cooperatives 
(each in this subtitle referred to as a ``HPPC'') in each State in 
accordance with this subtitle.
 (b) Grant Program for HPPCs.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary may provide assistance, 
 through grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements, with 
 States and with HPPCs for the planning, development, and 
 initial operation of HPPCs under this subtitle.
 (2) Terms.--Assistance under this subsection shall be 
 provided under such terms and conditions as the Secretary may 
 specify consistent with the following:
 (A) The period of such assistance may not extend 
 for longer than 5 years with respect to any HPPC.
 (B) The total amount of assistance with respect to 
 any HPPC may not exceed $5,000,000.
 (3) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized 
 to be appropriated, for the provision of assistance under this 
 subsection, a total of $150,000,000 for the 5-fiscal-year 
 period beginning with fiscal year 1994.

SEC. 222. ESTABLISHMENT OF HPPCS; DESIGNATION OF HPPC AREAS.

 (a) State Requirement.--
 (1) In general.--Each State--
 (A) shall provide by law for the organization and 
 operation, by not later than January 1, 1996, of 1 or 
 more health plan purchasing cooperatives in accordance 
 with section 223, and
 (B) may provide (in accordance with subsections (b) 
 and (c)) for the designation of more than 1 HPPC areas 
 in the State.
 (2) Coverage of all geographic areas in a state.--In 
 carrying out this subsection, HPPCs shall be established, and 
 HPPC areas designated, in a State so as to provide for the 
 offerring of qualified health plans in every geographic area of 
 the State.
 (3) Single organization serving multiple hppc areas.--
 Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as preventing--
 (A) a single corporation from being the HPPC for 
 more than one HPPC area, or
 (B) a State from coordinating, through a single 
 entity, the activities of one or more HPPCs in the 
 State.
 (4) Federal default.--If a State fails to provide for the 
 organization and continued operation of 1 or more HPPCs or 
 designation of HPPC areas in accordance with this section, the 
 Secretary shall provide for such organization and operation or 
 designation, and, in such case with respect to such a HPPC, any 
 subsequent reference to State law or a Governor in this 
 subtitle shall be deemed a reference to Federal law or the 
 Secretary, respectively.
 (b) HPPC Areas.--
 (1) In general.--Except as may be otherwise provided under 
 this subsection and subsection (c), each State shall be 
 considered a separate HPPC area.
 (2) Alternative, intrastate areas.--HPPC areas within a 
 State may cover less than the entire State so long as--
 (A) all portions of each metropolitan statistical 
 area in the State are within the same HPPC area, and
 (B) the number of individuals residing within a 
 HPPC area is not less than 1,000,000.
 (c) Interstate HPPCs.--
 (1) Authorization.--One or more contiguous States may 
 provide--
 (A) for the designation consistent with paragraph 
 (2) of a HPPC area that includes adjoining portions of 
 the States, and
 (B) for the organization and operation, in 
 accordance with rules of the Secretary, of a HPPC with 
 respect to such a designated HPPC area.
 (2) Interstate hppc areas.--Any HPPC area designated under 
 paragraph (1)(A)--
 (A) that includes any part of a metropolitan 
 statistical area shall include all of such area, and
 (B) shall have a population of not less than 
 1,000,000.

SEC. 223. ORGANIZATION AND OPERATION OF HPPCS.

 (a) In General.--Each HPPC shall be organized and operated 
consistent with the requirements of this subtitle.
 (b) Organization.--Each HPPC shall be a not-for-profit public 
benefit corporation established under State law and governed by a Board 
of Directors appointed by the Governor or other chief executive officer 
of the State.
 (c) General Duties of HPPCs.--
 (1) Making health care plans available to employers.--
 (A) In general.--Each HPPC shall enter into 
 agreements with qualified health plans under section 
 225 under which coverage under such a QHP is made 
 available with respect to employers which--
 (i) have employees who reside in the HPPC 
 area served by the HPPC, and
 (ii) have entered into an agreement with 
 the HPPC under section 224.
 (B) HPPC outreach to small employers.--Beginning 
 not later than 1 year after the date a HPPC is 
 organized, a HPPC shall inventory and inform all small 
 employers (as defined in section 228(c)(2)) in the HPPC 
 area (including employers in rural areas of the HPPC 
 area) of the health benefits available, through 
 enrollment with qualified health plans, through the 
 HPPC for their employees (and family members) who 
 reside in a HPPC area served by the HPPC.
 (2) Option of enrollment for eligible residents.--A HPPC 
 may provide, under such an agreement with a qualified health 
 plan, for coverage under such a plan with respect to 
 individuals who are eligible residents (as defined in section 
 228(a)(4)).
 (3) Construction.--Nothing in this subsection shall be 
 construed as requiring--
 (A) an employer to enter into an agreement under 
 section 224 with a HPPC, or
 (B) an employee or other individual to enroll in a 
 QHP offered by a HPPC.
 (d) Scope of Plans Offered.--To the maximum extent practicable, 
each HPPC--
 (1) shall enter into agreements with each QHP which is a 
 qualified health maintenance organization (as defined in 
 section 228(b)(2));
 (2) shall enter into agreements with at least one qualified 
 health plan that is a service benefit plan and at least one 
 qualified health plan that is an indemnity plan for each HPPC 
 area served by the HPPC; and
 (3) may enter into agreements with other qualified health 
 plans (such as preferred provider organizations).

SEC. 224. AGREEMENTS WITH EMPLOYERS.

 (a) In General.--Each agreement under this section, between a HPPC 
and an employer, shall include (as specified by the Secretary) 
provisions consistent with the requirements specified in the succeeding 
subsections of this section.
 (b) Forwarding Information on Eligible Employees.--
 (1) In general.--Under an agreement under this section 
 between an employer and a HPPC, the employer must forward to 
 the appropriate HPPC the name and address (and other 
 identifying information required by the HPPC) of each employee 
 (including part-time and seasonal employees).
 (2) Information on plans.--Under the agreement and 
 consistent with section 226, the HPPC--
 (A) shall provide to each employee identified under 
 paragraph (1) information on benefits available through 
 QHPs, and
 (B) upon the request of such an employee, shall 
 enroll the employee (and, at the option of the 
 employee, eligible family members) in such plans.
 (3) Appropriate hppc.--In this subsection, the term 
 ``appropriate HPPC'' means the HPPC for the principal place of 
 business of the employer or (at the option of an employee) the 
 HPPC serving the place of residence of the employee.
 (c) Payroll Deduction Option.--
 (1) In general.--Under an agreement under this section 
 between an employer and a HPPC, if the HPPC indicates to the 
 employer that an eligible employee is enrolled in a QHP through 
 the HPPC--
 (A) the employer shall pay to the HPPC the amount 
 of any employer contribution towards the premium for 
 enrollment of the employee under the QHP, and
 (B) if the employee elects to have any employee 
 share of premiums deducted from wages or other 
 compensation paid by the employer, the employer shall 
 provide for the deduction, from the employee's wages or 
 other compensation, of the employee's share of the 
 amount of the premium due and the payment of such 
 deduction to the HPPC.
 (2) Special rules for payment of employee share.--In the 
 case of an employee who is paid wages or other compensation on 
 a monthly or more frequent basis, an employer shall not be 
 required to provide for payment of amounts of the employee's 
 share to a HPPC other than at the same time at which the 
 amounts are deducted from wages or other compensation. In the 
 case of an employee who is paid wages or other compensation 
 less frequently than monthly, an employer may be required to 
 provide for payment of amounts under paragraph (1)(B) to a HPPC 
 on a monthly basis.
 (d) Limited Employer Obligations.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed as--
 (1) requiring an employer to provide directly for 
 enrollment of eligible employees under a QHP or other health 
 plan,
 (2) requiring the employer to make, or preventing the 
 employer from making, information about such plans available to 
 such employees, or
 (3) requiring the employer to make, or preventing the 
 employer from making, an employer contribution for coverage of 
 such individuals under such a plan.
 (e) Refusal to Enter into Agreement.--A HPPC may refuse to enter 
into an agreement under this section with a small employer if less than 
a percentage (specified by the HPPC, consistent with rules of the 
Secretary) of the otherwise eligible employees of the employer are 
enrolled with a QHP pursuant to such agreement.

SEC. 225. AGREEMENTS WITH QUALIFIED HEALTH PLANS (QHPs).

 (a) Agreements.--
 (1) In general.--Each HPPC for a HPPC area shall enter into 
 an agreement under this section with each qualified health plan 
 that serves residents of the area. Each such agreement under 
 this section between a QHP and a HPPC shall include (as 
 specified by the Secretary) provisions consistent with the 
 requirements of the succeeding subsections of this section. 
 Except as provided in paragraph (2)(A), a HPPC may not refuse 
 to enter into such an agreement with a QHP.
 (2) Termination of agreement.--In accordance with 
 regulations of the Secretary--
 (A) the HPPC may terminate an agreement under 
 paragraph (1) if the QHP's approval under this subtitle 
 is terminated, and
 (B) the QHP may terminate such an agreement only 
 upon sufficient notice in order to provide for the 
 orderly enrollment of enrollees under other QHPs.
 The Secretary shall establish a process for the termination of 
 agreements under this paragraph.
 (b) Offer of Enrollment Under Plan.--
 (1) In general.--Under an agreement under this section 
 between a QHP and a HPPC, the HPPC--
 (A) shall offer, on behalf of the QHP, enrollment 
 in the QHP to eligible employees, and
 (B) may offer, on behalf of the QHP, enrollment in 
 the QHP to eligible residents.
 (2) Timing of offer.--The offer of enrollment shall be 
 available on a continuous, year-round basis, consistent with 
 section 2104 of the Social Security Act (as added by section 
 202 of this Act).
 (c) Receipt of Gross Premiums.--
 (1) In general.--Under an agreement under this section 
 between a HPPC and a QHP, payment of premiums shall be made, by 
 individuals or employers on their behalf, directly to the HPPC 
 for the benefit of the QHP.
 (2) Timing of payment of premiums.--Premiums shall be 
 payable on a monthly basis (or, at the option of an eligible 
 resident, on a quarterly basis). The HPPC may provide for 
 penalties and grace periods for late payment.
 (3) QHPs retain risk of nonpayment.--Nothing in this 
 subsection shall be construed as placing upon a HPPC any risk 
 associated with failure to make prompt payment of premiums 
 (other than the portion of the premium representing the HPPC 
 overhead amount). Each eligible individual who enrolls with a 
 QHP through the HPPC is liable to the QHP for premiums.
 (d) Collection and Forwarding of Premiums.--
 (1) Premium charged.--Under an agreement under this section 
 between a QHP and a HPPC, the HPPC shall charge, with respect 
 to the enrollment of eligible individuals in the plan through 
 the HPPC, an amount equal to the sum of--
 (A) the premium rate established by the plan 
 (consistent with section 2104(c) of the Social Security 
 Act) for the type of enrollment, and
 (B) the HPPC overhead amount (established under 
 subsection (e) for enrollment of individuals through 
 the HPPC).
 (2) Amount forwarded.--Under an agreement under this 
 section between a QHP and a HPPC, the HPPC shall forward to 
 each QHP in which an eligible individual has been enrolled an 
 amount equal to the premium rate established by the plan 
 (consistent with section 2104(c) of the Social Security Act) 
 for the type of enrollment.
 (3) Payments.--Payments shall be made by the HPPC under 
 this subsection to a QHP within a period (specified by the 
 Secretary and not to exceed 7 days) after receipt of the 
 premium from the employer of the eligible individual or the 
 eligible individual, as the case may be.
 (4) Adjustments for differences in nonpayment rates.-- In 
 accordance with rules established by the Secretary, each 
 agreement between a QHP and a HPPC under this section shall 
 provide that, if a HPPC determines that the rates of nonpayment 
 of premiums during grace periods established under subsection 
 (c)(2) vary appreciably among QHPs, the HPPC shall provide for 
 such adjustments in the payments made under this subsection as 
 will place each QHP in the same position as if the rates of 
 nonpayment were the same.
 (e) HPPC Overhead Amount.--
 (1) HPPC budget.--Each HPPC shall establish a budget for 
 each year for each HPPC area in accordance with regulations 
 established by the Secretary.
 (2) HPPC overhead amount.--Based upon the budget, the HPPC 
 shall compute HPPC overhead amounts so that--
 (A) the amounts vary by type of enrollment based 
 upon factors (specified by the Secretary) reflecting 
 the relative average premium amounts established for 
 the different types of enrollment,
 (B) subject to subparagraph (C), the total of such 
 amounts are projected to equal the budget established 
 under paragraph (1), and
 (C) the average overhead amount for a type of 
 enrollment does not exceed 5 percent of the average 
 premium amounts imposed for that type of enrollment.

SEC. 226. ENROLLING INDIVIDUALS IN QUALIFIED HEALTH PLANS THROUGH A 
 HPPC.

 (a) In General.--Each HPPC shall offer in accordance with this 
section eligible employees (and, at the option of the HPPC, eligible 
residents) the opportunity to enroll in a QHP for the HPPC area in 
which the individual resides.
 (b) Enrollment Process.--Each HPPC shall establish an enrollment 
process in accordance with rules established by the Secretary.
 (c) Distribution of Comparative Information.--Each HPPC shall 
distribute, to eligible individuals and participating employers, 
information, in comparative form, on the prices, outcomes, enrollee 
satisfaction, and other information pertaining to the quality of the 
different QHPs for which it is offering enrollment. Each HPPC also 
shall make such information available to other interested persons.
 (d) Period of Coverage.--
 (1) In general.--Except as the Secretary may provide, in 
 the case of an eligible individual who enrolls with a QHP 
 through a HPPC, coverage under the plan shall begin on such 
 date (not later than the first day of the first month that 
 begins at least 15 days after the date of enrollment) as the 
 Secretary shall specify.
 (2) Minimum period of enrollment.--In order to avoid 
 adverse selection, each HPPC may require, consistent with rules 
 of the Secretary, that enrollment with QHPs be for not less 
 than 1 year (with exceptions permitted for such exceptional 
 circumstances as the Secretary may recognize).

SEC. 227. COORDINATION AMONG HPPCS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall establish rules consistent 
with this section for coordination among HPPCs in cases where 
participating employers are located in one HPPC area and their 
employees reside in a different HPPC area (and are eligible for 
enrollment with QHPs located in the other area).
 (b) Coordination Rules.--Under the rules established under 
subsection (a)--
 (1) HPPC for employer.--The HPPC for the principal place of 
 business of an employer shall be responsible--
 (A) for providing information to the employer's 
 employees on QHPs for areas in which employees reside;
 (B)(i) for enrolling employees under the QHP 
 selected (even if the QHP selected is not in the same 
 HPPC area as the HPPC) and (ii) if the QHP chosen is 
 not in the same HPPC area as the HPPC, for forwarding 
 the enrollment information to the HPPC for the area in 
 which the QHP selected is located; and
 (C) in the case of premiums to be paid through 
 payroll deduction, to receive such premiums and forward 
 them to the HPPC for the area in which the QHP selected 
 is located.
 (2) HPPC for employee residence.--The HPPC for the HPPC 
 area in which an employee resides shall be responsible for 
 providing other HPPCs with information concerning QHPs being 
 offered in the HPPC's areas.

SEC. 228. DEFINITIONS.

 (a) Eligibility.--In this title:
 (1) Eligible individual.--The term ``eligible individual'' 
 means, with respect to a HPPC area, an individual who--
 (A) is an eligible employee (as defined in 
 paragraph (2)),
 (B) is an eligible resident (as defined in 
 paragraph (4)), or
 (C) an eligible family member (as defined in 
 paragraph (3)) of an eligible employee or eligible 
 resident.
 (2) Eligible employee.--The term ``eligible employee'' 
 means, with respect to a HPPC area, an individual residing in 
 the area who is the employee of a participating employer.
 (3) Eligible family member.--The term ``eligible family 
 member'' means, with respect to an eligible employee or other 
 principal enrollee, an individual who is residing in the United 
 States and--
 (A) is the spouse of the employee or principal 
 enrollee, or
 (B) is an unmarried dependent child under 22 years 
 of age, including--
 (i) an adopted child or recognized natural 
 child, and
 (ii) a stepchild or foster child but only 
 if the child lives with the employee or 
 principal enrollee in a regular parent-child 
 relationship,
 or such an unmarried dependent child regardless of age 
 who is incapable of self-support because of mental or 
 physical disability which existed before age 22.
 (4) Eligible resident.--The term ``eligible resident'' 
 means, with respect to a HPPC area, an individual who--
 (A) is residing in the area, and
 (B) is not an eligible employee.
 (5) Participating employer.--The term ``participating 
 employer'' means an employer that has an agreement in effect 
 with a HPPC under section 224.
 (b) Abbreviations.--In this title:
 (1) HPPC; health plan purchasing cooperative.--The terms 
 ``health plan purchasing cooperative'' and ``HPPC'' mean a 
 health plan purchasing cooperative established under this part.
 (2) Qualified hmo; qualified health maintenance 
 organization.--The terms ``qualified HMO'' and ``qualified 
 health maintenance organization'' mean a health benefit plan 
 that--
 (A) is an eligible organization having a contract 
 under section 1876 of the Social Security Act, or
 (B) is a qualified health maintenance organization 
 (as defined in section 1310(d) of the Public Health 
 Service Act).
 (3) QHP; qualified health plan.--The terms ``qualified 
 health plan'' and ``QHP'' mean a health plan approved by the 
 Secretary under section 251(a).
 (c) Other Terms.--In this title:
 (1) Health benefit plan.--The term ``health benefit plan'' 
 has the meaning given such term in section 2108(3) of the 
 Social Security Act, as added by section 302 of this Act.
 (2) Small employer.--The term ``small employer'' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 2103(d)(2) of the Social 
 Security Act (as added by section 302 of this Act).
 (4) State.--The term ``State'' includes the District of 
 Columbia.
 (5) Type of enrollment.--There are 2 ``types of 
 enrollment'':
 (A) Coverage only of an individual (referred to in 
 this subtitle as enrollment ``on an individual 
 basis'').
 (B) Coverage of a family consisting of more than 1 
 individual (referred to in this subtitle as enrollment 
 ``on a family basis'').

 Part 2--Requirements for Qualified Health Plans

SEC. 251. APPROVAL PROCESS; QUALIFICATIONS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall provide a process whereby a 
health benefit plan (as defined in section 228(c)(1)) may be approved 
as a qualified health plan.
 (b) Qualifications.--
 (1) In general.--In order to be approved as a QHP, a plan 
 must--
 (A) provide, in accordance with section 252, for 
 coverage of the core group of benefits;
 (B) subject to paragraph (2), be a qualified health 
 maintenance organization (as defined in section 
 228(b)(2));
 (C) have been certified under section 2101 of the 
 Social Security Act as meeting the standards 
 established under title XXI of such Act (including 
 standards relating to prohibiting discrimination based 
 on health status, to open enrollment, use of community-
 rated premiums, etc.);
 (D) meet standards established by the Secretary to 
 protect enrollees with respect to potential insolvency; 
 and
 (E) provide, in accordance with the national 
 patient outcomes data reporting program under subtitle 
 C, for the collection and reporting to the Secretary of 
 certain information regarding its enrollees and 
 provision of services.
 (2) Waiver of qualified hmo requirement.--A HPPC may waive 
 the requirement of paragraph (1)(B) in the case of such plans 
 as it determines will promote access to quality, cost effective 
 health care in the HPPC area. However, any such plan that is 
 not a qualified health maintenance organization must meet the 
 following additional requirements:
 (A) Effective grievance procedures.--The plan must 
 provide for effective procedures for hearing and 
 resolving grievances between the plan and individuals 
 enrolled under the plan, which procedures meet 
 standards specified by the Secretary.
 (B) Restriction on certain physician incentive 
 plans.--
 (i) In general.--If the plan operates a 
 physician incentive plan (as defined in clause 
 (ii)), the incentive plan must meet the 
 requirements specified in clauses (i) through 
 (iii) of section 1876(i)(8)(A) of the Social 
 Security Act (in the same manner as they apply 
 to eligible organizations under section 1876 of 
 such Act).
 (ii) Physician incentive plan defined.--In 
 this subparagraph, the term ``physician 
 incentive plan'' means any compensation or 
 other financial arrangement between a plan and 
 a physician or physician group that may 
 directly or indirectly have the effect of 
 reducing or limiting services provided with 
 respect to individuals enrolled under the plan.
 (C) Written policies and procedures respecting 
 advance directives.--The plan must meet the 
 requirements of section 1866(f) of the Social Security 
 Act (relating to maintaining written policies and 
 procedures respecting advance directives), insofar as 
 such requirements would apply to the plan if the plan 
 were an eligible organization.
 (c) Protection Against Provider Claims.--In the case of a failure 
of a QHP to make payments with respect to an individual enrolled under 
the plan through a HPPC, under standards established by the Secretary, 
the individual is not liable to any health care provider or 
practitioner with respect to the provision of health services within 
such package of benefits covered in excess of the amount for which the 
enrollee would have been liable if the plan had made payments in a 
timely manner.

SEC. 252. BENEFIT PACKAGES.

 (a) Requirement of Offering.--The Secretary may not approve a 
qualified health plan unless, subject to subsection (b), the plan--
 (1) offers, as a separate and distinct benefit package, the 
 core benefit package specified pursuant to subsection (c);
 (2) has entered into arrangements with a sufficient number 
 and variety of providers to provide for its enrollees benefits 
 under such core benefit package without imposing cost-sharing 
 in excess of the cost-sharing permitted under such benefit 
 package and (except for an indemnity plan) does not permit 
 providers participating in the plan to charge for services 
 covered under the core benefit package amounts in excess of the 
 cost-sharing permitted under such package; and
 (3) provides, in the case of individuals covered under more 
 than one qualified health plan, for coordination of coverage 
 under such plans in an equitable manner specified by the 
 Secretary.
 (b) Treatment of Additional, Optional Benefits.--A QHP may also 
offer benefits in addition to (and not duplicative of) the core benefit 
package (including reducing cost-sharing below the cost-sharing 
provided for in such package), if such additional benefits--
 (1) are offered, and priced, separately from the core 
 benefit package, and
 (2) are only offered consistent with such standard, 
 incremental benefit packages as the Secretary specifies under 
 subsection (c).
 (c) Specification of Benefit Packages.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall specify the services 
 and cost-sharing to be included in--
 (A) the core benefit package under this subtitle, 
 and
 (B) additional incremental benefit packages under 
 this subtitle.
 (2) Core benefit package.--
 (A) Based on medicare benefits.--Except as provided 
 in subparagraph (B), the services and cost-sharing in 
 the core benefit package shall be the same as the 
 services and cost-sharing provided under the medicare 
 program.
 (B) Additional benefits.--The core benefit package 
 also shall include the following:
 (i) No limit on days of coverage of 
 inpatient hospital services based on a spell of 
 illness.
 (ii) An annual limitation on out-of-pocket 
 costs for cost-sharing (not including premiums 
 and extra-billing amounts) of $2,500 for 
 individual enrollment and $3,000 for family 
 enrollment.
 (iii) Instead of the deductible for 
 inpatient hospital services under part A of 
 title XVIII of the Social Security Act and the 
 general deductible applicable under part B of 
 such title (subject to clause (v)), there shall 
 be imposed an annual deductible of $300 for 
 each individual (but not to exceed $600 for all 
 individuals in a family).
 (iv) Benefits for maternity care, well-
 child care, and other preventive services 
 (identified by the Secretary), without the 
 imposition of deductibles or other cost-
 sharing.
 (v) In the case of qualified health 
 maintenance organizations, cost-sharing for 
 deductibles and copayments shall be nominal, 
 consistent with standards for such cost-sharing 
 permitted of qualified health maintenance 
 organizations under title XIII of the Public 
 Health Service Act.
 The Secretary may change, on an annual basis, the 
 dollar amounts specified under this subparagraph based 
 on changes in an appropriate index.
 (4) Changes in core benefit package.--The Secretary, after 
 appropriate advance notice, shall change the core benefit 
 package in order to reflect changes in the benefits under the 
 medicare program which are not reflected in paragraph (3).
 (5) Overriding of state benefit mandates.--Any State 
 requirement relating to the provision or coverage of benefits 
 under health plans shall not apply to the benefits provided by 
 qualified health plans through HPPCs under this subtitle.

 Subtitle C--National Patient Outcomes and Enrollee Satisfaction Data 
 Reporting Program

SEC. 271. NATIONAL PATIENT OUTCOMES PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall establish a national data base 
on patient outcomes (in this section referred to as the ``outcomes data 
base'') in accordance with this section.
 (b) Collection of Uniform Data Base.--In order to collect 
information in the outcomes data base in a uniform format--
 (1) By not later than January 1, 1995, the Secretary shall 
 define and publish the uniform outcomes data that would be 
 collected.
 (2) By not later than July 1, 1995, the Secretary shall 
 establish, by regulation, the reporting requirements for the 
 routine collection of the outcomes data.
 (3) By not later than January 1, 1996, the Secretary shall 
 require all qualified health maintenance organizations, all 
 other health benefit plans, and all health care providers to 
 begin reporting on an annual basis the outcomes data to the 
 Secretary pursuant to the regulations.
 (c) Publication and Distribution of National Outcomes Data Base.--
The Secretary shall publish and distribute an annual report regarding 
patient outcomes, including information on individual providers, based 
on information from the outcomes data base and appropriate utilization 
information available from the QHPs.

SEC. 272. ENROLLEE HEALTH PLAN SATISFACTION.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall establish a national data base 
on enrollee satisfaction with health benefit plans (including self-
insured health benefit plans) (in this section referred to as the 
``enrollee data base'') in accordance with this section.
 (b) Collection of Uniform Data Base.--In order to collect 
information in the enrollee data base in a uniform format--
 (1) By not later than July 1, 1995, the Secretary shall 
 define and publish the enrollee satisfaction survey to be used 
 by health benefit plans in collecting data under this section.
 (2) By not later than January 1, 1996, the Secretary shall 
 require all health benefit plans to begin reporting on an 
 annual basis the data to the Secretary pursuant to the 
 regulations.
 (c) Publication and Distribution of Data Base.--The Secretary shall 
publish and distribute an annual report regarding enrollee satisfaction 
with the different health plans based on information from the enrollee 
data base.

SEC. 273. RESEARCH AND DEMONSTRATION.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall provide for research and 
demonstration projects concerning--
 (1) new methods for collecting and analyzing outcomes and 
 enrollee satisfaction information under this subtitle, and
 (2) the use of outcomes information systems by qualified 
 health maintenance organizations, health benefits plans, and 
 providers of health care services.
The Secretary may also provide for research and demonstration projects 
concerning the collection and analysis of indicators of system 
performance (such as health status of community served, prevention of 
illness, and capacity of delivery system) with respect to integrated 
health care delivery systems.
 (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated $20,000,000 in each of fiscal years 1994 through 1998 to 
carry out this section.

 Subtitle D--Study of Universal Health Insurance Coverage and Cost 
 Containment

SEC. 291. STUDY.

 (a) In General.--The Congressional Budget Office shall conduct a 
study on the different options for providing universal health insurance 
coverage in the United States. Such study shall identify the following:
 (1) Options.--The cost of the different coverage options.
 (2) Cost containment.--The effectiveness of the different 
 options in cost containment.
 (3) Revenues required.--The revenue levels required for the 
 different options.
 (4) Financing options.--Options for financing these revenue 
 levels, including--
 (A) the distributional impact of these revenue 
 options, and
 (B) with respect to the option of imposing a 
 geographic-area specific limit on the tax-favored 
 status of employer payment for health care for 
 employees, former employees, and dependents, the 
 revenue, administrative, and distributive impact of 
 imposing such limits.
 (b) Assistance of Joint Tax Committee.--The Joint Committee on Tax 
shall provide such assistance to the Congressional Budget Office as may 
be required to conduct the study under this section.
 (c) Report.--The Director of the Congressional Budget Office shall 
submit, by not later than January 1, 1994, a report on the study 
conducted under this section to the Committees on Ways and Means and 
Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives and the Committee 
on Finance of the Senate.

 TITLE III--HEALTH SYSTEMS REFORM

 Subtitle A--Health Insurance Reform

SEC. 301. EXCISE TAX ON PREMIUMS RECEIVED ON HEALTH INSURANCE POLICIES 
 WHICH DO NOT MEET CERTAIN REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 47 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
(relating to taxes on group health plans) is amended by adding at the 
end thereof the following new section:

``SEC. 5000A. FAILURE TO SATISFY CERTAIN STANDARDS FOR HEALTH 
 INSURANCE.

 ``(a) Imposition of Tax.--
 ``(1) General rule.--There is hereby imposed a tax on any 
 nonqualified health benefit plan.
 ``(2) Nonqualified health benefit plan defined.--For 
 purposes of this section, the term `nonqualified health benefit 
 plan' means any health benefit plan that--
 ``(A) is not certified under section 2101 of the 
 Social Security Act, or
 ``(B) the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 determines is providing coverage in violation of 
 section 2101(a) of such Act.
 ``(b) Amount of Tax.--
 ``(1) In general.--The amount of tax imposed by subsection 
 (a) shall be equal to--
 ``(A) in the case of an insured health benefit 
 plan, 50 percent of the gross premiums received by the 
 issuer which are attributable to the period during 
 which the plan is a nonqualified health benefit plan, 
 and
 ``(B) in the case of a self-insured health benefit 
 plan, 50 percent of the expenditures under such plan 
 during the period that the plan is a nonqualified 
 health benefit plan.
 ``(2) Gross premiums.--For purposes of paragraph (1)(A), 
 gross premiums shall include any consideration received with 
 respect to any insured health benefit plan.
 ``(3) Controlled groups.--For purposes of paragraph (1)--
 ``(A) Controlled group of corporations.--All 
 corporations which are members of the same controlled 
 group of corporations shall be treated as 1 person. For 
 purposes of the preceding sentence, the term 
 `controlled group of corporations' has the meaning 
 given to such term by section 1563(a), except that--
 ``(i) `more than 50 percent' shall be 
 substituted for `at least 80 percent' each 
 place it appears in section 1563(a)(1), and
 ``(ii) the determination shall be made 
 without regard to subsections (a)(4) and 
 (e)(3)(C) of section 1563.
 ``(B) Partnerships, proprietorships, etc., which 
 are under common control.--Under regulations prescribed 
 by the Secretary, all trades or business (whether or 
 not incorporated) which are under common control shall 
 be treated as 1 person. The regulations prescribed 
 under this subparagraph shall be based on principles 
 similar to the principles which apply in the case of 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(c) Liability for Tax.--
 ``(1) Insured plan.--In the case of an insured health 
 benefit plan, the issuer of the insurance or subscriber 
 contract under which such plan is provided shall be liable for 
 the tax imposed by this section.
 ``(2) Self-insured plan.--In the case of a self-insured 
 plan--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), the employer maintaining such plan 
 shall be liable for the tax imposed by this section.
 ``(B) Multiemployer plans, etc.--In the case of a 
 multiemployer plan or any other plan not maintained by 
 an employer, the plan shall be liable for the tax 
 imposed by this section.
 ``(d) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Health benefit plan.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `health benefit plan' 
 means any plan or contract under which any medical 
 benefit is provided to any individual.
 ``(B) Certain plans and contracts not covered.--The 
 term `health benefit plan' does not include any plan or 
 contract--
 ``(i) which provides for accident only, 
 dental only, or disability only coverage,
 ``(ii) which provides coverage as a 
 supplement to liability insurance, and
 ``(iii) which provides insurance arising 
 out of a workers' compensation or similar law, 
 or automobile medical-payment insurance.
 ``(2) Insured health benefit plan.--The term `insured 
 health benefit plan' means any health benefit plan provided 
 through insurance, and includes a prepaid hospital or medical 
 service plan, the health benefit plan of a health maintenance 
 organization, and a multiple employer welfare arrangement (as 
 defined in section 3(40) of the Employee Retirement Income 
 Security Act of 1974).
 ``(3) Medical benefit.--The term `medical benefit' means 
 any benefit which consists of the providing (through insurance 
 or otherwise) of medical care (as defined in section 213(d)).
 ``(4) Self-insured health benefit plan.--The term `self-
 insured health benefit plan' means any health benefit plan that 
 is not an insured health benefit plan.''
 (b) Nondeductibility of Tax.--Subsection (a) of section 275 of such 
Code (relating to nondeductibility of certain taxes) is amended by 
adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 ``(7) Taxes imposed by section 5000A (failure to satisfy 
 certain standards for health insurance).''
 (c) Clerical Amendments.--
 (1) So much of chapter 47 of such Code as precedes 
 subsection (a) of section 5000 is amended to read as follows:

 ``CHAPTER 47--TAXES RELATING TO HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS

 ``Sec. 5000. Contributions to 
 nonconforming large group 
 health plans.
 ``Sec. 5000A. Failure to satisfy certain 
 standards for health insurance.

``SEC. 5000. CONTRIBUTIONS TO NONCONFORMING LARGE GROUP HEALTH PLANS.''

 (2) The table of chapters for subtitle D of such Code is 
 amended by striking the item relating to chapter 47 and 
 inserting the following new item:

 ``Chapter 47. Taxes relating to health 
 benefit plans.''

SEC. 302. HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN STANDARDS.

 The Social Security Act is amended by adding at the end the 
following new title:

 ``TITLE XXI--HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN STANDARDS

``SEC. 2101. STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS.

 ``(a) Certification Required.--
 ``(1) In general.--No health benefit plan (as defined in 
 section 2108(3)) may be issued on or after the effective date 
 specified in subsection (d) (and no new contract may be offered 
 under such plan with respect to any individual or group 
 beginning on or after such effective date) unless the plan has 
 been certified--
 ``(A) by the Secretary (in accordance with such 
 procedures as the Secretary establishes), or
 ``(B) by a State regulatory program (approved under 
 subsection (b)),
 as meeting the standards established under section 2102 by such 
 effective date.
 ``(2) Plan disapproved.--If the Secretary (or, in the case 
 of a plan certified by a State regulatory program, the State) 
 determines that a health benefit plan does not meet the 
 applicable standards of this title on or after such effective 
 date, no coverage may be provided under the plan to individuals 
 not enrolled as of the date of the determination and the plan 
 may not be continued for plan years beginning after the date of 
 such determination until the Secretary (or program) determines 
 that such plan is in compliance with such standards.
 ``(b) State Approved Programs.--
 ``(1) In general.--If the Secretary determines that a State 
 has in effect an effective regulatory program for the 
 application of the standards established under section 2102 to 
 health benefit plans, the Secretary may approve such program 
 for purposes of certification of health benefit plans under 
 this title.
 ``(2) Annual reports.--As a condition for the continued 
 approval of such a regulatory program, the State shall report 
 to the Secretary annually such information as the Secretary may 
 require with respect to the performance of the program. Such 
 information shall include a list of the health benefit plans 
 certified under the program, the compliance of such plans with 
 the standards established under section 2102, and enforcement 
 actions taken to ensure such compliance.
 ``(3) Periodic secretarial review of state regulatory 
 programs.--The Secretary annually shall review State regulatory 
 programs approved under paragraph (1) to determine if they 
 continue to apply and enforce the standards. If the Secretary 
 initially determines that a State regulatory program no longer 
 is applying and enforcing such standards, the Secretary shall 
 provide the State an opportunity to adopt such a plan of 
 correction that would bring such program into compliance. If 
 the Secretary makes a final determination that the State 
 regulatory program, fails to apply and enforce such standards 
 after such an opportunity, the Secretary shall disapprove such 
 program and reassume responsibility for certification of all 
 health benefit plans in that State.
 ``(4) GAO audits.--The Comptroller General shall conduct 
 periodic reviews on a sample of State regulatory programs 
 approved under paragraph (1) to determine their compliance with 
 the requirements of such paragraph. The Comptroller General 
 shall report to the Secretary and Congress on the findings of 
 such reviews.
 ``(c) Excise Tax Sanctions.--For application of excise tax in the 
case of a nonqualified health benefit plan, see section 5000A of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 ``(d) Effective Date.--The effective date specified in this 
subsection is January 1, 1994.

``SEC. 2102. ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS.

 ``(a) Establishment of Standards.--The Secretary shall develop and 
publish, by not later than October 1, 1993, specific standards to 
implement the requirements of this title and to be applied under 
section 5000A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 ``(b) More Stringent State Standards Permitted.--In the case of 
insured health benefit plans, a State may implement standards that are 
more stringent than the standards established under this section.
 ``(c) Application to ERISA.--The Secretary shall consult with the 
Secretary of Labor concerning the application of the requirements of 
this title to employee welfare benefit plans under title I of the 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.

``SEC. 2103. REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS.

 ``(a) No Discrimination Based on Health Status.--
 ``(1) Provision of services.--Except as provided under 
 subsections (b) and (c), a health benefit plan may not deny, 
 limit, or condition the coverage under (or benefits of) the 
 plan based on the health status, claims experience, receipt of 
 health care, medical history, or lack of evidence of 
 insurability, of an individual.
 ``(2) Premium charges within self-insured health benefit 
 plans.--A self-insured health benefit plan may not vary 
 premiums charged based on the health status, claims experience, 
 receipt of health care, medical history, or lack of evidence of 
 insurability, of an individual.
 ``(b) Treatment of Pre-existing Condition Exclusions for All 
Services.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to the succeeding provisions of 
 this subsection, a health benefit plan may exclude coverage 
 with respect to services related to treatment of a pre-existing 
 condition, but the period of such exclusion may not exceed 6 
 months.
 ``(2) Nonapplication to newborns.--The exclusion of 
 coverage permitted under paragraph (1) shall not apply to 
 services furnished to newborns.
 ``(3) Crediting of previous coverage.--
 ``(A) In general.--If an individual is in a period 
 of continuous coverage (as defined in subparagraph 
 (B)(i)) with respect to particular services as of the 
 date of initial coverage under a plan, any period of 
 exclusion of coverage with respect to a pre-existing 
 condition for such services or type of services shall 
 be reduced by 1 month for each month in the period of 
 continuous coverage.
 ``(B) Definitions.--In this paragraph:
 ``(i) Period of continuous coverage.--The 
 term `period of continuous coverage' means, 
 with respect to particular services, the period 
 beginning on the date an individual is enrolled 
 under a health benefit plan or program 
 (including the medicare program, a State plan 
 under title XIX, continuation coverage under 
 section 4980B of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986, or a State general medical assistance 
 program) which provides the same or 
 substantially similar benefits with respect to 
 such services and ends on the date the 
 individual is not so enrolled for a continuous 
 period of more than 3 months.
 ``(ii) Pre-existing condition.--The term 
 `pre-existing condition' means, with respect to 
 coverage under a plan, a condition which has 
 been diagnosed or treated during the 3-month 
 period ending on the day before the first date 
 of such coverage, except that such term does 
 not include a condition which was first 
 diagnosed or treated during a period of 
 continuous coverage.
 ``(C) Standards for similar benefits.--The 
 Secretary shall establish such criteria for determining 
 if benefits are substantially similar as may be 
 necessary to carry out this subsection.
 ``(c) Exclusion of Collectively Bargained Health Benefit Plans.--In 
the case of a health benefit plan established or maintained under or 
pursuant to one or more collective bargaining agreements, the plan may 
exclude from coverage individuals who are not covered under the plan or 
pursuant to one of such collective bargaining agreements.
 ``(d) Small Employers Cannot Offer Self-Insured Plans.--
 ``(1) In general.--No health benefit plan of a small 
 employer may be certified under this title unless such plan is 
 an insured health benefit plan.
 ``(2) Small employer defined.--
 ``(A) In general.--In paragraph (1), the term 
 `small employer' means, with respect to a plan year, an 
 employer that normally employs more than 1 but less 
 than 101 eligible employees on a typical business day 
 during such year.
 ``(B) Eligible employee.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), the term `eligible employee' means, 
 with respect to an employer, an employee who normally 
 performs on a monthly basis at least 17\1/2\ hours of 
 service per week for that employer. For the purposes of 
 this paragraph, the term `employee' includes a self-
 employed individual.
 ``(3) Controlled groups.--For purposes of paragraph (2)--
 ``(A) Controlled group of corporations.--All 
 corporations which are members of the same controlled 
 group of corporations shall be treated as 1 person. For 
 purposes of the preceding sentence, the term 
 `controlled group of corporations' has the meaning 
 given to such term by section 1563(a) of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986, except that--
 ``(i) `more than 50 percent' shall be 
 substituted for `at least 80 percent' each 
 place it appears in section 1563(a)(1) of such 
 Code, and
 ``(ii) the determination shall be made 
 without regard to subsections (a)(4) and 
 (e)(3)(C) of section 1563 of such Code.
 ``(B) Partnerships, proprietorships, etc., which 
 are under common control.--Under regulations prescribed 
 by the Secretary of the Treasury, all trades or 
 business (whether or not incorporated) which are under 
 common control shall be treated as 1 person. The 
 regulations prescribed under this subparagraph shall be 
 based on principles similar to the principles which 
 apply in the case of subparagraph (A).
 ``(4) Exception.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to a health 
 benefit plan that is exempt from treatment as a multiple 
 employer welfare benefit plan because of section 3(40)(A)(ii) 
 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.

``SEC. 2104. STANDARDS APPLICABLE ONLY TO INSURED HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS.

 ``(a) Open Enrollment.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to the succeeding provisions of 
 this subsection, a carrier that offers an insured health 
 benefit plan to individuals residing (or to groups located) in 
 a State must offer the same plan to any other resident of (or 
 group located in) the State. Such requirement shall apply on a 
 continuous, year-round basis.
 ``(2) Restrictions of enrollment in the case of certain 
 association coverage.--In the case of an insured health benefit 
 plan offered through an association which is composed 
 exclusively of employers (which may include self-employed 
 individuals) and which has been formed for purposes other than 
 obtaining health insurance, the carrier is not required to 
 offer the plan to individuals or employers who are not 
 employees of such employers or self-employed members of the 
 association, or their dependents.
 ``(3) Treatment of health maintenance organizations.--
 ``(A) Geographic limitations.--A health maintenance 
 organization may deny enrollment with respect to an 
 individual if the individual is residing outside the 
 service area of the organization, but only if such 
 denial is applied uniformly without regard to health 
 status or insurability.
 ``(B) Size limits.--A health maintenance 
 organization may apply to the Secretary to cease 
 enrolling new employer groups or individuals in its 
 insured health benefit plan (or in a geographic area 
 served by the plan) if--
 ``(i) it ceases to enroll any new employer 
 groups or individuals, and
 ``(ii) it can demonstrate that its 
 financial or administrative capacity to serve 
 previously enrolled groups and individuals (and 
 additional individuals who will be expected to 
 enroll because of affiliation with such 
 previously enrolled groups) will be impaired if 
 it is required to enroll new employer groups or 
 individuals.
 ``(b) Grounds for Refusal To Issue or Renew.--A carrier may refuse 
to issue or renew or terminate a plan only for--
 ``(1) nonpayment of premiums, and
 ``(2) fraud or misrepresentation.
 ``(c) Use of Community-Rated Premium Rates.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the premium 
 rate charged for an insured health benefit plan with similar 
 benefits in a community for a type of enrollment (described in 
 paragraph (4)) shall be--
 ``(A) the same for all enrollments on a group 
 basis, and
 ``(B) the same for all other enrollments.
 ``(2) Transition.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of an insured health 
 benefit plan that charged different premium rates for 
 similar benefits in a community for a type of 
 enrollment in 1993, notwithstanding paragraph (1) the 
 percentage range (as defined in subparagraph (B)) of 
 premium rates charged--
 ``(i) in 1994 may not be greater than \2/3\ 
 of the premium range of premium rates charged 
 in 1993, and
 ``(ii) in 1995 may not be greater than \1/
 3\ of the premium range of premium rates 
 charged in 1993.
 ``(B) Premium range defined.--In subparagraph (A), 
 the term `premium range' means, with respect to premium 
 rates under a plan for similar benefits in a community 
 for a type of enrollment, the quotient (expressed as a 
 percentage) of--
 ``(i) the difference between the highest 
 premium rate for such coverage and the lowest 
 premium rate for such coverage, divided by
 ``(ii) the lowest premium rate for such 
 coverage.
 ``(3) Specification of community.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, no carrier may use a geographic area that is 
 smaller than a metropolitan statistical area as a community.
 ``(4) Types of enrollment.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the types of enrollment in a health benefit plan 
 are individual-only coverage and coverage of a family 
 consisting of more than 1 individual.
 ``(d) Minimum Plan Period.--A carrier may not offer to, or issue 
with respect to, an individual or employer an insured health benefit 
plan with a term of less than 12 months.
 ``(e) Notices and Renewal Periods.--
 ``(1) Notice and specification of rates and administrative 
 changes.--
 ``(A) Notice.--The carrier of an insured health 
 benefit plan shall provide for notice, at least 30 days 
 before the date of expiration of the plan, of the terms 
 for renewal of the plan. Except with respect to rates 
 and administrative changes, the terms of renewal 
 (including benefits) shall be the same as the terms of 
 issuance.
 ``(B) Renewal rates same as issuance rates.--The 
 carrier may change the terms for such renewal, but the 
 premium rates charged with respect to such renewal 
 shall be the same as that for a new issue.
 ``(2) Period of renewal.--The period of renewal of each 
 insured health benefit plan shall be for a period of not less 
 than 12 months.

``SEC. 2105. PAYMENT OF COMMISSIONS.

 ``A carrier may not vary the remuneration paid a broker for the 
sale or renewal of any health benefit plan based, directly or 
indirectly, on the anticipated or actual claims experience associated 
with the group or individuals to which the plan was sold.

``SEC. 2106. INSURANCE REQUIREMENT FOR MULTIPLE EMPLOYER WELFARE 
 ARRANGEMENTS.

 ``Each insured health benefit plan that is a multiple employer 
welfare arrangement must be offered by an entity licensed under an 
insurance law of a State.

``SEC. 2107. NONAPPLICATION IN PUERTO RICO AND THE TERRITORIES.

 ``This title shall not apply outside the 50 States or the District 
of Columbia.

``SEC. 2108. DEFINITIONS.

 ``In this title:
 ``(1) Carrier.--The term `carrier' means any person that 
 offers a health benefit plan, whether through insurance or 
 otherwise, including a licensed insurance company, a prepaid 
 hospital or medical service plan, a health maintenance 
 organization, and a multiple employer welfare arrangement.
 ``(2) Group.--The term `group' means 2 or more employees of 
 the same employer who normally perform on a monthly basis at 
 least 17\1/2\ hours of service per week for that employer.
 ``(3) Health benefit plan.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `health benefit plan' 
 means any plan or contract under which any medical 
 benefit is provided to any individual.
 ``(B) Certain plans and contracts not covered.--The 
 term `health benefit plan' does not include any plan or 
 contract--
 ``(i) which provides for accident only, 
 dental only, or disability only coverage,
 ``(ii) which provides coverage as a 
 supplement to liability insurance, and
 ``(iii) which provides insurance arising 
 out of a workers' compensation or similar law, 
 or automobile medical-payment insurance.
 ``(4) Health maintenance organization.--The term `health 
 maintenance organization' has the meaning given the term 
 `eligible organization' in section 1876(b).
 ``(5) Insured health benefit plan.--The term `insured 
 health benefit plan' means any health benefit plan provided 
 through insurance, and includes a prepaid hospital or medical 
 service plan, the health benefit plan of a health maintenance 
 organization, and a multiple employer welfare arrangement.
 ``(6) Medical benefit.--The term `medical benefit' means 
 any benefit which consists of the providing (through insurance 
 or otherwise) of medical care (as defined in section 213(d) of 
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986).
 ``(7) Multiple employer welfare arrangement.--The term 
 `multiple employer welfare arrangement' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 3(40) of the Employee Retirement Income 
 Security Act of 1974.
 ``(8) Self-insured health benefit plan.--The term `self-
 insured health benefit plan' means any health benefit plan not 
 provided through insurance.
 ``(9) State.--The term `State' means the 50 States and the 
 District of Columbia.''.

SEC. 303. ASSURING CONTINUATION OF ACCESS TO COLLEGE AND UNIVERSITY 
 HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS BY GRADUATING STUDENTS.

 (a) In General.--No State shall establish or enforce any law or 
regulation that prevents the health benefit plan of a college or 
university from offering eligible individuals continuation of coverage 
under the plan.
 (b) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed--
 (1) as requiring the health benefit plan of a college or 
 university to provide for the continuation coverage described 
 in subsection (a),
 (2) if such continuation coverage is provided, as requiring 
 such continuation coverage to be made available to other 
 individuals or as requiring facilities of the health benefit 
 plan to be made available to any individuals who have not 
 otherwise been associated with the college or university, or
 (3) as preventing such a health benefit plan from imposing 
 premiums for such continuation coverage.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``college or university'' means an institution 
 of higher education (as defined in section 1201(a) of the 
 Higher Education Act of 1965).
 (2) The term ``eligible individual'' means, with respect to 
 a college or university, an individual who--
 (A) is enrolled under the health benefit plan of 
 the college or university as a student (or as a 
 dependent of a student), and
 (B) whose enrollment under the plan would otherwise 
 terminate because of the graduation from the college or 
 university of the individual (or the spouse or parent 
 of the individual).
 (d) Effective Date.--This section shall take effect on the date of 
the enactment of this Act.

 Subtitle B--Administrative Simplification

SEC. 321. REQUIREMENT FOR UNIFORM HEALTH CLAIMS CARDS.

 (a) Uniform Health Claims Cards.--
 (1) Requirement.--Each health benefit plan (as defined in 
 section 326(a)) shall issue a health claims card that meets the 
 requirements of subsection (c) for each individual who is 
 entitled to benefits under the plan and who is residing in the 
 United States. Such card shall be issued to the individual 
 involved or, in the case of an individual enrolled as a 
 dependent of another individual, to that other individual.
 (2) Deadline for application of requirement.--The deadline 
 specified under this paragraph for the requirement under 
 paragraph (1) is 6 months after the date the standards are 
 established under subsection (c).
 (b) Enforcement Through Civil Money Penalties.--
 (1) In general.--In the case of a health benefit plan that 
 fails to issue a health claims card in accordance with 
 subsection (a)(1), the plan is subject to a civil money penalty 
 of not to exceed $100 for each such violation. The provisions 
 of section 1128A of the Social Security Act (other than 
 subsections (a) and (b)) shall apply to a civil money penalty 
 under this subsection in the same manner as such provisions 
 apply to a penalty or proceeding under section 1128A(a) of such 
 Act.
 (2) Effective date.--No penalty may be imposed under 
 paragraph (1) for any failure occurring before the deadline 
 specified in subsection (a)(2).
 (c) Uniform Health Claims Cards.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish standards 
 consistent with this subsection respecting the form and 
 information to be contained on uniform health claims cards (for 
 purposes of subsection (a)).
 (2) Electronic.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
 card shall be in a form similar to that of a credit 
 card and shall have, encoded in electronic form--
 (i) the identity of the individual,
 (ii) the health benefit plan in which the 
 individual is enrolled, and
 (iii) the telephone number or numbers to be 
 used for the verification electronically of 
 entitlement to benefits under the plan under 
 section 322 and for the submission 
 electronically of claims under the plan under 
 section 323.
 (B) Use of electronic read-and-write cards.--The 
 Secretary may provide for cards in an electronic form 
 that permits information on the card to be readily 
 changed. Such information may include information 
 relating to the health coverage status of the 
 individual and the medical history of the individual.
 (C) Personal identifier.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A) and for purposes of claims processing 
 and related purposes under section 323, the Social 
 Security account number of the individual or, in the 
 case of an infant or other individual to whom such a 
 number has not been issued, such a Social Security 
 account number of a parent or guardian or other number 
 as the Secretary shall specify, shall be used as the 
 personal identifier for the individual.
 (3) Additional information.--The card shall include such 
 additional information, in electronic or other form, as the 
 Secretary may require to carry out the purposes of this Act. In 
 addition, the health benefit plan issuing the card may include 
 such additional information on the card as the plan desires, 
 subject to such limitations as the Secretary may provide.
 (4) Deadline.--The Secretary shall first establish the 
 standards for uniform health claims cards under this subsection 
 by not later than 12 months after the date of the enactment of 
 this Act.
 (d) Application to Medicare and Medicaid Programs.--
 (1) Medicare program.--The Secretary shall provide, in 
 regulations promulgated to carry out the medicare program, that 
 identification cards issued under that program are modified to 
 the extent required to conform to the standards established 
 under subsection (c), by not later than the deadline specified 
 in subsection (a)(2).
 (2) State medicaid plans.--As a condition for the approval 
 of a State plan under the medicaid program, effective for 
 calendar quarters beginning on or after the deadline specified 
 in subsection (a)(2), each such plan shall provide, in 
 accordance with regulations of the Secretary, that 
 identification cards issued under the plan are modified to the 
 extent required to conform to the requirements of subsection 
 (c).

SEC. 322. REQUIREMENT FOR ENTITLEMENT VERIFICATION SYSTEM.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Requirement.--Each health benefit plan shall provide 
 for an electronic system, that is certified by the Secretary as 
 meeting the standards established under subsection (c), for the 
 verification of an individual's entitlement to benefits under 
 such plan.
 (2) Deadline for application of requirement.--The deadline 
 specified under this paragraph for the requirement under 
 paragraph (1) is 6 months after the date the standards are 
 established under subsection (c).
 (b) Enforcement Through Civil Money Penalties.--
 (1) In general.--In the case of a health benefit plan that 
 fails to provide for an electronic verification system that is 
 certified by the Secretary as meeting the standards established 
 under subsection (c), the plan is subject to a civil money 
 penalty of not to exceed $100 for each day in which such 
 failure persists. The provisions of section 1128A of the Social 
 Security Act (other than subsections (a) and (b)) shall apply 
 to a civil money penalty under this subsection in the same 
 manner as such provisions apply to a penalty or proceeding 
 under section 1128A(a) of such Act.
 (2) Effective date.--No penalty may be imposed under 
 paragraph (1) for any failure occurring before the deadline 
 specified in subsection (a)(2).
 (c) Standards for Entitlement Verification Systems.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish standards 
 consistent with this subsection respecting the requirements for 
 certification of entitlement verification systems.
 (2) Information available.--Such standards shall require a 
 system to provide information, with respect to individuals, 
 concerning the following:
 (A) The specific benefits to which the individual 
 is entitled under the plan.
 (B) Current status of the individual with respect 
 to fulfillment of deductibles, copayments, and out-of-
 pocket limits on cost-sharing.
 (C) Restrictions on providers who may provide 
 covered services, including utilization controls (such 
 as preadmission certification).
 (3) Coordination of benefit information.--Such standards 
 shall require a system to provide for the transfer among health 
 benefit plans of appropriate information in determining 
 liability in cases in which benefits may be payable under two 
 or more such plans.
 (4) Form of inquiry.--Each verification system shall be 
 capable of accepting inquiries under this subsection from 
 health care providers (and, to the extent provided under 
 paragraph (3), from other health benefit plans) in a variety of 
 electronic and other forms, including--
 (A) through electronic transmission of information 
 on the uniform health claims card (in a manner similar 
 to that for verification of credit card purchases),
 (B) through the use of a touch-tone telephone line, 
 and
 (C) through the use of a computer modem.
 The system shall also provide, for an additional fee, for the 
 acceptance of inquiries in a nonelectronic form.
 (5) Form of response.--Each such system shall be capable of 
 responding to such inquiries under this subsection in a variety 
 of electronic and other forms, including--
 (A) through modem transmission of information,
 (B) through computer synthesized voice 
 communication, and
 (C) through transmission of information to a 
 facsimile (fax) machine.
 The system shall also provide, for an additional fee, for the 
 response to inquiries in a nonelectronic form.
 (6) Limitation on fees.--A health benefit plan may not 
 impose a fee for the acceptance or response to an inquiry under 
 this subsection except where the acceptance or response is in a 
 nonelectronic form.
 (7) Public domain software to providers.--The Secretary 
 shall provide for the development, and shall make available 
 without charge to health service providers and health benefit 
 plans, such computer software as will enable--
 (A) such providers to make inquiries, and receive 
 responses, electronically respecting the eligibility 
 and benefits of an individual under health benefit 
 plans, and
 (B) such plans to make inquiries, and receive 
 responses, electronically respecting liability of other 
 plans for the provision or payment of benefits.
 (8) Deadline.--The Secretary shall first establish the 
 standards under this subsection (and shall develop and make 
 available the software under paragraph (7)) by not later than 
 12 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (d) Application to Medicare and Medicaid Programs.--
 (1) Medicare program.--The Secretary shall provide, in 
 regulations promulgated to carry out the medicare program, that 
 there is established an entitlement verification system that 
 meets the standards established under subsection (c), by not 
 later than the deadline specified in subsection (a)(2).
 (2) State medicaid plans.--As a condition for the approval 
 of a State plan under the medicaid program, effective for 
 calendar quarters beginning on or after the deadline specified 
 in subsection (a)(2), each such plan shall provide, in 
 accordance with regulations of the Secretary, that there is 
 established an entitlement verification system that meets the 
 standards established under subsection (c).

SEC. 323. REQUIREMENTS FOR UNIFORM CLAIMS AND ELECTRONIC CLAIMS DATA 
 SET.

 (a) Requirements.--
 (1) Submission of claims.--Each health service provider 
 that furnishes services in the United States for which payment 
 may be made under a health benefit plan shall submit any claim 
 for payment for such services only in a form and manner 
 consistent with standards established under subsection (c).
 (2) Acceptance of claims.--A health benefit plan may not 
 reject a claim for payment under the plan on the basis of the 
 form or manner in which the claim is submitted if the claim is 
 submitted in accordance with the standards established under 
 subsection (c).
 (3) Effective date.--This subsection shall apply to claims 
 for services furnished on or after the date that is 6 months 
 after the date standards are established under subsection (c).
 (b) Enforcement Through Civil Money Penalties.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) Providers.--In the case of a health service 
 provider that submits a claim in violation of 
 subsection (a)(1), the provider is subject to a civil 
 money penalty of not to exceed $100 (or, if greater, 
 the amount of the claim) for each such violation.
 (B) Plans.--In the case of a health benefit plan 
 that rejects a claim in violation of subsection (a)(2), 
 the plan is subject to a civil money penalty of not to 
 exceed $100 (or, if greater, the amount of the claim) 
 for each such violation.
 (2) Process.--The provisions of section 1128A of the Social 
 Security Act (other than subsections (a) and (b)) shall apply 
 to a civil money penalty under paragraph (1) in the same manner 
 as such provisions apply to a penalty or proceeding under 
 section 1128A(a) of such Act.
 (3) Sunset for penalty.--No civil money penalty may be 
 imposed under this subsection for submission (or rejection) of 
 any claim on or after the date that is 36 months after the 
 effective date specified in subsection (a)(3).
 (c) Standards Relating to Uniform Claims and Electronic Claims Data 
Set.--
 (1) Establishment of standards.--The Secretary shall 
 establish standards that--
 (A) relate to the form and manner of submission of 
 claims for benefits under a health benefit plan, and
 (B) define the data elements to be contained in a 
 uniform electronic claims data set to be used with 
 respect to such claims.
 (2) Scope of information.--
 (A) In general.--The standards under this 
 subsection are intended to cover substantially most 
 claims that are filed under health benefit plans. Such 
 information need not include all elements that may 
 potentially be required to be reported under 
 utilization review provisions of plans.
 (B) Ensuring accountability for claims submitted 
 electronically.--In establishing such standards, the 
 Secretary, in consultation with appropriate agencies, 
 shall include such methods of ensuring provider 
 responsibility and accountability for claims submitted 
 electronically that are designed to control fraud and 
 abuse in the submission of such claims.
 (C) Components.--In establishing such standards the 
 Secretary shall--
 (i) with respect to data elements, define 
 data fields, formats, and medical nomenclature, 
 and plan benefit and insurance information;
 (ii) develop a single, uniform coding 
 system for diagnostic and procedure codes; and
 (iii) provide for standards for the uniform 
 electronic transmission of such elements.
 (3) Coordination with standards for electronic medical 
 records.--In establishing standards under this subsection, the 
 Secretary shall assure that--
 (A) the development of such standards is 
 coordinated with the development of the standards for 
 electronic medical records under section 324, and
 (B) the coding of data elements under the uniform 
 electronic claims data set and the coding of the same 
 elements in the uniform hospital clinical data set are 
 consistent.
 (4) Use of task forces.--In adopting standards under this 
 subsection--
 (A) the Secretary shall take into account the 
 recommendations of current task forces, including at 
 least the Workgroup on Electronic Data Interchange, 
 National Uniform Billing Committee, the Uniform Claim 
 Task Force, and the Computer-based Patient Record 
 Institute, and
 (B) the Secretary shall provide that the electronic 
 transmission standards are consistent, to the extent 
 practicable, with the applicable standards established 
 by the Accredited Standards Committee X-12 of the 
 American National Standards Institute.
 (5) Uniform, unique provider identification codes.--In 
 establishing standards under this subsection--
 (A) the Secretary shall provide for a unique 
 identifier code for each health service provider that 
 furnishes services for which a claim may be submitted 
 under a health benefit plan, and
 (B) in the case of a provider that has a unique 
 identifier issued for purposes of the medicare program, 
 the code provided under subparagraph (A) shall be the 
 same as such unique identifier.
 (6) Public domain software to providers.--The Secretary 
 shall provide for the development, and shall make available 
 without charge to health service providers, such computer 
 software as will enable the providers to submit claims and to 
 receive verification of claims status electronically.
 (7) Standards for paper claims.--The standards shall 
 provide for a uniform paper claims form which is consistent 
 with data elements required for the submission of claims 
 electronically.
 (8) Standards for claims for clinical laboratory tests.--
 The standards shall provide that claims for clinical laboratory 
 tests for which benefits are provided under a health benefit 
 plan shall be submitted directly by the person or entity that 
 performed (or supervised the performance of) the tests to the 
 plan in a manner consistent with (and subject to such 
 exceptions as are provided under) the requirement for direct 
 submission of such claims under the medicare program.
 (9) Deadline.--The Secretary shall first provide for the 
 standards for the uniform claims under this subsection (and 
 shall develop and make available the software under paragraph 
 (6)) by not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment 
 of this Act.
 (d) Use Under Medicare and Medicaid Programs.--
 (1) Requirement for providers.--In the case of a health 
 service provider that submits a claim for services furnished 
 under the medicare program or medicaid program in violation of 
 subsection (a)(1), no payment shall be made under such program 
 for such services.
 (2) Requirements of intermediaries and carriers under 
 medicare program.--The Secretary shall provide, in regulations 
 promulgated to carry out title XVIII of the Social Security 
 Act, that the claims process provided under that title is 
 modified to the extent required to conform to the standards 
 established under subsection (c).
 (3) Requirements of state medicaid plans.--As a condition 
 for the approval of State plans under the medicaid program, 
 effective as of the effective date specified in subsection 
 (a)(3), each such plan shall provide, in accordance with 
 regulations of the Secretary, that the claims process provided 
 under the plan is modified to the extent required to conform to 
 the standards established under subsection (c).

SEC. 324. ELECTRONIC MEDICAL RECORDS AND REPORTING.

 (a) Standards for Electronic Medical Records for Hospitals.--
 (1) Promulgation of standards.--
 (A) In general.--Between July 1, 1994, and January 
 1, 1995, the Secretary shall promulgate standards 
 described in paragraph (2) for hospitals concerning 
 electronic medical records.
 (B) Revision.--The Secretary may from time to time 
 revise the standards promulgated under this paragraph.
 (2) Contents of standards.--The standards promulgated under 
 paragraph (1) shall include at least the following:
 (A) A definition of a uniform hospital clinical 
 data set, including a definition of the set of 
 comprehensive data elements, for use by utilization and 
 quality control peer review organizations.
 (B) Standards for an electronic patient care 
 information system with data obtained at the point of 
 care.
 (C) A specification of, and manner of presentation 
 of, the individual data elements of the set and system 
 under this paragraph.
 (D) Standards concerning the transmission of 
 electronic medical data.
 (E) Standards relating to confidentiality of 
 patient-specific information, which include the 
 physical security of electronic data and the use of 
 keys, passwords, encryption, and other means to ensure 
 the protection of the confidentiality and privacy of 
 electronic data.
 (3) Coordination with standards for uniform electronic 
 claims data set.--In establishing standards under this 
 subsection, the Secretary shall assure that--
 (A) the development of such standards is 
 coordinated with the development of the standards for 
 the uniform electronic claims data set under section 
 323, and
 (B) the coding of data elements under the uniform 
 hospital clinical data set and the coding of the same 
 elements under the uniform electronic claims data set 
 are consistent.
 (4) Consultation.--in establishing standards under this 
 subsection, the Secretary shall--
 (A) consult with the American National Standards 
 Institute, hospitals, health benefit plans, and other 
 interested parties, and
 (B) take into consideration, in developing 
 standards under paragraph (2)(A), the data set used by 
 the utilization and quality control peer review program 
 under part B of title XI of the Social Security Act.
 (b) Requirement for Application of Electronic Records Standards to 
Hospitals.--
 (1) As condition of medicare participation.--As of January 
 1, 1996, each hospital, as a requirement of each participation 
 agreement under section 1866 of the Social Security Act, shall, 
 in accordance with the standards promulgated under subsection 
 (a)(1)--
 (A) maintain clinical data included in the uniform 
 hospital clinical data set under subsection (a)(2)(A) 
 in electronic form on all inpatients,
 (B) upon request of the Secretary or of a 
 utilization and quality control peer review 
 organization (with which the Secretary has entered into 
 a contract under part B of title XI of such Act), 
 transmit electronically data requested from such data 
 set, and
 (C) upon request of the Secretary, or of a fiscal 
 intermediary or carrier, transmit electronically any 
 data (with respect to a claim) from such data set.
 (2) Application of presentation and transmission standards 
 to electronic transmission to federal agencies.--Effective 
 January 1, 1996, if a hospital is required under a Federal 
 program to transmit a data element that is subject to a 
 standard, promulgated under subsection (a)(1), described in 
 subparagraph (C) or (D) of subsection (a)(2), the head of the 
 Federal agency responsible for such program (if not otherwise 
 authorized) is authorized to require the provider to present 
 and transmit the data element electronically in accordance with 
 such a standard.
 (c) Limitation on Data Requirements Where Standards In Effect.--
 (1) In general.--On or after January 1, 1996, a health 
 benefit plan may not require, for the purpose of utilization 
 review or as a condition of providing benefits or making 
 payments under the plan, that a hospital--
 (A) provide any data element not in the uniform 
 hospital clinical data set specified under the 
 standards promulgated under subsection (a), or
 (B) transmit or present any such data element in a 
 manner inconsistent with such standards applicable to 
 such transmission or presentation.
 (2) Compliance.--The Secretary may impose a civil money 
 penalty on any health benefit plan that fails to comply with 
 paragraph (1) in an amount not to exceed $100 for each such 
 failure. The provisions of section 1128A of the Social Security 
 Act (other than the first sentence of subsection (a) and other 
 than subsection (b)) shall apply to a civil money penalty under 
 this paragraph in the same manner as such provisions apply to a 
 penalty or proceeding under section 1128A(a) of such Act.
 (3) Application to medicare program.--Effective as of 
 January 1, 1996, neither the Secretary, nor any carrier or 
 fiscal intermediary, nor any utilization and quality control 
 peer review organization may require, for the purpose of 
 utilization review or as a condition of providing benefits or 
 making payments under the medicare program, that a hospital--
 (A) provide any data element not in the uniform 
 hospital clinical data set specified under the 
 standards promulgated under subsection (a), or
 (B) transmit or present any such data element in a 
 manner inconsistent with such standards applicable to 
 such transmission or presentation.
 (4) Application to medicaid program.--As a condition for 
 the approval of State plans under the medicaid program and in 
 accordance with regulations of the Secretary, effective as of 
 January 1, 1996, each such plan may not require that a 
 hospital, for the purpose of utilization review or as a 
 condition of providing benefits or making payments under the 
 plan--
 (A) provide any data element not in the uniform 
 hospital clinical data set specified under the 
 standards promulgated under subsection (a), or
 (B) transmit or present any such data element in a 
 manner inconsistent with such standards applicable to 
 such transmission or presentation.
 (d) Preemption of State Quill Pen Laws.--
 (1) In general.--Any provision of State law that requires 
 medical or health insurance records (including billing 
 information) to be maintained in written, rather than 
 electronic, form shall deemed to be satisfied if the records 
 are maintained in an electronic form that meets standards 
 established by the Secretary under paragraph (2).
 (2) Secretarial authority.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall 
 issue regulations to carry out paragraph (1). The regulations 
 shall provide for an electronic substitute that is in the form 
 of a unique identifier (assigned to each authorized individual) 
 that serves the functional equivalent of a signature. The 
 regulations may provide for such exceptions to paragraph (1) as 
 the Secretary determines to be necessary to prevent fraud and 
 abuse, to prevent the illegal distribution of controlled 
 substances, and in such other cases as the Secretary deems 
 appropriate.
 (3) Effective date.--Paragraph (1) shall take effect on the 
 first day of the first month that begins more than 30 days 
 after the date the Secretary issues the regulations referred to 
 in paragraph (2).

SEC. 325. UNIFORM HOSPITAL COST REPORTING.

 Each hospital, as a requirement under a participation agreement 
under section 1866(a) of the Social Security Act for each cost 
reporting period beginning during or after fiscal year 1993, shall 
provide for the reporting of information to the Secretary with respect 
to any hospital care provided in a uniform manner consistent with 
standards established by the Secretary to carry out section 4007(c) of 
the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987 and in an electronic form 
consistent with standards established by the Secretary.

SEC. 326. DEFINITIONS.

 (a) Health Benefit Plan.--In this subtitle:
 (1) In general.--The term ``health benefit plan'' means, 
 except as provided in paragraphs (2) through (4), any public or 
 private entity or program that provides for payments for health 
 care services, including--
 (A) a group health plan (as defined in section 
 5000(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986), and
 (B) any other health insurance arrangement, 
 including any arrangement consisting of a hospital or 
 medical expense incurred policy or certificate, 
 hospital or medical service plan contract, or health 
 maintenance organization subscriber contract.
 (2) Plans excluded.--Such term does not include--
 (A) accident-only, credit, or disability income 
 insurance;
 (B) coverage issued as a supplement to liability 
 insurance;
 (C) an individual making payment on the 
 individual's own behalf (or on behalf of a relative or 
 other individual) for deductibles, coinsurance, or 
 services not covered under a health benefit plan; and
 (D) such other plans as the Secretary may 
 determine, because of the limitation of benefits to a 
 single type or kind of health care, such as dental 
 services, or other reasons should not be subject to the 
 requirements of this section.
 (3) Plans included.--Such term includes--
 (A) worker's compensation or similar insurance, and
 (B) automobile medical-payment insurance.
 (4) Treatment of direct federal provision of services.--
 Such term does not include a Federal program that provides 
 directly for the provision of health services to beneficiaries.
 (b) Health Service Provider.--In this subtitle, the term ``health 
service provider'' includes a provider of services (as defined in 
section 1861(u) of the Social Security Act), physician, supplier, and 
other person furnishing health care services.

 Subtitle C--Fraud and Abuse

 Part 1--National Health Care Fraud Control Program

SEC. 341. ALL-PAYER FRAUD AND ABUSE CONTROL PROGRAM

 (a) Establishment of Program.--
 (1) Establishment.--Not later than January 1, 1994, the 
 Secretary shall establish in the Office of the Inspector 
 General of the Department of Health and Human Services a 
 program--
 (A) to coordinate Federal, State, and local law 
 enforcement programs to control fraud and abuse with 
 respect to the delivery of and payment for health care 
 in the United States,
 (B) to conduct investigations, audits, evaluations, 
 and inspections relating to the delivery of and payment 
 for health care in the United States, and
 (C) to facilitate the enforcement of the provisions 
 of sections 1128, 1128A, and 1128B of the Social 
 Security Act and other statutes applicable to health 
 care fraud and abuse.
 (2) Coordination with law enforcement agencies.--In 
 carrying out the program established under paragraph (1), the 
 Secretary shall consult with, and arrange for the sharing of 
 data and resources with, the Attorney General and State law 
 enforcement agencies, State medicaid fraud and abuse units, and 
 State agencies responsible for the licensing and certification 
 of health care providers.
 (3) Regulations.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary shall by regulation 
 establish standards to carry out the program under 
 paragraph (1).
 (B) Information standards.--
 (i) In general.--Such standards shall 
 include standards relating to the furnishing of 
 information by health insurers (including self-
 insured health benefit plans), providers, and 
 others to enable the Secretary to carry out the 
 program (including coordination with law 
 enforcement agencies under paragraph (2)).
 (ii) Confidentiality.--Such standards shall 
 include procedures to assure that such 
 information is provided and utilized in a 
 manner that protects the confidentiality of the 
 information and the privacy of individuals 
 receiving health care services.
 (iii) Qualified immunity for providing 
 information.--The provisions of section 1157(a) 
 of the Social Security Act (relating to 
 limitation on liability) shall apply to a 
 person providing information to the Secretary 
 under the program under this section, with 
 respect to the Secretary's performance of 
 duties under the program, in the same manner as 
 such section applies to information provided to 
 organizations with a contract under part B of 
 title XI of such Act, with respect to the 
 performance of such a contract.
 (C) Disclosure of ownership information.--
 (i) In general.--Such standards shall 
 include standards relating to the disclosure of 
 ownership information described in clause (ii).
 (ii) Ownership information described.--The 
 ownership information described in this clause 
 includes--
 (I) covered items and services 
 provided by an entity;
 (II) the names and unique physician 
 identification numbers of all 
 physicians with an ownership or 
 investment interest in the entity (as 
 described in section 1877(a)(2)(A) of 
 the Social Security Act) or whose 
 immediate relatives have such an 
 ownership or investment interest; and
 (III) the names of all other 
 individuals with such an ownership or 
 investment interest in the entity.
 (D) Integrity of issuance of provider 
 identification codes.--Such standards shall, insofar as 
 they relate to the issuance of unique provider codes 
 (described in section 323(c)(5))--
 (i) include standards relating to the 
 information (including ownership information 
 described in subparagraph (C)(ii) and other 
 information needed in the administration of the 
 program) to be required for the issuance of 
 such codes, and
 (ii) provide for the issuance of such a 
 code upon the presentation of such information 
 as would be sufficient to provide for the 
 issuance of similar codes under the medicare 
 program.
 (4) Authorization of appropriations for investigators and 
 other personnel.--
 (A) In general.--In addition to any other amounts 
 authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary for 
 health care anti-fraud and abuse activities for a 
 fiscal year, there are authorized to be appropriated 
 additional amounts described in subparagraph (B) to 
 enable the Secretary to conduct investigations of 
 allegations of health care fraud and otherwise carry 
 out the program established under paragraph (1) in a 
 fiscal year.
 (B) Amounts described.--The amounts referred to in 
 subparagraph (A) are as follows:
 (i) For fiscal year 1995, $300,000,000.
 (ii) For fiscal year 1996, $350,000,000.
 (iii) For fiscal year 1997, $400,000,000.
 (iv) For fiscal year 1998, $450,000,000.
 (5) Ensuring access to documentation.--(A) The Inspector 
 General of the Department of Health and Human Services is 
 authorized to exercise the authority described in paragraphs 
 (4) and (5) of section 6 of the Inspector General Act of 1978 
 (relating to subpoenas and administration of oaths) with 
 respect to the activities under the all-payor fraud and abuse 
 control program established under this subsection to the same 
 extent as such Inspector General may exercise such authorities 
 to perform the functions assigned to such official by such Act.
 (B) Section 1128(b) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1320a-7(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(15) Failure to supply requested information to 
 the inspector general.--Any individual or entity that 
 fails fully and accurately to provide, upon request of 
 the Inspector General of the Department of Health and 
 Human Services, records, documents, and other 
 information necessary for the purposes of carrying out 
 activities under the all-payor fraud and abuse control 
 program established under section 341 of the Health 
 Care Cost Containment and Reform Act of 1993.''.
 (b) Establishment of Anti-Fraud and Abuse Trust Fund.--
 (1) Establishment.--
 (A) In general.--There is hereby created on the 
 books of the Treasury of the United States a trust fund 
 to be known as the ``Anti-Fraud and Abuse Trust Fund'' 
 (in this section referred to as the ``Trust Fund''). 
 The Trust Fund shall consist of such gifts and bequests 
 as may be made as provided in subparagraph (B) and such 
 amounts as may be deposited in, or appropriated to, 
 such Trust Fund as provided in this subtitle, section 
 143(b), and title XI of the Social Security Act.
 (B) Authorization to accept gifts.--The Managing 
 Trustee of the Trust Fund is authorized to accept on 
 behalf of the United States money gifts and bequests 
 made unconditionally to the Trust Fund, for the benefit 
 of the Trust Fund, or any activity financed through the 
 Trust Fund.
 (2) Management.--
 (A) In general.--The Trust Fund shall be managed by 
 the Secretary through a Managing Trustee designated by 
 the Secretary.
 (B) Investment of funds.--It shall be the duty of 
 the Managing Trustee to invest such portion of the 
 Trust Fund as is not, in the trustee's judgment, 
 required to meet current withdrawals. Such investments 
 may be made only in interest-bearing obligations of the 
 United States or in obligations guaranteed as to both 
 principal and interest by the United States. For such 
 purpose such obligations may be acquired (i) on 
 original issue at the issue price, or (ii) by purchase 
 of outstanding obligations at market price. The 
 purposes for which obligations of the United States may 
 be issued under chapter 31 of title 31, United States 
 Code, are hereby extended to authorize the issuance at 
 par of public-debt obligations for purchase by the 
 Trust Fund. Such obligations issued for purchase by the 
 Trust Fund shall have maturities fixed with due regard 
 for the needs of the Trust Fund and shall bear interest 
 at a rate equal to the average market yield (computed 
 by the Managing Trustee on the basis of market 
 quotations as of the end of the calendar month next 
 preceding the date of such issue) on all marketable 
 interest-bearing obligations of the United States then 
 forming a part of the public debt which are not due or 
 callable until after the expiration of 4 years from the 
 end of such calendar month, except that where such 
 average is not a multiple of \1/8\ of 1 percent, the 
 rate of interest on such obligations shall be the 
 multiple of \1/8\ of 1 percent nearest such market 
 yield. The Managing Trustee may purchase other 
 interest-bearing obligations of the United States or 
 obligations guaranteed as to both principal and 
 interest by the United States, on original issue or at 
 the market price, only where the Trustee determines 
 that the purchase of such other obligations is in the 
 public interest.
 (C) Any obligations acquired by the Trust Fund 
 (except public-debt obligations issued exclusively to 
 the Trust Fund) may be sold by the Managing Trustee at 
 the market price, and such public-debt obligations may 
 be redeemed at par plus accrued interest.
 (D) The interest on, and the proceeds from the sale 
 or redemption of, any obligations held in the Trust 
 Fund shall be credited to and form a part of the Trust 
 Fund.
 (E) The receipts and disbursements of the Secretary 
 in the discharge of the functions of the Secretary 
 shall not be included in the totals of the budget of 
 the United States Government. For purposes of part C of 
 the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act 
 of 1985, the Secretary and the Trust Fund shall be 
 treated in the same manner as the Federal Retirement 
 Thrift Investment Board and the Thrift Savings Fund, 
 respectively. The United States is not liable for any 
 obligation or liability incurred by the Trust Fund.
 (3) Use of funds.--Amounts in the Trust Fund shall be used 
 to assist the Inspector General of the Department of Health and 
 Human Services in carrying out the all-payor fraud and abuse 
 control program established under subsection (a) in the fiscal 
 year involved.

SEC. 342. APPLICATION OF FEDERAL HEALTH ANTI-FRAUD AND ABUSE SANCTIONS 
 TO ALL FRAUD AND ABUSE AGAINST ANY HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN.

 (a) Civil Monetary Penalties.--Section 1128A of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7a) is amended as follows:
 (1) In subsection (a)(1), in the matter before subparagraph 
 (A), by inserting ``or of any health benefit plan,'' after 
 ``subsection (i)(1)),''.
 (2) In subsection (b)(1)(A), by inserting ``or under a 
 health benefit plan'' after ``title XIX''.
 (3) In subsection (f), by amending paragraph (2) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(2) In the case of amounts recovered arising out of claim 
 under a health benefit plan, the portion of amounts recovered 
 as is determined to have been paid out of the Federal Hospital 
 Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Supplementary Medical 
 Insurance Trust Fund, and the portion of amounts recovered 
 arising out of a claim under title XIX that is not paid to the 
 State agency under paragraph (1)(A), such amounts (and such 
 portions) shall be paid to the Anti-Fraud and Abuse Trust Fund 
 established under section 341(b) of the Health Care Cost 
 Containment and Reform Act of 1993.''.
 (4) In subsection (i)--
 (A) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``or under a 
 health benefit plan'' before the period at the end, and
 (B) in paragraph (5), by inserting ``or under a 
 health benefit plan'' after ``or XX''.
 (b) Crimes.--
 (1) Social security act.--Section 1128B of such Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1320a-7b) is amended as follows:
 (A) In the heading, by adding at the end the 
 following: ``or health benefit plans''.
 (B) In subsection (a)(1)--
 (i) by striking ``title XVIII or'' and 
 inserting ``title XVIII,'', and
 (ii) by adding at the end the following: 
 ``or a health benefit plan (as defined in 
 section 1128(i)),''.
 (C) In subsection (a)(5), by striking ``title XVIII 
 or a State health care program'' and inserting ``title 
 XVIII, a State health care program, or a health benefit 
 plan''.
 (D) In the second sentence of subsection (a)--
 (i) by inserting after ``title XIX'' the 
 following: ``or a health benefit plan'', and
 (ii) by inserting after ``the State'' the 
 following: ``or the plan''.
 (E) In subsection (b)(1), by striking ``title XVIII 
 or a State health care program'' each place it appears 
 and inserting ``title XVIII, a State health care 
 program, or a health benefit plan''.
 (F) In subsection (b)(2), by striking ``title XVIII 
 or a State health care program'' each place it appears 
 and inserting ``title XVIII, a State health care 
 program, or a health benefit plan''.
 (G) In subsection (b)(3), by striking ``title XVIII 
 or a State health care program'' each place it appears 
 in subparagraphs (A) and (C) and inserting ``title 
 XVIII, a State health care program, or a health benefit 
 plan''.
 (H) In subsection (d)(2)--
 (i) by striking ``title XIX,'' and 
 inserting ``title XIX or under a health benefit 
 plan,'', and
 (ii) by striking ``State plan,'' and 
 inserting ``State plan or the health benefit 
 plan,''.
 (2) Treble damages for criminal sanctions.--Section 1128B 
 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7b) is amended by adding at the 
 end the following new subsection:
 ``(f) In addition to the fines that may be imposed under subsection 
(a), (b), or (c), any individual found to have violated the provisions 
of any of such subsections may be subject to treble damages.''.
 (3) Identification of community service opportunities.--
 Section 1128B of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7b) is further 
 amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(g) The Secretary shall--
 ``(1) identify opportunities for the satisfaction of 
 community service obligations that a court may impose upon the 
 conviction of an offense under this section, and
 ``(2) make information concerning such opportunities 
 available to Federal and State law enforcement officers.''.
 (d) Health Benefit Plan Defined.--Section 1128 of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 1320a-7) is amended by redesignating subsection (i) as 
subsection (j) and by inserting after subsection (h) the following new 
subsection:
 ``(i) Health Benefit Plan Defined.--For purposes of sections 1128A 
and 1128B, the term `health benefit plan' means a health benefit 
program other than the medicare program, the medicaid program, or a 
State health care program.''.
 (e) Conforming Amendment.--Section 1128(b)(8)(B)(ii) of such Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1320a-7(b)(8)(B)(ii)) is amended by striking ``1128A'' and 
inserting ``1128A (other than a penalty arising from a health benefit 
plan, as defined in subsection (i))''.

SEC. 343. PROHIBITION AGAINST OFFERING INDUCEMENTS TO INDIVIDUALS 
 ENROLLED UNDER OR EMPLOYED BY PROGRAMS OR PLANS.

 (a) Inducements to Individuals Enrolled Under Medicare.--Section 
1128A(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7a(a)(1)) is 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (1)(D);
 (2) by striking ``, or'' at the end of paragraph (2) and 
 inserting a semicolon;
 (3) by striking the semicolon at the end of paragraph (3) 
 and inserting ``; or''; and
 (4) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(4) routinely transfers anything for less than fair 
 market value to (or for the benefit of) an individual entitled 
 to benefits under the medicare program in order to influence 
 the individual to receive from a particular provider, 
 practitioner, or supplier a covered item or service for which 
 payment may be made under such program;''.
 (b) Inducements to Employees.--Section 1128A(a)(1) of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 1320a-7a(a)(1)), as amended by subsection (a), is further 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (3);
 (2) by striking the semicolon at the end of paragraph (4) 
 and inserting ``; or''; and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (4) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(5) pays a bonus, reward, or other incentive to an 
 employee to induce the employee to encourage individuals to 
 seek or obtain covered items or services for which payment may 
 be made under the medicare program, a State health care 
 program, or a health benefit plan where the amount of the 
 incentive is in proportion to the activities of the employee in 
 encouraging individuals to seek or obtain covered items or 
 services;''.

SEC. 344. INTERMEDIATE SANCTIONS FOR MEDICARE HEALTH MAINTENANCE 
 ORGANIZATIONS.

 (a) Application of Intermediate Sanctions for Any Program 
Violations.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1876(i)(1) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395mm(i)(1)) is amended by striking ``the 
 Secretary may terminate'' and all that follows and inserting 
 the following: ``in accordance with procedures established 
 under paragraph (9), the Secretary may at any time terminate 
 any such contract or may impose the intermediate sanctions 
 described in paragraph (6)(B) or (6)(C) (whichever is 
 applicable) on the eligible organization if the Secretary 
 determines that the organization--
 ``(A) has failed substantially to carry out the 
 contract;
 ``(B) is carrying out the contract in a manner 
 inconsistent with the efficient and effective 
 administration of this section;
 ``(C) is operating in a manner that is not in the 
 best interests of the individuals covered under the 
 contract; or
 ``(D) no longer substantially meets the applicable 
 conditions of subsections (b), (c), (e), and (f).''.
 (2) Other intermediate sanctions for miscellaneous 
 program violations.--Section 1876(i)(6) of such Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395mm(i)(6)) is amended by adding at the end 
 the following new subparagraph:
 ``(C) In the case of an eligible organization for which the 
 Secretary makes a determination under paragraph (1) the basis 
 of which is not described in subparagraph (A), the Secretary 
 may apply the following intermediate sanctions:
 ``(i) civil money penalties of not more than 
 $25,000 for each determination under paragraph (1) if 
 the deficiency that is the basis of the determination 
 has directly adversely affected (or has the substantial 
 likelihood of adversely affecting) an individual 
 covered under the organization's contract;
 ``(ii) civil money penalties of not more than 
 $10,000 for each week beginning after the initiation of 
 procedures by the Secretary under paragraph (9) during 
 which the deficiency that is the basis of a 
 determination under paragraph (1) exists; and
 ``(iii) suspension of enrollment of individuals 
 under this section after the date the Secretary 
 notifies the organization of a determination under 
 paragraph (1) and until the Secretary is satisfied that 
 the deficiency that is the basis for the determination 
 has been corrected and is not likely to recur.''.
 (3) Procedures for imposing sanctions.--Section 1876(i) of 
 such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395mm(i)) is amended by adding at the end 
 the following new paragraph:
 ``(9) The Secretary may terminate a contract with an eligible 
organization under this section or may impose the intermediate 
sanctions described in paragraph (6) on the organization in accordance 
with formal investigation and compliance procedures established by the 
Secretary under which--
 ``(A) the Secretary provides the organization with the 
 opportunity to develop and implement a corrective action plan 
 to correct the deficiencies that were the basis of the 
 Secretary's determination under paragraph (1);
 ``(B) the Secretary shall impose more severe sanctions on 
 organizations that have a history of deficiencies or that have 
 not taken steps to correct deficiencies the Secretary has 
 brought to their attention;
 ``(C) there are no unreasonable or unnecessary delays 
 between the finding of a deficiency and the imposition of 
 sanctions; and
 ``(D) the Secretary provides the organization with 
 reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing (including the 
 right to appeal an initial decision) before imposing any 
 sanction or terminating the contract.''.
 (4) Conforming amendments.--(A) Section 1876(i)(6)(B) of 
 such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395mm(i)(6)(B)) is amended by striking the 
 second sentence.
 (B) Section 1876(i)(6) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395mm(i)(6)) 
 is further amended by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(D) The provisions of section 1128A (other than 
 subsections (a) and (b)) shall apply to a civil money penalty 
 under subparagraph (A) or (B) in the same manner as they apply 
 to a civil money penalty or proceeding under section 
 1128A(a).''.
 (b) Agreements With Peer Review Organizations.--
 (1) Requirement for written agreement.--Section 
 1876(i)(7)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395mm(i)(7)(A)) is amended by striking ``an agreement'' and 
 inserting ``a written agreement''.
 (2) Development of model agreement.--Not later than July 1, 
 1993, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall develop 
 a model of the agreement that an eligible organization with a 
 risk-sharing contract under section 1876 of the Social Security 
 Act must enter into with an entity providing peer review 
 services with respect to services provided by the organization 
 under section 1876(i)(7)(A) of such Act.
 (3) Report by gao.--
 (A) Study.--The Comptroller General shall conduct a 
 study of the costs incurred by eligible organizations 
 with risk-sharing contracts under section 1876(b) of 
 such Act of complying with the requirement of entering 
 into a written agreement with an entity providing peer 
 review services with respect to services provided by 
 the organization, together with an analysis of how 
 information generated by such entities is used by the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services to assess the 
 quality of services provided by such eligible 
 organizations.
 (B) Report to congress.--Not later than July 1, 
 1995, the Comptroller General shall submit a report to 
 the Committee on Ways and Means and the Committee on 
 Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives and 
 the Committee on Finance of the Senate on the study 
 conducted under subparagraph (A).
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply with respect to contract years beginning on or after January 1, 
1994.

 Part 2--Ban on Improper Physician Referrals

SEC. 351. APPLICATION OF MEDICARE BAN ON SELF-REFERRALS TO ALL PAYORS.

 Section 1877 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395nn) is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking ``for which 
 payment otherwise may be made under this title'' and 
 inserting ``for which a charge is imposed'', and
 (B) in paragraph (1)(B), by striking ``under this 
 title'';
 (2) by amending paragraph (1) of subsection (g) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(1) Denial of payment.--No payment may be made under this 
 title, under another Federal health care program, or under a 
 State health care program (as defined in section 1128(h)) for a 
 designated health service for which a claim is presented in 
 violation of subsection (a)(1)(B). No individual, third party 
 payor, or other entity is liable for payment for designated 
 health services for which a claim is presented in violation of 
 such subsection.''; and
 (3) in subsection (g)(3), by striking ``for which payment 
 may not be made under paragraph (1)'' and inserting ``for which 
 such a claim may not be presented under subsection (a)(1)''.

SEC. 352. EXTENSION OF SELF-REFERRAL BAN TO ADDITIONAL SPECIFIED 
 SERVICES.

 (a) In General.--Section 1877 of the Social Security Act is further 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``clinical laboratory services'' and 
 ``clinical laboratory services'' and inserting ``designated 
 health services'' and ``designated health services'', 
 respectively, each place either appears in subsections (a)(1), 
 (b)(2)(A)(ii)(I), (b)(4), (d)(1), (d)(2), and (d)(3), and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(i) Designated Health Services Defined.--In this section, the 
term `designated health services' means--
 ``(1) clinical laboratory services;
 ``(2) physical therapy services;
 ``(3) radiology services, including magnetic resonance 
 imaging, computerized axial tomography scans, and ultrasound 
 services;
 ``(4) radiation therapy services;
 ``(5) the furnishing of durable medical equipment;
 ``(6) the furnishing of parenteral and enteral nutrition 
 equipment and supplies;
 ``(7) the furnishing of outpatient prescription drugs;
 ``(8) ambulance services;
 ``(9) home infusion therapy services;
 ``(10) occupational therapy services; and
 ``(11) inpatient and outpatient hospital services 
 (including services furnished at a psychiatric or 
 rehabilitation hospital).''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--Section 1877 of such Act is further 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (d)(2), by striking ``laboratory'' and 
 inserting ``entity'',
 (2) in subsection (g)(1), by striking ``clinical laboratory 
 service'' and inserting ``designated health service'', and
 (3) in subsection (h)(7)(B), by striking ``clinical 
 laboratory service'' and inserting ``designated health 
 service''.

SEC. 353. CHANGES IN EXCEPTIONS AND OTHER PROVISIONS RELATING TO 
 COMPENSATION ARRANGEMENTS.

 (a) Multiple Locations for Group Practices.--Section 
1877(b)(2)(A)(ii)(II) of the Social Security Act is amended by striking 
``centralized provision'' and inserting ``provision of some or all''.
 (b) Treatment of Compensation Arrangements.--
 (1) Rental of office space and equipment.--Paragraph (1) of 
 section 1877(e) of such Act is amended to read as follows:
 ``(1) Rental of office space; rental of equipment.--
 ``(A) Office space.--Payments made by a lessee to a 
 lessor for the use of premises if--
 ``(i) the lease is set out in writing, 
 signed by the parties, and specifies the 
 premises covered by the lease,
 ``(ii) the aggregate space rented or leased 
 is reasonable and necessary for the legitimate 
 business purposes of the lease or rental,
 ``(iii) the lease provides for a term of 
 rental or lease for at least one year,
 ``(iv) in the case of a lease that is 
 intended to provide the lessee with access to 
 the premises for periodic intervals of time, 
 rather than on a full-time basis, the lease 
 specifies exactly the schedule of such 
 intervals, their length, and the rent for such 
 intervals,
 ``(v) the rental charges over the term of 
 the lease are set in advance, are consistent 
 with fair market value, and are not determined 
 in a manner that takes into account the volume 
 or value of any referrals or other business 
 generated between the parties,
 ``(vi) the lease would be commercially 
 reasonable even if no referrals were made 
 between the parties, and
 ``(vii) the compensation arrangement meets 
 such other requirements as the Secretary may 
 impose by regulation as needed to protect 
 against program or patient abuse.
 ``(B) Equipment.--Payments made by a lessee of 
 equipment to the lessor of the equipment for the use of 
 the equipment if--
 ``(i) the lease is set out in writing, 
 signed by the parties, and specifies the 
 equipment covered by the lease,
 ``(ii) the equipment rented or leased is 
 reasonable and necessary for the legitimate 
 business purposes of the lease or rental,
 ``(iii) the lease provides for a term of 
 rental or lease of at least one year,
 ``(iv) in the case of a lease that is 
 intended to provide the lessee with use of the 
 equipment for periodic intervals of time, 
 rather than on a full-time basis, the lease 
 specifies exactly the schedule of such 
 intervals, their length, and the rent for such 
 intervals,
 ``(v) the rental charges over the term of 
 the lease are set in advance, are consistent 
 with fair market value, and are not determined 
 in a manner that takes into account the volume 
 or value of any referrals or other business 
 generated between the parties,
 ``(vi) the lease would be commercially 
 reasonable even if no referrals were made 
 between the parties, and
 ``(vii) the compensation arrangement meets 
 such other requirements as the Secretary may 
 impose by regulation as needed to protect 
 against program or patient abuse.''.
 (2) Bona fide employment relationships.--Paragraph (2) of 
 such section is amended--
 (A) by striking ``with hospitals'',
 (B) by striking ``An arrangement'' and all that 
 follows through ``if'' and inserting ``Any amount paid 
 by an employer to an employee who has a bona fide 
 employment relationship with the employer for 
 employment, or paid by a hospital pursuant to an 
 arrangement with a physician (or immediate family 
 member) for the provision of administrative services, 
 if'',
 (C) in subparagraphs (A), (B), and (D), by striking 
 ``arrangement'' and inserting ``employment relationship 
 or arrangement'', and
 (D) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``to the 
 hospital''.
 (3) Additional exceptions.--Such subsection is further 
 amended by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
 ``(7) Payments to a physician for other items or 
 services.--
 ``(A) In general.--Payments made by an entity to a 
 physician (or family member) who is not employed by the 
 entity as compensation for services specified in 
 subparagraph (B), if--
 ``(i) the compensation agreement is set out 
 in writing and specifies the services to be 
 provided by the parties, the compensation for 
 each unit of service provided under the 
 agreement, and the schedule for the provision 
 of such services,
 ``(ii) the compensation paid over the term 
 of the agreement is consistent with fair market 
 value and is not determined in a manner that 
 takes into account the volume or value of any 
 referrals or other business generated between 
 the parties,
 ``(iii) the compensation is provided 
 pursuant to an agreement which would be 
 commercially reasonable even if no referrals 
 were made to the entity, and
 ``(iv) the compensation arrangement meets 
 such other requirements as the Secretary may 
 impose by regulation as needed to protect 
 against program or patient abuse.
 ``(B) Specified services.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), the services specified in this 
 subparagraph are any of the following:
 ``(i) Consultative services that--
 ``(I) relate to results that have 
 been obtained that are outside 
 established parameters, or are 
 specifically requested by the referring 
 physician on a specified patient,
 ``(II) are furnished by a physician 
 other than the referring physician (or 
 by another physician who is a member of 
 the same group practice), and
 ``(III) for which the physician 
 furnishes a written report for that 
 patient.
 ``(ii) Interpretation of tissue pathology 
 or Pap smear slides or the provision of other 
 cytology services.
 ``(iii) Phlebotomy services for paternity 
 or toxicology testing where the services are 
 furnished by a physician other than the 
 physician referring the individual for such 
 testing (or by another physician who is a 
 member of the same group practice).
 ``(iv) Employment-related health care 
 services, including a payment by a self-insured 
 employer for services rendered to employee 
 applicants, employees, or their families under 
 the terms of a health benefit plan.
 ``(v) Services as a clinical consultant to 
 the entity as required for certification of the 
 provider under section 353 of the Public Health 
 Service Act.
 ``(vi) Services required by local, State, 
 or Federal licensure, accreditation, or other 
 health and safety provisions.
 ``(vii) Services billed in the name of a 
 group practice provided by a physician under 
 contract to the group practice for services not 
 otherwise available directly through a 
 physician who is a member of the group.
 ``(8) Payments by a physician for items and services.--
 Payments made by a physician--
 ``(A) to a laboratory in exchange for the provision 
 of clinical laboratory services, or
 ``(B) to an entity as compensation for other items 
 or services if the items or services are furnished at a 
 price that is consistent with fair market value and are 
 generally available to referrors and non-referrors 
 alike on similar terms and conditions.
 ``(9) Payments for pathology services of a group 
 practice.--Payments made to a group practice for pathology 
 services under an agreement if--
 ``(A) the agreement is set out in writing and 
 specifies the services to be provided by the parties 
 and the compensation for services provided under the 
 agreement,
 ``(B) the compensation paid over the term of the 
 agreement is consistent with fair market value and is 
 not determined in a manner that takes into account the 
 volume or value of any referrals or other business 
 generated between the parties,
 ``(C) the compensation is provided pursuant to an 
 agreement which would be commercially reasonable even 
 if no referrals were made to the entity; and
 ``(D) the compensation arrangement between the 
 parties meets such other requirements as the Secretary 
 may impose by regulation as needed to protect against 
 program or patient abuse.''.
 (c) Treatment of Group Practices.--
 (1) Use of billing numbers, etc.--Section 1877 of the 
 Social Security Act is amended--
 (A) in subsection (b)(2)(B), by inserting ``under a 
 billing number assigned to the group practice'' after 
 ``member'',
 (B) in subsection (h)(4)(B), by inserting ``and 
 under a billing number assigned to the group'' after 
 ``in the name of the group'', and
 (C) in subsection (h)(4)(C), by striking ``by 
 members of the group''.
 (2) Treatment of clinical laboratory services furnished 
 under arrangements between hospitals and group practices.--
 (A) In general.--Section 1877(h)(4) of such Act is 
 amended--
 (i) in subparagraph (B) (as amended by 
 paragraph (1)(B)), by inserting ``(or are 
 billed in the name of a hospital for which the 
 group provides clinical laboratory services 
 pursuant to an arrangement that meets the 
 requirements of subparagraph (B))'' after 
 ``assigned to the group'';
 (ii) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) 
 through (D) as clauses (i) through (iv), 
 respectively;
 (iii) by inserting ``(A)'' after ``.--''; 
 and
 (iv) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(B) The requirements of this subparagraph, with respect 
 to an arrangement for clinical laboratory services provided by 
 the laboratory of a group and billed in the name of a hospital, 
 are that--
 ``(i) with respect to services provided to an 
 inpatient of the hospital, the arrangement is pursuant 
 to the provision of inpatient hospital services under 
 section 1861(b)(3);
 ``(ii) the arrangement began before December 19, 
 1989, and has continued in effect without interruption 
 since such date;
 ``(iii) the laboratory provides substantially all 
 of the clinical laboratory services to the hospital's 
 patients;
 ``(iv) the arrangement is pursuant to an agreement 
 that is set out in writing and that specifies the 
 services to be provided by the parties and the 
 compensation for services provided under the agreement;
 ``(v) the compensation paid over the term of the 
 agreement is consistent with fair market value and the 
 compensation per unit of services is fixed in advance 
 and is not determined in a manner that takes into 
 account the volume or value of any referrals or other 
 business generated between the parties;
 ``(vi) the compensation is provided pursuant to an 
 agreement which would be commercially reasonable even 
 if no referrals were made to the entity; and
 ``(vii) the arrangement between the parties meets 
 such other requirements as the Secretary may impose by 
 regulation as needed to protect against program or 
 patient abuse.''.
 (B) Conforming amendment.--Section 1877(b)(2)(B) of 
 such Act is amended by inserting ``(or by a hospital 
 for which such a group practice provides clinical 
 laboratory services pursuant to an arrangement that 
 meets the requirements of subsection (h)(4)(B))'' after 
 ``by a group practice of which such physician is a 
 member''.
 (3) Treatment of certain faculty practice plans.--The last 
 sentence of section 1877(h)(4)(A) of such Act, as redesignated 
 by paragraph (1)(A), is amended by inserting ``, institution of 
 higher education, or medical school'' after ``hospital''.
 (d) Expanding Rural Provider Exception To Cover Compensation 
Arrangements.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1877(b) of such Act is further 
 amended--
 (A) by redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph 
 (7), and
 (B) by inserting after paragraph (4) the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(5) Rural providers.--In the case of designated services 
 if--
 ``(A) the entity furnishing the services is in a 
 rural area (as defined in section 1886(d)(2)(D)), and
 ``(B) substantially all of the services furnished 
 by the entity to individuals entitled to benefits under 
 this title are furnished to such individuals who reside 
 in such a rural area.''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--Section 1877(d) of such Act is 
 amended--
 (A) by striking paragraph (2), and
 (B) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph 
 (2).
 (e) Exemption of Compensation Arrangements Involving Certain Types 
of Remuneration.--Section 1877(h)(1) of such Act is amended--
 (1) by striking subparagraph (B);
 (2) in subparagraph (A), by inserting before the period the 
 following: ``(other than an arrangement involving only 
 remuneration described in subparagraph (B))''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(B) Remuneration described in this subparagraph is any 
 remuneration consisting of any of the following:
 ``(i) The forgiveness of amounts owed for 
 inaccurate tests or procedures, mistakenly performed 
 tests or procedures, or the correction of minor billing 
 errors.
 ``(ii) The provision of items, devices, or supplies 
 of minor value that are used to--
 ``(I) collect, transport, process, or store 
 specimens for the entity providing the item, 
 device, or supply, or
 ``(II) communicate the results of tests or 
 procedures for such entity.
 ``(iii) The furnishing by an entity of laboratory 
 services to a group practice affiliated with the 
 entity, if the entity provides all or substantially all 
 of the clinical laboratory services of the group 
 practice.''.
 (f) Miscellaneous and Technical Corrections.--Section 1877 of such 
Act is amended--
 (1) in the fourth sentence of subsection (f)--
 (A) by striking ``provided'' and inserting 
 ``furnished'', and
 (B) by striking ``provides'' and inserting 
 ``furnish'';
 (2) in the fifth sentence of subsection (f)--
 (A) by striking ``providing'' each place it appears 
 and inserting ``furnishing'',
 (B) by striking ``with respect to the providers'' 
 and inserting ``with respect to the entities'', and
 (C) by striking ``diagnostic imaging services of 
 any type'' and inserting ``magnetic resonance imaging, 
 computerized axial tomography scans, and ultrasound 
 services''; and
 (3) in subsection (a)(2)(B), by striking ``subsection 
 (h)(1)(A)'' and inserting ``subsection (h)(1)''.

SEC. 354. EFFECTIVE DATES.

 (a) Expansion of Coverage and Payors.--The amendments made by 
sections 351 and 352 shall apply with respect to a referral by a 
physician for designated health services (as described in section 
1877(i) of the Social Security Act) made on or after the first day of 
the first month beginning 2 years after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.
 (b) Changes in Exceptions, Etc.--The amendments made by section 353 
shall apply to referrals made on or after January 1, 1992.

 Subtitle D--Other Provisions

SEC. 361. MALPRACTICE REFORM.

 (a) Study by Physician Payment Review Commission.--The Physician 
Payment Review Commission shall conduct a study of--
 (1) the need for tort reforms with respect to medical 
 malpractice liability claims, including the need to establish 
 or impose alternative dispute resolution requirements on such 
 claims; and
 (2) the impact of such reforms on--
 (A) expenditures for health care services and on 
 access to such services,
 (B) the quality of health care services, and
 (C) access of injured patients to the medical 
 malpractice system.
 (b) Report.--Not later than September 30, 1993, the Commission 
shall submit a report to Congress on the study conducted under 
paragraph (1) and shall include in such study such recommendations as 
the Commission considers appropriate.

 TITLE IV--EXPANSIONS OF HEALTH BENEFITS AND OTHER HEALTH INITIATIVES

 Subtitle A--Medicaid Benefit Improvements

SEC. 401. FLOOR ON MEDICAID PAYMENT LEVELS FOR INPATIENT HOSPITAL 
 SERVICES AND PHYSICIANS' SERVICES.

 (a) Inpatient Hospital Services.--
 (1) In general.--(A) A State plan under title XIX of the 
 Social Security Act shall not be considered to meet the 
 requirement of section 1902(a)(13)(A) of such Act (insofar as 
 it requires payments to hospitals for inpatient hospital 
 services that are reasonable and adequate to meet the costs 
 which must be incurred by efficiently and economically operated 
 facilities), as of October 1, 1996, unless the State has 
 submitted to the Secretary of Health and Human Services (in 
 this subsection referred to as the ``Secretary''), by not later 
 than such date, an amendment to such plan that assures that, in 
 the aggregate, the amount of payments for inpatient hospital 
 services provided in subsection (d) hospitals (as defined in 
 section 1886(d)(1)(B) of such Act) under the plan is not less 
 than--
 (i) in the case of services furnished during fiscal 
 year 1997, 80 percent (or, if greater, the percent 
 specified in subparagraph (B)) of the amount of 
 payments for such services that would be made under 
 title XVIII of such Act (without regard to any 
 deductible imposed under section 1813(a) of such Act or 
 any limitation on the coverage of inpatient hospital 
 services under such title) for such services if covered 
 under such title;
 (ii) in the case of services furnished during 
 fiscal year 1998, 85 percent (or, if greater, the 
 percent specified in subparagraph (B)) of the amount of 
 payments for such services that would be made under 
 title XVIII of such Act (without regard to any 
 deductible imposed under section 1813(a) of such Act or 
 any limitation on the coverage of inpatient hospital 
 services under such title) for such services if covered 
 under such title; and
 (iii) in the case of services furnished during any 
 succeeding fiscal year, 90 percent of the amount of 
 payments for such services that would be made under 
 title XVIII of such Act (without regard to any 
 deductible imposed under section 1813(a) of such Act or 
 any limitation on the coverage of inpatient hospital 
 services under such title) for such services if covered 
 under such title.
 (B) The percent specified in this subparagraph is the 
 quotient of--
 (i) the total payments made under the State plan 
 under title XIX of the Social Security Act in fiscal 
 year 1993 with respect to inpatient hospital services, 
 divided by
 (ii) the amount of payments for such services that 
 would be made under title XVIII of such Act (without 
 regard to any deductible imposed under section 1813(a) 
 of such Act or any limitation on the coverage of 
 inpatient hospital services under such title) for such 
 services in such fiscal year if covered under such 
 title,
 expressed as a percentage, or, if less, 90 percent.
 (C) In computing amounts under subparagraph (A), the 
 Secretary shall adjust for differences in case mix, volume, the 
 age and disability of the populations covered by the two 
 programs, and other relevant factors identified by the 
 Secretary.
 (2) Review.--The Secretary, by not later than 90 days after 
 the date of submission of a plan amendment under paragraph (1), 
 shall--
 (A) review each such amendment for compliance with 
 the requirement of section 1902(a)(13)(A) of the Social 
 Security Act; and
 (B) approve or disapprove each such amendment.
 If the Secretary disapproves such an amendment, the State shall 
 immediately submit a revised amendment which meets such 
 requirement.
 (3) Collection of data.--The Secretary may provide for such 
 collection of data on payment for inpatient hospital services 
 as may be necessary to carry out this subsection.
 (4) Nonwaivability.--The provisions of this subsection may 
 not be waived by the Secretary.
 (b) Physicians' Services.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1902 of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1396a) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)(13)--
 (i) by striking ``and'' at the end of 
 subparagraph (E);
 (ii) by striking the semicolon at the end 
 of subparagraph (F) and inserting ``; and''; 
 and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following 
 new subparagraph:
 ``(G) for payment for physicians' services through 
 a methodology under which the amount of payment for 
 such services furnished during a calendar quarter is 
 not less than the amount specified in subsection 
 (z);''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(z)(1) For purposes of subsection (a)(13)(G), the amount 
specified in this subsection is--
 ``(A) for physicians' services furnished during a calendar 
 quarter in fiscal year 1997, 60 percent (or, if greater, the 
 percent specified in paragraph (2)) of the applicable fee 
 schedule amount established under section 1848 for services 
 furnished in such year,
 ``(B) for physicians' services furnished during a calendar 
 quarter in fiscal year 1998, 70 percent (or, if greater, the 
 percent specified in subparagraph (B)) of the applicable fee 
 schedule amount established under section 1848 for services 
 furnished in such year, and
 ``(C) for physicians' services furnished during a calendar 
 quarter in a succeeding fiscal year, 90 percent (or, if 
 greater, the percent specified in subparagraph (B)) of the 
 applicable fee schedule amount established under section 1848 
 for services furnished in such year.
 ``(2) The percent specified in this paragraph is the quotient of--
 ``(A) the total payments made under the State plan under 
 title XIX of the Social Security Act in fiscal year 1993 for 
 physicians' services, divided by
 ``(B) the amount of payments for such services that would 
 be made under title XVIII of such Act (without regard to any 
 deductible or coinsurance) for such services in such fiscal 
 year if covered under such title,
expressed as a percentage, or, if less, 90 percent.''.
 (2) Transmittal of payment information to states.--Section 
 1848(i) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4(i)) is amended by adding 
 at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Transmittal of physician payment information to 
 states.--Not later than August 1 of 1996 (and of each year 
 thereafter), the Secretary shall transmit such information to 
 the States as is necessary to enable the States to carry out 
 the requirements of section 1902(a)(13)(G) of the Social 
 Security Act (as added by section 401(b)(1) of the Health Care 
 Cost Containment and Reform Act of 1993).''.
 (3) Relation to payments for obstetrical and pediatric 
 services.--Section 1926 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-7) is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(e) Payment rates established under this section with respect to 
services shall in no case be less than the minimum payment amounts 
specified under section 1902(z) with respect to such services. The fact 
that payment amounts with respect to such services are consistent with 
the payment rates required under such section shall not be the basis 
for a determination that the payment amounts comply with the 
requirements of this section.''.
 (4) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to payments under title XIX of the Social Security 
 Act for calendar quarters beginning on or after October 1, 
 1997.

SEC. 402. MEDICAID ELIGIBILITY EXPANSION.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Benefits for low-income individuals.--Section 
 1902(a)(10)(A)(i) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1396a(a)(10)(A)(i)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of subclause 
 (VI);
 (B) by striking the semicolon at the end of 
 subclause (VII) and inserting ``, or''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subclause:
 ``(VIII) who are described in 
 subsection (aa)(1);''.
 (2) Individuals described.--
 (A) In general.--Section 1902 of such Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396a), as amended by section 401(b), is amended 
 by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(aa)(1) Individuals described in this paragraph are--
 ``(A) for quarters beginning on or after October 1, 1996, 
 women during pregnancy (and during the 60-day period beginning 
 on the last day of the pregnancy) or individuals who have not 
 attained 6 years of age;
 ``(B) for quarters beginning on or after October 1, 1997, 
 individuals not described in subparagraph (A) who have not 
 attained 11 years of age;
 ``(C) for quarters beginning on or after October 1, 1998, 
 individuals not described in subparagraph (A) or (B) who have 
 not attained 19 years of age; and
 ``(D) for quarters beginning on or after October 1, 1999, 
 individuals not described in a preceding subparagraph who have 
 not attained 65 years of age,
who are not described in any of subclauses (I) through (VII) of 
subsection (a)(10)(A)(i) and whose family income does not exceed the 
income level described in paragraph (2) for a family of the size of the 
family.
 ``(2)(A) The income level described in this paragraph is the 
percent provided under subparagraph (B) of the official poverty line 
(as defined by the Office of Management and Budget, and revised 
annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget 
Reconciliation Act of 1981) applicable to a family of the size 
involved.
 ``(B) The percentage provided in this subparagraph is--
 ``(i) for individuals described in subparagraph (A), (B), 
 or (C) of paragraph (1), 200 percent; and
 ``(ii) with respect to any other individual, for purposes 
 of determining eligibility for medical assistance on or after--
 ``(I) October 1, 1999, is 50 percent,
 ``(II) October 1, 2000, is 100 percent,
 ``(III) October 1, 2001, is 150 percent, and
 ``(IV) October 1, 2002, is 200 percent.
 ``(3) Notwithstanding subsection (a)(17), for individuals who are 
eligible for medical assistance because of subsection 
(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII)--
 ``(A) no resource standard shall be applied;
 ``(B) the income standard to be applied is the appropriate 
 income standard established under paragraph (2); and
 ``(C) family income shall be determined in accordance with 
 the methodology that is not more restrictive than the 
 methodology employed under the State plan under part A or E of 
 title IV (except to the extent such methodology is inconsistent 
 with clause (D) of subsection (a)(17)), and costs incurred for 
 medical care or for any other type of remedial care shall not 
 be taken into account.
Any different treatment provided under this paragraph for such 
individuals shall not, because of subsection (a)(17), require or permit 
such treatment for other individuals.
 ``(4)(A) In the case of any State which is providing medical 
assistance to its residents under a waiver granted under section 1115, 
the Secretary shall require the State to provide medical assistance for 
individuals described in paragraph (1) in the same manner as the State 
would be required to provide such assistance for such individuals if 
the State had in effect a plan approved under this title.
 ``(B) In the case of a State which is not one of the 50 States or 
the District of Columbia, the State need not meet the requirement of 
subsection (a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII) and, for purposes of paragraph (2)(A), 
the State may substitute for the percentages provided under such 
paragraph any percentages that are less than such percentages.
 ``(5) The Secretary may not require that an individual apply for 
eligibility under subclauses (I) through (VII) of subsection 
(a)(10)(A)(i) as a condition of being determined to be eligible for 
medical assistance under this title as an individual described in 
paragraph (1).''.
 (B) Conforming amendment.--Section 1905(a) of such 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)) is amended--
 (i) by striking ``or'' at the end of clause 
 (ix),
 (ii) by adding ``or'' at the end of clause 
 (x), and
 (iii) by inserting after clause (x) the 
 following new clause:
 ``(xi) individuals described in section 
 1902(aa)(1),''.
 (b) Restrictions on Benefits Provided.--Section 1902(a)(10) of such 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)) is amended in the matter following 
subparagraph (F)--
 (1) by striking ``; and (XI) the making'' and inserting ``, 
 (XI) the making'';
 (2) by striking ``and (XI) the medical'' and inserting 
 ``(XII) the medical''; and
 (3) by striking the semicolon at the end and inserting the 
 following: `` and (XIII) the medical assistance required to be 
 made available to an individual described in subsection (aa)(1) 
 shall not include nursing facility services, home and 
 community-based services (as defined in section 
 1915(d)(5)(C)(i)), services in an intermediate care facility 
 for the mentally retarded, and community supported living 
 arrangements services;''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) 
shall apply to quarters beginning on or after October 1, 1996, without 
regard to whether or not regulations to carry out such amendments have 
been promulgated by such date.

SEC. 403. FULL FEDERAL PAYMENT FOR INCREASED COSTS.

 Section 1903 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(w)(1) Notwithstanding subsection (a), with respect to new 
mandated expenditures (as defined in paragraph (2)) in a quarter, 
instead of the amounts otherwise paid to a State under subsection (a) 
for a quarter with respect to such expenditures, there shall be paid to 
the State an amount equal to 100 percent of the amount of such 
expenditures.
 ``(2) In this subsection, the term `new mandated expenditures' 
means the sum of the following expenditures under the State plan during 
a quarter:
 ``(A) The amount by which (i) the minimum amount of 
 expenditures for medical assistance for inpatient hospital 
 services (consistent with section 401(a) of the Health Care 
 Cost Containment and Reform Act of 1993), exceeds (ii) the 
 amount of expenditures for such assistance which the Secretary 
 determines would have been payable under the plan (as such plan 
 was in effect as of the date of the enactment of this 
 subsection).
 ``(B) The amount by which (i) the minimum amount of 
 expenditures under the plan for medical assistance for 
 physicians' services (consistent with section 1902(a)(13)(G)) 
 for the quarter, exceeds (ii) the amount of expenditures under 
 the plan for such assistance which the Secretary determines 
 would have been payable under the plan (as such plan was in 
 effect as of the date of the enactment of this subsection) for 
 the quarter.
 ``(C) The amount of expenditures for medical assistance 
 attributable to individuals with respect to whom the State plan 
 would not be required to provide such assistance but for the 
 amendments made by section 402.
 ``(D) The amount of expenses reasonably attributable to the 
 expenditures described in subparagraphs (A) through (C).''.

 Subtitle B--Expansion of Medicare Benefits

 Part 1--Preventive Benefits

SEC. 411. ANNUAL SCREENING MAMMOGRAPHY.

 (a) Annual Screening Mammography for Women Over Age 64.--Section 
1834(c)(2)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m(b)(2)(A)) is 
amended--
 (1) in clause (iv), by striking ``but under 65 years of 
 age,''; and
 (2) by striking clause (v).
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to screening mammography performed on or after January 1, 1995.

SEC. 412. COVERAGE OF COLORECTAL SCREENING.

 (a) In General.--Section 1834 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395m) is amended by inserting after subsection (c) the following new 
subsection:
 ``(d) Frequency and Payment Limits for Screening Fecal-Occult Blood 
Tests and Screening Flexible Sigmoidoscopies.--
 ``(1) Screening fecal-occult blood tests.--
 ``(A) Payment limit.--In establishing fee schedules 
 under section 1833(h) with respect to screening fecal-
 occult blood tests provided for the purpose of early 
 detection of colon cancer, except as provided by the 
 Secretary under paragraph (3)(A), the payment amount 
 established for tests performed--
 ``(i) in 1995 shall not exceed $5; and
 ``(ii) in a subsequent year, shall not 
 exceed the limit on the payment amount 
 established under this subsection for such 
 tests for the preceding year, adjusted by the 
 applicable adjustment under section 1833(h) for 
 tests performed in such year.
 ``(B) Frequency limit.--Subject to revision by the 
 Secretary under paragraph (3)(B), no payment may be 
 made under this part for a screening fecal-occult blood 
 test provided to an individual for the purpose of early 
 detection of colon cancer--
 ``(i) if the individual is under 50 years 
 of age; or
 ``(ii) if the test is performed within 11 
 months after a previous screening fecal-occult 
 blood test.
 ``(2) Screening flexible sigmoidoscopies.--
 ``(A) Payment amount.--The Secretary shall 
 establish a payment amount under section 1848 with 
 respect to screening flexible sigmoidoscopies provided 
 for the purpose of early detection of colon cancer that 
 is consistent with payment amounts under such section 
 for similar or related services, except that such 
 payment amount shall be established without regard to 
 subsection (a)(2)(A) of such section.
 ``(B) Frequency limit.--Subject to revision by the 
 Secretary under paragraph (3)(B), no payment may be 
 made under this part for a screening flexible 
 sigmoidoscopy provided to an individual for the purpose 
 of early detection of colon cancer--
 ``(i) if the individual is under 50 years 
 of age; or
 ``(ii) if the procedure is performed within 
 59 months after a previous screening flexible 
 sigmoidoscopy.
 ``(3) Reductions in payment limit and revision of 
 frequency.--
 ``(A) Reductions in payment limit.--The Secretary 
 shall review from time to time the appropriateness of 
 the amount of the payment limit established for 
 screening fecal-occult blood tests under paragraph 
 (1)(A). The Secretary may, with respect to tests 
 performed in a year after 1997, reduce the amount of 
 such limit as it applies nationally or in any area to 
 the amount that the Secretary estimates is required to 
 assure that such tests of an appropriate quality are 
 readily and conveniently available during the year.
 ``(B) Revision of frequency.--
 ``(i) Review.--The Secretary, in 
 consultation with the Director of the National 
 Cancer Institute, shall review periodically the 
 appropriate frequency for performing screening 
 fecal-occult blood tests and screening flexible 
 sigmoidoscopies based on age and such other 
 factors as the Secretary believes to be 
 pertinent.
 ``(ii) Revision of frequency.--The 
 Secretary, taking into consideration the review 
 made under clause (i), may revise from time to 
 time the frequency with which such tests and 
 procedures may be paid for under this 
 subsection, but no such revision shall apply to 
 tests or procedures performed before January 1, 
 1998.
 ``(4) Limiting charges of nonparticipating physicians.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of a screening 
 flexible sigmoidoscopy provided to an individual for 
 the purpose of early detection of colon cancer for 
 which payment may be made under this part, if a 
 nonparticipating physician provides the procedure to an 
 individual enrolled under this part, the physician may 
 not charge the individual more than the limiting charge 
 (as defined in section 1848(g)(2)).
 ``(B) Enforcement.--If a physician or supplier 
 knowing and willfully imposes a charge in violation of 
 subparagraph (A), the Secretary may apply sanctions 
 against such physician or supplier in accordance with 
 section 1842(j)(2).''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--(1) Paragraphs (1)(D) and (2)(D) of 
section 1833(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)) are each amended by 
striking ``subsection (h)(1),'' and inserting ``subsection (h)(1) or 
section 1834(d)(1),''.
 (2) Section 1833(h)(1)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(h)(1)(A)) is 
amended by striking ``The Secretary'' and inserting ``Subject to 
paragraphs (1) and (3)(A) of section 1834(d), the Secretary''.
 (3) Clauses (i) and (ii) of section 1848(a)(2)(A) of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395w-4(a)(2)(A)) are each amended by striking ``a service'' and 
inserting ``a service (other than a screening flexible sigmoidoscopy 
provided to an individual for the purpose of early detection of colon 
cancer)''.
 (4) Section 1862(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y(a)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in subparagraph (E), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end,
 (ii) in subparagraph (F), by striking the semicolon 
 at the end and inserting ``, and'', and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(G) in the case of screening fecal-occult blood 
 tests and screening flexible sigmoidoscopies provided 
 for the purpose of early detection of colon cancer, 
 which are performed more frequently than is covered 
 under section 1834(d);''; and
 (B) in paragraph (7), by striking ``paragraph (1)(B) or 
 under paragraph (1)(F)'' and inserting ``subparagraphs (B), 
 (F), or (G) of paragraph (1)''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to screening fecal-occult blood tests and screening flexible 
sigmoidoscopies performed on or after January 1, 1995.

SEC. 413. COVERAGE OF CERTAIN IMMUNIZATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 1861(s)(10) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395x(s)(10)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A)--
 (A) by striking ``, subject to section 4071(b) of 
 the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987,'', and
 (B) by striking ``; and'' and inserting a comma;
 (2) in subparagraph (B), by striking the semicolon at the 
 end and inserting ``, and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(C) tetanus-diphtheria booster and its 
 administration;''.
 (b) Limitation on Frequency.--Section 1862(a)(1) of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395y(a)(1)), as amended by section 412(b)(4)(A), is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (F), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in subparagraph (G), by striking the semicolon at the 
 end and inserting ``, and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(H) in the case of an influenza vaccine, which is 
 administered within the 11 months after a previous 
 influenza vaccine, and, in the case of a tetanus-
 diphtheria booster, which is administered within the 
 119 months after a previous tetanus-diphtheria 
 booster;''.
 (c) Conforming Amendment.--Section 1862(a)(7) of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395y(a)(7)), as amended by section 412(b)(4)(B), is amended by 
striking ``or (G)'' and inserting ``(G), or (H)''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to influenza vaccines and tetanus-diphtheria boosters 
administered on or after January 1, 1995.

SEC. 414. COVERAGE OF WELL-CHILD CARE.

 (a) In General.--Section 1861(s)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395x(s)(2)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (O);
 (2) by striking the semicolon at the end of subparagraph 
 (P) and inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(Q) well-child services (as defined in subsection 
 (ll)(1)) provided to an individual entitled to benefits under 
 this title who is under 7 years of age;''.
 (b) Services Defined.--Section 1861 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x) 
is amended--
 (1) by redesignating the subsection (jj) as subsection 
 (kk); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (kk) (as so redesignated) 
 the following new subsection:

 ``Well-Child Services

 ``(ll)(1) The term `well-child services' means well-child care, 
including routine office visits, routine immunizations (including the 
vaccine itself), routine laboratory tests, and preventive dental care, 
provided in accordance with the periodicity schedule established with 
respect to the services under paragraph (2).
 ``(2) The Secretary, in consultation with the American Academy of 
Pediatrics, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, and other 
entities considered appropriate by the Secretary, shall establish a 
schedule of periodicity which reflects the appropriate frequency with 
which the services referred to in paragraph (1) should be provided to 
healthy children.''.
 (c) Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 1862(a)(1) of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 1395y(a)(1)), as amended by sections 412(b)(4)(A) and 413(b), is 
amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (G), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (B) in subparagraph (H), by striking the semicolon at the 
 end and inserting ``, and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(I) in the case of well-child services, which are 
 provided more frequently than is provided under the schedule of 
 periodicity established by the Secretary under section 
 1861(ll)(2) for such services;''.
 (2) Section 1862(a)(7) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y(a)(7)), as 
amended by sections 412(b)(4)(B) and 413(c), is amended by striking 
``or (H)'' and inserting ``(H), or (I)''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to well-child services provided on or after January 1, 1995.

SEC. 415. DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS FOR COVERAGE OF OTHER PREVENTIVE 
 SERVICES.

 (a) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish and provide for a 
series of ongoing demonstration projects under which the Secretary 
shall provide for coverage of the preventive services described in 
subsection (c) under the medicare program in order to determine--
 (1) the feasibility and desirability of expanding coverage 
 of medical and other health services under the medicare program 
 to include coverage of such services for all individuals 
 enrolled under part B of title XVIII of the Social Security 
 Act; and
 (2) appropriate methods for the delivery of those services 
 to medicare beneficiaries.
 (b) Sites for Project.--The Secretary shall provide for the conduct 
of the demonstration projects established under subsection (a) at the 
sites at which the Secretary conducts the demonstration program 
established under section 9314 of the Consolidated Omnibus Budget 
Reconciliation Act of 1985 and at such other sites as the Secretary 
considers appropriate.
 (c) Services Covered Under Projects.--The Secretary shall cover the 
following services under the series of demonstration projects 
established under subsection (a):
 (1) Glaucoma screening.
 (2) Cholesterol screening and cholesterol-reducing drug 
 therapies.
 (3) Screening and treatment for osteoporosis, including 
 tests for bone-marrow density and hormone replacement therapy.
 (4) Screening services for pregnant women, including ultra-
 sound and clamydial testing and maternal serum alfa-protein.
 (5) One-time comprehensive assessment for individuals 
 beginning at age 65 or 75.
 (6) Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) testing.
 (7) Other services considered appropriate by the Secretary.
 (d) Reports to Congress.--Not later than October 1, 1996, and every 
2 years thereafter, the Secretary shall submit a report to the 
Committee on Finance of the Senate and the Committee on Ways and Means 
and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
Representatives describing findings made under the demonstration 
projects conducted pursuant to subsection (a) during the preceding 2-
year period and the Secretary's plans for the demonstration projects 
during the succeeding 2-year period.
 (e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated from the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust 
Fund for expenses incurred in carrying out the series of demonstration 
projects established under subsection (a) the following amounts:
 (1) $4,000,000 for fiscal year 1995.
 (2) $4,000,000 for fiscal year 1996.
 (3) $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1997.
 (4) $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1998.
 (5) $6,000,000 for fiscal year 1999.

 Part 2--Coverage of Prescription Drugs

SEC. 421. COVERAGE OF OUTPATIENT PRESCRIPTION DRUGS.

 (a) Description of Covered Outpatient Drugs.--Section 1861 of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (s)(2), by amending subparagraph (J) to 
 read as follows:
 ``(J) covered outpatient drugs (as defined in subsection 
 (t)); and''; and
 (2) in subsection (t)--
 (A) by inserting ``and paragraph (2)'' after 
 ``subsection (m)(5)'',
 (B) by striking ``(t)'' and inserting ``(t)(1)'', 
 and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraphs:
 ``(2) Subject to paragraph (3), the term `covered outpatient drug' 
means--
 ``(A) a drug which may be dispensed only upon prescription 
 and--
 ``(i) which is approved for safety and 
 effectiveness as a prescription drug under section 505 
 or 507 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act or 
 which is approved under section 505(j) of such Act;
 ``(ii)(I) which was commercially used or sold in 
 the United States before the date of the enactment of 
 the Drug Amendments of 1962 or which is identical, 
 similar, or related (within the meaning of section 
 310.6(b)(1) of title 21 of the Code of Federal 
 Regulations) to such a drug, and (II) which has not 
 been the subject of a final determination by the 
 Secretary that it is a `new drug' (within the meaning 
 of section 201(p) of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
 Cosmetic Act) or an action brought by the Secretary 
 under section 301, 302(a), or 304(a) of such Act to 
 enforce section 502(f) or 505(a) of such Act; or
 ``(iii)(I) which is described in section 107(c)(3) 
 of the Drug Amendments of 1962 and for which the 
 Secretary has determined there is a compelling 
 justification for its medical need, or is identical, 
 similar, or related (within the meaning of section 
 310.6(b)(1) of title 21 of the Code of Federal 
 Regulations) to such a drug, and (II) for which the 
 Secretary has not issued a notice of an opportunity for 
 a hearing under section 505(e) of the Federal Food, 
 Drug, and Cosmetic Act on a proposed order of the 
 Secretary to withdraw approval of an application for 
 such drug under such section because the Secretary has 
 determined that the drug is less than effective for all 
 conditions of use prescribed, recommended, or suggested 
 in its labeling;
 ``(B) a biological product which--
 ``(i) may only be dispensed upon prescription,
 ``(ii) is licensed under section 351 of the Public 
 Health Service Act, and
 ``(iii) is produced at an establishment licensed 
 under such section to produce such product; and
 ``(C) insulin certified under section 506 of the Federal 
 Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
 ``(3)(A) The term `covered outpatient drug' does not include any 
drug, biological product, or insulin provided as, as part of, or as 
incident to, any of the following (and for which payment may be 
included under this title):
 ``(i) Inpatient hospital services (described in subsection 
 (b)(2)).
 ``(ii) Extended care services (described in subsection 
 (h)(5)).
 ``(iii) Physicians' services under subparagraph (A) or (B) 
 of subsection (s)(2).
 ``(iv) Dialysis supplies under subsection (s)(2)(F).
 ``(v) Antigens under subsection (s)(2)(G).
 ``(vi) Blood clotting factors for hemophiliacs under 
 subsection (s)(2)(I).
 ``(vii) Services of a physician assistant, nurse 
 practitioner, or clinical nurse specialist under subsection 
 (s)(2)(K).
 ``(viii) Pneumococcal, hepatitis B, or influenza vaccines 
 under subsection (s)(10).
 ``(ix) Rural health clinic services (under subsection 
 (aa)(1)).
 ``(x) Comprehensive outpatient rehabilitation facility 
 services (under subsection (cc)(1)).
 ``(xi) Hospice care (as defined in subsection (dd)(1)).
 ``(xii) Certified nurse-midwife service (as defined in 
 subsection (gg)(1)).
 ``(xiii) Inpatient or outpatient rural primary care 
 hospital services (as defined in subsection (mm)).
 ``(xiv) A covered surgical procedure in an ambulatory 
 surgical center (under section 1832(a)(2)(F)(i)).
 ``(B) The term `covered outpatient drug' does not include any drug 
that is intravenously administered in a home setting.''.
 (b) Deductible and Payment Amounts.--(1) Section 1833(a)(1) of such 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)(1)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``1834(h)(1), (M)'' and inserting 
 ``1834(h)(1), (N)'';
 (B) by striking ``(r)(2)) and (N)'' and inserting 
 ``(r)(2)), (O)''; and
 (C) by striking the semicolon at the end and inserting the 
 following ``, and (P) with respect to expenses incurred for 
 covered outpatient drugs, the amounts paid shall be the amounts 
 determined under section 1834(d)(2);''.
 (2) Section 1833(a)(2) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(a)(2)) is 
amended by inserting ``(other than covered outpatient drugs)'' after 
``(2) in the case of services''.
 (3) Section 1833(b) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l(b)) is amended--
 (A) in clause (1), by inserting ``or for covered outpatient 
 drugs'' after ``1861(s)(10)(A)'', and
 (B) in clause (2), by inserting ``or with respect to 
 covered outpatient drugs'' after ``home health services''.
 (4) Section 1834 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395m), as 
amended by section 412(a), is amended by inserting after subsection (d) 
the following new subsection:
 ``(e) Payment for Covered Outpatient Drugs.--
 ``(1) Deductible.--
 ``(A) Application.--
 ``(i) In general.--Except as provided in 
 clauses (ii) and (iii), payment shall be made 
 under paragraph (2) only with respect to 
 expenses incurred by an individual for covered 
 outpatient drugs during a calendar year on or 
 after such date in the year as the Secretary 
 determines that the individual has incurred 
 expenses in the year for covered outpatient 
 drugs (during a period in which the individual 
 is entitled to benefits under this part) equal 
 to the amount of the prescription drug 
 deductible specified in subparagraph (C) for 
 that year.
 ``(ii) Deductible not applied to 1st year 
 immunosuppressives.--The prescription drug 
 deductible established under this paragraph 
 shall not apply to drugs described in section 
 1861(t)(2)(A) used in immunosuppressive therapy 
 and furnished, to an individual who receives an 
 organ transplant for which payment is made 
 under this title, within 1 year after the date 
 of the transplant.
 ``(B) Response to application.--If the system 
 described in section 1842(o)(4) has not been 
 established and an individual applies to the Secretary 
 to establish that the individual has met the 
 requirement of subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall 
 promptly notify the individual (and, if the application 
 was submitted by or through a participating pharmacy, 
 the pharmacy) as to the date (if any) as of which the 
 individual has met such requirement.
 ``(C) Prescription drug deductible amount.--The 
 prescription drug deductible specified in this 
 subparagraph for--
 ``(i) 1997 is $850,
 ``(ii) 1998 is $900,
 ``(iii) 1999 is $950, and
 ``(iv) any succeeding year, is the amount 
 specified for the previous year, increased by 
 the percentage increase in the allocation for 
 the class of services consisting of 
 prescription drugs for such year (attributable 
 to the medicare program) over such allocation 
 for the previous year, as determined in 
 accordance with subtitle A of title I of the 
 Health Care Cost Containment and Reform Act of 
 1993.
 ``(2) Payment amount.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to the prescription drug 
 deductible established under paragraph (1)(A) and 
 except as provided in subparagraph (B), the amounts 
 payable under this part with respect to a covered 
 outpatient drug is equal to 80 percent of the lesser 
 of--
 ``(i) the actual charge for the drug, or
 ``(ii) the applicable payment limit 
 established under paragraph (3).
 ``(B) Treatment of certain cost-based prepaid 
 organizations.--In applying subparagraph (A) in the 
 case of an organization under a reasonable cost 
 reimbursement contract under section 1876 and in the 
 case of an organization receiving payment under section 
 1833(a)(1)(A) and providing coverage of covered 
 outpatient drugs, the Secretary shall provide for an 
 appropriate adjustment in the payment amounts otherwise 
 made to reflect the aggregate increase in payments that 
 would otherwise be made with respect to enrollees in 
 such an organization if payments were made other than 
 under such clause or such a contract on an individual-
 by-individual basis.
 ``(3) Payment limits.--
 ``(A) Payment limit for non-multiple source drugs 
 and multiple-source drugs with restrictive 
 prescriptions.--In the case of a drug that either is 
 not a multiple source drug (as defined in paragraph 
 (9)(A)) or is a multiple source drug and has a 
 restrictive prescription (as defined in paragraph 
 (9)(B)), the payment limit for the drug under this 
 paragraph for a payment calculation period is equal to 
 the lesser of--
 ``(i) the 90th percentile of the actual 
 charges (computed on a statewide basis, 
 carrier-wide basis, or other appropriate 
 geographic area basis, as specified by the 
 Secretary) for the drug for the second previous 
 payment calculation period, adjusted (as the 
 Secretary determines to be appropriate) to 
 reflect the number of tablets (or other dosage 
 units) dispensed; or
 ``(ii) the amount of the administrative 
 allowance (established under paragraph (4)) 
 plus the product of--
 ``(I) the number of tablets (or 
 other dosage units) dispensed, and
 ``(II) the per tablet or unit 
 average wholesale price for such drug 
 (as determined under subparagraph (C) 
 for the period for purposes of this 
 subparagraph).
 ``(B) Payment limit for multiple source drugs 
 without restrictive prescriptions.--In the case of a 
 drug that is a multiple source drug but does not have a 
 restrictive prescription, the payment limit for the 
 drug under this paragraph for a payment calculation 
 period is equal to the amount of the administrative 
 allowance (established under paragraph (4)) plus the 
 product of--
 ``(i) the number of tablets (or other 
 dosage units) dispensed, and
 ``(ii) the unweighted median of the per 
 tablet or unit average wholesale prices 
 (determined under subparagraph (C) for purposes 
 of this subparagraph) for such drug for the 
 period.
 ``(C) Determination of unit price.--
 ``(i) In general.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the Secretary shall determine, with 
 respect to the dispensing of a covered 
 outpatient drug in a payment calculation period 
 (beginning on or after January 1, 1997), the 
 per tablet or unit average wholesale price for 
 the drug.
 ``(ii) Basis for determinations.--
 ``(I) Determination for non-
 multiple-source drugs.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), such determination 
 shall be based on a biannual survey 
 conducted by the Secretary of a 
 representative sample of direct 
 sellers, wholesalers, or pharmacies (as 
 appropriate) of wholesale (or 
 comparable direct) prices (excluding 
 discounts to pharmacies); except that 
 if, because of low volume of sales for 
 the drug or other appropriate reasons 
 or in the case of covered outpatient 
 drugs during 1997, the Secretary 
 determines that such a survey is not 
 appropriate with respect to a specific 
 drug, such determination shall be based 
 on published average wholesale (or 
 comparable direct) prices for the drug.
 ``(II) Determination for multiple-
 source drugs.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (B), the Secretary may 
 base the determination under this 
 subparagraph on the published average 
 wholesale (or comparable direct) prices 
 for the drug or on a biannual survey 
 conducted by the Secretary of a 
 representative sample of direct 
 sellers, wholesalers, or pharmacists 
 (as appropriate) of wholesale (or 
 comparable direct) prices (excluding 
 discounts to pharmacies).
 ``(III) Compliance with survey 
 required.--If a wholesaler or direct 
 seller of a covered outpatient drug 
 refuses, after being requested by the 
 Secretary, to provide the information 
 required in a survey under this clause, 
 or deliberately provides information 
 that is false, the Secretary may impose 
 a civil money penalty of not to exceed 
 $10,000 for each such refusal or 
 provision of false information. The 
 provisions of section 1128A (other than 
 subsections (a) and (b)) shall apply to 
 civil money penalties under the 
 previous sentence in the same manner as 
 such provisions apply to a penalty or 
 proceeding under section 1128A(a). 
 Information gathered pursuant to the 
 survey shall not be disclosed except as 
 the Secretary determines to be 
 necessary to carry out the purposes of 
 this part.
 ``(iii) Quantity and timing.--Such 
 determination shall be based on the price or 
 prices for purchases in reasonable quantities 
 and shall be made for a payment calculation 
 period based on prices for the first day of the 
 first month of the previous payment calculation 
 period.
 ``(iv) Geographic basis.--The Secretary 
 shall make such determination, and calculate 
 the payment limits under this paragraph, on a 
 national basis; except that the Secretary may 
 make such determination, and calculate such 
 payment limits, on a regional basis to take 
 account of limitations on the availability of 
 drug products and variations among regions in 
 the average wholesale prices for a drug 
 product.
 ``(4) Administrative allowance for purposes of payment 
 limits.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), for drugs dispensed in--
 ``(i) 1997, the administrative allowance 
 under this paragraph is--
 ``(I) $5.00 for drugs dispensed by 
 a participating pharmacy, or
 ``(II) $3.00 for drugs dispensed by 
 another pharmacy; or
 ``(ii) a subsequent year, the 
 administrative allowance under this paragraph 
 is the administrative allowance under this 
 paragraph for the preceding year increased by 
 the percentage increase (if any) in the 
 implicit price deflator for gross national 
 product (as published by the Department of 
 Commerce in its `Survey of Current Business') 
 over the 12-month period ending with August of 
 such preceding year.
 Any allowance determined under the clause (ii) which is 
 not a multiple of 1 cent shall be rounded to the 
 nearest multiple of 1 cent.
 ``(B) Adjustment in allowance for mail service 
 pharmacies.--The Secretary may, by regulation and after 
 consultation with pharmacists, elderly groups, and 
 private insurers, reduce the administrative allowances 
 established under subparagraph (A) for any drug 
 dispensed by a mail service pharmacy (as defined by the 
 Secretary) based on differences between such pharmacies 
 and other pharmacies with respect to operating costs 
 and other economies.
 ``(5) Assuring appropriate prescribing and dispensing 
 practices.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a 
 program to identify (and to educate physicians and 
 pharmacists concerning)--
 ``(i) instances or patterns of unnecessary 
 or inappropriate prescribing or dispensing 
 practices for covered outpatient drugs;
 ``(ii) instances or patterns of substandard 
 care with respect to such drugs; and
 ``(iii) potential adverse reactions.
 ``(B) Standards.--In carrying out the program under 
 subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall establish for 
 each covered outpatient drug standards for the 
 prescribing of the drug which are based on accepted 
 medical practice. In establishing such standards, the 
 Secretary shall incorporate standards from such current 
 authoritative compendia as the Secretary may select; 
 except that the Secretary may modify such a standard by 
 regulation on the basis of scientific and medical 
 information that such standard is not consistent with 
 the safe and effective use of the drug.
 ``(C) Prohibition of formulary.--Nothing in this 
 title (other than section 1862(c)) shall be construed 
 as authorizing the Secretary to exclude from coverage 
 or to deny payment--
 ``(i) for any specific covered outpatient 
 drug, or specific class of covered outpatient 
 drug; or
 ``(ii) for any specific use of such a drug 
 for a specific indication unless such exclusion 
 is pursuant to section 1862(a)(1) based on a 
 finding by the Secretary that such use is not 
 safe or is not effective.
 ``(6) Treatment of certain prepaid organizations.--
 ``(A) General rule counting prepaid plan expenses 
 towards the prescription drug deductible.--Except as 
 provided in subparagraph (B), expenses incurred by (or 
 on behalf of) a medicare beneficiary for covered 
 outpatient drugs shall be counted (consistent with 
 subparagraph (C)) toward the prescription drug 
 deductible established under paragraph (1) whether or 
 not, at the time the expenses were incurred, the 
 beneficiary was enrolled in a plan under section 
 1833(a)(1)(A) or under section 1876.
 ``(B) Treatment of drug buy-out plan expenses.--In 
 the case of a medicare beneficiary enrolled in a month 
 in a drug buy-out plan (as defined in subparagraph 
 (D))--
 ``(i) expenses incurred by the beneficiary 
 for covered outpatient drugs reimbursed under 
 the plan shall not be counted towards the 
 prescription drug deductible, but
 ``(ii) if the individual disenrolls from 
 the plan during the year, the beneficiary is 
 deemed to have incurred, for each month of such 
 enrollment, expenses for covered outpatient 
 drugs in an amount equal to the actuarial value 
 (with respect to such month) of the deductible 
 for covered outpatient drugs (as computed by 
 the Secretary for purposes of section 
 1876(e)(1)) applicable on the average to 
 individuals in the United States.
 ``(C) Treatment of expenses for covered outpatient 
 drugs incurred while enrolled in a prepaid plan other 
 than a drug buy-out plan.--The Secretary may not enter 
 into a contract with an organization under section 
 1876, or provide for payment under section 
 1833(a)(1)(A) with respect to an organization which 
 provides reimbursement for covered outpatient drugs, 
 with respect to a plan that is not a drug buy-out plan, 
 unless the organization provides assurances, 
 satisfactory to the Secretary, that--
 ``(i) the organization will maintain and 
 make available, for its enrollees and in 
 coordination with the appropriate carriers 
 under this part, an accounting of expenses 
 incurred by (or on behalf of) enrollees under 
 the plan for covered outpatient drugs; and
 ``(ii) the organization will take into 
 account, in any deductibles established under 
 the plan in a year with respect to covered 
 outpatient drugs under this part, the amounts 
 of expenses for covered outpatient drugs 
 incurred in the year by (or on behalf of) the 
 beneficiary and otherwise counted towards the 
 prescription drug deductible in the year.
 ``(D) Drug buy-out plan defined.--In this 
 paragraph, the term `drug buy-out plan' means a plan 
 under section 1833(a)(1)(A) or offered by an 
 organization under section 1876 and with respect to 
 which--
 ``(i) the amount of any deductible under 
 the plan with respect to covered outpatient 
 drugs under this title,
 is less than 50 percent of--
 ``(ii) the prescription drug deductible 
 specified in paragraph (1)(C).
 ``(E) Medicare beneficiary defined.--In this 
 subsection, the term `medicare beneficiary' means, with 
 respect to a month, an individual covered for benefits 
 under this part for the month.
 ``(F) Treatment of plan charges.--In the case of 
 covered outpatient drugs furnished by an eligible 
 organization under section 1876(b) or an organization 
 described in section 1833(a)(1)(A) which does not 
 impose charges on covered outpatient drugs dispensed to 
 its members, for purposes of this subsection the actual 
 charges of the organization shall be the organization's 
 standard charges to members, and other individuals, not 
 entitled to benefits with respect to such drugs.
 ``(7) Physician guide.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall develop, and 
 update annually, an information guide for physicians 
 concerning the comparative average wholesale prices of 
 at least 500 of the most commonly prescribed covered 
 outpatient drugs. Such guide shall, to the extent 
 practicable, group covered outpatient drugs (including 
 multiple source drugs) in a manner useful to physicians 
 by therapeutic category or with respect to the 
 conditions for which they are prescribed. Such guide 
 shall specify the average wholesale prices on the basis 
 of the amount of the drug required for a typical daily 
 therapeutic regimen.
 ``(B) Mailing guide.--The Secretary shall provide 
 for mailing, in January of each year (beginning with 
 1997), a copy of the guide developed and updated under 
 subparagraph (A)--
 ``(i) to each hospital with an agreement in 
 effect under section 1866;
 ``(ii) to each physician (as defined in 
 section 1861(r)(1)) who routinely provides 
 services under this part; and
 ``(iii) to Social Security offices, senior 
 citizen centers, and other appropriate places.
 ``(8) Reports on utilization and effects on prices.--
 ``(A) Compilation of information.--The Secretary 
 shall compile information on--
 ``(i) manufacturers' prices for covered 
 outpatient drugs, and on charges of pharmacists 
 for covered outpatient drugs, and
 ``(ii) the use of covered outpatient drugs 
 by individuals entitled to benefits under this 
 part.
 The information compiled under clause (i) shall include 
 a comparison of the increases in prices and charges for 
 covered outpatient drugs during each 6-month period 
 (beginning with January 1997) with the semiannual 
 average increase in such prices and charges during the 
 5 years beginning with 1992.
 ``(B) Reports.--The Secretary shall submit to the 
 Committees on Ways and Means and Energy and Commerce of 
 the House of Representatives and the Committee on 
 Finance of the Senate a report, in May and November of 
 1998 and 1999 and in May of each succeeding year, 
 providing the information compiled under subparagraph 
 (A). For each such report submitted after 1999, the 
 report shall include an explanation of the extent to 
 which the increases in outlays for covered outpatient 
 drugs under this part are due to the factors described 
 in subparagraphs (A)(i) and (A)(ii).
 ``(9) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Multiple source drug.--
 ``(i) In general.--The term `multiple 
 source drug' means, with respect to a payment 
 calculation period, a covered outpatient drug 
 for which there are 2 or more drug products 
 which--
 ``(I) are rated as therapeutically 
 equivalent (under the Food and Drug 
 Administration's most recent 
 publication of `Approved Drug Products 
 with Therapeutic Equivalence 
 Evaluations');
 ``(II) except as provided in clause 
 (ii), are pharmaceutically equivalent 
 and bioequivalent, as defined in clause 
 (iii) and as determined by the Food and 
 Drug Administration; and
 ``(III) are sold or marketed during 
 the period.
 ``(ii) Exception.--Subclause (II) of clause 
 (i) shall not apply if the Food and Drug 
 Administration changes by regulation (after an 
 opportunity for public comment of 90 days) the 
 requirement that, for purposes of the 
 publication described in clause (i)(I), in 
 order for drug products to be rated as 
 therapeutically equivalent, they must be 
 pharmaceutically equivalent and bioequivalent, 
 as defined in clause (iii).
 ``(iii) Definitions.--For purposes of this 
 subparagraph:
 ``(I) Pharmaceutically 
 equivalent.--Drug products are 
 pharmaceutically equivalent if the 
 products contain identical amounts of 
 the same active drug ingredient in the 
 same dosage form and meet compendial or 
 other applicable standards of strength, 
 quality, purity, and identity.
 ``(II) Bioequivalent.--Drugs are 
 bioequivalent if they do not present a 
 known or potential bioequivalence 
 problem or, if they do present such a 
 problem, are shown to meet an 
 appropriate standard of bioequivalence.
 ``(III) Sold or marketed.--A drug 
 is considered to be sold or marketed 
 during a period if it is listed in the 
 publications referred to in clause 
 (i)(I), unless the Secretary determines 
 that such sale or marketing is not 
 actually taking place.
 ``(B) Restrictive prescription.--A drug has a 
 `restrictive prescription' only if--
 ``(i) in the case of a written 
 prescription, the prescription for the drug 
 indicates, in the handwriting of the physician 
 or other person prescribing the drug and with 
 an appropriate phrase (such as `brand medically 
 necessary') recognized by the Secretary, that 
 the particular drug must be dispensed; or
 ``(ii) in the case of a prescription issued 
 by telephone--
 ``(I) the physician or other person 
 prescribing the drug (through use of 
 such an appropriate phrase) states that 
 the particular drug must be dispensed, 
 and
 ``(II) the physician or other 
 person submits to the pharmacy 
 involved, within 30 days after the date 
 of the telephone prescription, a 
 written confirmation which is in the 
 handwriting of the physician or other 
 person prescribing the drug and which 
 indicates with such appropriate phrase 
 that the particular drug was required 
 to have been dispensed.
 ``(C) Payment calculation period.--The term 
 `payment calculation period' means the 6-month period 
 beginning with January of each year and the 6-month 
 period beginning with July of each year.''.
 (c) Participating Pharmacies; Civil Money Penalties.--
 (1) Participating pharmacies.--Section 1842 of such Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1395t) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (h)(1), by inserting before the 
 period at the end of the second sentence the following: 
 ``, except that, with respect to a supplier of covered 
 outpatient drugs, the term `participating supplier' 
 means a participating pharmacy (as defined in 
 subsection (o)(1))'';
 (B) in subsection (h)(4), is amended by adding at 
 the end the following: ``In publishing directories 
 under this paragraph, the Secretary shall provide for 
 separate directories (wherever appropriate) for 
 participating pharmacies.''; and
 (C) by inserting after subsection (n) the following 
 new subsection:
 ``(o)(1) For purposes of this section, the term `participating 
pharmacy' means, with respect to covered outpatient drugs dispensed on 
or after January 1, 1997, an entity which is authorized under a State 
law to dispense covered outpatient drugs and which has entered into an 
agreement with the Secretary, providing at least the following:
 ``(A) The entity agrees to accept payment under this part 
 on an assignment-related basis for all covered outpatient drugs 
 dispensed to an individual entitled to benefits under this part 
 (in this subsection referred to as a `medicare beneficiary') 
 during a year after--
 ``(i) the Secretary has notified the entity, 
 through the electronic system described in paragraph 
 (4); or
 ``(ii) in the absence of such a system, the entity 
 is otherwise notified that the Secretary has 
 determined,
 that the individual has met the prescription drug deductible 
 with respect to such drugs under section 1834(e)(1) for the 
 year.
 ``(B) The entity agrees--
 ``(i) not to refuse to dispense covered outpatient 
 drugs stocked by the entity to any medicare 
 beneficiary; and
 ``(ii) not to charge medicare beneficiaries 
 (regardless of whether or not the beneficiaries are 
 enrolled under a prepaid health plan or with eligible 
 organization under section 1876) more for such drugs 
 than the amount it charges to the general public (as 
 determined by the Secretary in regulations).
 ``(C) The entity agrees to keep patient records (including 
 records on expenses) for all covered outpatient drugs dispensed 
 to all medicare beneficiaries.
 ``(D) The entity agrees to submit information (in a manner 
 specified by the Secretary to be necessary to administer this 
 title) on all purchases of covered outpatient drugs dispensed 
 to medicare beneficiaries.
 ``(E) The entity agrees--
 ``(i) to offer to counsel, or to offer to provide 
 information (consistent with State law respecting the 
 provision of such information) to, each medicare 
 beneficiary on the appropriate use of a drug to be 
 dispensed and whether there are potential interactions 
 between the drug and other drugs dispensed to the 
 beneficiary; and
 ``(ii) to advise the beneficiary on the 
 availability (consistent with State laws respecting 
 substitution of drugs) of therapeutically equivalent 
 covered outpatient drugs.
 ``(F) The entity agrees to provide the information 
 requested by the Secretary in surveys under section 
 1834(e)(3)(C)(ii).
Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as requiring a pharmacy 
operated by an eligible organization (described in section 1876(b)) or 
an organization described in section 1833(a)(1)(A) for the exclusive 
benefit of its members to dispense covered outpatient drugs to 
individuals who are not members of the organization.
 ``(2) The Secretary shall provide to each participating pharmacy--
 ``(A) a distinctive emblem (suitable for display to the 
 public) indicating that the pharmacy is a participating 
 pharmacy; and
 ``(B) upon request, such electronic equipment and technical 
 assistance (other than the costs of obtaining, maintaining, or 
 expanding telephone service) as the Secretary determines may be 
 necessary for the pharmacy to submit claims using the 
 electronic system established under paragraph (4).
 ``(3) The Secretary shall provide for periodic audits of 
participating pharmacies to assure--
 ``(A) compliance with the requirements for participation 
 under this title; and
 ``(B) the accuracy of information submitted by the 
 pharmacies under this title.
 ``(4) The Secretary shall establish, by not later than January 1, 
1997, a point-of-sale electronic system for use by carriers and 
participating pharmacies in the submission of information respecting 
covered outpatient drugs dispensed to medicare beneficiaries under this 
part.
 ``(5) Notwithstanding subsection (b)(3)(B), payment for covered 
outpatient drugs may be made on the basis of an assignment described in 
clause (ii) of that subsection only to a participating pharmacy.''.
 (2) Civil money penalties for violation of participation 
 agreement, for excessive charges for nonparticipating 
 pharmacies and for failure to provide survey information.--
 Section 1128A(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7a(a)), as 
 amended by subsections (a) and (b) of section 243, is amended--
 (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (1);
 (B) in paragraph (2)(C), by inserting ``or to be a 
 participating pharmacy under section 1842(o)'' after 
 ``1842(h)(1)'';
 (C) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (4);
 (D) by adding ``or'' at the end of paragraph (5); 
 and
 (E) by inserting after paragraph (5) the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(6) in the case of a participating or nonparticipating 
 pharmacy (as defined for purposes of part B of title XVIII)--
 ``(A) presents or causes to be presented to any 
 person a request for payment for covered outpatient 
 drugs dispensed to an individual entitled to benefits 
 under part B of title XVIII and for which the amount 
 charged by the pharmacy is greater than the amount the 
 pharmacy charges the general public (as determined by 
 the Secretary in regulations), or
 ``(B) fails to provide the information requested by 
 the Secretary in a survey under section 
 1834(e)(3)(C)(ii);''.
 (d) Limitation on Length of Prescription.--Section 1862(c) of such 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y(c)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) through (D) of 
 paragraph (1) as clauses (i) through (iv);
 (2) in paragraph (2)(A), by striking ``paragraph (1)'' and 
 inserting ``subparagraph (A)'';
 (3) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph 
 (2) as clauses (i) and (ii);
 (4) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B);
 (5) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(c)''; and
 (6) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(2) No payment may be made under part B for any expense incurred 
for a covered outpatient drug if the drug is dispensed in a quantity 
exceeding a supply of 30 days or such longer period of time (not to 
exceed 90 days, except in exceptional circumstances) as the Secretary 
may authorize.''.
 (e) Use of Carriers, Fiscal Intermediaries, and Other Entities in 
Administration.--
 (1) Authorizing use of other entities in electronic claims 
 system.--Section 1842(f) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395u(f)) is 
 amended--
 (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph 
 (1);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph 
 (2) and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(3) with respect to implementation and operation (and 
 related functions) of the electronic system established under 
 subsection (o)(4), a voluntary association, corporation, 
 partnership, or other nongovernmental organization, which the 
 Secretary determines to be qualified to conduct such 
 activities.''.
 (2) Additional functions of carriers.--Section 1842(b)(3) 
 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395u(b)(3)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph 
 (H);
 (B) by adding ``and'' at the end of subparagraph 
 (L);
 (C) by redesignating subparagraph (L) as 
 subparagraph (I); and
 (D) by inserting after subparagraph (I) (as so 
 redesignated) the following new subparagraphs:
 ``(J) if it makes determinations or payments with respect 
 to covered outpatient drugs, will--
 ``(i) receive information transmitted under the 
 electronic system established under subsection (o)(4), 
 and
 ``(ii) respond to requests by participating 
 pharmacies (and individuals entitled to benefits under 
 this part) as to whether or not such an individual has 
 met the prescription drug deductible established under 
 section 1834(e)(1)(A) for a year; and
 ``(K) will enter into such contracts with organizations 
 described in subsection (f)(3) as the Secretary determines may 
 be necessary to implement and operate (and for related 
 functions with respect to) the electronic system established 
 under subsection (o)(4) for covered outpatient drugs under this 
 part;''.
 (3) Special contract provisions for electronic claims 
 system.--
 (A) Payment on other than a cost basis.--Section 
 1842(c)(1)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395u(c)(1)(A)) is 
 amended--
 (i) by inserting ``(i)'' after 
 ``(c)(1)(A)'';
 (ii) in the first sentence, by inserting 
 ``, except as provided in clause (ii),'' after 
 ``under this part, and''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following 
 new clause:
 ``(ii) To the extent that a contract under this section provides 
for implementation and operation (and related functions) of the 
electronic system established under subsection (o)(4) for covered 
outpatient drugs, the Secretary may provide for payment for such 
activities based on any method of payment determined by the Secretary 
to be appropriate.''.
 (B) Application of different performance 
 standards.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, 
 before entering into contracts under section 1842 of 
 the Social Security Act with respect to the 
 implementation and operation (and related functions) of 
 the electronic system for covered outpatient drugs, 
 shall establish standards with respect to performance 
 with respect to such activities. The provisions of 
 section 1153(e)(2) and paragraphs (1) and (2) of 
 section 1153(h) of such Act shall apply to such 
 activities in the same manner as they apply to 
 contracts with peer review organizations, instead of 
 the requirements of the last 2 sentences of section 
 1842(b)(2) of such Act.
 (C) Use of regional carriers.--Section 
 1842(b)(2)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395u(b)(2)(A)) is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new 
 sentence: ``With respect to activities relating to 
 implementation and operation (and related functions) of 
 the electronic system established under subsection 
 (o)(4), the Secretary may enter into contracts with 
 carriers under this section to perform such activities 
 on a regional basis.''.
 (4) Delay in application of coordinated benefits with 
 medigap.--The provisions of subparagraph (B) of section 
 1842(h)(3) of the Social Security Act shall not apply to 
 covered outpatient drugs (other than drugs described in section 
 1861(s)(2)(J) of such Act as of the date of the enactment of 
 this Act) dispensed before January 1, 1999.
 (5) Batch prompt processing of claims.--Section 1842(c) (42 
 U.S.C. 1395u(c)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraphs (2)(A) and (3)(A), by striking 
 ``Each'' and inserting ``Except as provided in 
 paragraph (3), each'';
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(4)(A) Each contract under this section which provides for the 
disbursement of funds, as described in subsection (a)(1)(B), with 
respect to claims for payment for covered outpatient drugs shall 
provide for a payment cycle under which each carrier will, on a monthly 
basis, make a payment with respect to all claims which were received 
and approved for payment in the period since the most recent date on 
which such a payment was made with respect to the participating 
pharmacy or individual submitting the claim.
 ``(B) If payment is not issued, mailed, or otherwise transmitted 
within 5 days of when such a payment is required to be made under 
subparagraph (A), interest shall be paid at the rate used for purposes 
of section 3902(a) of title 31, United States Code (relating to 
interest penalties for failure to make prompt payments) for the period 
beginning on the day after such 5-day period and ending on the date on 
which payment is made.''.
 (f) Modification of HMO/CMP Contracts.--
 (1) Separate actuarial determination for covered outpatient 
 drug benefit.--Section 1876(e)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395mm(e)(1)) is amended by adding at the end thereof the 
 following new sentence: ``The preceding sentence shall be 
 applied separately with respect to covered outpatient drugs.''.
 (2) Additional optional benefits.--Section 1876(g)(3)(A) of 
 such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395mm(g)(3)(A)) is amended by striking 
 ``rate'' and inserting ``rates''.
 (g) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) The first sentence of section 1866(a)(2)(A) (42 U.S.C. 
 1395cc(a)(2)(A)) is amended--
 (A) by inserting ``1834(e),'' after ``1833(b),''; 
 and
 (B) by inserting ``and in the case of covered 
 outpatient drugs, applicable coinsurance percent 
 (specified in section 1834(e)(2)(C)) of the lesser of 
 the actual charges for the drugs or the payment limit 
 (established under section 1834(e)(3))'' after 
 ``established by the Secretary''.
 (2) Section 1903(i)(5) (42 U.S.C. 1396b(i)(5)) is amended 
 by striking ``section 1862(c)'' and inserting ``section 
 1862(c)(1)''.
 (h) Effective Dates.--
 (1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this 
 subsection, the amendments made by this section shall apply to 
 items dispensed on or after July 1, 1997.
 (2) Carriers.--The amendments made by subsection (e) shall 
 take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act; except 
 that the amendments made by subsection (e)(5) shall take effect 
 on January 1, 1998, but shall not be construed as requiring 
 payment before February 1, 1998.
 (3) HMO/CMP enrollments.--The amendment made by subsection 
 (f) shall apply to enrollments effected on or after January 1, 
 1997.

SEC. 422. ESTABLISHMENT OF PRESCRIPTION DRUG PAYMENT REVIEW COMMISSION.

 Part B of title XVIII of the Social Security Act is amended by 
inserting after section 1846 the following new section:

 ``prescription drug payment review commission

 ``Sec. 1847. (a)(1) The Director of the Congressional Office of 
Technology Assessment (in this section referred to as the `Director' 
and the `Office', respectively) shall provide for the appointment of a 
Prescription Drug Payment Review Commission (in this section referred 
to as the `Commission'), to be composed of individuals with expertise 
in the provision and financing of covered outpatient drugs appointed by 
the Director (without regard to the provisions of title 5, United 
States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service).
 ``(2) The Commission shall consist of 11 individuals. Members of 
the Commission shall first be appointed by no later than January 1, 
1996, for a term of 3 years, except that the Director may provide 
initially for such shorter terms as will insure that (on a continuing 
basis) the terms of no more than 4 members expire in any one year.
 ``(3) The membership of the Commission shall include recognized 
experts in the fields of health care economics, medicine, pharmacology, 
pharmacy, and prescription drug reimbursement, as well as at least one 
individual who is a medicare beneficiary.
 ``(b)(1) The Commission shall submit to Congress an annual report 
no later than May 1 of each year, beginning with 1997, concerning 
methods of determining payment for covered outpatient drugs under this 
part.
 ``(2) Such report, in 1998 and thereafter, shall include, with 
respect to the previous year, information on--
 ``(A) increases in manufacturers' prices for covered 
 outpatient drugs and in charges of pharmacists for covered 
 outpatient drugs,
 ``(B) the level of utilization of covered outpatient drugs 
 by medicare beneficiaries, and
 ``(C) administrative costs relating to covered outpatient 
 drugs.
 ``(3) The report submitted in 1998 shall include the Commissions's 
recommendations regarding the feasibility and desirability of 
establishing coverage rules for covered outpatient drugs under which 
the Secretary may exclude from coverage or deny payment--
 ``(A) for specific covered outpatient drugs, or a specific 
 class of covered outpatient drug; or
 ``(B) for the specific use of such a drug for a specific 
 indication (in addition to exclusions pursuant to section 
 1862(a)(1) based on a finding by the Secretary that such use is 
 not safe or is not effective).
 ``(c) Section 1845(c)(1) shall apply to the Commission in the same 
manner as it applies to the Physician Payment Review Commission.
 ``(d) There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be 
necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. Such sums shall 
be payable from the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust 
Fund.''.

SEC. 423. COVERAGE OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS FOR QUALIFIED MEDICARE 
 BENEFICIARIES AND QUALIFIED DISABLED AND WORKING 
 INDIVIDUALS.

 (a) In General.--Section 1902(a)(10)(E) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(E)) is amended--
 (1) by striking the semicolon at the end of clause (i) and 
 inserting a comma;
 (2) by striking ``; and'' at the end of clause (ii) and 
 inserting a comma;
 (3) by striking the semicolon at the end of clause (iii) 
 and inserting ``, and''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(iv) for making available prescribed drugs for 
 qualified medicare beneficiaries described in section 
 1905(p)(1), qualified disabled and working individuals 
 described in section 1905(s), and individuals described 
 in clause (iii);''.
 (b) Full Federal Payment for Increased Costs.--Section 1903(w)(2) 
of such Act, as added by section 403, is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (D), by striking ``(C)'' and inserting 
 ``(D)'';
 (2) by redesignating subparagraph (D) as subparagraph (E); 
 and
 (3) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(D) The amount of expenditures for medical assistance 
 attributable to individuals with respect to whom the State plan 
 would not be required to provide such assistance but for the 
 amendments made by section 423(a) of the Health Care Cost 
 Containment and Reform Act of 1993.''.
 (c) Conforming Amendment.--Section 1902(a)(10) of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)) is amended in clause (VIII) of the matter 
following subparagraph (E) by striking ``1905(p)(3),'' and inserting 
``1905(p)(3) and for prescribed drugs,''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to calendar quarters beginning on or after January 1, 1996, 
without regard to whether or not regulations to implement such 
amendments are promulgated by such date.

 Part 3--Qualified Medicare Beneficiary Enrollment

SEC. 431. QUALIFIED MEDICARE BENEFICIARY ENROLLMENT.

 (a) Enrollment.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall 
establish and implement a method for obtaining information from newly 
eligible medicare beneficiaries that may be used (beginning with fiscal 
year 1997) to determine whether such beneficiaries may be eligible for 
medical assistance for medicare cost-sharing under State medicaid plans 
as qualified medicare beneficiaries, and for transmitting such 
information to the State in which such a beneficiary resides. If, under 
such method, the Secretary determines that an individual is eligible 
for medical assistance for such cost-sharing under the medicaid plan of 
a State, the Secretary shall enroll the individual in such plan for 
quarters beginning after the date on which the Secretary makes such 
determination.
 (b) Explanations in Annual Notice of Benefits.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1804 of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1395b-2) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph 
 (2);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph 
 (3) and inserting ``, and''; and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(4) a general description in clear language of the 
 availability of and the requirements for obtaining medical 
 assistance for medicare cost-sharing under State plans approved 
 under title XIX.''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraph (1) 
 shall apply to annual notices under section 1804 of the Social 
 Security Act for years beginning with 1996.

 Subtitle C--Health Insurance Deduction for the Self-Employed

SEC. 441. DEDUCTION FOR HEALTH INSURANCE COSTS OF SELF-EMPLOYED 
 INDIVIDUALS MADE PERMANENT AND INCREASED.

 (a) Deduction Made Permanent.--
 (1) In general.--Subsection (l) of section 162 of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to special rules for 
 health insurance costs of self-employed individuals) is amended 
 by striking paragraph (6).
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) 
 shall apply to taxable years beginning after June 30, 1992.
 (b) Increase in Deduction.--
 (1) In general.--Paragraph (1) of section 162(l) of such 
 Code is amended by striking ``25 percent of''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) 
 shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.

 Subtitle D--Health Insurance Program for Children

SEC. 451. HEALTH INSURANCE FOR CHILDREN.

 (a) In General.--The Social Security Act, as amended by section 
302, is amended by adding at the end the following new title:

 ``TITLE XXII--HEALTH INSURANCE FOR CHILDREN

``SEC. 2200. ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM OF HEALTH INSURANCE FOR CHILDREN.

 ``There is hereby established a program of health insurance for 
children under 19 years of age.

 ``Part A--Eligibility and Enrollment

``SEC. 2201. ELIGIBILITY.

 ``(a) In General.--Every eligible child (as defined in subsection 
(b)) is eligible to enroll for benefits under this title.
 ``(b) Eligible Child Defined.--In this title, the term `eligible 
child' means, for a month, an individual who--
 ``(1) is under 19 years of age as of the last day of the 
 month;
 ``(2) is a resident of the United States; and
 ``(3) is a citizen or national of the United States, an 
 alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence, or an alien 
 otherwise permanently residing in the United States under color 
 of law.

``SEC. 2202. ENROLLMENT PERIODS.

 ``(a) In General.--An eligible individual may enroll in the program 
under this title only in such manner and form as may be prescribed by 
regulations, and only during an enrollment period prescribed in or 
under this section.
 ``(b) General Enrollment Period.--There shall be a general 
enrollment period during the month of September of each year (beginning 
with 1995).
 ``(c) Initial Special Enrollment Periods.--
 ``(1) Birth.--With respect to each eligible individual who 
 becomes an eligible individual by reason of birth during a 
 month after the end of first general enrollment period, there 
 shall be a special enrollment period during the 30-day period 
 beginning on the date of the birth.
 ``(2) Obtaining lawful resident status.--With respect to 
 each eligible individual who does not meet the requirements of 
 paragraphs (2) and (3) of section 2201(a) at the time of birth 
 and who becomes an eligible individual during a month after the 
 end of the first general enrollment period, there shall be a 
 special enrollment period during the 30-day period beginning on 
 the first date on which the individual is an eligible 
 individual.
 ``(d) Continuation Special Enrollment Periods.--In the case of an 
eligible individual--
 ``(1) who at the time the individual first becomes an 
 eligible individual (or, if later, the first month of the first 
 general enrollment period) is enrolled in a group health plan 
 (including continuation coverage under such a plan), and
 ``(2) whose coverage under such a plan (including 
 continuation coverage under such a plan) is terminated due to a 
 qualifying event (within the meaning of section 4980B(f)(3) of 
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) or due to expiration of the 
 period of continuation coverage,
there shall be a special enrollment period during the 3-month period 
beginning 1 month before the effective date of termination of coverage 
under such a plan.

``SEC. 2203. EMPLOYMENT-BASED ENROLLMENT.

 ``(a) In General.--Subject to subsection (d), the Secretary shall 
permit the sponsor of a group health plan to elect to offer coverage to 
eligible children under a group health plan through enrollment under 
this title in accordance with this section. Except as specifically 
provided in this section, the terms and period of the coverage effected 
pursuant to such election shall be the same as the terms and period of 
coverage that would be provided if the individual were enrolled under 
this title not pursuant to such election.
 ``(b) Conditions for Election.--An election is available under this 
section with respect to a group health plan only if the sponsor 
provides assurances, satisfactory to the Secretary, that the following 
conditions are met:
 ``(1) Offer to all eligible children.--The offer of 
 coverage under the election must be made (at such times, 
 including at the time of initial employment, and in such manner 
 as the Secretary determines to be consistent with the 
 provisions of this title) to every eligible child for every 
 individual to whom health benefits are made available under the 
 plan.
 ``(2) Payment towards premium.--
 ``(A) In general.--Under the election, the plan 
 shall provide for payment of the premiums imposed under 
 this title and may not collect from any such child or 
 the parent or guardian of such a child more than 20 
 percent of the amount of such premiums paid by the plan 
 with respect to such a child.
 ``(B) Treatment of continuation coverage.--
 Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to children of those 
 individuals who are eligible for benefits under the 
 group health plan only on the basis of continuation 
 coverage (such as that described in section 4980B of 
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986).
 ``(3) No mandated enrollment.--The plan may not require an 
 individual, as a condition for the receipt of benefits under 
 the group health plan, to accept the offer of enrollment under 
 the election.
 ``(c) Termination of Election.--If the Secretary determines that a 
group health plan has failed to meet the conditions described in 
subsection (b), the Secretary, after notice and opportunity for 
correction, shall terminate the election and shall provide individuals 
enrolled under the election the opportunity to enroll directly as 
individuals under this title.
 ``(d) Limitation.--In the case of a sponsor of a group health plan 
that offers coverage (other than under the election under this section) 
for some or all classes of eligible children as of any date, the 
election under this section shall not be available during the 2-year 
period following such date.

``SEC. 2204. COVERAGE PERIOD.

 ``(a) In General.--No payments may be made under this title with 
respect to the expenses of an eligible child unless such expenses were 
incurred by such child during a period which, with respect to the 
individual, is a coverage period provided under this section.
 ``(b) Enrollment During General Enrollment Period.--In the case of 
an eligible child who enrolls under this title during a general 
enrollment period in a year, the period during which the individual is 
entitled to benefits under the program under this title shall begin on 
January 1 of the following year.
 ``(c) Enrollment During Special Enrollment Periods.--
 ``(1) Birth.--In the case of an eligible child who enrolls 
 under this title during a special enrollment period described 
 in section 2202(c)(1), the period during which the individual 
 is entitled to benefits under the program under this title 
 shall begin as of the date of birth.
 ``(2) Obtaining lawful resident status.--In the case of an 
 eligible child who enrolls under this title during a special 
 enrollment period described in section 2202(c)(2), the period 
 during which the individual is entitled to benefits under the 
 program under this title shall begin as of the first day of the 
 month in which the individual enrolls.
 ``(3) Continuation of coverage.--In the case of an eligible 
 child who enrolls under this title during a special enrollment 
 period described in section 2202(d), the period during which 
 the individual is entitled to benefits under the program under 
 this title shall begin as of the first day of the month in 
 which the individual enrolls (or, if later, the first day of 
 the month in which coverage under the group health plan, 
 including continuation coverage under such a plan, terminates).
 ``(d) Termination of Enrollment.--
 ``(1) Initial minimum 1-year period.--Except as provided in 
 paragraph (5), an individual's coverage period shall continue 
 until terminated under paragraph (2), (3), or (4), and 
 termination under such paragraph may not occur before the end 
 of the 12-month period beginning with the first month in which 
 the coverage period begins.
 ``(2) Termination.--
 ``(A) Individual notice.--With respect to coverage 
 after the minimum coverage period required under 
 paragraph (1), an individual may terminate coverage 
 under this title by the filing of notice that the 
 individual no longer wishes to participate in the 
 program under this title. The termination of coverage 
 under this subparagraph shall take effect at the close 
 of the month following the month in which the notice is 
 filed.
 ``(B) Failure to pay premiums.--The Secretary shall 
 terminate coverage under this title in the case of an 
 individual for nonpayment of premiums, but such 
 termination shall not be effective for coverage before 
 the end of the minimum coverage required under 
 paragraph (1). The Secretary may provide by regulation 
 for a grace period before coverage is terminated under 
 this subparagraph.
 ``(3) Age.--An individual's coverage period shall in no 
 case continue beyond the end of the month in which the 
 individual attains 19 years of age or in which the individual 
 dies.
 ``(4) Medicare coverage.--An individual's coverage period 
 shall be terminated in the month in which the individual 
 becomes entitled to benefits under part A of title XVIII.
 ``(5) Coverage under group health plan.--The 12-month 
 minimum enrollment period under paragraph (1) shall not apply 
 in the case of an eligible child if it is demonstrated (to the 
 satisfaction of the Secretary) that at the time of termination 
 of enrollment under this title the child will be covered under 
 a group health plan.

 ``Part B--Benefits; Payments for Benefits

``SEC. 2211. SCOPE OF BENEFITS.

 ``(a) In General.--Except as provided in the succeeding provisions 
of this section, the benefits provided to an individual by the program 
established by this title shall consist of the same benefits that are 
available under title XVIII (including benefits for well-child services 
under section 1861(ll)) to individuals entitled to benefits under part 
A of that title and enrolled under part B of that title.
 ``(b) Newborn and Well-Baby Care; Waiver of Cost-Sharing for Well-
Child Services and of Deductible for Covered Outpatient Services.--
 ``(1) In general.--In addition to the benefits described in 
 subsection (a), the benefits under this title shall include 
 entitlement to have payment made (in the same manner as for 
 physicians' services under part B of title XVIII) for newborn 
 and well-baby care, including normal newborn care and 
 pediatrician services for high-risk deliveries, without the 
 application of deductibles, coinsurance, or copayments, subject 
 to the periodicity schedule established with respect to the 
 services under paragraph (2).
 ``(2) Periodicity schedule.--The Secretary, in consultation 
 with the American Academy of Pediatrics, shall establish a 
 schedule of periodicity which reflects the general, appropriate 
 frequency with which services described in paragraph (1) should 
 be provided to healthy newborns and babies.
 ``(c) Waiver of Cost-Sharing for Well-Child Services.--For purposes 
of this title, payment shall be made under this title for well-child 
services (as defined in section 1861(ll)) without regard to any 
deductible or coinsurance.
 ``(d) Special Rule for Deductible for Covered Outpatient Drugs.--
For purposes of this title, payment shall be made under this title for 
covered outpatient drugs without regard to the deductible specified 
under section 1834(e)(1).

``SEC. 2212. EXCLUSIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), 
section 1862 shall apply to expenses incurred for items and services 
provided under this title the same manner as such section applies to 
items and services provided under title XVIII.
 ``(b) Benefits Exception.--In applying section 1862(a) with respect 
to services described in section 2211(b)(1) (relating to newborn and 
well-baby care), payment shall not be denied under paragraph (1), (7), 
or (12) of such section 1862(a) if the services are provided in 
accordance with the periodicity schedule described in section 
2211(b)(2).

``SEC. 2213. PAYMENTS FOR BENEFITS.

 ``(a) In General.--Except as otherwise provided in this section--
 ``(1) payment of benefits under this title with respect to 
 benefits shall be made in the same amounts and on the same 
 basis as payment may be made with respect to such benefits 
 under title XVIII, and
 ``(2) the provisions of sections 1814, 1833, 1842, 1848, 
 and 1886 shall apply to payment of benefits under this title in 
 the same manner as they apply to benefits under title XVIII.
 ``(b) No Cost-Sharing for Certain Services.--No deductibles, 
coinsurance, copayments, or other cost-sharing shall be imposed with 
respect to newborn and well-baby care described in section 2211(b)(1) 
and no deductible shall be imposed with respect to covered outpatient 
drugs.
 ``(c) Establishment of New DRGs and Weights.--In making payment 
under this title with respect to inpatient hospital services, the 
Secretary shall make such adjustments in the diagnosis-related groups 
and weighting factors with respect to discharges within such groups, 
otherwise established under section 1886(d)(4) as may be necessary to 
reflect the types of discharges occurring under this title which are 
not occurring under title XVIII.
 ``(d) Conditions of and Limitations on Payments.--The provisions of 
sections 1814 and 1835 shall apply to payment for services under this 
title in the same manner as they apply to payment for services under 
parts A and B, respectively, of title XVIII.
 ``(e) Use of Trust Fund.--In carrying out this section, any 
reference in title XVIII to a trust fund shall be treated as a 
reference to the Children's Health Insurance Trust Fund established 
under section 2233.

 ``Part C--Premiums; Trust Fund

``SEC. 2231. AMOUNT OF PREMIUMS.

 ``(a) Premium Classes.--There are 2 monthly premium rate classes 
under this section as follows:
 ``(1) Single child monthly premium rate.--A premium rate 
 for a single eligible child in a family (in this section 
 referred to as the `single child monthly premium rate'), which 
 shall be the rate paid under section 2232 with respect to a 
 child who has no other eligible children in the same family.
 ``(2) Family monthly premium rate.--A premium rate for two 
 or more eligible children in a family (in this section referred 
 to as the `family monthly premium rate'), which shall be the 
 rate paid under section 2232 with respect to all eligible 
 children in the same family.
 ``(3) Family.--The Secretary shall specify, in regulations, 
 those children who shall be considered to be in the same family 
 for purposes of this section.
 ``(b) Monthly Premium Rates.--
 ``(1) 1996 and 1997.--Subject to subsection (c), the single 
 child monthly premium rate and the family monthly premium rate, 
 for months in 1996 and 1997, are determined as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The single child The family 
 For months in monthly premium monthly premium 
 rate rate 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1996.............................. $156 $299 
1997.............................. $167 $321 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

 ``(2) After 1997.--Subject to subsection (d), for months in 
 years after 1997, the single child monthly premium rate and the 
 family monthly premium rate are equal to such respective rates 
 established under this subsection for the previous year 
 multiplied by the applicable adjustment factor (specified under 
 section 101(c) of the Health Care Cost Containment and Reform 
 Act of 1993) for the year involved.
 ``(c) Geographic Area Adjustment.--
 ``(1) Formula.--The Secretary shall compute, for each 
 geographic locality, the ratio of the average per capita costs 
 of coverage under this title in locality to the national 
 average per capita costs.
 ``(2) Adjustment.--The premium rates otherwise established 
 under this section and applied to a geographic locality shall 
 be multiplied by such ratio and by such factor as the Secretary 
 determines to be necessary so that, if all eligible children 
 were enrolled in the program under this title for all months in 
 the year and paid premiums based on the rates specified in 
 subsection (c) as adjusted under this subsection, the total 
 amount of such premiums would equal the total amount of 
 payments that would be made under this title in the year.
 ``(3) Selection of geographic localities.--For purposes of 
 this subsection, the Secretary shall use contiguous geographic 
 localities that are not smaller than metropolitan statistical 
 areas.
 ``(d) Publication of Rates.--The Secretary shall during July of 
each year (beginning in 1996) publish the applicable premiums under 
this section for months in the succeeding year for the different 
localities used under subsection (c).

``SEC. 2232. PAYMENT OF PREMIUMS.

 ``(a) In General.--Subject to subsection (c), premiums under this 
title shall be paid at the rates specified under section 2231 to the 
Secretary at such times, and in such manner, as the Secretary shall 
prescribe by regulations.
 ``(b) Interest for Late Payment.--In the case premiums are not paid 
on a timely basis, the Secretary may impose a reasonable late charge 
and interest at a rate (estimated by the Secretary) not to exceed 125 
percent of the average market yield described in the third sentence of 
section 1817(c).
 ``(c) Suspension of Premiums.--Payment of premiums under this 
section shall be suspended for any month for which the eligible 
individual establishes that the individual--
 ``(1) is entitled to medical assistance under a State plan 
 approved under title XIX, or
 ``(2) is entitled to benefits under a group health plan (as 
 defined in section 5000(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986), including benefits under continuation coverage.
 ``(d) Deposit into Trust Fund.--Premiums collected under this 
section shall be deposited in the Children's Health Insurance Trust 
Fund.

``SEC. 2233. CHILDREN'S HEALTH INSURANCE TRUST FUND.

 ``(a) Establishment.--(1) There is hereby created on the books of 
the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the 
`Children's Health Insurance Trust Fund' (in this section referred to 
as the `Trust Fund'). The Trust Fund shall consist of such gifts and 
bequests as may be made as provided in section 201(i)(1) and amounts 
appropriated under paragraph (2).
 ``(2) There are authorized to be appropriated for each fiscal year 
out of any moneys in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated to the 
Trust Fund a Government contribution equal to the amount of 
expenditures made under this title in the fiscal year, reduced by the 
amount of the premiums deposited in the Trust Fund under section 
2232(d).
 ``(b) Incorporation of Provisions.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the provisions 
 of subsections (b) through (j) of section 1817 shall apply to 
 the Trust Fund in the same manner as they apply to the Federal 
 Hospital Insurance Trust Fund.
 ``(2) Exceptions.--In applying paragraph (1)--
 ``(A) the Board of Trustees and Managing Trustee of 
 the Trust Fund shall be composed of the members of the 
 Board of Trustees and the Managing Trustee, 
 respectively, of the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust 
 Fund; and
 ``(B) any reference in section 1817 to the Federal 
 Hospital Insurance Trust Fund or to title XVIII (or 
 part A thereof) is deemed a reference to the Trust Fund 
 under this section and this title, respectively.

 ``Part D--General Provisions

``SEC. 2251. INCORPORATION OF CERTAIN MEDICARE PROVISIONS.

 ``(a) Use of Carriers and Intermediaries.--The Secretary shall 
provide for the administration of this title through the use of fiscal 
intermediaries and carriers in the same manner as title XVIII is 
carried out through the use of such fiscal intermediaries and carriers.
 ``(b) Definitions.--Except as otherwise provided in this title, the 
definitions contained in section 1861 shall apply for purposes of this 
title in the same manner as they apply for purposes of title XVIII.
 ``(c) Certification, Provider Qualification, Etc.--The provisions 
of sections 1863 through 1875, sections 1878 through 1880, section 
1883, section 1885, and sections 1887 through 1892 shall apply to this 
title in the same manner as they apply to title XVIII.
 ``(d) Health Maintenance Organizations and Competitive Medical 
Plans.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in this subsection, 
 section 1876 shall apply to individuals entitled to benefits 
 under this title in the same manner as such section applies to 
 individuals entitled to benefits under part A, and enrolled 
 under part B, of title XVIII.
 ``(2) Application.--In applying section 1876 under this 
 subsection--
 ``(A) the provisions of such section relating only 
 to individuals enrolled under part B of title XVIII 
 shall not apply;
 ``(B) any reference to a Trust Fund established 
 under title XVIII and to benefits under such title is 
 deemed a reference to the Children's Health Insurance 
 Trust Fund and to benefits under this title;
 ``(C) the adjusted average per capita cost and the 
 adjusted community rate shall be determined on the 
 basis of benefits under this title; and
 ``(D) subsection (f) shall not apply.

``SEC. 2252. INCORPORATION OF PEER REVIEW PROVISIONS AND FRAUD AND 
 ABUSE PROVISIONS.

 ``The provisions of sections 1121 through 1126, sections 1128 
through 1128B, section 1134, section 1138, and part B of title XI shall 
apply to this title in the same manner as they apply to title XVIII.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 201(g)(1)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 401(g)(1)(A)) is amended by striking ``and the Federal 
 Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund'' and inserting ``, 
 Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund, and the 
 Children's Health Insurance Trust Fund''.
 (2) Section 201(i)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 401(i)(1)) is 
 amended by striking ``and the Federal Supplementary Medical 
 Insurance Trust Fund'' and inserting ``, Federal Supplementary 
 Medical Insurance Trust Fund, and the Children's Health 
 Insurance Trust Fund''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on the date of the enactment of this Act, except that no 
benefits shall be available under title XXII of the Social Security Act 
for items or services furnished before January 1, 1996.

 <all>

HR 200 SC----2
HR 200 SC----3
HR 200 SC----4
HR 200 SC----5
HR 200 SC----6
HR 200 SC----7
HR 200 SC----8
HR 200 SC----9
HR 200 SC----10
HR 200 SC----11
HR 200 SC----12
HR 200 SC----13
HR 200 SC----14
HR 200 SC----15
HR 200 SC----16
HR 200 SC----17
HR 200 SC----18
HR 200 SC----19