B37 3/2/89 [OC's]
HR 1144 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1144
To amend the McCarran-Ferguson Act to limit the exemption with respect to
the business of personal motor vehicle insurance, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
February 28, 1989
Mr. COURTER introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on the Judiciary
A BILL
To amend the McCarran-Ferguson Act to limit the exemption with respect to
the business of personal motor vehicle insurance, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Motor Vehicle Insurance Consumer Protection
 Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS; DECLARATION OF PURPOSE.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) the Federal antitrust laws comprise an essential component of national
 policy in favor of competition; and
 (2) the current broad exemption from the antitrust laws afforded the
 insurance industry has adversely affected free competition in personal
 motor vehicle insurance.
 (b) PURPOSE- The purpose of this Act is to protect the interests of consumers
 by promoting competition in the business of personal motor vehicle insurance.
SEC. 3. AMENDMENTS.
 Section 2(b) of the Act entitled `An Act to express the intent of the
 Congress with reference to the regulation of the business of insurance',
 approved March 9, 1945 (15 U.S.C. 1012(b)), commonly known as the
 McCarran-Ferguson Act, is amended in the proviso by striking `applicable'
 and all that follows through the period, and inserting the following:
`applicable to--
 `(1) the business of insurance, other than personal motor vehicle insurance,
 to the extent such business is not regulated by State law; and
 `(2) the business of personal motor vehicle insurance, except conduct
 of 1 or more persons engaged in the business of personal motor vehicle
 insurance if such conduct is carrying out, or attempting to carry out,
 any of the following activities as a part of engaging in such business:
 `(A) Collecting, compiling, or disseminating historical data regarding
 losses if such data are made available to any State regulatory agency
 required by State law, if any.
 `(B) Developing statistical plans, including territorial and class
 definitions.
 `(C) Preparing and distributing pure premium rate data, adjusted for loss
 development and claims trending, in accordance with a statistical plan,
 if applicable.
 `(D) Preparing and distributing manuals of pure premium rates, rating
 guidelines, and rating schedules for personal motor vehicle insurance,
 except that such manuals may not contain a final rate, or a guideline or
 schedule regarding a final rate.
 `(E) Preparing, disseminating, or filing--
 `(i) a policy form, endorsement, classification, statistical plan, or term
 of coverage; or
 `(ii) a guideline for the use of a policy form, endorsement, classification,
 statistical plan, or term of coverage;
for voluntary use by persons engaged in the business of personal motor
vehicle insurance.
 `(F) Conducting a survey, audit, or inspection for the purpose of
 classification.
 `(G) Conducting research or collecting statistics in order to discover,
 identify, or classify information relating to the cause or prevention
 of losses.
 `(H) Compiling or distributing information relating to fraudulent claims
 or other fraudulent practices if such information is made available to
 any State regulatory agency required by State law, if any.
 `(I) Compiling or distributing information on any past or current price
 charged by any person for personal motor vehicle insurance if such
 information is made available to any State regulatory agency required by
 State law, if any.
 `(d) This Act shall not be construed to prohibit any State from establishing
 or approving a residual market mechanism to provide personal motor vehicle
 insurance.
 `(e) As used in subsections (c) and (d)--
 `(1) the term `antitrust laws' means the Sherman Act, the Clayton Act,
 and the Federal Trade Commission Act;
 `(2) the term `claims trending' means any procedure for adjusting the
 claims rate to reflect changes in the rate of claims per unit of exposure;
 `(3) the term `class definition' means the establishment of categories
 of risks having similar characteristics, for the purpose of analyzing,
 ranking, and rating the potential for loss to persons engaged in the
 business of personal motor vehicle insurance from each class;
 `(4) the term `classification' means the assignment of an insured risk to
 a category of risks;
 `(5) the term `expense component' means the amount of any rate attributable
 to--
 `(A) acquisition, field supervision, and collection expenses;
 `(B) general expenses; and
 `(C) taxes, licenses, and fees;
 `(6) the term `final rate' means the rate actually applied to an insured
 risk after all rating factors, discounts, and surcharges have been calculated
 and applied;
 `(7) the term `loss development' means an adjustment that reflects the
 amount that will eventually be paid out on policies in effect for a period
 of time and that equals the product of--
 `(A) the amount that has been paid out over a previous period of time for
 claims covered by a class of policies; and
 `(B) a factor based on the pattern of payouts for settlements on policies
 in a period of time previous to the period referred to in subparagraph (A);
 `(8) the term `motor vehicle' has the meaning given such term in section
 2(15) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act;
 `(9) the term `personal motor vehicle insurance' means property and casualty
 insurance services provided by any person protecting interests in and
 arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or use of a motor vehicle for
 personal, family, or household purposes;
 `(10) the term `pure premium rate' means the amount equal to the loss cost
 per unit of exposure, plus the average loss adjustment expense directly
 allocated to the settlement of specific losses;
 `(11) the term `rating guideline' means an instruction describing the method
 to be used by a person engaged in the business of personal motor vehicle
 insurance to develop and apply a rate to a risk insured by such person;
 `(12) the term `rating schedule' means a series of objective standards
 used to measure risks according to their class definition for the purpose
 of applying a rate to an insured risk;
 `(13) the term `residual market mechanism' means any arrangement, either
 voluntary or required by law, involving the equitable apportionment among
 any persons of insurance risks arising from insurance which may be made
 available to persons who are unable, for any reason other than a financial
 reason, to obtain insurance through ordinary market mechanisms;
 `(14) the term `statistical plan' means a system of instructions for
 collecting and making a record of premium, loss exposure, and expense
 information;
 `(15) the term `territorial definition' means the division of a geographical
 area into regions, for the purpose of analyzing, ranking, and rating the
 potential for loss to a person engaged in the business of personal motor
 vehicle insurance from each region; and
 `(16) the term `unit of exposure' means a single insured motor vehicle.'.
SEC. 4. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 This Act shall become effective 1 year after the date of enactment of
 this Act.