HR 5556 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5556
To establish in the Food and Drug Administration the Patented Medicine
Prices Review Board to regulate the prices of certain prescription drugs,
and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 2, 1992
Mr. STARK introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the
Committees on the Judiciary and Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To establish in the Food and Drug Administration the Patented Medicine
Prices Review Board to regulate the prices of certain prescription drugs,
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Patented Medicine Prices Review Board Act
 of 1992'.
SEC. 2. ESTABLISHMENT.
 There is established in the Food and Drug Administration a board to be
 known as the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (in this Act referred
 to as the `Board').
SEC. 3. MEMBERSHIP.
 (a) NUMBER AND APPOINTMENT- The Board shall be composed of 5 members
 appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the
 Senate, from among individuals--
 (1) who are recognized experts in the fields of consumer advocacy, medicine,
 pharmacology, pharmacy, and prescription drug reimbursement; and
 (2) who have not worked in the pharmaceutical industry during the 1-year
 period ending on the date of appointment.
 (b) INITIAL APPOINTMENTS- Initial appointments under subsection (a) shall
 be made not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (c) TERMS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3), each member
 shall be appointed for a term of 5 years.
 (2) TERMS OF INITIAL APPOINTEES- As designated by the President at the
 time of appointment, of the members first appointed--
 (A) 1 member shall be appointed for a term of 1 year;
 (B) 1 member shall be appointed for a term of 2 years;
 (C) 1 member shall be appointed for a term of 3 years;
 (D) 1 member shall be appointed for a term of 4 years; and
 (E) 1 member shall be appointed for a term of 5 years.
 (3) VACANCIES- A vacancy in the Board shall be filled in the manner in
 which the original appointment was made. Any member appointed to fill a
 vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which the member's
 predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of
 that term. A member may serve after the expiration of the member's term
 until a successor has taken office.
 (d) INITIAL MEETING- The initial meeting of the Board shall be held not
 later than 90 days after the date on which the initial appointments of
 the members have been completed.
 (e) CHAIRPERSON- The President shall designate 1 member of the Board to
 serve as the chairperson.
 (f) BASIC PAY-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Members shall be paid at a rate not to exceed the daily
 equivalent of the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable for grade GS-18
 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code,
 for each day during which the members are engaged in the actual performance
 of the duties of the Board.
 (2) TRAVEL EXPENSES- Members shall receive travel expenses, including per
 diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of
 title 5, United States Code.
SEC. 4. DIRECTOR AND STAFF.
 (a) DIRECTOR- The Board shall have a director who shall be appointed by
 the chairperson, subject to rules prescribed by the Board.
 (b) STAFF- The chairperson may appoint and fix the pay of such additional
 personnel as the chairperson considers appropriate, subject to rules
 prescribed by the Board.
 (c) APPLICABILITY OF CERTAIN CIVIL SERVICE LAWS- The director and staff
 of the Board shall be appointed subject to the provisions of title 5,
 United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service,
 and shall be paid in accordance with the requirements of chapter 51 and
 subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and
 General Schedule pay rates; except that an individual so appointed may not
 receive pay in excess of the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable for
 grade GS-15 of the General Schedule.
SEC. 5. REGULATION OF PRESCRIPTION DRUG PRICING.
 (a) ANNUAL INFORMATION REQUIREMENT- The Board shall require each patentee
 of a prescription drug to provide the Board with information on an annual
 basis--
 (1) identifying the type of prescription drug sold by the patentee;
 (2) identifying the price at which the prescription drug is being sold in
 the United States; and
 (3) describing the costs of producing and marketing the prescription drug
 in the United States.
 (b) DECREASE IN LENGTH OF PATENT TERM-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall decrease the length of a term of a patent
 issued under section 151 of title 35, United States Code, for a prescription
 drug, after notice and an opportunity for a hearing, if the patentee of
 such drug charges an excessive price for such drug.
 (2) EXCESSIVE PRICE-
 (A) IN GENERAL- For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `excessive price'
 means the average price charged by the patentee for a prescription drug
 during the calendar year preceding the date on which the Board gives notice
 to the patentee under paragraph (1), if such price for such calendar year
 (adjusted for cost-of-living, as determined by the Board) exceeds the
 average price for such drug charged by the patentee for the calendar year
 preceding such year in an amount determined by the Board to be excessive
 under subparagraph (B).
 (B) EXCESSIVE AMOUNT- In determining if an amount of increase in a drug
 price is excessive, the Board shall consider--
 (i) the average price at which the patentee sold the drug during the 5-year
 period ending on the date on which the Board gives notice to the patentee
 under paragraph (1);
 (ii) the average prices of other prescription drugs in the same therapeutic
 class sold in the United States during such period;
 (iii) the average price at which the prescription drug and other prescription
 drugs in the same therapeutic class have been sold in countries other than
 the United States during such period;
 (iv) the costs associated with producing and marketing the prescription
 drug during such period;
 (v) the average total compensation provided to officers and members of the
 board of directors of the patentee during the calendar year preceding the
 date on which the Board gives notice to the patentee under paragraph (1)
 as compared to the average total compensation provided to employees in the
 lower-level positions (with responsibilities related to the manufacturing
 of the prescription drug) of the patentee during such calendar year;
 (vi) the average total compensation provided to officers and members of the
 board of directors of the patentee during such calendar year (as determined
 under clause (v)) as compared to the average total compensation provided to
 officers and members of the board of directors of a representative sample
 of businesses of similar size (as determined by total sales, earnings,
 and number of employees) during such calendar year; and
 (vii) the ratio of--
 (I) the amount equal to the difference between the average total compensation
 provided to officers and members of the board of directors of the patentee
 during such calendar year (as determined under clause (v)) and the average
 total compensation provided to employees in the lower-level positions of
 the patentee during such calendar year (as determined under such clause); and
 (II) the amount equal to the difference between the average total
 compensation provided to officers and members of the board of directors
 of a representative sample of businesses of similar size (as determined
 by total sales, earnings, and number of employees) during such calendar
 year (as determined under clause (vi)) and the average total compensation
 provided to employees in the lower-level positions (with responsibilities
 related to the manufacturing of the product sold by such business) of such
 businesses during such calendar year.
 (3) LENGTH OF TERM DECREASE- The Board shall determine the length of
 the decrease of a term of a patent for a prescription drug described in
 paragraph (1).
 (c) INCREASE IN LENGTH OF PATENT TERM-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Upon application of the patentee, the Board may increase
 the length of a term of a patent issued under section 151 of title 35,
 United States Code, for a prescription drug, if--
 (A) the Board determines that the patentee of such drug has not charged
 an excessive price for such drug during the 5-year period ending on the
 date the patentee applies to the Board, as determined by the Board using
 rules similar to the rules applicable under subsection (b); and
 (B) the patentee provides assurances satisfactory to the Board that it
 will not charge an excessive price for such drug for any period during
 the extension of the term.
 (2) LENGTH OF TERM INCREASE-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Subject to subparagraph (B), the Board shall determine
 the length of the increase of a term of a patent for a prescription drug
 described in paragraph (1).
 (B) LIMITATION- The Board may not increase the length of a term of such
 patent in excess of 10 percent of the length of the original term of
 such patent.
 (d) REGULATIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Not later than 1 year after the date of the initial meeting
 held under section 3(e), the Board shall develop regulations to carry out
 subsections (a), (b), and (c).
 (2) NOTICE AND COMMENT REQUIREMENT- The regulations developed under paragraph
 (1) shall be issued in accordance with the notice and comment procedures
 established under section 553 of title 5, United States Code.
 (e) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section, the following definitions
 apply:
 (1) PATENTEE- The term `patentee' has the meaning given such term in
 section 100(d) of title 35, United States Code.
 (2) PRESCRIPTION DRUG- The term `prescription drug' means a drug (as
 defined in section 201(g)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
 (21 U.S.C. 321 (g)(1))) which is subject to regulation under section 503(b)
 of such Act.
SEC. 6. PROVISION OF REPORT TO FEDERAL AGENCIES RELATING TO PRESCRIPTION
DRUGS SOLD AT EXCESSIVE PRICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Board shall provide on an annual basis to each Federal
 agency which dispenses or makes payments for the dispensing of prescription
 drugs a report containing--
 (1) a list of each prescription drug which is sold at an excessive price,
 as determined by the Board under section 5(b)(2);
 (2) recommendations to the Federal agency against dispensing or making
 payments for the dispensing of the prescription drug; and
 (3) recommendations to the Federal agency to substitute the drug with a
 similar prescription drug which is not sold at an excessive price.
 (b) PRESCRIPTION DRUG DEFINED- For purposes of this section, the term
 `prescription drug' has the meaning given such term in section 5(e)(2).
SEC. 7. POWERS.
 (a) OBTAINING OFFICIAL DATA- The chairperson may secure directly from
 any Federal agency information necessary to enable the Board to carry out
 its duties. Upon request of the chairperson, the head of the agency shall
 furnish such information to the Board to the extent such information is
 not prohibited from disclosure by law.
 (b) MAILS- The Board may use the United States mails in the same manner
 and under the same conditions as other Federal agencies.
 (c) ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT SERVICES- Upon the request of the chairperson,
 the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Board on a
 reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the
 Board to carry out its duties.
 (d) CONTRACT AUTHORITY- The chairperson may contract with and compensate
 government and private agencies or persons for the purpose of conducting
 research, surveys, and other services necessary to enable the Board to
 carry out its duties.
 (e) INVESTIGATIONS- The Board may make such investigations as it considers
 necessary to determine whether there is or may be a violation of any
 regulation promulgated under this Act and may require or permit any person
 to file with it a statement in writing, under oath or otherwise as the
 Board shall determine, as to all the facts and circumstances concerning
 the matter to be investigated.
 (f) SUBPOENA POWER-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board may issue subpoenas requiring the attendance
 and testimony of witnesses and the production of any evidence relating to
 any matter under investigation by the Board. The attendance of witnesses
 and the production of evidence may be required from any place within the
 United States at any designated place of hearing within the United States.
 (2) FAILURE TO OBEY A SUBPOENA- If a person refuses to obey a subpoena
 issued under paragraph (1), the Board may apply to a United States district
 court for an order requiring that person to appear before the Board to
 give testimony, produce evidence, or both, relating to the matter under
 investigation. The application may be made within the judicial district
 where the hearing is conducted or where that person is found, resides,
 or transacts business. Any failure to obey the order of the court may be
 punished by the court as civil contempt.
 (3) SERVICE OF SUBPOENAS- The subpoenas of the Board shall be served in the
 manner provided for subpoenas issued by a United States district court under
 the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure for the United States district courts.
 (4) SERVICE OF PROCESS- All process of any court to which application is
 made under paragraph (2) may be served in the judicial district in which
 the person required to be served resides or may be found.
SEC. 8. REPORT.
 Not later than 1 year after the initial meeting of the Board under section
 3(e), and annually thereafter, the Board shall submit to the Congress a
 report describing the activities of the Board for the preceding year.