Calendar No. 646
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2795
[Report No. 101-338]
A BILL
To amend the Public Health Service Act to establish a center for tobacco
products, to inform the public concerning the hazards of tobacco use, to
provide for disclosure of additives to such products, and to require that
information be provided concerning such products to the public, and for
other purposes.
June 27 (legislative day, JUNE 11), 1990
Read twice and placed on the calendar
S 2795 PCS
Calendar No. 646
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2795
[Report No. 101-338]
To amend the Public Health Service Act to establish a center for tobacco
products, to inform the public concerning the hazards of tobacco use, to
provide for disclosure of additives to such products, and to require that
information be provided concerning such products to the public, and for
other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
June 27 (legislative day, JUNE 11), 1990
Mr. KENNEDY, from the Committee on Labor and Human Resources, reported the
following original bill; which was read twice and placed on the calendar
A BILL
To amend the Public Health Service Act to establish a center for tobacco
products, to inform the public concerning the hazards of tobacco use, to
provide for disclosure of additives to such products, and to require that
information be provided concerning such products to the public, and for
other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Tobacco Product Education and Health Protection
 Act of 1990'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
 (a) FINDINGS- Congress finds that--
 (1) despite a steady decline in tobacco consumption, 52,000,000 Americans
 still use tobacco products annually;
 (2) tobacco use causes nearly 400,000 deaths each year in the United States,
 the equivalent of over 1,000 deaths a day;
 (3) tobacco use is the most important cause of death and illness in the
 United States today, causing one sixth of all deaths annually;
 (4) in 1985, the private and public sectors in the United States spent
 approximately $22,000,000,000 on smoking-related illnesses and absorbed
 $43,000,000,000 in economic losses from such illnesses;
 (5) 50 percent of all smokers begin using tobacco by the age of 14, and
 90 percent of all smokers begin using tobacco before the age of 20;
 (6) tobacco products contain nicotine and are addictive;
 (7) most young people initiate tobacco use and become addicted before
 they are sufficiently informed or mature enough to make an informed choice
 concerning such use;
 (8) the tobacco industry contributes significantly to the experimentation
 with tobacco and the initiation of regular tobacco use by children and
 young adults through its advertising and promotion practices;
 (9) in 1988 the tobacco industry spent $3,250,000,000 on the advertising
 and promotion of tobacco products, ranking such products among the most
 heavily advertised and promoted products in the United States;
 (10) the tobacco industry claims that the purpose of advertising is to
 influence consumer brand selection, but only 10 percent of tobacco users
 switch brands each year;
 (11) convincing evidence demonstrates that tobacco advertising is
 predominantly directed at market expansion or retention or both;
 (12) the tobacco industry must attract 6,000 new smokers daily to replace
 those who stop smoking or who die of smoking-related diseases and other
 causes, or who quit;
 (13) tobacco product advertising and promotion are intended to capture
 the youth market and seek to do so through advertisements that suggest a
 strong association between smoking and physical fitness, attractiveness,
 success, adventure, and independence, and advertisements that are designed
 to influence minors, who are more vulnerable to image-based advertising;
 (14) serious gaps in knowledge about the harmful effects of the use of
 tobacco products persist in both minors and the adult population, with
 surveys showing that large numbers of citizens are unaware that smoking
 causes lung cancer, heart disease and still births in pregnancy;
 (15) education is effective in preventing and halting the use of tobacco
 products;
 (16) the proportion of smokers among the most educated adults is less than
 half that among the least educated adults;
 (17) the highest percentage of smoking is among those individuals with the
 least amount of education, including young citizens, blue-collar workers,
 high school drop-outs and minorities;
 (18) the total resources of the major voluntary organizations that sponsor
 educational activities on smoking have never exceeded 2 percent of tobacco
 industry expenditures for the promotion of tobacco;
 (19) children and teenagers should be informed about the dangers of smoking
 and be discouraged from initiating the use of tobacco products;
 (20) the American public and groups with high prevalences of tobacco use
 should be informed about the dangers of tobacco products;
 (21) although most States prohibit the sale of tobacco products to minors,
 such laws are not uniformly enforced;
 (22) in recent years, there have been efforts in some States to improve the
 enforcement of existing laws which prohibit the sale of tobacco products
 to minors;
 (23) cooperative Federal-State efforts will encourage more effective action
 to limit the sale of tobacco products to minors;
 (24) no Federal law currently requires public disclosure of the numerous
 additives in tobacco products; and
 (25) tobacco and tobacco products are in interstate commerce.
 (b) PURPOSES- It is the purpose of this Act to--
 (1) help educate citizens to prevent initiation and encourage cessation
 of tobacco use;
 (2) inform the public about the harmful effects of tobacco products;
 (3) support State efforts to improve educational programs for the prevention
 and cessation of tobacco use;
 (4) support State efforts to strengthen laws limiting the sale of tobacco
 products to minors;
 (5) provide for the determination of the risk to individual health of
 additives to tobacco products and establish Federal regulatory authority
 over such additives; and
 (6) ensure the disclosure of accurate information to the public.
SEC. 3. TOBACCO HEALTH AND EDUCATION PROGRAMS.
 The Public Health Service Act is amended by inserting before title XVI
 (42 U.S.C. 300q et seq.) the following new title:
`TITLE XV--TOBACCO HEALTH AND EDUCATION PROGRAMS
`Subtitle A--Center for Tobacco Products
`SEC. 1501. ESTABLISHMENT OF CENTER.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall establish a Center for Tobacco Products
 that shall be headed by a Director, who shall be appointed by the Secretary.
 `(b) FUNCTIONS- The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Center
 shall--
 `(1) educate the public concerning the health consequences of using tobacco
 products, provide outreach services to youth, and promote cessation of
 tobacco use through the provision of technical and material assistance to
 States, workplaces, and the media;
 `(2) support research efforts concerning patterns of tobacco use and
 cessation;
 `(3) provide assistance to States to enhance their efforts to enforce
 existing State laws concerning the sale of tobacco products to minors
 within the State;
 `(4) coordinate the education and research activities of the Federal
 Government with regard to tobacco products;
 `(5) document the additives that are contained in tobacco products,
 determine the additives that represent a health risk, restrict the use of
 tobacco additives that represent a significant additional health risk to
 the public, and ensure the disclosure of such information to the public
 in a manner that assures the protection of proprietary information; and
 `(6) carry out the programs established under this title.
 `(c) CONTRACTS- The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Center,
 may enter into contracts and cooperative agreements with Federal agencies
 within and outside of the Public Health Service in the exercise of the
 functions of the Secretary under this title.
 `(d) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to carry out this section $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, and such sums
 as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1992 and 1993.
`SEC. 1502. EDUCATIONAL AND RESEARCH ACTIVITIES.
 `The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Center and in cooperation
 with non-Federal entities, shall carry out educational and research
 activities that shall include--
 `(1) the preparation and distribution of materials to educate the public
 concerning the health effects of using tobacco products;
 `(2) the preparation of public service announcements and the preparation
 and implementation of educational campaigns (that include paid advertising)
 to inform specific populations, including youth and the general population,
 of the health effects of using tobacco products and the opportunities for
 prevention and cessation of such use;
 `(3) the provision of information to film makers, broadcast media managers,
 and others regarding the role of the media in promoting tobacco use;
 `(4) the conduct of research on patterns of tobacco use, initiation,
 and cessation, and effective methods for disseminating such information;
 `(5) the development of plans to effectively provide outreach services to
 high risk groups and youth with such information; and
 `(6) the conduct of reviews of the effectiveness of information required
 to be contained in rotating warning labels on tobacco product packages and
 the undertaking of research to establish how to improve the effectiveness
 of such labels.
`Subtitle B--Anti-Smoking Programs
`CHAPTER 1--PUBLIC INFORMATION CAMPAIGNS
`SEC. 1511. GRANTS FOR PUBLIC INFORMATION CAMPAIGNS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Center,
 shall make grants to public or nonprofit private entities, or enter into
 contracts or cooperative agreements with private entities, to conduct
 public information campaigns concerning the use of tobacco products.
 `(b) ACTIVITIES- Assistance under this chapter shall be used for the
 development of a public information campaign that may include public
 service announcements, paid educational messages for print media, public
 transit advertising, electronic broadcast media, and any other mode of
 conveying information concerning tobacco products that the Secretary
 considers appropriate. Such activities shall--
 `(1) focus on seeking to discourage the initiation of use of tobacco
 products by youth and nonusers;
 `(2) encourage cessation of tobacco use by those who currently use tobacco
 products; and
 `(3) counter the messages contained in tobacco advertisements that promote
 tobacco use.
Such activities shall focus on one or more of the specific groups described
in subsection (c)(1).
 `(c) CRITERIA- The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Center,
 shall publish the criteria used for awarding grants under this chapter in
 the Federal Register. Such criteria shall ensure that the applicant--
 `(1) will conduct activities that educate one or more communities or groups
 with high prevalences of tobacco use and high health risks from tobacco
 use, specifically youth, school dropouts, pregnant women, minorities,
 blue collar workers, and low income individuals;
 `(2) has a record of high quality campaigns of a comparable type; and
 `(3) has a record of high quality campaigns that educate the population
 groups specified in paragraph (1).
 `(d) PREFERENCE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In awarding grants, contracts, or agreements under this
 chapter, the Secretary shall give a preference to those applicants that
 will conduct activities that will most likely encompass an audience that
 includes several of the groups identified in subsection (c)(1).
 `(2) COMPREHENSIVENESS- In awarding grants, contracts, or agreements
 under this chapter, the Secretary shall attempt to distribute such grants,
 contracts, or agreements so that all groups identified in subsection (c)(1)
 are reached with diverse media. Single grants, contracts, or agreements
 shall not require that all groups are reached or that all media must be used.
`SEC. 1512. GRANT APPLICATION.
 `(a) REQUIREMENT- No grant, contract, or cooperative agreement shall be
 made or entered into under this chapter unless an application that meets
 the requirements of subsection (b) has been submitted to, and approved by,
 the Secretary.
 `(b) CONTENTS- An application submitted under subsection (a) shall provide
 such agreements, assurances, and information, be in such form and submitted
 in such manner as the Secretary shall prescribe through notice in the
 Federal Register. Such application shall contain--
 `(1) a complete description of the plan of the applicant for the development
 of a public information campaign, including--
 `(A) an identification of the specific audiences that shall be educated
 by the campaign, including one or more communities or groups with high
 prevalences of tobacco use and high health risks from tobacco use, such as
 youth, school dropouts, minorities, blue collar workers, pregnant women,
 and low income individuals;
 `(B) an identification of the media to be used in the campaign and the
 geographic distribution of the campaign;
 `(C) a description of plans to test market the campaign with a relevant
 population group and in a relevant geographic area; and
 `(D) an assurance that effectiveness criteria will be implemented prior to
 the completion of the final plan that shall include an evaluation component
 to measure the overall effectiveness of the campaign; and
 `(2) a complete description of the kind, amount, distribution, and timing
 of informational messages and an assurance that the applicant will work
 with any media organizations or other groups with which such messages
 are placed to ensure that such organizations or groups will not lower the
 current frequency of public service announcements.
`SEC. 1513. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 `There are authorized to be appropriated to make grants or enter into
 contracts or agreements under this chapter, $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1991,
 and such sums as may be necessary in each of the fiscal years 1992 and 1993.
`CHAPTER 2--MODEL STATE LEADERSHIP INCENTIVE GRANTS FOR ANTI-TOBACCO USE
INTERVENTION
`SEC. 1515. GRANT PROGRAM.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Center,
 shall designate not less than 10 nor more than 20 States as model States
 under subsection (b), and shall make grants to each designated model State
 to assist the State in meeting the costs of improving State leadership
 concerning activities that--
 `(1) will prevent the initial use of tobacco products by minors;
 `(2) will encourage the cessation of the use of tobacco products among the
 youth and other residents of the State, with particular attention directed
 towards those individuals and groups who are at high risk and suffer
 high prevalences of tobacco use, including school dropouts, minorities,
 low-income individuals, pregnant women and blue collar workers; and
 `(3) will implement and enforce a prohibition on the sale of tobacco
 products to minors.
 `(b) CRITERIA FOR MODEL STATE DESIGNATION- To be designated as a model
 State under subsection (a), a State shall--
 `(1) have in effect a law that prohibits the sale of tobacco products to
 individuals under the age of 18;
 `(2) seek to improve the enforcement of the law referred to in paragraph (1);
 `(3) have in effect a law or regulation that is intended to reduce the
 use of, or access to, cigarette vending machines by minors who are under
 the age of 18; and
 `(4) seek to improve the enforcement of the law or regulation referred to
 in paragraph (3).
`SEC. 1516. APPLICATIONS.
 `To be eligible to be designated as a model State under section 1515 and
 receive a grant, a State shall prepare and submit to the Secretary an
 application that--
 `(1) includes a designation of a lead agency within the State that will work
 in conjunction with the Center, and contain assurances that such agency--
 `(A) has experience in matters that affect the public health;
 `(B) has expertise regarding the health effects and use of tobacco products;
 `(C) provides direct services for smoking cessation or referrals for
 such services;
 `(D) administers activities intended to prevent the initiation of use
 of tobacco products by minors who are under the age of 18, and by other
 individuals;
 `(E) will have a lead office or division that will have the experience
 and expertise described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) and will be chiefly
 responsible for the functions described in subparagraphs (C) and (D); and
 `(F) will provide personnel sufficient to staff the lead office or division;
 `(2) provides assurances that as part of a program to improve State
 enforcement of laws prohibiting the sale of tobacco products to minors
 the State, will--
 `(A) establish a mechanism for the reporting of citizen or other complaints
 to the office or division referred to in paragraph (1)(E) concerning
 retail establishments that sell tobacco products to minors in violation
 of State law;
 `(B) establish a program to make the public aware of the office or division
 referred to in paragraph (1)(E);
 `(C) establish a procedure by which the State may make a finding or a
 presumption that a retail establishment has a pattern or practice of
 selling tobacco products to minors in violation of State law; and
 `(D) establish a procedure for the lead State agency to report periodically
 to the Center regarding the implementation of subparagraphs (A) through (C);
 `(3) includes a complete description of the type of programs that will
 be established or assisted by or through the State, and a statement of
 goals, objectives, and timetables of such programs or activities that are
 consistent with the purposes of section 1515;
 `(4) specifies how the State will meet the criteria described in section
 1517;
 `(5) includes copies of the State laws and regulations described in
 paragraphs (1) and (3) of section 1515(b); and
 `(6) is in such form, is submitted in such manner, and contains such
 information as the Secretary shall require, including such other information
 as the Secretary may by regulation prescribe.
`SEC. 1517. GRANT CRITERIA.
 `The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Center, shall establish
 criteria for awarding grants under this chapter. Such criteria shall
 include requirements that the State must provide--
 `(1) evidence that the State has made efforts to discourage tobacco use
 among the youth residing in such State;
 `(2) evidence of the need of the State for the assistance that is requested,
 as reflected in the prevalence of the use of tobacco within the State,
 especially among the populations that are described under section 1515(a)(2),
 and assurances that the State intends to concentrate its efforts on such
 populations; and
 `(3) evidence of the need of the State for the assistance that is requested,
 as reflected in the necessity for the development of statewide expertise
 in the planning of, and implementation of anti-tobacco use interventions;
 `(4) evidence of cooperative arrangements that the State has, or will
 enter into, with other entities that will participate in the activities
 established or assisted under the grant.
`SEC. 1518. ASSISTANCE TO MODEL STATES.
 `The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Center, shall provide
 to designated model States, on request--
 `(1) model printed materials for distribution to retail establishments
 concerning the health hazards and illegality of the sale of tobacco products
 to minors;
 `(2) support for, and assistance in, the planning of meetings, conferences,
 and conventions to educate retail establishments concerning the health
 hazards associated with tobacco products, the addictive nature of tobacco
 products, and State laws that prohibit the sale of tobacco products
 to minors;
 `(3) technical assistance in the development of reporting systems to identify
 specific retail establishments and retail chains that consistently sell
 tobacco products to minors in violation of State law;
 `(4) assistance in the development of notification systems to make specific
 retail establishments aware that such establishments are acting consistently
 in violation of State law; and
 `(5) model notices to be distributed to retail establishments concerning
 the awareness of State authorities and of the Center of the continued sale
 by the establishment of tobacco products to minors in violation of State law.
`SEC. 1519. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- There are authorized to be appropriated to make grants
 under this chapter, $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, and such sums as
 may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1992 and 1993.
 `(b) DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS- Funds shall be distributed under this chapter
 so that no State designated by the Secretary as a model State shall receive
 more than $2,000,000 for each fiscal year under this section.
`CHAPTER 3--EDUCATION TO DECREASE TOBACCO USE IN THE WORKPLACE
`SEC. 1521. PURPOSE.
 `The Secretary, acting through the Center, shall make grants to public
 and nonprofit entities and enter into contracts and cooperative agreements
 with private entities (including employer organizations and employer and
 employee consortia) for educational activities to reduce the incidence
 of tobacco use among workers with high prevalences of tobacco use. Such
 grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements shall be used for meeting
 all or part of the costs of activities that will prevent the initiation,
 and encourage the cessation, of the use of tobacco products among workers
 and their families. In making grants and entering into contracts and
 cooperative agreements, the Secretary shall give priority to applicants
 that will educate groups with the highest prevalences of tobacco use.
`SEC. 1522. ACTIVITIES AND CRITERIA.
 `(a) ACTIVITIES- Assistance provided under this chapter shall be used for--
 `(1) education to promote the cessation of tobacco use among workers who
 have high prevalences of tobacco use;
 `(2) information and activities to provide family members of workers with
 education concerning the health consequences of tobacco use;
 `(3) training and education to develop the expertise of a health educator
 or other personnel who will perform the activities described in this
 subsection for workers and their families; and
 `(4) the development of audio, visual, or print materials that will
 facilitate any of the activities described in this subsection when such
 appropriate audio, visual, or print materials are not otherwise available.
 `(b) CRITERIA- The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Center,
 shall establish criteria for the awarding of grants under this chapter that
 shall include requirements that the applicant provide to the Secretary,
 in the application required under section 1523--
 `(1) evidence of--
 `(A) the potential for success of the proposed plan of the applicant; and
 `(B) the existence of any cooperative arrangements with other entities
 that will participate in the proposed plan;
 `(2) an agreement that activities to be conducted under the grant will be
 implemented with the cooperation of the employer; and
 `(3) any other information as the Secretary shall specify.
`SEC. 1523. APPLICATION.
 `(a) REQUIREMENT- No grant, contract or cooperative agreement shall be made
 under this chapter unless an application therefor has been submitted to,
 and approved by, the Secretary.
 `(b) CONTENTS- An application submitted under subsection (a) shall be in
 such form and submitted in such manner as the Secretary shall prescribe
 through publication of a notice in the Federal Register. Such application
 shall contain--
 `(1) a complete description of the type of educational activities that
 the applicant intends to carry out with assistance provided under this
 chapter, including--
 `(A) a description of the activities that are designed to establish an
 ongoing anti-tobacco program that may include working cooperatively with
 existing anti-tobacco programs in the community or State; and
 `(B) an assurance that activities conducted under subparagraph (A) will
 demonstrate a concentration of effort to change tobacco use behavior in
 those groups identified in section 1521 and will include one or more of
 the activities described in section 1522;
 `(2) an assurance by the applicant of its ongoing commitments to support
 the anti-tobacco use activities after the period of the grant, contract,
 or cooperative agreement has expired;
 `(3) a description of the manner in which the applicant will meet the
 criteria specified in section 1522; and
 `(4) such other information as the Secretary may by regulation prescribe.
`SEC. 1524. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 `There are authorized to be appropriated to make grants, contracts, or
 agreements under this chapter, $5,000,000 for each of the fiscal years
 1991 through 1993.
`CHAPTER 4--INFORMATION REGARDING CIGARETTE SMOKING
`SEC. 1526. DEFINITIONS.
 `As used in this chapter:
 `(1) COMMITTEE- The term `Committee' means the committee established
 under section 1527(c), or the committee established under section 3(b)
 of the Comprehensive Smoking Education Act (15 U.S.C. 1341(b)) as such
 section existed before the date of enactment of this section.
 `(2) UNITED STATES- The term `United States', when used in a geographical
 sense, includes the several States, the District of Columbia, the
 Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa,
 Wake Island, Midway Islands, Kingman Reef, Johnston Island, and the
 installations of the Armed Forces.
`SEC. 1527. SMOKING RESEARCH, EDUCATION, AND INFORMATION IN GENERAL.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM- The Secretary shall establish and carry out
 a program to inform the public of the dangers to human health presented
 by cigarette smoking.
 `(b) ADMINISTRATION OF PROGRAM- In carrying out the program established
 under subsection (a), the Secretary shall--
 `(1) conduct and support research on the effects of cigarette smoking and
 of passive smoke on human health and develop materials for informing the
 public of such effects;
 `(2) coordinate all research and educational programs and other activities
 within the Department of Health and Human Services that relate to the effect
 of cigarette smoking and passive smoke on human health and coordinate,
 through the Committee, with similar activities of other Federal agencies
 and of private agencies;
 `(3) establish and maintain liaison with appropriate private entities,
 other Federal agencies, and State and local public agencies concerning
 activities relating to the effect of cigarette smoking and passive smoke
 on human health;
 `(4) collect, analyze, and disseminate (through publications, bibliographies,
 and otherwise) information, studies, and other data relating to the effect of
 cigarette smoking and passive smoke on human health, and develop standards,
 criteria, and methodologies to improve information programs related to
 smoking and health;
 `(5) compile and make available information on State and local laws relating
 to the use and consumption of cigarettes;
 `(6) establish an outreach program to inform individuals under the age of
 18 about the health consequences of smoking; and
 `(7) undertake any other additional information and research activities that
 the Secretary determines necessary and appropriate to carry out this section.
 `(c) COMMITTEE-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT- To carry out the activities described in paragraphs
 (2) and (3) of subsection (b), the Secretary shall establish an Interagency
 Committee on Smoking and Health.
 `(2) COMPOSITION- The Committee established under paragraph (1) shall be
 composed of--
 `(A) the Director of the Center;
 `(B) members appointed by the Secretary from appropriate institutes and
 agencies of the Department, that may include the National Cancer Institute,
 the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, the National Institute of
 Child Health and Human Development, the National Institute on Drug Abuse,
 Health Resources and Services Administration, and the Centers for Disease
 Control;
 `(C) one member appointed from each of the Federal Trade Commission, the
 Department of Education, the Department of Labor, and any other Federal
 agency designated by the Secretary, the appointment of whom shall be made
 by the head of the entity from which the member is appointed; and
 `(D) five members appointed by the Secretary from physicians and scientists
 who represent private entities involved in informing the public about the
 health effects of tobacco use and passive smoking.
 `(3) CHAIRPERSON- The Secretary shall designate the chairperson of the
 Committee established under paragraph (1).
 `(4) EXPENSES- While away from their homes or regular places of business in
 the performance of services for the Committee established under paragraph
 (1), members of such Committee shall be allowed travel expenses, including
 per diem in lieu of subsistence, in the manner provided by sections 5702
 and 5703 of title 5 of the United States Code.
 `(5) OTHER INFORMATION- The Secretary shall make available to the Committee
 established under paragraph (1) such staff, information, and other assistance
 as it may require to carry out its activities effectively.
 `(d) REPORT- Not later than January 1, 1991, and biennially thereafter,
 the Secretary shall prepare and submit, to the appropriate Committees of
 Congress, a report that shall contain--
 `(1) an overview and assessment of Federal activities undertaken to inform
 the public of the health consequences of smoking and passive smoke and
 the extent of public knowledge of such consequences;
 `(2) a description of the activities of the Secretary and the Committee
 under subsection (a);
 `(3) information regarding the activities of the private sector taken in
 to deal with the effects of smoking on health; and
 `(4) such recommendations as the Secretary may consider appropriate.
`SEC. 1528. PUBLIC EDUCATION REGARDING SMOKELESS TOBACCO.
 `(a) DEVELOPMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Center,
 shall establish and carry out a program to inform the public of dangers
 to human health resulting from the use of smokeless tobacco products.
 `(2) DUTIES OF SECRETARY- In carrying out the program established under
 paragraph (1) the Secretary, acting through the Director of the Center,
 shall--
 `(A) develop educational programs and materials and public service
 announcements respecting the dangers to human health from the use of
 smokeless tobacco;
 `(B) make such programs, materials, and announcements available to States,
 local governments, school systems, the media, and such other entities as
 the Secretary determines appropriate to further the purposes of this section;
 `(C) conduct and support research concerning the effects of the use of
 smokeless tobacco on health; and
 `(D) collect, analyze, and disseminate information and studies on smokeless
 tobacco and health.
 `(3) CONSULTATION- In developing programs, materials, and announcements under
 paragraph (2), the Secretary shall consult with the Secretary of Education,
 medical and public health entities, consumer groups, representatives of
 manufacturers of smokeless tobacco products, and other appropriate entities.
 `(b) ASSISTANCE- The Secretary may provide technical assistance and make
 grants to States--
 `(1) to assist in the development of educational programs and materials
 and public service announcements respecting the dangers to human health
 from the use of smokeless tobacco;
 `(2) to assist in the distribution of such programs, materials, and
 announcements through the States; and
 `(3) to assist States in enacting laws and regulations to establish 18 as
 the minimum age for the purchase of smokeless tobacco.
`SEC. 1529. REPORTS.
 `Not later than January 1, 1991, and biennially thereafter, the Secretary
 shall prepare and submit, to the appropriate Committees of Congress,
 a report containing--
 `(1) a description of the effects of health education efforts on the use
 of smokeless tobacco products;
 `(2) a description of the use by the public of smokeless tobacco products;
 `(3) an evaluation of the health effects of smokeless tobacco products
 and the identification of areas appropriate for further research; and
 `(4) such recommendations for legislation and administrative action as
 the Secretary considers appropriate.
`CHAPTER 5--GENERAL PROVISIONS
`SEC. 1535. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
 `(a) AMOUNT AND METHOD OF PAYMENT-
 `(1) AMOUNT- The Secretary shall determine the amount of a grant, contract,
 or agreement awarded under this subtitle.
 `(2) METHOD- Payments under grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements
 awarded under this subtitle may be made in advance, on the basis of
 estimates, or by way of reimbursement, with necessary adjustments because
 of underpayments or overpayments, and in such installments and on such
 terms and conditions as the Secretary determines necessary to carry out
 the purposes of such grants, contracts, or agreements.
 `(b) MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT- No grant, contract, or agreement shall be
 made under this subtitle unless the Secretary determines that there
 is satisfactory assurance that Federal funds made available under such
 a grant, contract, or agreement for any period will be so used as to
 supplement and, to the extent practical, increase the level of State,
 local, and other non-Federal funds that would, in the absence of such
 Federal funds, be made available for the program for which the grant,
 contract, or agreement is to be made and will in no event supplant such
 State, local and other non-Federal funds.
 `(c) SUPPLIES, EQUIPMENT, AND EMPLOYEE DETAIL-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary, at the request of a recipient of a grant,
 contract, or cooperative agreement under this subtitle, may reduce the
 amount of such a grant, contract, or agreement by--
 `(A) the fair market value of any supplies or equipment furnished to the
 recipient by the Secretary;
 `(B) the amount of pay, allowances, and travel expenses incurred by any
 officer or employee of the Federal government when such officer or employee
 has been detailed to the recipient; and
 `(C) the amount of any other costs incurred in connection with the detail
 of an officer or employee as described in subparagraph (B);
when the furnishing of such supplies or equipment or the detail of such
an officer or employee is for the convenience, and at the request, of such
recipient and for the purpose of carrying out activities under the grant,
contract, or agreement.
 `(2) USE OF AMOUNT OF REDUCTION- The amount by which any grant, contract,
 or agreement awarded under this subtitle is reduced under this subsection
 shall be available for payment by the Secretary of the costs incurred
 in furnishing the supplies or equipment, or in detailing the personnel,
 on which the reduction of such grant, contract, or agreement is based,
 and such amount shall be considered as part of the grant, contract, or
 agreement that has been paid to the recipient.
 `(d) RECORDS- Each recipient of a grant, contract, or agreement under this
 subtitle shall keep such records as the Secretary determines appropriate,
 including records that fully disclose--
 `(1) the amount and disposition by such recipient of the proceeds of such
 grant contract, or agreement;
 `(2) the total cost of the activity for which such grant, contract, or
 agreement was made;
 `(3) the amount of the cost of the activity for which such grant, contract,
 or agreement was made that has been received from other sources; and
 `(4) such other records as will facilitate an effective audit.
 `(e) AUDIT AND EXAMINATION OF RECORDS- The Secretary and the Comptroller
 General of the United States shall have access to any books, documents,
 papers, and records of the recipient of a grant, contract, or cooperative
 agreement under this subtitle, for the purpose of conducting audits and
 examinations of such recipient that are pertinent to such grant, contract,
 or agreement.
`Subtitle C--Prohibited Acts, Enforcement, and Additives
`CHAPTER 1--PROHIBITED ACTS AND ENFORCEMENT
`SEC. 1541. PROHIBITED ACTS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The following acts and the causing thereof are prohibited:
 `(1) COMPLIANCE- The failure of a manufacturer of a tobacco product to
 comply with section 1551.
 `(2) DELIVERY- The introduction or delivery for introduction into interstate
 commerce of any tobacco product that is adulterated or misbranded.
 `(3) ADULTERATION OR MISBRANDING OF PRODUCT IN COMMERCE- The adulteration
 or misbranding of any tobacco product in interstate commerce.
 `(4) RECEIPT- The receipt in interstate commerce of any tobacco product
 that is adulterated or misbranded, and the delivery or proffered delivery
 thereof for pay or otherwise.
 `(5) TRADE SECRET- The using by any person to the advantage of such person,
 or revealing, other than to the Secretary or officers or employees of
 the Department, or to the courts when relevant in any judicial proceeding
 under this title, any information acquired under authority of this title
 concerning any method or process that as a trade secret is entitled to
 protection. This paragraph shall not be construed to prohibit disclosure
 of information to Congress.
 `(6) MISREPRESENTATION OF APPROVAL- The representation or suggestion that
 an approval of any tobacco product is in effect under this title or any
 other Federal law or regulation.
 `(7) COPIES OF MATERIAL- The failure of the manufacturer of a tobacco
 product to maintain for transmittal, or to transmit, to any individual
 who makes a written request for information as to such product, true and
 correct copies of all printed matter that are required to be included in
 or on any package of a tobacco product.
 `(8) REPORTS, RECORDS, REQUIREMENTS- The failure to make reports required,
 the failure to retain records required, or the failure to meet requirements
 prescribed, under this title.
 `(b) OFFICE OF REGULATORY AFFAIRS- To carry out this subtitle, the Secretary
 shall establish within the Public Health Service, or designate an existing
 entity within such Service as, an Office of Regulatory Affairs. Such
 office shall coordinate its work with other offices and agencies of the
 Federal Government.
`SEC. 1542. ENFORCEMENT.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Any person who violates the provisions of this subtitle
 shall be subject to the penalties described in subsection (b).
 `(b) JURISDICTION- The district courts of the United States shall have
 jurisdiction over violations of section 1541 in the same manner, and may
 enforce the same and take the same actions, as described under sections 302,
 303(a), 303(c)(1), 303(c)(2), 304(a)(1), 304(b), 304(c), 304(d), 304(e),
 304(f), 306, and 307 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act with respect
 to violations of section 301 of such Act (20 U.S.C. 331), except that any
 fines shall be calculated in accordance with the Criminal Fine Improvement
 Act of 1987, and no showing of interstate commerce shall be required.
 `(c) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude
 any person injured by a violation of this title from seeking redress in
 an appropriate court to remedy such violation.
`SEC. 1543. REGULATIONS.
 The Secretary shall have the authority to promulgate regulations to carry
 out this subtitle.
`CHAPTER 2--ADDITIVES; MISBRANDED AND ADULTERATED TOBACCO PRODUCTS
`SEC. 1551. TOBACCO ADDITIVES.
 `(a) REPORTING-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture,
 import, or package, any tobacco product brand name unless such person has
 provided to the Secretary, within the time periods described in paragraph
 (2), a complete list of--
 `(A) each tobacco additive used in the manufacture of each tobacco product
 brand name that such person manufactures, imports, or packages; and
 `(B) for each such additive, the range of the quantities of such additive
 used by such person in all tobacco product brand names manufactured,
 imported, or packaged by such person.
 `(2) TIME PERIOD FOR REPORTING REQUIREMENT-
 `(A) ACTIONS ON DATE OF ENACTMENT- With respect to any tobacco product
 brand name manufactured, imported, or packed on the date of enactment of
 this title, the person manufacturing, importing, or packaging such product
 brand name shall provide to the Secretary the list required by paragraph
 (1) not later than 3 months after the date of enactment of this title.
 `(B) ACTIONS AFTER DATE OF ENACTMENT- With respect to any tobacco product
 brand name manufactured, imported, or packed after the date of enactment
 of this section, the person manufacturing, importing, or packaging such
 product brand name shall provide to the Secretary the list required by
 paragraph (1) at least 3 months prior to the date on which such person
 commences to manufacture, import, or package such product brand name.
 `(b) ANALYSIS- Any manufacturer, importer, or purchaser of a tobacco
 product shall provide the Secretary, on the request of the Secretary,
 with information regarding the impact of such additives on health.
 `(c) PUBLIC DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS-
 `(1) PRESCRIPTION- Not later than January 1, 1991, the Secretary shall by
 regulation prescribe requirements for manufacturers to place information on
 packages of tobacco products or in package inserts that are provided with
 such products so that the public will be adequately informed of the tobacco
 additives contained in any brand or variety of tobacco products, except that
 spices, flavorings, fragrances, and colorings may be designated as spices,
 flavorings, fragrances, and colorings without specifically naming each.
 `(2) REDUCTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS ON USE OF ADDITIVES-
 `(A) DETERMINATION- If the Secretary determines that any tobacco additive
 in a tobacco product, either by itself or in conjunction with any other
 additive, significantly increases the risk of the product to human health,
 the Secretary may require that such levels of the tobacco additive in the
 tobacco product be reduced or that it be prohibited from use.
 `(B) BASIS-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- The determination under subparagraph (A) shall be made
 by regulation.
 `(ii) COMMENT- Prior to the issuance of a regulation under clause (i),
 the Secretary shall provide notice and an opportunity for comment pursuant
 to section 553 of title 5, United States Code, except that the time for
 such comment shall not be less than 60 days. The Secretary, in the event
 that it appears that material facts may be in dispute concerning the
 proposed regulation, shall provide such appropriate opportunities for
 the presentation of evidence and for cross-examination of witnesses as
 the circumstances require either before the Secretary or an officer or
 employee of the Department designated by the Secretary.
 `(d) JUDICIAL REVIEW- Judicial review of a determination under this section
 shall be governed by and shall be in accordance with section 409(g) of
 the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 348(g)), except that
 the requirements of paragraph (3) of such subsection shall not apply.
`SEC. 1552. MISBRANDED TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
 `A tobacco product shall be considered to be misbranded if it is not
 labeled in accordance with the requirements prescribed by the Secretary
 under section 1551(c)(1).
`SEC. 1553. ADULTERATED TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
 `A tobacco product shall be considered to be adulterated--
 `(1) if the level of any tobacco additive contained in the product is in
 violation of a requirement under section 1551(c)(2)(A);
 `(2) if it contains any tobacco additive that has been prohibited from
 use under section 1551(c)(2)(A);
 `(3) if it contains in whole or in part any filthy, putrid, or decomposed
 substance; or
 `(4) if it has been prepared, packed, or held under unsanitary conditions
 where it may have become contaminated with filth or where it may have been
 rendered more injurious to health.
`SEC. 1554. EXAMINATIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
 `(a) AUTHORITY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Office of Regulatory Affairs is authorized to conduct
 examinations and investigations for the purposes of this subtitle through
 officers and employees of the Department or through any health officer
 or employee of any State, territory, or political subdivision thereof,
 duly commissioned by the Secretary as an officer of the Department.
 `(2) PUERTO RICO AND THE TERRITORIES- In the case of tobacco products
 packed in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or a territory the Office of
 Regulatory Affairs shall attempt to make inspection of such products at
 the first point of entry within the United States, when in the opinion of
 the Office of Regulatory Affairs and with due regard to the enforcement
 of all the provisions of this title, the facilities at the disposal of
 the Office of Regulatory Affairs will permit of such inspection.
 `(3) DEFINITION- As used in this subsection the term `United States'
 means the States and the District of Columbia.
 `(b) SAMPLES- Where a sample of a tobacco product is collected for analysis
 under this subtitle the Center shall, on request, provide a part of such
 official sample for examination or analysis by any person named on the
 label of the product, or the owner thereof, or the attorney or agent of such
 persons, except that the Secretary may, by regulation, make such reasonable
 exceptions from, and impose such reasonable terms and conditions relating
 to, the operation of this subsection as the Secretary finds necessary for
 the proper administration of the provisions of this subtitle.
 `(c) INSPECTION OF RECORDS- For purposes of enforcement of this subtitle,
 records of any department or independent establishment in the executive
 branch of the Federal government shall be open to inspection by any
 official of the Department of Health and Human Services duly authorized
 by the Office of Regulatory Affairs to make such inspection.
`SEC. 1555. NONTOBACCO NICOTINE CONTAINING PRODUCTS.
 `Any product that contains nicotine but that is not a tobacco product
 as defined in section 1561, shall be considered to be a drug under
 section 201(g)(1)(C) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21
 U.S.C. 321(g)(1)(C)).
`Subtitle D--Miscellaneous Provisions
`SEC. 1561. DEFINITIONS.
 `As used in this title:
 `(1) CENTER- The term `Center' means the Center for Tobacco Products
 established under section 1501.
 `(2) INTERSTATE COMMERCE- The term `interstate commerce' has the same
 meaning given such term in section 201(b) of the Federal Food, Drug,
 and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321(b)).
 `(3) MINOR- The term `minor' means any individual who is under the age of
 18 years.
 `(4) PERSON- The term `person' includes individual, partnership, corporation,
 and association.
 `(5) RECIPIENT- The term `recipient' means any entity or individual that
 has received a grant, contract, or cooperative agreement under this title.
 `(6) SMOKELESS TOBACCO- The term `smokeless tobacco' means any finely cut,
 ground, powdered, or leaf tobacco that is intended to be placed in the
 oral cavity.
 `(7) STATE- The term `State' means any State or territory of the United
 States, the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
 `(8) TERRITORY- The term `territory' has the same meaning given such
 term in section 201(a)(2) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
 (21 U.S.C. 321(a)(2)).
 `(9) TOBACCO ADDITIVE- The term `tobacco additive' means any ingredient
 that is added to a tobacco product in the process of manufacturing or
 producing a tobacco product.
 `(10) TOBACCO PRODUCT- The term `tobacco product' means cigarettes, cigars,
 little cigars, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, and snuff, and any other
 product that contains tobacco and is intended for human use.
 `(11) TOBACCO USE- The term `tobacco use' means the use of any tobacco
 product that is used through smoking, inhalation, or mastication, and such
 term shall include the use of nasal and oral snuff.'.
SEC. 4. DRUG-FREE SCHOOLS AND COMMUNITIES ACT OF 1986.
 (a) STATE PROGRAMS- Section 5122(a)(1) of the Drug-Free Schools and
 Communities Act of 1986 (20 U.S.C. 3192(a)(1)) is amended by inserting
 `and tobacco use' after `alcohol abuse'.
 (b) LOCAL DRUG ABUSE EDUCATION PREVENTION PROGRAMS- Section 5125(a) of
 such Act (20 U.S.C. 3195(a)) is amended--
 (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by inserting `and tobacco use'
 after `alcohol abuse';
 (2) in paragraph (11), by striking out `abuse,' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `abuse and tobacco use,';
 (3) in paragraph (13), by inserting `and tobacco use' after `alcohol abuse'
 each place that such occurs; and
 (4) in paragraph (14), by inserting `and tobacco use' after `alcohol abuse'.
 (c) LOCAL APPLICATIONS- Section 5126(a)(2) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 3196(a)(2))
 is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (D), by striking out `drug' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `drug, tobacco';
 (2) in subparagraph (E), by--
 (A) by striking out `applicant's drug' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `applicant's drug, tobacco';
 (B) by striking out `and' at the end of clause (i);
 (C) by inserting `and' at the end of clause (ii); and
 (D) by adding at the end thereof the following new clause:
 `(iii) how it will discourage use of tobacco products by students;'; and
 (3) in subparagraph (I), by striking out `conduct drug and alcohol abuse' and
 inserting in lieu thereof `conduct drug and alcohol abuse and tobacco use'.
 (d) FEDERAL ACTIVITIES- Section 5132(b) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 3212(b))is
 amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by inserting before the semicolon the following: `and
 for dissemination under section 1527 of the Public Health Service Act'; and
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking out `drug' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `drug and tobacco'.
 (e) DEFINITIONS- Section 5141(b)(1) of such Act (20 U.S.C. 3221(b)(1)) is
 amended by striking out `alcohol' and inserting in lieu thereof `alcohol,
 the use of tobacco,'.
SEC. 5. NATIONAL COMMISSION ON DRUG-FREE SCHOOLS.
 Section 5051(i) of the Anti Drug Abuse Act of 1988 (20 U.S.C. 3172 note)
 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) by inserting `, including anti-tobacco education,' after `program'
 in subparagraph (A);
 (B) by inserting `or tobacco products' after `drugs' in subparagraph (C); and
 (C) by inserting `and tobacco' after `drug' in subparagraph (D); and
 (2) in paragraph (3), by inserting `and smoke-free' after `drug-free'.
SEC. 6. INCENTIVE GRANTS TO ESTABLISH SMOKE FREE SCHOOLS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- There are authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for
 fiscal year 1991, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal
 years 1992 and 1993, to enable the Secretary of Education to make incentive
 grants to States in accordance with this section.
 (b) STATE POLICY- To receive a grant under this section, a State shall
 establish a policy that--
 (1) creates smoke-free elementary and secondary school buildings and
 grounds and school buses;
 (2) requires schools to establish smoking areas in which adults only are
 permitted to smoke, and to ensure adequate safeguards exist to protect
 students from exposure to smoke; and
 (3) provides technical assistance to schools and other assistance to
 implement the provision of this section.
 (c) USE OF FUNDS- A State receiving a grant under subsection (a) shall
 use such grant to disseminate materials to school personnel and students,
 and hold conferences and meetings, concerning the health hazards of tobacco
 use by students.
 (d) REGULATIONS- The Secretary of Education, in consultation with the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall promulgate regulations
 necessary to implement this section.
 (e) ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS- A State receiving a grant under subsection (a)
 may place restrictions on the use of tobacco products in schools in addition
 to the requirements referred to in subsection (b). A State receiving funds
 under this section shall provide assistance under this section only to
 schools that are subject to the State laws described in subsection (b).
 (f) APPLICATION- No grant may be made under this section unless an
 application therefor is submitted to the Secretary of Education in such
 form, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary of
 Education shall require.
SEC. 7. TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS.
 (a) COMPREHENSIVE SMOKING EDUCATION ACT- Section 3 of the Comprehensive
 Smoking Education Act (15 U.S.C. 1341) is repealed.
 (b) COMPREHENSIVE SMOKELESS TOBACCO HEALTH EDUCATION ACT OF 1986- Sections
 2, 4, 5, and 8 of the Comprehensive Smokeless Tobacco Health Education
 Act of 1986 (15 U.S.C. 4401, 4403, 4404, and 4407) are repealed.
SEC. 8. STUDY AND REPORT.
 (a) REQUIREMENT- Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this
 Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, in consultation with the
 Secretary of Agriculture, shall conduct the study described in subsection
 (b), and prepare and submit, to the appropriate Committees of Congress,
 a report concerning the results of such study.
 (b) CONTENT OF STUDY- The study referred to in subsection (a) shall--
 (1) investigate the use of pesticides on tobacco and the presence of
 pesticides in tobacco products;
 (2) analyze the effect that the presence of pesticides in tobacco products
 has on human health; and
 (3) determine whether tolerances should be established for the use of
 pesticides in tobacco products.
SEC. 9. CONSTRUCTION.
 Nothing in this Act, or an amendment made by this Act, shall be construed to
 limit, restrict, expand, or otherwise affect the authority of the Federal
 Trade Commission.
S 2795 PCS----2
S 2795 PCS----3
S 2795 PCS----4