S 2235 IS1S
(Star Print)
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2235
To provide for the disposition of certain Federal lands created from the
public domain in the State of Montana, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
March 6 (legislative day, JANUARY 23), 1990
Mr. BURNS introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
A BILL
To provide for the disposition of certain Federal lands created from the
public domain in the State of Montana, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Montana Federal Lands Management Act of 1990'.
SEC. 2. PURPOSES.
 The purposes of this Act are--
 (1) to designate certain National Forest System lands in the State of Montana
 as components of the National Wilderness Preservation System, in furtherance
 of the purposes of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.); and
 (2) to ensure that certain National Forest System lands in the State of
 Montana be available for nonwilderness uses.
SEC. 3. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) the Department of Agriculture's Land and Resource Management Plans and
 other studies of National Forest System lands in the State of Montana and
 the related congressional review of such lands have identified--
 (A) areas which, on the basis of their landform, ecosystem, associated
 wildlife, and location, warrant inclusion in the National Wilderness
 Preservation System; and
 (B) areas which do not possess outstanding wilderness attributes or do
 possess outstanding energy, mineral, timber, grazing, dispersed recreation,
 wildlife habitat, and other values, which therefore do not warrant inclusion
 in the National Wilderness Preservation System, but should be available
 for nonwilderness multiple uses under the land management planning process
 and other law;
 (2) the Department of Agriculture has adequately met the wilderness study
 requirements of the Act entitled `An Act to designate certain lands as
 wilderness', approved October 19, 1976 (Public Law 94-557; 90 Stat. 2633) and
 the Montana Wilderness Study Act of 1977 (Public Law 95-150; 91 Stat. 1243);
 (3) the Land and Resource Management Plans and associated Environmental
 Impact Statements and decision documents for all the National Forests in
 the State of Montana (referred to as `Land and Resource Management Plans')
 have been completed as required by section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland
 Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604);
 (4) the Department of Agriculture, with substantial public input, has
 reviewed the wilderness potential of these and other areas;
 (5) the Congress has made its own examination of National Forest System
 roadless areas in the State of Montana and of the environmental impacts
 associated with alternative allocations of those areas; and
 (6) with respect to the remaining roadless lands in Montana not specifically
 designated wilderness in section 101 or specifically released to other
 nonwilderness multiple uses in section 203, nothing in this Act shall be
 construed to imply any intent of Congress as to the final disposition of
 these lands.
TITLE I--WILDERNESS DESIGNATION
SEC. 101. DESIGNATION.
 In furtherance of the purposes of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131
 et seq.), the following lands in the State of Montana are designated
 as wilderness and, therefore, as components of the National Wilderness
 Preservation System:
 (1) Certain lands in the Beaverhead, Bitterroot, and Deerlodge National
 Forest, Montana, which comprise approximately 12,400 acres, as generally
 depicted on a map entitled `Anaconda-Pintler Wilderness Additions--Proposed'
 (North Big Hole, Storm Lake), dated March 1990, which are incorporated in
 and shall be deemed to be a part of the Anaconda-Pintler Wilderness.
 (2) Certain lands in the Beaverhead National Forest, Montana, which comprise
 approximately 25,000 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled
 `Italian Peaks Wilderness--Proposed', dated March 1990, which shall be
 known as the Italian Peaks Wilderness.
 (3) Certain lands in the Beaverhead National Forest, Montana, which comprise
 approximately 79,500 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `East
 Pioneer Wilderness--Proposed', dated March 1990, which shall be known as
 the East Pioneer Wilderness.
 (4) Certain lands in the Beaverhead National Forest, Montana, which comprise
 approximately 55,000 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `West
 Big Hole--Proposed', dated March 1990, which shall be known as the West
 Big Hole Wilderness.
 (5) Certain lands in the Bitterroot and Lolo National Forests, Montana,
 which comprise approximately 52,290 acres, as generally depicted on a map
 entitled `Selway-Bitterroot Wilderness Additions--Proposed', dated March
 1990, which are incorporated in and shall be deemed to be a part of the
 Selway-Bitterroot Wilderness.
 (6) Certain lands in the Custer National Forest, Montana, which comprise
 approximately 5,800 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Lost
 Water Canyon Wilderness--Proposed', dated March 1990, which shall be known
 as the Lost Water Canyon Wilderness.
 (7) Certain lands in the Custer National Forest, Montana, which comprise
 approximately 6,000 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Absaroka
 Beartooth Wilderness Additions--Proposed (Burnt Mountain, Red Lodge Creek,
 Stateline Fishtail)', dated March 1990, which are incorporated in and
 shall be deemed to be a part of the Absaroka Beartooth Wilderness.
 (8) Certain lands in the Flathead National Forest, Montana, which comprise
 approximately 31,800 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled
 `Jewell Basin--Proposed', dated March 1990, which shall be known as the
 Jewell Basin Wilderness.
 (9) Certain lands in the Flathead, Lolo, Helena, and National Forests,
 Montana, which comprise approximately 135,600 acres, as generally depicted
 on a map entitled `Bob Marshall Additions--Proposed (Swan Front, Slippery
 Bill, Limestone Cave, Morrell Falls, Monture)', dated March 1990, which
 are incorporated in and shall be deemed to be a part of the Bob Marshall
 Wilderness.
 (10) Certain lands in the Gallatin National Forest, Montana, which comprise
 approximately 500 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `North
 Absaroka Wilderness Additions--Proposed (Republic Mountain)', dated March
 1990 which are incorporated in and shall be deemed to be a part of the
 Absaroka--Beartooth Wilderness.
 (11) Certain lands in the Gallatin National Forest, which comprise
 approximately 21,500 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled
 `Earthquake Wilderness--Proposed', dated March 1990, which shall be known
 as the Earthquake Wilderness.
 (12) Certain lands in the Helena National Forest, Montana, which comprise
 approximately 8,600 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Mount
 Baldy Wilderness--Proposed', dated March 1990, which shall be known as
 the Mount Baldy Wilderness.
 (13) Certain lands in the Helena National Forest, Montana, which comprise
 approximately 14,300 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled
 `Electric Peak Wilderness--Proposed', dated March 1990, which shall be
 known as the Electric Peak Wilderness.
 (14) Certain lands in the Helena National Forest, Montana, which comprise
 approximately 10,000 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Gates
 of the Mountain Wilderness Additions--Proposed', dated March 1990, which
 are incorporated in and shall be deemed to be part of the Gates of the
 Mountain Wilderness.
 (15) Certain lands in the Kootenai and Idaho Panhandle National Forests,
 Montana, which comprise approximately 36,200 acres, as generally depicted
 on a map entitled `Scotchman Peaks Wilderness--Proposed', dated March 1990,
 which shall be known as the Scotchman Peaks Wilderness.
 (16) Certain lands in the Kootenai National Forest, Montana, which comprise
 approximately 35,500 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Cabinet
 Mountains Wilderness Additions--Proposed', dated March 1990, which are
 incorporated in and shall be a part of the Cabinet Mountains Wilderness.
 (17) Certain lands in the Lolo National Forest, Montana, which comprise
 approximately 89,500 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Great
 Burn Wilderness--Proposed', dated March 1990, which shall be known as the
 Great Burn Wilderness.
SEC. 102. MAPS AND LEGAL DESCRIPTIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of Agriculture shall file the maps referred
 to in section 101 and legal descriptions of each wilderness area designated
 by section 101 with the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the
 Senate and the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs of the House of
 Representatives, and each such map and legal description shall have the
 same force and effect as if included in this Act.
 (b) CORRECTIONS- The Secretary of Agriculture may correct clerical and
 typographical errors in the maps and legal descriptions submitted pursuant
 to subsection (a).
 (c) PUBLIC INSPECTION- Each map and legal description referred to in
 subsection (a) shall be on file and available for public inspection in
 the office of the Chief of the Forest Service, Department of Agriculture.
SEC. 103. ADMINISTRATION.
 Subject to valid existing rights, each wilderness area designated by
 section 101 shall be administered by the Secretary of Agriculture in
 accordance with the provisions of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et
 seq.) governing areas designated by that Act as wilderness areas, except
 that, with respect to any area designated in section 101 of this Act, any
 reference to the effective date of the Wilderness Act shall be deemed to
 be a reference to the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 104. CONSOLIDATION OF WILDERNESS AREAS.
 (a) CONSOLIDATION- In order to consolidate existing contiguous wilderness
 areas, the lands comprising the Great Bear Wilderness Area designated by
 the Act entitled `An Act to designate the Great Bear Wilderness, Flathead
 National Forest, and enlarge the Bob Marshall Wilderness, Flathead and
 Lewis and Clark National Forests, State of Montana', approved October
 28, 1978 (92 Stat. 2062; Public Law 95-546) and the Scapegoat Wilderness
 Area designated by the Act entitled `An Act to designate the Scapegoat
 Wilderness, Helena, Lolo, and Lewis and Clark National Forests, in the State
 of Montana', approved August 20, 1972, (86 Stat. 578; Public Law 92-395)
 are incorporated in and deemed to be a part of the Bob Marshall Wilderness.
 (b) REFERENCES TO WILDERNESS AREAS- The designations of the Great Bear
 Wilderness Area and the Scapegoat Wilderness Area are abolished, and any
 reference to the Great Bear Wilderness Area or the Scapegoat Wilderness
 Area in any law, regulation, map, document, record, or other paper of the
 United States shall be considered to be a reference to the part of the
 Bob Marshall Wilderness Area formerly so designated.
SEC. 105. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
 (a) WILDERNESS AREA PERIMETERS- (1) Congress does not intend that the
 designation of a wilderness area in section 101 will lead to the creation
 of protective perimeters or buffer zones around the wilderness area.
 (2) That nonwilderness activities or uses can be seen or heard from areas
 within a wilderness area shall not, of itself, preclude such activities
 or uses up to the boundary of the wilderness area.
 (b) COLLECTION DEVICES- (1) Within the wilderness areas designated in
 section 101, neither the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.) nor this
 Act shall be construed to prevent the installation and maintenance of
 hydrological, meteorological, or climatological collection devices and
 ancillary facilities subject to such conditions as the Secretary deems
 desirable, where such facilities or access are essential to flood warning,
 flood control, and water reservoir operation purposes.
 (2) Access to the devices and facilities described in paragraph (1) shall
 be by the means historically used, provided that the method is the least
 intrusive practicable means available.
 (c) WHEELCHAIRS- Nothing in the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.),
 this Act, or any other wilderness Act relating to the State of Montana
 shall preclude the use of either motorized or nonmotorized wheelchairs on
 any lands designated as wilderness within the State of Montana.
 (d) STATE JURISDICTION- In accordance with section 4(d)(7) of the Wilderness
 Act (16 U.S.C. 1133(d)(7)), nothing in this Act shall be construed as
 affecting the jurisdiction or responsibilities of the State of Montana
 with respect to wildlife and fish in the national forests in Montana.
SEC. 106. WATER RIGHTS.
 With respect to lands in the State of Montana designated as wilderness in
 section 101, nothing in the Wilderness Act or this Act shall constitute
 or be construed to constitute an express or implied reservation of water
 or water rights for any purpose. The United States may acquire such water
 rights as it deems necessary to carry out its responsibilities on any
 lands designated as wilderness pursuant to the substantive and procedural
 requirements of the laws of the State of Montana. This section shall not
 affect any reserved water right that the United States may have previously
 acquired within the State of Montana with respect to any lands designated
 as wilderness by this Act or any other Act for the primary purposes for
 which such lands had been originally withdrawn from the public domain.
SEC. 107. GRAZING.
 The grazing of livestock and all grazing allotments on lands designated as
 wilderness in section 101 where established prior to the date of enactment
 of this Act shall be continued and shall be administered in accordance with
 section 4(d)(4) of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1133(d)(4)) and section
 108 of the Act entitled `An Act to designate certain National Forest System
 lands in the States of Colorado, South Dakota, Missouri, South Carolina,
 and Louisiana for inclusion in the National Wilderness Preservation System,
 and for other purposes' (94 Stat. 3271; 16 U.S.C. 1133 note).
SEC. 108. LAND EXCHANGES.
 The Secretary of Agriculture shall act expeditiously to complete land
 exchanges for any private or State lands within the boundaries of areas
 designated as wilderness by section 101.
TITLE II--ROADLESS AREA RELEASE
SEC. 201. WILDERNESS REVIEW.
 (a) IN GENERAL- On the basis of its review of roadless areas in the State
 of Montana, insofar as they pertain to the roadless areas described in
 section 203, the Congress determines and directs that--
 (1) without otherwise passing on the question of the legal and factual
 sufficiency of the Land and Resource Management Plans completed prior to
 the date of enactment of this Act, the wilderness evaluation, wilderness
 recommendation and management area prescriptions, and associated
 environmental analyses and disclosure shall not be subject to judicial
 review;
 (2) with respect to the reviews of National Forest System lands in the
 State of Montana that were conducted by the Department of Agriculture
 in wilderness studies conducted pursuant to the 1978 forest plan for the
 Beaverhead National Forest, and the Land and Resource Management Plans,
 those reviews shall be deemed, for the purposes of the initial Land
 and Resource Management Plans required for such lands by the Forest and
 Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974, to be an adequate
 consideration of the suitability of those lands for inclusion in the
 National Wilderness Preservation System, and the Department of Agriculture
 shall not be required to review the wilderness option prior to the revision
 of the plans, but shall review the wilderness option when the plans are
 revised, which revisions will ordinarily occur on a 10-year cycle, or at
 least every 15 years, unless prior to that time the Secretary finds that
 conditions in a unit have significantly changed;
 (3) the roadless areas in the State of Montana shall be managed for multiple
 use other than wilderness in accordance with land management plans pursuant
 to the Multiple Use Sustained Yield Act of 1960 (16 U.S.C. 528 et seq.) and
 section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act
 of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604), but those areas shall not be managed for the
 purpose of protecting their suitability for wilderness designation prior
 to or during revision of the initial Land and Resource Management Plans;
 (4) if revised Land and Resource Management Plans are implemented pursuant
 to section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning
 Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604) and other law, areas not recommended for
 wilderness designation shall not be managed for the purpose of protecting
 their suitability for wilderness designation prior to or during revision
 of such plans, and areas recommended for wilderness designation shall be
 managed for the purpose of protecting their suitability for wilderness
 designation as may be required by the Forest and Rangeland Renewable
 Resources Planning Act of 1974 and other law;
 (5) unless expressly authorized by Congress, the Department of Agriculture
 shall not conduct any further statewide roadless area review and evaluation
 of National Forest System lands in the State of Montana for the purpose
 of determining their suitability for inclusion in the National Wilderness
 Preservation System; and
 (6) any action in a roadless area that implements a Land and Resource
 Management Plan shall not be subject to judicial review concerning the
 wilderness evaluation, wilderness recommendation and management area
 prescriptions, and associated environmental analyses in that plan or
 concerning the impacts of the action on the roadless condition or values
 of the area.
 (b) DEFINITION- As used in this section, and as provided in section 6
 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16
 U.S.C. 1604), the term `revision' does not include an amendment to a plan.
SEC. 202. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
 (a) MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY- Nothing in this Act shall be construed to
 either diminish or increase the authority of the Forest Service to manage
 roadless areas in National Forests in Montana not described in section 203 in
 accordance with applicable Land and Resource Management Plans, the Forest and
 Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974, and Public Law 95-150.
 (b) WILDERNESS CHARACTERISTICS OF LAND NOT RELEASED- Nothing in this Act
 shall be construed to imply that any roadless lands in Montana not released
 in section 203 either do or do not exhibit any outstanding wilderness
 characteristics, nor is there any implication that they either should
 or should not be managed or studied in any special way for protection as
 possible wilderness areas.
SEC. 203. RELEASE OF LANDS IN ROADLESS AREAS.
 (a) RELEASE- In furtherance of the purposes of the Multiple Use Sustained
 Yield Act of 1960 (16 U.S.C. 528 et seq.), the lands described in subsection
 (b) are released to be managed for the full range of multiple use according
 to the Land and Resource Management Plans for the National Forests in the
 State of Montana.
 (b) DESCRIPTION- (1) The following areas are to be released in their
 entirety as described in this Act and the respective Land Management Plans:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Forest plan ID number Area name National Forest
Net acres
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 (2) The following areas are to be released only in the portions of the
 roadless area described in this paragraph, as referenced in the respective
 Land and Resource Management Plans:
 (A) The portion of the Maiden Peak Roadless Area (1-945) in T. 11. S.,
 T. 12. S., and T. 13. S., P.M.M., in the Beaverhead National Forest,
 Montana, consisting of approximately 40,000 acres.
 (B) The portion of the Selway-Bitterroot additions (01067) in secs. 1, 2,
 3 T. 3. N. R. 22. W.; secs. 25, 26, 27, 34, 35, 36 T. 4. N. R. 22. W.;
 secs. 18, 19, 20, 29, 30 T. 7. N. R. 21. W.; secs. 13, 14, 15, 22,
 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 T. 7. N. R. 22. W.; secs. 4, 8, 9, 10, 15, 16, 17,
 18, 19, 29, 30, 31 T. 8. N. R. 21. W.; sec. 36 T. 8. N. R. 22. W.;
 secs. 26, 27, 34 T. 9. N. R. 21. W.; secs. 5, 6, 7, 8, 17, 18, 19
 T. 10. N. R. 20. W.; secs. 12, 13, 23, 24 T. 10. N. R. 21. W.; and secs. 31,
 32 T. 10. N. R. 20. W., P.M.M., in the Bitterroot National Forest, Montana,
 consisting of approximately 70,000 acres.
 (C) The portion of the Redlodge Creek-Hellroaring Roadless Area (01363) in
 R. 19. E., and R. 20. E., P.M.M., in the Custer National Forest, Montana,
 consisting of approximately 14,000 acres.
 (D) The portion of the Quigg Roadless Area (01-807) in T. 10. N., P.M.M.,
 in the Lolo National Forest, Montana, and the portion east of Sandstone
 Ridge in the Deerlodge National Forest, Montana, consisting of approximately
 20,000 acres.
 (E) The portions of the North Absaroka Roadless Area (1371) in Sweet Grass
 County, Montana, in R. 7. E.; R. 8. E.; T. 8. S. R. 9. E.; T. 9. S. R. 9. E.,
 P.M.M., in the Gallatin National Forest, Montana, consisting of approximately
 120,000 acres.
 (F) The portion of the Gallatin Fringe Roadless Area (J1-548), in
 T. 3. S. and T. 4. S., P.M.M., in the Gallatin National Forest, Montana,
 consisting of approximately 11,000 acres.
 (G) The portion of the Stonewall Mountain Roadless Area (A1485) in T. 15. N.,
 P.M.M., in the Helena National Forest, Montana, consisting of approximately
 25,000 acres.
 (H) The portion of the Cabinet Face East Additions Roadless Area (01671)
 in T. 25. N., T. 26. N., T. 27. N., and T. 28. N., P.M.M., in the Kootenai
 National Forest, Montana, consisting of approximately 18,000 acres.
 (I) The portion of the Lolo Creek Roadless Area (01805) in secs. 8, 10,
 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 23, 24 T. 11. N. R. 21. W.; secs. 12, 13, 23, 24, 25,
 26, 35, 36 T. 11. N. R. 22. W.; sec. 2 T. 10. N. R. 22. W.; P.M.M., in
 the Lolo National Forest, Montana, consisting of approximately 10,000 acres.
TITLE III--PLUM CREEK LAND EXCHANGE
SEC. 301. PLUM CREEK LAND EXCHANGE--PORCUPINE AREA.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of Agriculture shall, notwithstanding any
 other law, exchange lands and interests in lands with Plum Creek Timber
 Company, L.P. (referred to as `the company') in accordance with this section.
 (b) DESCRIPTION OF LANDS- (1) If the company offers to the United States the
 fee title to approximately 8,130.67 acres of land of the company which is
 available for exchange to the United States as depicted on a map entitled
 `Plum Creek Timber Company and Forest Service Proposed Porcupine Land
 Exchange', dated May 20, 1988, the Secretary of the Interior shall accept
 a warranty deed to such land and, in exchange therefor, and subject to
 valid existing rights, convey by patent the fee title to approximately
 9,181.74 acres of National Forest System lands available for exchange to
 the company as depicted on such map, subject to--
 (A) the reservation of ditches and canals as required by the Act entitled
 `An Act making appropriations for sundry civil expenses of the Government for
 the fiscal year ending June thirtieth, eighteen hundred and ninety-one, and
 for other purposes', approved August 30, 1890 (26 Stat. 391; 43 U.S.C. 945).
 (B) the reservation of rights under Federal oil and gas lease numbers 49432,
 32843 and 55325; and
 (C) such other terms, conditions, reservations and exceptions as may be
 agreed upon by the Secretary of Agriculture and the company.
 (2) On termination or relinquishment of the leases referred to in
 paragraph (1)(B), all the rights and interests in land granted therein
 shall immediately vest in the company, its successors and assigns, and
 the Secretary of Agriculture shall give notice of that event by a document
 suitable for recording in the county wherein the leased lands are situated.
 (c) EASEMENTS- At closing on the conveyances authorized by this section:
 (1) In consideration of the easements conveyed by the company as provided
 in paragraph (2), the Secretary of Agriculture shall execute and deliver
 to the company easements over federally owned lands for such existing
 or future roads as are needed to provide the company, its successors and
 assigns, access to company-owned lands.
 (2) In consideration of the easements conveyed by the United States as
 provided in paragraph (1), the company shall execute and deliver to the
 United States easements over company-owned lands for such existing or
 future roads as are needed to provide the United States, and its assigns,
 access to federally owned lands.
 (3) Road easements conveyed pursuant to this subsection shall be in the
 form customarily used by the Forest Service and cooperators for cost-shared
 roads in Road Right-of-Way Construction and Use Agreements.
 (d) REVOCATION OF ORDER OF WITHDRAWAL- The order of withdrawal contained in
 Executive Order No. 30-Montana 7-Phosphate Reserve, dated October 9, 1917
 (960 acres, more or less), insofar as it applies to the lands conveyed by
 the United States in the transactions authorized by this section, is revoked.
 (e) MAPS- The maps referred to in subsection (b) are subject to such minor
 corrections as the Secretary of Agriculture and the company may agree
 to. The Secretary of Agriculture shall notify the appropriate committees
 of Congress of any correction made pursuant to this subsection.
 (f) TIMING OF TRANSACTION- It is the sense of Congress that the conveyances
 authorized by this section should be completed within 90 days after the
 date of the enactment of the Act.
 (g) FOREST LANDS- All lands conveyed to the United States pursuant to
 this section shall be national forest lands administered by the Secretary
 of Agriculture.
SEC. 302. PLUM CREEK LAND EXCHANGE--GALLATIN AREA.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of Agriculture shall, notwithstanding any
 other law, acquire, by exchange and cash equalization in the amount of
 $3,400,000, certain lands and interests in land of the company in and
 adjacent to the Hyalite-Porcupine-Buffalo Horn Wilderness Study Area,
 the Scapegoat Wilderness Area, and other land in the Gallatin National
 Forest in accordance with this section.
 (b)(1) DESCRIPTION OF LANDS- If the company offers to the United States
 the fee title to approximately 37,752.15 acres of land of the company
 which is available for exchange to the United States as depicted on a map
 entitled `Plum Creek Timber Company and Forest Service Proposed Gallatin
 Land Exchange', dated May 20, 1988, the Secretary of the Interior shall
 accept a warranty deed to such land and, in exchange therefor, and subject
 to valid existing rights, convey by patent the fee title to approximately
 12,414.06 acres of National Forest System lands available for exchange to
 the company as depicted on such map, subject to--
 (A) the reservation of ditches and canals required by the Act entitled `An
 Act making appropriations for sundry civil expenses of the Government for
 the fiscal year ending June thirtieth, eighteen hundred and ninety-one, and
 for other purposes', approved August 30, 1890 (26 Stat. 391; 43 U.S.C. 945);
 (B) the reservation of rights under Federal Oil and Gas Lease numbers 49739,
 55610, 23290, 29230, 40389, 53670, 40215, 38678, 33385, 53736, and 38684; and
 (C) such other terms, conditions, reservations and exceptions as may be
 agreed upon by the Secretary of Agriculture and the company.
 (2) On termination or relinquishment of the leases referred to in paragraph
 (1), all the rights and interests in land granted therein shall immediately
 vest in the company, its successors and assigns, and the Secretary of
 Agriculture shall give notice of that event by a document suitable for
 recording in the county wherein the leased lands are situated.
 (c) EASEMENTS- At closing on the conveyances authorized by this section:
 (1) In consideration of the easements conveyed by the company as provided
 in paragraph (2), the Secretary of Agriculture shall execute and deliver
 to the company to easements for such existing or future roads as are
 needed to provide the company, its successors and assigns, access to
 company-owned lands.
 (2) In consideration of the easements conveyed by the United States as
 provided in paragraph (1), the company shall execute and deliver to the
 United States easements over company-owned lands for such existing or future
 rights-of-way as are needed to provide the United States, and its assigns,
 access to federally owned lands.
 (3) Road easements conveyed pursuant to this subsection shall be in the
 form customarily used by the Forest Service and cooperators for cost-shared
 roads in Road Right-of-Way Construction and Use Agreements.
 (d) MAPS- The maps referred to in subsection (b) are subject to such minor
 corrections as the Secretary of Agriculture and the company may agree
 to. The Secretary of Agriculture shall notify the appropriate Committees
 of Congress of any corrections made pursuant to the subsection.
 (e) TIMING OF TRANSACTION- It is the sense of Congress that the acquisition
 authorized pursuant to this section should be completed within 90 days
 after the date of enactment of an Act making the appropriation authorized
 by subsection (g).
 (f) FOREST LANDS- All lands conveyed to the United States pursuant to
 this section shall be national forest lands administered by the Secretary
 of Agriculture.
 (g) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There is authorized to be appropriated
 to carry out this section the sum of $3,400,000, which amount the Secretary
 shall, when appropriated, pay to the company to equalize the value of the
 exchange of land authorized by this section.
SEC. 303. SEVERED MINERALS EXCHANGE.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) underlying certain areas in Montana described in subsection (b) are
 mineral rights owned by the company or its affiliates;
 (2) there are federally owned minerals underlying lands of the company
 lying outside those areas;
 (3) the company has agreed in principle with the Department of Agriculture
 to an exchange of mineral rights to consolidate surface and subsurface
 ownerships and to avoid potential conflicts with the surface management
 of such areas; and
 (4) it is desirable that an exchange be completed within 2 years after
 the date of enactment of this Act.
 (b) DESCRIPTION OF MINERAL INTERESTS- (1) Pursuant to an exchange agreement
 between the Secretary of Agriculture and the company, the Secretary of
 Agriculture may acquire mineral interests owned by the company or an
 affiliate of the company thereof underlying surface lands owned by the
 United States located in the areas depicted on the maps entitled `Severed
 Minerals Exchange, Clearwater-Monture Area', dated September 1988 and
 `Severed Minerals Exchanges, Gallatin Area', dated September 1988, or in
 fractional sections adjacent to those areas.
 (2) In exchange for the mineral interests conveyed to the Secretary of
 Agriculture pursuant to paragraph (1), the Secretary of the Interior shall
 convey, subject to valid existing rights, such federally owned mineral
 interests as the Secretary of Agriculture and the company may agree upon.
 (c) EQUAL VALUE- (1) The value of mineral interests exchanged pursuant to
 this section shall be approximately equal based on available information.
 (2) To assure that the wilderness or other natural values of the areas
 are not affected, a formal appraisal shall not be required for any mineral
 interest proposed for exchange, but the Secretary of Agriculture and the
 company shall fully share all available information on the quality and
 quantity of mineral interests proposed for exchange.
 (3) In the absence of adequate information regarding values of minerals
 proposed for exchange, the Secretary of Agriculture and the company
 may agree to an exchange on the basis of mineral interests of similar
 development potential, geologic character, and similar factors.
 (d) IDENTIFICATION OF FEDERALLY OWNED MINERAL INTERESTS- (1) Subject to
 paragraph (2), mineral interests conveyed by the United States pursuant
 to this section shall underlie lands the surface of which are owned by
 the company.
 (2) If there are not sufficient federally owned mineral interests of
 approximately equal value underlying Company lands, the Secretary of
 Agriculture and the Bureau of Land Management may identify for exchange
 any other federally owned mineral interest in land in the State of Montana
 of which the surface estate is in private ownership.
 (e) CONSULTATION WITH BLM- (1) The Secretary shall consult with the Bureau
 of Land Management in the negotiation of the exchange agreement authorized
 by subsection (b), particularly with respect to the inclusion in such
 an agreement of a provision calling for the exchange of federally owned
 mineral interests lying outside the boundaries of units of the National
 Forest System.
 (2) Notwithstanding any other law, the Secretary of the Interior shall
 convey the federally owned mineral interests identified in a final exchange
 agreement between the Secretary of Agriculture and the company and its
 affiliates.
 (f) DEFINITION- For purposes of this section, the term `mineral interests'
 includes all locatable and leasable minerals, including oil and gas,
 geothermal resources, and all other subsurface rights.
 (g) ENVIRONMENTAL LAW- The execution and performance of an exchange
 agreement and the taking of other actions pursuant to this section shall
 not be deemed a major Federal action significantly affecting the quality
 of the environment within the meaning of section 102 of the National
 Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4332), nor shall they require
 the preparation of an environmental assessment under that Act.