HR 3972 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 3972
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide incentives for savings
and investments in order to stimulate economic growth.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
February 7, 1990
Mr. ARCHER (for himself, Mr. MICHEL, Mr. VANDER JAGT, Mr. CRANE, Mr. FRENZEL,
Mr. SCHULZE, Mr. GRADISON, Mr. THOMAS of California, Mr. MCGRATH, Mr. BROWN of
Colorado, Mr. CHANDLER, Mr. SHAW, Mr. SUNDQUIST, Mrs. JOHNSON of Connecticut,
Mr. GINGRICH, Mr. LEWIS of California, Mr. MCCOLLUM, Mr. WEBER, Mr. EDWARDS
of Oklahoma, Mr. HUNTER, Mr. DORNAN of California, Mr. THOMAS of Wyoming,
Mr. WHITTAKER, Mr. GALLO, Mr. PURSELL, Mr. CALLAHAN, Mr. BURTON of Indiana,
Mr. SHAYS, Mr. GOSS, Mr. HILER, Mr. ROTH, Mr. BAKER, Mr. SMITH of Texas,
Mrs. MEYERS of Kansas, Mr. CRAIG, Mr. SMITH of New Hampshire, Mr. JAMES,
Mr. MILLER of Ohio, Mr. GRANDY, Mr. DANNEMEYER, Mr. GALLEGLY, Mr. MARTIN of
New York, Mr. LENT, Mr. NIELSON of Utah, Mr. WALSH Mr. GILMAN, Mr. MARLENEE,
Mr. SENSENBRENNER, Mr. LAGOMARSINO, Mr. DREIER of California, Mr. HORTON,
Mr. DUNCAN, Ms. ROS-LEHTINEN, Mr. ROBINSON, Mr. SAXTON, Mr. COURTER,
Mr. RHODES, Mr. SMITH of New Jersey, Mr. HAMMERSCHMIDT, Mr. CLINGER,
Mr. MCEWEN, Mr. RAVENEL, Mr. HANCOCK, Mr. BROOMFIELD, Mrs. LLOYD, Mr. GRANT,
Mr. MADIGAN, Mr. SOLOMON, Mr. TAUKE, Mr. HERGER, Mr. KOLBE, Mr. OXLEY,
Mr. HEFLEY, Me. GEKAS, Mr. LIGHTFOOT, Mr. RITTER, Mr. EMERSON, Mr. LEWIS of
Florida, Mr. HASTERT, Mr. PACKARD, Mr. FAWELL, Mr. UPTON, Mr. GUNDERSON,
Mr. HANSEN, Mr. ROGERS, Mr. GILLMOR, Mr. SHUSTER, Mrs. VUCANOVICH, and
Mr. COMBEST) introduced the following bill; which was referred to the
Committee on Ways and Means
A BILL
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide incentives for savings
and investments in order to stimulate economic growth.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT OF 1986 CODE.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Savings and Economic Growth
 Act of 1990'.
 (b) AMENDMENT OF 1986 CODE- Except as otherwise expressly provided,
 whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an
 amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference
 shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
TITLE I--CAPITAL GAINS PROVISIONS
Subtitle A--Reduction in Capital Gains Tax
SEC. 101. REDUCTION IN CAPITAL GAINS TAX FOR NONCORPORATE TAXPAYERS.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Part I of subchapter P of chapter 1 (relating to treatment
 of capital gains) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new section:
`SEC. 1202. REDUCTION IN CAPITAL GAINS TAX FOR NONCORPORATE TAXPAYERS.
 `(a) DEDUCTION ALLOWED FOR CAPITAL GAIN-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- If, for any taxable year, a taxpayer other than a
 corporation has a net capital gain, an amount equal to the sum of the
 applicable percentages of the applicable capital gain shall be allowed as
 a deduction.
 `(2) ESTATES AND TRUSTS- In the case of an estate or trust, the deduction
 under paragraph (1) shall be computed by excluding the portion (if any) of
 the gains for the taxable year from sales or exchanges of capital assets
 which, under sections 652 and 662 (relating to inclusions of amounts in
 gross income of beneficiaries of trusts), is includible by the income
 beneficiaries as gain derived from the sale or exchange of capital assets.
 `(b) APPLICABLE PERCENTAGES- For purposes of this subsection, the applicable
 percentages shall be the percentages determined in accordance with the
 following table:
--The applicable
`In the case of:
--percentage is:
1-year gain
--10
2-year gain
--20
3-year gain
--30.
 `(c) GAIN TO WHICH DEDUCTION APPLIES- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) APPLICABLE CAPITAL GAIN- The term `applicable capital gain' means 1-year
 gain, 2-year gain, or 3-year gain determined by taking into account only gain
 which is properly taken into account for periods on or after March 15, 1990.
 `(2) 3-YEAR GAIN- The term `3-year gain' means the lesser of--
 `(A) the net capital gain for the taxable year, or
 `(B) the long-term capital gain determined by taking into account only
 gain from the sale or exchange of assets held more than 3 years.
 `(3) 2-YEAR GAIN- The term `2-year gain' means the lesser of--
 `(A) the net capital gain for the taxable year, reduced by 3-year gain, or
 `(B) the long-term capital gain determined by taking into account only
 gain from the sale or exchange of assets held more than 2 years but not
 more than 3 years.
 `(4) 1-YEAR GAIN- The term `1-year gain' means the net capital gain for
 the taxable year determined by taking into account only--
 `(A) gain from the sale or exchange of assets held more than 1 year but
 not more than 2 years, and
 `(B) losses from the sale or exchange of assets held more than 1 year.
 `(5) SPECIAL RULES FOR GAIN ALLOCABLE TO PERIODS BEFORE 1992- For purposes
 of this section--
 `(A) GAIN ALLOCABLE TO PERIODS AFTER MARCH 14, 1990 AND BEFORE 1991- In
 the case of any gain from any sale or exchange which is properly taken into
 account for the period beginning on March 15, 1990 and ending on December
 31, 1990, gain which is 1-year gain or 2-year gain (without regard to this
 subparagraph) shall be treated as 3-year gain.
 `(B) GAIN ALLOCABLE TO 1991- In the case of any gain from any sale or
 exchange which is properly taken into account for periods during 1991, gain
 which is 1-year gain or 2-year gain (without regard to this subparagraph)
 shall be treated as 2-year gain and 3-year gain, respectively.
 `(6) SPECIAL RULES FOR PASS-THRU ENTITIES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- In applying this subsection with respect to any pass-thru
 entity, the determination of when a sale or exchange has occurred shall
 be made at the entity level.
 `(B) PASS-THRU ENTITY DEFINED- For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term
 `pass-thru entity' means--
 `(i) a regulated investment company,
 `(ii) a real estate investment trust,
 `(iii) an S corporation,
 `(iv) a partnership,
 `(v) an estate or trust, and
 `(vi) a common trust fund.
 `(7) RECAPTURE OF NET ORDINARY LOSS UNDER SECTION 1231- For purposes of
 this subsection, if any amount is treated as ordinary income under section
 1231(c) for any taxable year--
 `(A) the amount so treated shall be allocated proportionately among the
 section 1231 gains (as defined in section 1231(a)) for such taxable year, and
 `(B) the amount so allocated to any such gain shall reduce the amount of
 such gain.'
 (b) TREATMENT OF COLLECTIBLES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 1222 is amended by inserting after paragraph (11)
 the following new paragraph:
 `(12) Special rule for collectibles-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Any gain or loss from the sale or exchange of a collectible
 shall be treated as a short-term capital gain or loss (as the case may be),
 without regard to the period such asset was held. The preceding sentence
 shall apply only to the extent the gain or loss is taken into account in
 computing taxable income.
 `(B) TREATMENT OF CERTAIN SALES OF INTEREST IN PARTNERSHIP, ETC- For
 purposes of subparagraph (A), any gain from the sale or exchange of an
 interest in a partnership, S corporation, or trust which is attributable
 to unrealized appreciation in the value of collectibles held by such entity
 shall be treated as gain from the sale or exchange of a collectible. Rules
 similar to the rules of section 751(f) shall apply for purposes of the
 preceding sentence.
 `(C) COLLECTIBLE- For purposes of this paragraph, the term `collectible'
 means any capital asset which is a collectible (as defined in section 408(m)
 without regard to paragraph (3) thereof).'
 (2) Charitable deduction not affected-
 (A) Paragraph (1) of section 170(e) is amended by adding at the end
 thereof the following new sentence: `For purposes of this paragraph,
 section 1222 shall be applied without regard to paragraph (12) thereof
 (relating to special rule for collectibles).'
 (B) Clause (iv) of section 170(b)(1)(C) is amended by inserting before
 the period at the end thereof the following: `and section 1222 shall be
 applied without regard to paragraph (12) thereof (relating to special rule
 for collectibles)'.
 (c) MINIMUM TAX- Section 56(b)(1) is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new subparagraph:
 `(F) CAPITAL GAINS DEDUCTION DISALLOWANCE- The deduction under section
 1202 shall not be allowed.'
 (d) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Section 62(a) is amended by inserting after paragraph (13) the following
 new paragraph:
 `(14) CAPITAL GAINS DEDUCTION- The deduction allowed by section 1202.'
 (2) Clause (ii) of section 163(d)(4)(B) is amended by inserting `, reduced
 by the amount of any deduction allowable under section 1202 attributable
 to gain from such property' after `investment'.
 (3)(A) Section 170(e)(1)(B) is amended by inserting `the nondeductible
 percentage' before `the amount of gain'.
 (B) Section 170(e)(1) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new sentence: `For purposes of subparagraph (B), the term `nondeductible
 percentage' means 100 percent minus the applicable percentage with respect
 to such property under section 1202(b), or, in the case of a corporation,
 100 percent.'
 (4)(A) Section 172(d)(2) (relating to modifications with respect to net
 operating loss deduction) is amended to read as follows:
 `(2) CAPITAL GAINS AND LOSSES OF TAXPAYERS OTHER THAN CORPORATIONS- In
 the case of a taxpayer other than a corporation--
 `(A) the amount deductible on account of losses from sales or exchanges
 of capital assets shall not exceed the amount includible on account of
 gains from sales or exchanges of capital assets; and
 `(B) the deduction provided by section 1202 shall not be allowed.'
 (B) Subparagraph (B) of section 172(d)(4) is amended by inserting `,
 (2)(B),' after `paragraph (1)'.
 (5)(A) Section 221 (relating to cross reference) is amended to read
 as follows:
`SEC. 221. CROSS REFERENCES.
 `(1) For deduction for net capital gains in the case of a taxpayer other
 than a corporation, see section 1202.
 `(2) For deductions in respect of a decedent, see section 691.'
 (B) The table of sections for part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 is
 amended by striking `reference' in the item relating to section 221 and
 inserting `references'.
 (6) Paragraph (4) of section 642(c) is amended to read as follows:
 `(4) ADJUSTMENTS- To the extent that the amount otherwise allowable as a
 deduction under this subsection consists of gain from the sale or exchange
 of capital assets held for more than 1 year, proper adjustment shall be
 made for any deduction allowable to the estate or trust under section 1202
 (relating to deduction for net capital gain). In the case of a trust,
 the deduction allowed by this subsection shall be subject to section 681
 (relating to unrelated business income).'
 (7) Paragraph (3) of section 643(a) is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following new sentence: `The deduction under section 1202 (relating
 to deduction for net capital gain) shall not be taken into account.'
 (8) Paragraph (6)(C) of section 643(a) is amended--
 (A) by inserting `(i)' before `there', and
 (B) by inserting `, and (ii) the deduction under section 1202 (relating
 to deduction for excess of capital gains over capital losses)' before the
 period at the end thereof.
 (9) Paragraph (4) of section 691(c) is amended by striking `1201, and 1211'
 and inserting `1201, 1202, and 1211'.
 (10) The second sentence of paragraph (2) of section 871(a) is amended
 by inserting `such gains and losses shall be determined without regard
 to section 1202 (relating to deduction for net capital gain) and' after
 `except that'.
 (11) Section 1402(i)(1) is amended to read as follows:
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In determining the net earnings from self-employment of
 any options dealer or commodities dealer--
 `(A) notwithstanding subsection (a)(3)(A), there shall not be excluded any
 gain or loss (in the normal course of the taxpayer's activity of dealing in
 or trading section 1256 contracts) from section 1256 contracts or property
 related to such contracts, and
 `(B) the deduction provided by section 1202 shall not apply.'
 (12)(A) Sections 7518(g)(6)(A) is amended by striking the last sentence.
 (B) Section 607(h)(6)(A) of the Merchant Marine Act, 1936, is amended by
 striking the last sentence.
 (e) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for part I of subchapter P
 of chapter 1 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`Sec. 1202. Reduction in capital gains tax for noncorporate taxpayers.'
 (f) EFFECTIVE DATES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by
 this section shall apply to taxable years ending on or after March 15, 1990.
 (2) Treatment of collectibles-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The amendment made by subsection (b) shall apply to taxable
 years beginning after March 15, 1990.
 (B) SPECIAL RULE FOR 1990 TAXABLE YEAR- In case of any taxable year which
 includes March 15, 1990, for purposes of section 1202 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 and section 1(g) of such Code, any gain or loss from the
 sale or exchange of a collectible (within the meaning of section 1222(12)
 of such Code) shall be treated as gain or loss from a sale or exchange
 occurring before such date.
Subtitle B--Depreciation Recapture
SEC. 111. RECAPTURE UNDER SECTION 1250 OF TOTAL AMOUNT OF DEPRECIATION.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Subsections (a) and (b) of section 1250 (relating to
 gain from disposition of certain depreciable realty) are amended to read
 as follows:
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- Except as otherwise provided in this section, if section
 1250 property is disposed of, the lesser of--
 `(1) the depreciation adjustments in respect of such property, or
 `(2) the excess of--
 `(A) the amount realized (or, in the case of a disposition other than a
 sale, exchange, or involuntary conversion, the fair market value of such
 property), over
 `(B) the adjusted basis of such property,
shall be treated as gain which is ordinary income. Such gain shall be
recognized notwithstanding any other provision of this subtitle.
 `(b) DEPRECIATION ADJUSTMENTS- For purposes of this section, the term
 `depreciation adjustments' means, in respect of any property, all adjustments
 attributable to periods after December 31, 1963, reflected in the adjusted
 basis of such property on account of deductions (whether in respect of
 the same or other property) allowed or allowable to the taxpayer or to any
 other person for exhaustion, wear and tear, obsolescence, or amortization
 (other than amortization under section 168 (as in effect before its repeal
 by the Tax Reform Act of 1976), 169, 185 (as in effect before its repeal
 by the Tax Reform Act of 1986), 188, 190, or 193). For purposes of the
 preceding sentence, if the taxpayer can establish by adequate records or
 other sufficient evidence that the amount allowed as a deduction for any
 period was less than the amount allowable, the amount taken into account
 for such period shall be the amount allowed.'
 (b) LIMITATION IN CASE OF INSTALLMENT SALES- Subsection (i) of section
 453 is amended--
 (1) by striking `1250' the first place it appears and inserting `1250
 (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Savings
 and Economic Growth Act of 1990', and
 (2) by striking `1250' the second place it appears and inserting `1250
 (as so in effect)'.
 (c) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Subparagraph (E) of section 1250(d)(4) is amended--
 (A) by striking `additional depreciation' and inserting `amount of the
 depreciation adjustments', and
 (B) by striking `ADDITIONAL DEPRECIATION' in the subparagraph heading and
 inserting `DEPRECIATION ADJUSTMENTS'.
 (2) Subparagraph (B) of section 1250(d)(6) is amended to read as follows:
 `(B) DEPRECIATION ADJUSTMENTS- In respect of any property described in
 subparagraph (A), the amount of the depreciation adjustments attributable
 to periods before the distribution by the partnership shall be--
 `(i) the amount of gain to which subsection (a) would have applied if
 such property had been sold by the partnership immediately before the
 distribution at its fair market value at such time, reduced by
 `(ii) the amount of such gain to which section 751(b) applied.'
 (3) Subparagraph (D) of section 1250(d)(8) is amended--
 (A) by striking `additional depreciation' each place it appears and inserting
 `amount of the depreciation adjustments', and
 (B) by striking `ADDITIONAL DEPRECIATION' in the subparagraph heading and
 inserting `DEPRECIATION ADJUSTMENTS'.
 (4) Paragraph (8) of section 1250(d) is amended by striking subparagraphs
 (E) and (F) and inserting the following:
 `(E) ALLOCATION RULES- For purposes of this paragraph, the amount of
 gain attributable to the section 1250 property disposed of shall be the
 net amount realized with respect to such property reduced by the greater
 of the adjusted basis of the section 1250 property disposed of, or the
 cost of the section 1250 property acquired, but shall not exceed the gain
 recognized in the transaction.'
 (5) Subsection (d) of section 1250 is amended by striking paragraph (10).
 (6) Section 1250 is amended by striking subsections (e), (f), and (g)
 and by redesignating subsections (h) and (i) as subsections (e) and (f),
 respectively.
 (7) Paragraph (5) of section 48(q) is amended to read as follows:
 `(5) RECAPTURE OF REDUCTION- For purposes of sections 1245 and 1250, any
 reduction under this subsection shall be treated as a deduction allowed
 for depreciation.'
 (8) Clause (i) of section 267(e)(5)(D) is amended by striking `section
 1250(a)(1)(B)' and inserting `section 1250(a)(1)(B) (as in effect on the
 day before the date of the enactment of the Savings and Economic Growth
 Act of 1990)'.
 (9)(A) Subsection (a) of section 291 is amended by striking paragraph (1)
 and by redesignating paragraphs (2), (3), (4), and (5) as paragraphs (1),
 (2), (3), and (4), respectively.
 (B) Subsection (c) of section 291 is amended to read as follows:
 `(c) SPECIAL RULE FOR POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES- Section 168 shall apply
 with respect to that portion of the basis of any property not taken into
 account under section 169 by reason of subsection (a)(4).'
 (C) Section 291 is amended by striking subsection (d) and redesignating
 subsection (e) as subsection (d).
 (D) Paragraph (2) of section 291(d) (as redesignated by subparagraph (C))
 is hereby repealed.
 (E) Subparagraph (A) of section 265(b)(3) is amended by striking
 `291(e)(1)(B)' and inserting `291(d)(1)(B)'.
 (F) Subsection (c) of section 1277 is amended by striking `291(e)(1)(B)(ii)'
 and inserting `291(d)(1)(B)(ii)'.
 (10) Subsection (d) of section 1017 is amended to read as follows:
 `(d) RECAPTURE OF DEDUCTIONS- For purposes of sections 1245 and 1250--
 `(1) any property the basis of which is reduced under this section and
 which is neither section 1245 property nor section 1250 property shall be
 treated as section 1245 property, and
 `(2) any reduction under this section shall be treated as a deduction
 allowed for depreciation.'
 (11) Paragraph (5) of section 7701(e) is amended by striking `(relating
 to low-income housing)' and inserting `(as in effect on the day before
 the date of the enactment of the Savings and Economic Growth Act of 1990).'
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 dispositions made on or after March 15, 1990, in taxable years ending on
 or after such date.
TITLE II--HOME OWNERSHIP AND SAVINGS INCENTIVES
SEC. 201. HOME OWNERSHIP INITIATIVE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Paragraph (2) of section 72(t) (relating to exceptions
 to 10-percent additional tax on early distributions from qualified
 retirement plans) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new subparagraph:
 `(E) DISTRIBUTION FROM INDIVIDUAL RETIREMENT PLAN FOR FIRST HOME PURCHASE-
 A distribution from an individual retirement plan with respect to which
 the requirements of paragraph (6) are met.'
 (b) REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO DISTRIBUTIONS- Section 72(t) is amended by
 adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(6) REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO FIRST HOME PURCHASE DISTRIBUTIONS- For
 purposes of paragraph (2)(E)--
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The requirements of this paragraph are met with respect
 to a distribution if--
 `(i) DOLLAR LIMIT- The amount of the distribution does not exceed the excess
 (if any) of--
 `(I) $10,000, over
 `(II) the sum of the distributions to which paragraph (2)(E) previously
 applied with respect to the individual who is the owner of the individual
 retirement plan.
 `(ii) USE OF DISTRIBUTION- The distribution--
 `(I) is made to or on behalf of a qualified first home purchaser, and
 `(II) is applied within 60 days of the date of distribution to the purchase
 or construction of a principal residence of such purchaser.
 `(iii) LIMITATION ON ACQUISITION COST- The cost of acquiring or constructing
 the principal residence described in clause (ii) does not exceed the
 amount determined by the Secretary to be 110 percent of the median home
 price for the geographic market in which such residence is located.
 `(iv) ELIGIBLE PLANS- The distribution is not made from an individual
 retirement plan which--
 `(I) is an inherited individual retirement plan (within the meaning of
 section 408(d)(3)(C)(ii)), or
 `(II) received at any time before such distribution a rollover contribution
 described in section 402(a)(5), 402(a)(7), 403(a)(4), or 403(b)(8).
 `(B) QUALIFIED FIRST HOME PURCHASER- For purposes of this paragraph,
 the term `qualified first home purchaser' means the individual who is the
 owner of the individual retirement plan if such individual (and if married,
 such individual's spouse) had no present ownership interest in a principal
 residence at any time during the 3-year period ending on the day before
 the date of the distribution.
 `(C) SPECIAL RULE WHERE DELAY IN ACQUISITION- If any distribution from an
 individual retirement plan fails to meet the requirements of subparagraph (A)
 solely by reason of a delay or cancellation of the purchase or construction
 of the residence, the amount of the distribution may be contributed to
 an individual retirement plan as provided in section 408(d)(3)(A)(i),
 except that--
 `(i) section 408(d)(3)(B) shall not be applied to such contribution, and
 `(ii) such amount shall not be taken into account--
 `(I) in determining whether section 408(d)(3)(A)(i) applies to any other
 amount, or
 `(II) for purposes of subclause (II) of subparagraph (A)(i).
 `(D) PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE- For purposes of this paragraph, the term
 `principal residence' has the meaning given such term by section 1034.
 `(E) OWNER- For purposes of this paragraph, the term `owner' means, with
 respect to any individual retirement plan, the individual with respect to
 whom such plan was established.'
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 distributions on or after March 15, 1990.
SEC. 202. FAMILY SAVINGS ACCOUNTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subchapter B of chapter 1 (relating to computation of taxable
 income) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new part:
`PART XII--FAMILY SAVINGS ACCOUNTS
`Sec. 292. Special rules for family savings accounts.
`SEC. 292. SPECIAL RULES FOR FAMILY SAVINGS ACCOUNTS.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- For purposes of this title, in the case of a family
 savings account--
 `(1) the taxation of such account shall be determined under subsection
 (d), and
 `(2) the taxation of any distributions from such account shall be determined
 under subsection (e).
 `(b) FAMILY SAVINGS ACCOUNT DEFINED- For purposes of this section, the term
 `family savings account' means a trust created or organized in the United
 States for the exclusive benefit of an individual and the individual's
 beneficiaries, but only if the written governing instrument creating the
 trust meets the following requirements:
 `(1) No contribution will be accepted unless it is in cash, and contributions
 will not be accepted for the taxable year on behalf of any individual in
 excess of $2,500.
 `(2) The trustee is a bank (as defined in section 408(n)) or such other
 person who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the manner
 in which such other person will administer the trust will be consistent
 with the requirements of this section.
 `(3) No part of the trust assets will be invested in insurance contracts
 or collectibles (within the meaning of section 408(m)).
 `(4) The interest of the individual in the balance in such individual's
 account is nonforfeitable.
 `(5) The assets of the trust will not be commingled with other property
 except in a common trust fund or common investment fund.
 `(c) Contributions to Family Savings Accounts-
 `(1) FORM OF CONTRIBUTION- No amount may be contributed to a family savings
 account unless such amount is paid in cash by or on behalf of the individual
 for whom such account is maintained.
 `(2) Contribution limits-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this subsection, the aggregate
 amount of contributions for any taxable year to all family savings accounts
 maintained for the benefit of an individual shall not exceed the lesser of--
 `(i) $2,500, or
 `(ii) an amount equal to the compensation includible in the individual's
 gross income for such taxable year.
 `(B) MARRIED INDIVIDUALS FILING JOINT RETURNS- For purposes of subparagraph
 (A)(ii), in the case of married individuals filing a joint return under
 section 6013 for the taxable year, the compensation of each of such
 individuals for such taxable year shall be treated as equal to one-half
 of the aggregate compensation of both individuals.
 `(C) COMPENSATION- For purposes of this paragraph, the term `compensation'
 has the meaning given such term by section 219(f)(1).
 `(3) Limitation based on adjusted gross income-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- No contribution may be made during a taxable year to a
 family savings account maintained for the benefit of the taxpayer if the
 taxpayer's adjusted gross income exceeds the applicable dollar amount.
 `(B) APPLICABLE DOLLAR AMOUNT- For purposes of this paragraph, the term
 `applicable dollar amount' means--
 `(i) in the case of a taxpayer filing a joint return, $120,000,
 `(ii) in the case of a taxpayer who is a surviving spouse (as defined in
 section 2(a)) or who is a head of a household (as defined in section 2(b)),
 $100,000, or
 `(iii) in the case of any other taxpayer, $60,000.
 `(C) SPECIAL RULE FOR MARRIED INDIVIDUALS FILING SEPARATE RETURNS- In the
 case of a married individual filing a separate return whose adjusted gross
 income does not exceed the applicable dollar limit, such individual's
 adjusted gross income shall be treated as exceeding such limit if the
 aggregate adjusted gross income of such individual and the individual's
 spouse exceeds $120,000.
 `(D) MARITAL STATUS- Subparagraph (C) shall not apply to any individual
 who is not treated as married under the rules of section 219(g)(4).
 `(E) ADJUSTED GROSS INCOME- For purposes of this paragraph, the term
 `adjusted gross income' has the meaning given such term by section
 219(g)(3)(A).
 `(4) NO CONTRIBUTION IN CASE OF DEPENDENTS- No contribution may be made
 during a taxable year to a family savings account maintained for the
 benefit of an individual with respect to whom a deduction under section
 151(c) is allowable to another taxpayer for a taxable year beginning in
 the calendar year in which the individual's taxable year begins.
 `(5) Transfers permitted-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- In the case of a transfer by a trustee of a family savings
 account maintained for the benefit of an individual to a trustee of another
 family savings account maintained for the benefit of such individual, such
 transfer shall not be treated as a contribution for purposes of this section.
 `(B) INFORMATION PROVIDED- A trustee making a transfer described in
 subparagraph (A) shall provide to the other trustee such information as
 the Secretary requires to carry out the purposes of this section.
 `(d) Tax Treatment of Accounts-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), a family savings
 account is exempt from taxation under this subtitle.
 `(2) UNRELATED BUSINESS INCOME- A family savings account shall be subject to
 the tax imposed by section 511 (relating to imposition of tax on unrelated
 business income of charitable, etc. organizations).
 `(3) POOLING ARRANGEMENTS PERMITTED- A common trust fund or common
 investment fund consisting of family savings accounts assets which is
 exempt from taxation under this subtitle shall not be treated as failing
 to be exempt from taxation under this subtitle solely by reason of the
 participation or inclusion in such fund of assets of--
 `(A) a trust exempt from taxation under section 501(a) which is part of
 a plan described in section 401(a), or
 `(B) an individual retirement plan exempt from taxation under section
 408(e)(1).
 `(4) CESSATION OF TREATMENT AS ACCOUNT-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- If during any taxable year of an individual for whom a
 family savings account is maintained the requirements of subsection (b)
 are not met with respect to such account, the account shall cease to be
 a family savings account as of the first day of such taxable year.
 `(B) ACCOUNT TREATED AS DISTRIBUTING ALL ITS ASSETS- In any case in which
 any account ceases to be a family savings account by reason of subparagraph
 (A) on the first day of any taxable year, subsection (e) shall apply as
 if there were a distribution immediately before the account ceased to
 be a family savings account in an amount equal to the fair market value
 (on such first day) of all assets in the account (on such first day).
 `(e) Tax Treatment of Distributions-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this subsection, any amount paid
 or distributed out of a family savings account shall not be included in
 the gross income of the distributee.
 `(2) Exception for earnings on contributions held less than 7 years-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Any amount distributed out of a family savings account
 which consists of earnings allocable to contributions made to the account
 during the 7-year period ending on the day before such distribution shall
 be included in the gross income of the distributee for the taxable year
 in which the distribution occurs.
 `(B) 10-percent additional tax on earnings on contributions held less than
 3 years-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- If any amount described in subparagraph (A) consists of
 earnings allocable to contributions made during the 3-year period ending
 on the day before the distribution, the tax imposed by this chapter on the
 distributee for the taxable year in which such distribution occurs shall
 be increased by an amount equal to 10 percent of such earnings.
 `(ii) EXCEPTION FOR DISTRIBUTIONS ON DEATH- Clause (i) shall not apply
 to distributions made to a beneficiary (or the estate of the individual)
 on or after the death of the individual.
 `(C) ORDERING RULE-
 `(i) FIRST-IN, FIRST-OUT RULE- Distributions from a family savings account
 shall be treated as having been made--
 `(I) first from the earliest contribution (and earnings allocable thereto)
 remaining in the account at the time of the distribution, and
 `(II) then from other contributions (and earnings allocable thereto)
 in the order in which made.
 `(ii) ALLOCATIONS BETWEEN CONTRIBUTIONS AND EARNINGS- Any portion of a
 distribution allocated to a contribution (and earnings allocable thereto)
 shall be treated as allocated first to the earnings and then to the
 contribution.
 `(iii) ALLOCATION OF EARNINGS- Earnings shall be allocated to a contribution
 in such manner as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe.
 `(iv) CONTRIBUTIONS IN SAME YEAR- Under regulations, all contributions
 made during the same taxable year may be treated as 1 contribution for
 purposes of this subparagraph.
 `(3) OTHER AMOUNTS TREATED AS DISTRIBUTIONS- For purposes of this
 subsection--
 `(A) IN GENERAL- In the case of any distributable event--
 `(i) there shall be treated as distributed during the taxable year in which
 the event occurs to the individual for whom the family savings account is
 maintained an amount equal to the distributable amount, and
 `(ii) any earnings after the date of the distributable event which (as
 determined under regulations) are allocable to the distributable amount
 shall be treated as distributed to such individual in the taxable year in
 which earned.
 `(B) TAX TREATMENT OF AMOUNTS-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this subparagraph, paragraph (2)
 shall apply to any amount treated as distributed under subparagraph (A).
 `(ii) SUBSEQUENT EARNINGS- Notwithstanding paragraph (2), any earnings
 treated as distributed under subparagraph (A)(ii)--
 `(I) shall be included in gross income in the taxable year in which treated
 as distributed, and
 `(II) shall be subject to the additional tax under paragraph (2)(B) for such
 taxable year, except that paragraph (2)(B) shall be applied by substituting
 `20 percent' for `10 percent'.
 `(iii) EXCEPTION FOR EXCESS CONTRIBUTIONS- In the case of a distributable
 event described in subparagraph (C)(ii) (relating to excess contributions)
 which occurs by reason of a contribution not permitted under subsection
 (c)(4), any amount required to be included in gross income (or any additional
 tax imposed) by reason of this paragraph shall be included in the gross
 income of (or imposed on) the taxpayer entitled to the deduction under
 section 151(c) for the individual for whom the account is maintained.
 `(iv) ACTUAL DISTRIBUTIONS- If any portion of any distributable amount
 and any earnings allocable to such amount are actually distributed from
 the account during any taxable year, this paragraph shall cease to apply
 to any earnings attributable to such portion for periods following such
 distribution.
 `(C) DISTRIBUTABLE EVENT- For purposes of this paragraph, the following
 are distributable events:
 `(i) The use of a family savings account (or any portion thereof) as
 security for a loan.
 `(ii) Except as provided in paragraph (4), a contribution to a family
 savings account in excess of the amount allowed under subsection (c).
 `(iii) Any other event to the extent, and subject to such terms and
 conditions, as the Secretary may prescribe by regulations in order to
 accomplish the purposes of, or to prevent abuse of, this section.
 `(D) DISTRIBUTABLE AMOUNT- For purposes of this paragraph, the term
 `distributable amount' means the following:
 `(i) In the case of a distributable event described in subparagraph (C)(i),
 the amount in the account used as security for a loan.
 `(ii) In the case of a distributable event described in subparagraph
 (C)(ii), the amount of the excess contribution.
 `(iii) In any other case, the amount determined under regulations.
 `(4) EXCESS CONTRIBUTIONS RETURNED BEFORE DUE DATE OF RETURN-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Paragraph (2) shall not apply to the distribution of any
 contribution paid during a taxable year to a family savings account to the
 extent that such contribution exceeds the amount allowable under subsection
 (c) by reason of paragraph (3) or (4) thereof if--
 `(i) at the time of making such contribution, the taxpayer in good faith
 believed that--
 `(I) in any case to which subsection (c)(3) applies, the taxpayer's adjusted
 gross income would not exceed the applicable dollar limit under subsection
 (c)(3), or
 `(II) in any case to which subsection (c)(4) applies, the individual for
 whom the account is maintained would not be the dependent of any individual
 for purposes of section 151(c),
 `(ii) such distribution is received on or before the last day of the
 taxable year following such taxable year, and
 `(iii) such distribution is accompanied by the amount of earnings actually
 attributable to such excess contribution.
 `(B) LIMITATION ON AMOUNT- Subparagraph (A) shall apply only to that portion
 of the amount of the distribution which does not exceed the limitation
 under subsection (c)(2) (and earnings actually attributable to such portion).
 `(C) EARNINGS- Any earnings described in subparagraph (A)(iii) shall be
 included in the gross income of the individual for whom the account is
 established (or in the case described in subclause (II) of subparagraph
 (A)(i), the taxpayer entitled to the deduction under section 151(c))
 for the taxable year in which it is received.
 `(5) Transfers-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Paragraph (2) shall not apply to any distribution which
 is a transfer to which subsection (c)(5) applies.
 `(B) CONTRIBUTION PERIOD- For purposes of paragraph (2), the family savings
 account to which any contributions are transferred in a transfer to which
 subsection (c)(5) applies shall be treated as having held such contributions
 during any period such contributions were held (or are treated as held
 under this subparagraph) by the account from which transferred.
 `(6) TRANSFER OF ACCOUNT INCIDENT TO DIVORCE- Rules similar to the rules
 of section 408(d)(6) shall apply to a family savings account.
 `(f) OTHER RULES-
 `(1) DISALLOWANCE OF LOSSES- No loss shall be allowed in connection with
 a contribution to, or distribution from, a family savings account.
 `(2) DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES PAYMENT- For purposes of this section, the term
 `distribution' includes any payment and the term `distributee' includes
 any payee.
 `(3) COMMUNITY PROPERTY LAWS- This section shall be applied without regard
 to any community property laws.
 `(4) CUSTODIAL ACCOUNTS- For purposes of this section, a custodial account
 shall be treated as a trust if--
 `(A) the assets of such account are held by a bank (as defined in section
 408(n)) or such other person who demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the
 Secretary, that the manner in which such other person will administer the
 account will be consistent with the requirements of this section, and
 `(B) the custodial account would, except for the fact that it is not a
 trust, constitute a family savings account described in subsection (b).
For purposes of this title, in the case of a custodial account treated as
a trust by reason of the preceding sentence, the custodian of such account
shall be treated as the trustee thereof.
 `(g) REPORTS- The trustee of a family savings account shall make such
 reports regarding such account to the Secretary and to the individual for
 whose benefit the account is maintained with respect to contributions
 (and the years to which such contributions relate), distributions, and
 such other matters as the Secretary may require under regulations. Such
 reports shall be filed with the Secretary and furnished to such individuals
 at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may prescribe.
 `(h) Cross Reference-
`For taxes on prohibited transactions involving a family savings account,
see section 4975.'
 (b) TAX ON PROHIBITED TRANSACTIONS- Section 4975 (relating to prohibited
 transactions) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `, or a family savings account described in section 292(b)'
 after `described in section 408(b)' in subsection (e)(1), and
 (2) by adding at the end of subsection (h) the following new sentence:
 `This subsection shall not apply to any tax imposed with respect to a
 family savings account (as defined in section 292(b)).'
 (c) FAILURE TO PROVIDE REPORTS ON FAMILY SAVINGS ACCOUNTS- Section 6693
 (relating to failure to provide reports on individual retirement account
 or annuities) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `or on family savings accounts' after `annuities' in the
 heading of such section, and
 (2) by adding at the end of subsection (a) the following: `The person
 required by section 292(g) to file a report regarding a family savings
 account at the time and in the manner required by such section shall pay
 a penalty of $50 for each failure unless it is shown that such failure is
 due to reasonable cause.'
 (d) COMMON FUNDS- Section 408(e)(6) is amended to read as follows:
 `(6) COMMINGLING INDIVIDUAL RETIREMENT ACCOUNT AMOUNTS IN CERTAIN COMMON
 TRUST FUNDS AND COMMON INVESTMENT FUNDS- Any common trust fund or common
 investment fund consisting of individual retirement account assets which
 is exempt from taxation under this subtitle does not cease to be exempt
 on account of the participation or inclusion of assets of--
 `(A) a trust exempt from taxation under section 501(a) which is part of
 a plan described in section 401(a), or
 `(B) a family savings account exempt from taxation under section 292.'
 (e) Conforming Amendments-
 (1) The table of parts for subchapter B of chapter 1 is amended by adding
 at the end thereof the following new item:
`Part XII. Family savings accounts.'
 (2) The table of sections for subchapter B of chapter 68 is amended by
 inserting `or on family savings accounts' after `annuities' in the item
 relating to section 6693.
 (f) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1989.