S 2817 IS
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2817
To establish a national health plan, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
June 9 (legislative day, MARCH 26), 1992
Mr. INOUYE introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To establish a national health plan, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `National Health Care Act
 of 1992'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Purpose.
Sec. 3. Definitions.
TITLE I--NATIONAL HEALTH CARE PROGRAM
Sec. 101. Establishment.
Sec. 102. Approval of State programs.
Sec. 103. Eligibility for enrollment.
Sec. 104. Enrollment.
Sec. 105. Portability.
TITLE II--BENEFITS AND PROVISION OF SERVICES
Subtitle A--Scope of Services
Sec. 201. Covered services.
Sec. 202. Exclusions.
Sec. 203. Prohibitions on limitations.
Sec. 204. Eligibility.
Sec. 205. Additional and duplicate services.
Subtitle B--Provision of Services
Sec. 211. Health care providers.
Sec. 212. Delivery systems.
Sec. 213. State long-term care coordination agencies.
Sec. 214. Incorporation of miscellaneous medicare-related provisions.
Sec. 215. Nondiscrimination.
TITLE III--REVENUE
Subtitle A--Budget Process
Sec. 301. National and State health budgets.
Sec. 302. Payments to States.
Sec. 303. Establishment of exchange program.
Subtitle B--Payments to Health Care Providers
Sec. 311. Payments to health care providers.
Sec. 312. Payments to institutional health care providers.
Sec. 313. Payments for services by individual health care providers.
Sec. 314. Payments to integrated health service plans.
Sec. 315. Grievance procedure.
Subtitle C--Sources of Revenue
Sec. 321. Federal sources of revenue.
Sec. 322. State sources of revenue.
Sec. 323. Cost-sharing.
Sec. 324. National Health Care Trust Fund.
TITLE IV--ADMINISTRATION
Subtitle A--Federal Administration
Sec. 401. National Health Care Administration.
Sec. 402. National Health Board.
Sec. 403. National Council on Quality Assurance and Consumer Protection.
Sec. 404. Medical Malpractice Commission.
Sec. 405. Utilization and quality control peer review organizations.
Sec. 406. Public Health Functions and Activities Commission.
Sec. 407. Technical assistance centers.
Subtitle B--State and Local Administration
Sec. 411. State agency.
Sec. 412. State and local planning boards.
TITLE V--TRANSITION AND RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER PROGRAMS
Sec. 501. Effective date.
Sec. 502. Repeals and incorporations.
Sec. 503. Transition.
Sec. 504. Rules governing congressional consideration.
Sec. 505. Relation to Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.
TITLE VI--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sec. 601. Bill of rights.
Sec. 602. Research and demonstration projects.
Sec. 603. Prevention, health promotion, and health awareness program grants.
SEC. 2. PURPOSE.
 The purpose of this Act is to establish a single-payer national program
 of health care services that is administered by the States under Federal
 guidelines and provides--
 (1) a right to health care services for every United States citizen and
 resident, regardless of race, color, religion, sex, national origin,
 age, health condition, sexual preference, income, language, or geographic
 residence in an urban or rural area;
 (2) comprehensive health benefits that--
 (A) enable consumers to achieve and maintain physical and mental health,
 maximize potential for enhanced social and physical functioning, and
 sustain a meaningful quality of life; and
 (B) provide a major emphasis on primary prevention and health promotion;
 (3) a broad range of involvement on the local level by health care
 providers, public agencies, consumers, civic organizations, schools,
 employers, and unions;
 (4) cost-conscious delivery of high quality services through prospective
 global budgeting for the States and hospitals, negotiated fee schedules
 for health care providers, efficient use of health care facilities and
 equipment, and the elimination of unnecessary medical procedures;
 (5) the right of consumers to participate in the decisions that directly
 affect their lives, and in the decisions that relate to the design and
 implementation of covered services;
 (6) a simplified administrative structure that enhances access and reduces
 administrative waste;
 (7) freedom of choice of consumers to select health care providers within
 the framework of a national health care program;
 (8) primary financing through progressive Federal taxation;
 (9) an integrated health delivery system that--
 (A) provides a continuum of care that links all levels of the health
 care program;
 (B) addresses the physical, mental, and psychosocial health needs of the
 consumer and the family; and
 (C) promotes multidisciplinary collaboration in the delivery of services;
 (10) a health care program that reflects the demographic and sociocultural
 diversity and needs of the community;
 (11) professional standards linked to performance for all health care
 providers that ensure the delivery of high-quality health care services
 and accountability to both health care providers and consumers;
 (12) special resources to address the medical, mental, and social health
 needs of medically underserved populations and health professional
 shortage areas;
 (13) education and training programs for professional, allied, and
 paraprofessional personnel in health professional shortage areas, and the
 assurance that the programs offer equal access to minorities and women;
 (14) continued commitment to and strengthening of basic public health
 functions to provide for a safe environment, control of infectious diseases,
 and promotion of a healthy lifestyle and behavior;
 (15) support of research efforts that will--
 (A) enhance the physical, mental, and social well-being of major segments
 of society;
 (B) improve the delivery of cost-conscious, quality health care services; and
 (C) enable health care providers and consumers to make more informed
 decisions; and
 (16) continued commitment to basic biomedical and comprehensive mental
 health research.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act:
 (1) ADMINISTRATION- The term `Administration' means the National Health
 Care Administration, established in section 401(a).
 (2) ADMINISTRATOR- The term `Administrator' means the Administrator of
 the Administration, appointed under section 401(b)(1).
 (3) BOARD- The term `Board' means the National Health Board, established
 in section 402.
 (4) CONSUMER- The term `consumer' means an eligible individual who receives
 covered services.
 (5) COVERED SERVICE- The term `covered service' means a service described
 in section 201, provided under a State program.
 (6) ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL- The term `eligible individual' means an individual
 who is eligible--
 (A) for enrollment, as described in section 103; and
 (B) with respect to a covered service, to receive the service, as described
 in section 204.
 (7) HEALTH CARE FACILITY- The term `health care facility' means a facility
 entitled under the law of a State to provide covered services.
 (8) HEALTH CARE PROVIDER- The term `health care provider' means a person
 entitled under the law of a State to provide covered services, and a health
 care facility.
 (9) HEALTH PROFESSIONAL SHORTAGE AREA- The term `health professional
 shortage area' has the meaning given the term in section 332(a)(1) of the
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254e(a)(1)).
 (10) INTEGRATED HEALTH SERVICE PLAN- The term `Integrated Health Service
 Plan' means a nonprofit, consumer-controlled, health plan that--
 (A) provides all covered services; and
 (B) operates as a single organization in the health care facilities of
 the organization.
 (11) LOCAL PLANNING AREA- The term `local planning area' means an area
 designated under section 412.
 (12) MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED POPULATION- The term `medically underserved
 population' has the meaning given the term in section 330(b)(3) of the
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254c(b)(3).
 (13) NATIONAL HEALTH CARE DATA BASE- The term `national health care data
 base' means the data base established in section 401(h).
 (14) NATIONAL HEALTH CARE PROGRAM- The term `national health care program'
 means the program established in section 101.
 (15) NURSING FACILITY- The term `nursing facility' has the meaning given
 the term in section 1919(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r(a)).
 (16) STATE- The term `State' includes the District of Columbia, the
 Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, Guam,
 American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
 (17) STATE AGENCY- The term `State agency' means an agency designated
 under section 411.
 (18) STATE PROGRAM- The term `State program' means a program approved
 under section 102.
 (19) TRUST FUND- The term `Trust Fund' means, except as otherwise
 specifically provided, the fund established in section 324.
TITLE I--NATIONAL HEALTH CARE PROGRAM
SEC. 101. ESTABLISHMENT.
 The Administrator shall establish and carry out a national health care
 program in accordance with this Act. In carrying out the national health
 care program, the Administrator shall make payments under section 302 to
 assist the States in establishing and carrying out State programs that
 provide covered services to eligible individuals.
SEC. 102. APPROVAL OF STATE PROGRAMS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Administrator shall provide for the review, and approval
 or disapproval, of programs as State programs under this Act.
 (b) APPLICATION- For purposes of obtaining the approval described
 in subsection (a), a State agency shall submit an application to the
 Administrator at such time, in such manner, and containing such information
 as the Administrator may require, including a State plan that contains
 information describing a State program for providing covered services to
 eligible individuals in the State. At a minimum, the plan shall specify--
 (1) procedures for enrollment of individuals described in subsection (a)
 or (b) of section 103 in the State program in accordance with this title;
 (2) covered services to be provided by the State program in accordance
 with subtitle A of title II, including a description of the manner in
 which each health care provider shall provide care coordination services;
 (3) requirements for provision of covered services in the State program
 in accordance with subtitle B of title II;
 (4) procedures for establishing an exchange program in accordance with
 section 303;
 (5) procedures for making payments to health care providers in accordance
 with subtitle B of title III;
 (6) sources of State revenues for the State program, and cost-sharing
 procedures, in accordance with sections 322 and 323, respectively;
 (7) an assurance that the State will comply with the State administrative
 and planning requirements set forth in subtitle B of title IV;
 (8) an assurance that the State program will reflect the demographic and
 sociocultural diversity and needs of the communities with the State; and
 (9) an assurance that the State agency shall annually prepare and submit
 to the Administrator a report concerning the operation of the State program.
 (c) NOTIFICATION OF APPROVAL- Not later than 90 days after the date the State
 agency submits the plan described in subsection (b) the Administrator shall
 notify the State agency of the decision of the Administration approving
 or disapproving the State plan.
 (d) ENFORCEMENT-
 (1) MONITORING- The Administration shall monitor the compliance of State
 programs with the applicable requirements of this Act, including the
 provisions specified in subsection (b).
 (2) RECORDS- Each State program shall maintain such records regarding the
 implementation of the State program as the Administrator may by regulation
 require.
 (3) ACCESS- Any officer, employee, or representative of a State program
 shall, upon request of an officer, employee, or representative of the
 Administration, duly designated by the Administrator, furnish information
 relating to the implementation of the State program and permit the officer,
 employee, or representative at all reasonable times to have access to,
 and to copy, the records described in paragraph (2).
 (e) WITHDRAWAL OF APPROVAL- If the Administrator determines, after notice and
 opportunity for a hearing, that a program that has been previously approved
 as a State program no longer meets the applicable requirements of this Act,
 the Administrator may require corrective action or withdraw approval of
 the program. If the Administrator withdraws approval of a program within a
 State, the Administrator shall, by grant or contract, carry out a program
 that provides covered services to eligible individuals in accordance with
 the requirements, within the State served by the State program.
SEC. 103. ELIGIBILITY FOR ENROLLMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- An individual shall be eligible to enroll in the national
 health care program for covered services under a State program, if the
 individual--
 (1) maintains a primary residence in the State; and
 (2) is--
 (A) a citizen of the United States;
 (B) a national of the United States;
 (C) a lawful resident alien of the United States; or
 (D) an alien nonimmigrant made eligible under subsection (b).
 (b) ALIEN NONIMMIGRANTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Administration may make eligible to enroll in the
 national health care program, as described in subsection (a), individuals
 within such classes of aliens admitted to the United States as nonimmigrants
 as the Administrator may provide in regulations prescribed under section
 401(e)(1)(A).
 (2) CONSIDERATIONS- In providing for eligibility under paragraph (1), the
 Administration shall consider reciprocity in health care services offered
 to United States citizens who are nonimmigrants to other foreign states,
 and such other factors as the Administration determines to be appropriate.
 (c) NONDISCRIMINATION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Any State that receives assistance under this Act shall not
 discriminate in the enrollment of individuals eligible for enrollment under
 subsection (a) or (b) in the plan on the basis of race, color, religion,
 sex, national origin (except in accordance with regulations promulgated
 under subsection (b)(1)), age, health condition, sexual preference,
 income, language, or geographic residence in an urban or a rural area
 within the State.
 (2) RULES AND REGULATIONS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- In carrying out this section, a State agency shall implement
 eligibility procedures in accordance with regulations prescribed under
 section 401(e)(1)(A).
 (B) ENFORCEMENT- The Administrator shall promulgate rules and regulations to
 provide for the enforcement of this section, including provisions for summary
 suspension of assistance for not more than 30 days, on an emergency basis,
 until the Administration can provide notice and an opportunity to be heard.
 (d) DEFINITION- As used in this section, the term `lawful resident alien'
 means an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence and any other
 alien lawfully residing permanently in the United States under color of
 law, including an alien granted asylum or with lawful temporary status
 under section 210, 210A, or 245A of the Immigration and Nationality Act
 (8 U.S.C. 1160, 1161, or 1255a).
SEC. 104. ENROLLMENT.
 (a) ENROLLMENT PROCESS- In order to be eligible to receive a payment under
 section 302, each State program shall provide a mechanism, in accordance
 with regulations prescribed under section 401(e)(1)(B), for the enrollment
 of individuals described in subsection (a) or (b) of section 103 in the
 national health care program.
 (b) LOCATION- Enrollment may occur at offices of the State program and
 other locations specified by the State agency.
 (c) AUTOMATIC ENROLLMENT- The mechanism under subsection (a) shall include
 a process for the automatic enrollment of individuals at the time of birth
 in the United States or at the time of immigration into the United States
 or other acquisition of lawful resident status in a State. Such mechanism
 shall also provide for the enrollment of eligible individuals as of January
 1, 1995.
 (d) ISSUANCE OF CARD- On enrollment of an individual in the national
 health care program, the State program shall issue the individual a card
 that may be used for purposes of identification and processing of claims
 for covered services.
SEC. 105. PORTABILITY.
 (a) REIMBURSEMENT- Each State program shall, in accordance with regulations
 issued by the Administrator, include procedures for portability of coverage
 and reimbursement for individuals who are enrolled in the State program
 and require a covered service in another State or country.
 (b) ENROLLMENT IN OTHER STATE PROGRAMS- Each State agency shall agree to
 provide covered services, under such conditions as the Administrator shall
 by regulation specify, to individuals enrolled in other State programs.
 (c) REQUIREMENTS- Each State program--
 (1) shall not impose any minimum period of residence in the State, or
 waiting period, in excess of 3 months before residents of the State are
 eligible for or entitled to covered services; and
 (2) shall provide for, and be administered and operated, so as to provide
 for the payments of amounts for the cost of covered services provided to
 enrolled persons while temporarily absent from the State on the basis that--
 (A) if covered services are provided within another State with a State
 program, payment for covered services shall be at the rate that is approved
 by the State program in the State in which the services are provided,
 unless the States concerned agree to apportion the cost between the States
 in a different manner; and
 (B) if the covered services are provided out of the United States, or in
 a State that does not have a State program, payment shall be made on the
 basis of the amount that would have been paid by the State in which the
 enrolled persons reside for similar services rendered in the State, with
 due regard, in the case of hospital services, to the size of the hospital,
 standards of service, and other relevant factors.
 (d) PRIOR CONSENT FOR SERVICES PROVIDED TO TEMPORARILY ABSENT RESIDENTS
 PERMITTED- Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a State
 program may require that the prior consent of the State program be obtained
 for elective insured health services provided to a resident of the State
 while temporarily absent from the State if the services in question are
 available on a substantially similar basis in the State.
 (e) DEFINITION- For the purposes of this section, the term `elective
 insured health services' means covered services other than services that
 are provided in an emergency or in any other circumstance in which health
 care services are required without delay.
TITLE II--BENEFITS AND PROVISION OF SERVICES
Subtitle A--Scope of Services
SEC. 201. COVERED SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The covered services provided under this Act by the
 national health care program are all medically necessary services, except
 as provided in section 202, that contribute to the physical, mental, or
 psychosocial health of an individual or family, as determined in accordance
 with regulations prescribed under section 401(e)(1)(C), including--
 (1) primary prevention and health promotion services;
 (2) primary care services;
 (3) inpatient and outpatient hospital services, including emergency and
 trauma services;
 (4) laboratory and radiology services;
 (5) care coordination services;
 (6) rehabilitation services;
 (7) mental health services;
 (8) substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services;
 (9) long-term care services provided in accordance with section 213(c);
 (10) hospice care services;
 (11) provision of drugs, medical supplies, and durable medical equipment
 prescribed by a health care provider;
 (12) dental care services;
 (13) hearing and speech services;
 (14) vision care services;
 (15) occupational health services;
 (16) organ transplant services; and
 (17) other inpatient and outpatient professional services.
 (b) DEFINITIONS- As used in this title:
 (1) CARE COORDINATION SERVICES- The term `care coordination services'
 means services that--
 (A) are provided through an individual health care provider or a
 multidisciplinary team of health care providers, including physicians,
 nurses, social workers, and other nonphysician health care providers; and
 (B)(i) promote physical, mental, and psychosocial health maintenance;
 (ii) provide for the coordination and monitoring of health care services
 for consumers, as well as maintenance of appropriate records; and
 (iii) provide transition management from inpatient facilities to other
 needed community-based care services.
 (2) DENTAL CARE SERVICES- The term `dental care services' means all
 medically necessary dental care and routine dental examinations, provided
 as frequently as the Administrator shall by regulation specify for consumers
 within specified age groups.
 (3) HEARING AND SPEECH SERVICES- The term `hearing and speech services'
 means all medically necessary screening, treatment, and provision of devices,
 relating to promotion of hearing and speech.
 (4) HOSPICE CARE SERVICES- The term `hospice care services' means--
 (A) hospice care, as defined in section 1861(dd)(1) of the Social Security
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(dd)(1))--
 (i) whether provided in the home, through community-based services, or on
 an inpatient basis; and
 (ii) except that the reference to `medical social services' in subparagraph
 (C) of such section is deemed a reference to `medical social work services';
 and
 (B) counseling services, including bereavement counseling.
 (5) LONG-TERM CARE COORDINATION SERVICES- The term `long-term care
 coordination services' means ongoing services that--
 (A) provide entry to and management of long-term care services and covered
 services for individuals described in section 204(1); and
 (B) ensure--
 (i) effective, cost-efficient, and coordinated delivery of such services
 to a consumer; and
 (ii) comprehensive, continuous, and coordinated care that meets the physical,
 mental, and psychosocial health needs of such individuals.
 (6) LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES- The term `long-term care services' means items
 and services provided to individuals described in section 204(1) under a
 written plan of care through home and community-based care programs and
 nursing facilities and constitutes--
 (A) long-term care coordination services;
 (B) information and referral services;
 (C) skilled and intermediate nursing home services;
 (D) day treatment or partial hospitalization;
 (E) nursing care;
 (F) services of a homemaker or home health aide, personal care services,
 and heavy chore services;
 (G) social work services;
 (H) physical, occupational, speech, and any other appropriate therapy
 services;
 (I) day health care services and social day care;
 (J) respite care for caregivers;
 (K) consumer and health care provider education, training, and counseling,
 regarding health care services;
 (L) medical, skilled nursing, and social support services, for residents
 of foster care programs, board and care facilities, and other assisted
 living programs;
 (M) medical supplies and minor remodeling changes to the home required by
 a health condition;
 (N) Meals on Wheels;
 (O) nutrition and dietary counseling;
 (P) assisted transportation;
 (Q) emergency alarm response systems;
 (R) coverage of health care needs of people with chronic illnesses;
 (S) coverage of acute health care, if required, in a hospital, nursing
 facility, rehabilitation facility, or other inpatient or outpatient
 facility; and
 (T) home and community-based services to assist people recovering from
 illness, disease, or injury.
 (7) MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES- The term `mental health services' means services
 related to the diagnosis and treatment of mental illnesses and the promotion
 of mental health, including--
 (A) inpatient services, including services provided at hospitals and other
 inpatient facilities, such as residential treatment centers;
 (B) partial hospitalization and other types of day programs;
 (C) crisis intervention;
 (D) outpatient services, with particular emphasis on outpatient services
 for children and adolescents, provided through--
 (i) community-based health care facilities and systems; or
 (ii) autonomous health care providers, including psychiatrists, clinical
 psychologists, clinical social workers, psychiatric nurse specialists,
 or such other qualified health care providers as the Administrator shall
 by regulation specify; and
 (E) community-based residential programs, particularly programs that
 prepare individuals for independent living.
 (8) OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH SERVICES- The term `occupational health services'
 means--
 (A) prevention and health promotion activities to be carried out in high
 risk workplaces and workplaces with sizable work forces; and
 (B) specific health monitoring activities to be carried out in workplaces
 that are determined, in consultation with the Occupational Safety and
 Health Administration, by the Federal Government to pose a significant
 threat to the health and safety of the workers.
 (9) ORGAN TRANSPLANT SERVICES- The term `organ transplant services' means
 organ transplants for which screening indicates a likelihood of significant
 and sustained improvement in the quality of life of the consumer.
 (10) PRIMARY CARE SERVICES- The term `primary care services' means services
 provided by a health care provider that provide--
 (A) comprehensive services focused on the maintenance of physical, mental
 and psychosocial health; and
 (B) care coordination services.
 (11) PRIMARY PREVENTION AND HEALTH PROMOTION SERVICES- The term `primary
 prevention and health promotion services' means--
 (A) comprehensive well-child care services, including health education
 services, for consumers below age 22, including immunizations and early,
 routine assessment, diagnosis, and treatment, that--
 (i) will help to ensure prevention of disease and early identification
 before onset of illness; and
 (ii) assess a wide array of health conditions;
 (B) perinatal and infant health care services, including prenatal care
 and follow-up for a mother and an infant through the first year of the
 life of the infant;
 (C) routine, age-appropriate, clinical health maintenance examinations
 for consumers age 22 and older;
 (D) family planning and reproductive health services; and
 (E) school-based primary prevention and health promotion programs, which
 may include school-based clinics, mobile programs, or satellite clinics
 serving several schools in close proximity.
 (12) PROFESSIONAL SERVICES- The term `professional services' means services
 of physicians, registered nurses, nurse practitioners, nutritionists,
 podiatrists, physician's assistants, psychologists, social workers,
 nurse midwives, and physical, speech, and occupational therapists, and
 such other health care providers as the Administrator shall approve.
 (13) REHABILITATION SERVICES- The term `rehabilitation services' means,
 except as used within the term `substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation
 services'--
 (A) physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech-language therapy,
 pathology, and audiology, provided by autonomous health care providers or
 by health care facilities;
 (B) social work services;
 (C) provision of medical appliances, including prosthetic devices;
 (D) community-based residential programs for the disabled, including group
 homes that prepare consumers for independent living; and
 (E) such additional services as the Administrator may determine, after
 consultation with appropriate State review boards, to be necessary to
 address special cases or circumstances,
provided on an inpatient or outpatient basis.
 (14) SUBSTANCE ABUSE TREATMENT AND REHABILITATION SERVICES- The term
 `substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation programs' means services to
 promote recovery from substance abuse, including--
 (A) inpatient and outpatient hospital services;
 (B) partial hospitalization and other types of day programs;
 (C) crisis intervention;
 (D) residential treatment or rehabilitation programs certified under
 Federal regulation;
 (E) outpatient substance abuse treatment services provided through--
 (i) community-based health care facilities and treatment programs; or
 (ii) autonomous health care providers, including psychiatrists, clinical
 psychologists, clinical social workers, psychiatric nurse specialists,
 and such other qualified health care providers as the Administrator shall
 by regulation specify; and
 (F) community-based residential programs, particularly programs that
 prepare individuals for independent living.
 (15) VISION CARE SERVICES- The term `vision care services' means--
 (A) routine eye examinations, provided as frequently as the Administrator
 shall by regulation specify for consumers within specified age groups;
 (B) provision of glasses and contact lenses, as frequently as the
 Administrator shall by regulation specify; and
 (C) all medically necessary vision treatment.
SEC. 202. EXCLUSIONS.
 Covered services do not include--
 (1) cosmetic surgery, except medically necessary reconstructive surgery;
 (2) cosmetic orthodontics;
 (3) such amenities in inpatient facilities as the Administrator shall
 by regulation specify, such as private rooms, unless the amenities are
 medically necessary;
 (4) medical examinations and medical reports required for purchasing or
 renewing life insurance policies, or as part of a civil action for the
 recovery of settlement or damages; or
 (5) any service that a health care provider determines not to be medically
 necessary.
SEC. 203. PROHIBITIONS ON LIMITATIONS.
 A State program may not limit the covered services provided to a consumer
 on the basis of a health condition of the individual that existed on the
 date of the enrollment of the consumer in the national health care program
 for services under the State program.
SEC. 204. ELIGIBILITY.
 Persons enrolled under section 104 who are eligible for covered services
 shall include--
 (1) with respect to long-term care services, individuals--
 (A) over 18 years of age determined (in a manner specified by the
 Secretary)--
 (i) to be unable to perform, without the assistance of an individual,
 at least 2 of the following 5 activities of daily living (or who has a
 similar level of disability due to cognitive impairment)--
 (I) bathing;
 (II) eating;
 (III) dressing;
 (IV) toileting; and
 (V) transferring in and out of a bed or in and out of a chair; or
 (ii) due to cognitive or mental impairments, requires supervision because
 the individual behaves in a manner that poses health or safety hazards to
 the individual or others; or
 (B) under 19 years of age determined (in a manner specified by the
 Secretary) to meet such alternative standard of disability for children
 as the Secretary develops;
 (2) with respect to hospice care services, terminally ill individuals,
 regardless of the cause of illness;
 (3) with respect to services to be provided in schools, workplaces, and
 assisted living programs, such individuals as may be specified in the
 State plan described in section 102(b); and
 (4) with respect to covered services not described in paragraphs (1)
 through (3), all individuals.
SEC. 205. ADDITIONAL AND DUPLICATE SERVICES.
 (a) ADDITIONAL SERVICES-
 (1) CONSTRUCTION- Except as provided in section 202, nothing in this
 Act shall be construed as limiting the health care services that a State
 program may provide.
 (2) STATE FINANCING OF ADDITIONAL SERVICES- There shall be no Federal
 financing available under this Act for health care services other than
 covered services.
 (b) Coverage of Services-
 (1) PROHIBITION ON DUPLICATE PRIVATE INSURANCE- No person may sell private
 insurance that provides coverage for health care services that duplicate
 covered services.
 (2) COVERAGE OF ADDITIONAL BENEFITS- Nothing in this Act shall be construed
 as prohibiting the sale of private insurance that provides health care
 services other than covered services.
 (c) PRIVATE CARE-
 (1) ARRANGEMENTS- Except as provided in paragraph (2), nothing in this
 Act shall be construed as prohibiting arrangements between a health care
 provider and an individual for the provision of covered services.
 (2) LIMITATION- Arrangements described in paragraph (1) shall provide for
 acceptance of payment as described in section 311(b)(1).
Subtitle B--Provision of Services
SEC. 211. HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.
 (a) CERTIFICATION AND LICENSING- State programs shall include procedures
 for certification and licensing of health care providers participating in
 the national health care program in accordance with regulations prescribed
 under section 401(e)(1)(H) and other applicable Federal and State law.
 (b) QUALITY ASSURANCE AND CONSUMER PROTECTION STANDARDS- State agencies
 shall regulate the health care providers, and shall ensure compliance
 with quality assurance standards prescribed under section 401(e)(1)(G),
 consumer protection standards prescribed under section 401(e)(1)(I),
 and other applicable Federal and State law.
 (c) ENFORCEMENT- A State agency that determines, after notice and an
 opportunity for a hearing, that a health care provider has repeatedly
 violated the quality assurance standards, or has been convicted of an
 offense involving medical malpractice, shall debar the provider from
 receiving payment under the State program. The State agency shall develop
 appropriate procedures for determining the length of the debarment and
 for terminating a debarment in an appropriate case.
SEC. 212. DELIVERY SYSTEMS.
 (a) INNOVATIVE DELIVERY SYSTEMS- State programs may implement innovative
 delivery systems of covered services, including private health services,
 State-operated health services, and Integrated Health Service Plans,
 to provide covered services.
 (b) INTEGRATED HEALTH SERVICE PLANS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Each State agency shall provide for the review, and approval
 or disapproval, of health plans as Integrated Health Service Plans in the
 State for purposes of this Act.
 (2) APPLICATION- For purposes of obtaining the approval described in
 paragraph (1), an entity shall submit an application to the head of the
 State agency at such time, in such manner, and containing such information
 as the head of the State agency may require.
 (3) NOTIFICATION OF APPROVAL- Not later than 60 days after the date the
 entity submits the application described in paragraph (2), the head of the
 State agency shall notify the entity of the decision of the State agency
 approving or disapproving the plan.
 (4) WITHDRAWAL OF APPROVAL- If the head of the State agency determines,
 after notice and an opportunity for a hearing, that a health plan that has
 been previously approved as an Integrated Health Service Plan no longer
 meets the applicable requirements of this Act, the head of the State
 agency shall withdraw approval of the plan and shall, in accordance with
 regulations prescribed under section 401(e)(1)(B), provide a procedure
 under which individuals enrolled in the plan may be enrolled in other
 Integrated Health Service Plans.
SEC. 213. STATE LONG-TERM CARE COORDINATION AGENCIES.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- State agencies shall establish State long-term care
 coordination agencies, to ensure a continuum of care for every individual
 described in section 204(1).
 (b) SERVICES- Services provided through the agencies shall include--
 (1) services of certified public or nonprofit coordination agencies,
 provided through qualified professionals that meet such professional
 standards as the Administrator shall prescribe under section 401(e)(1)(H),
 to serve as resources for health care facilities, physicians, and other
 health care providers; and
 (2) long-term care coordination services as an integral part of
 long-term care services, as described in subsection (c), and of home and
 community-based benefits.
 (c) LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- State long-term care coordination agencies shall be
 responsible for screening all potential recipients of long-term care
 services and authorizing needed services.
 (2) REQUIREMENTS- State long-term care coordination agencies shall provide
 services in accordance with the following requirements:
 (A) SETTING AND LEVEL OF CARE- The setting and level of care to be provided
 to persons needing long-term care services shall be based on an assessment
 of the severity of cognitive impairment, inability to perform specified
 activities of daily living (as well as certain functional tasks), the level
 of disability, the need for regular ongoing care, behavioral and emotional
 problems, and the ability of family caregivers to care for persons in need.
 (B) COORDINATION- Long-term care services shall be coordinated with the
 provision of acute health care and other health care and mental health
 services if needed.
 (C) REQUESTS- All requests for services shall be processed in a timely
 manner.
 (D) INTENSITY- The intensity of care coordination provided under this
 subsection shall depend on the severity of need and the level of services
 required to meet the needs.
 (E) OUTPATIENT EMPHASIS- The agency shall place priority on maintaining
 consumers in their homes (with the necessary supports) or in community-based
 residential programs rather than inpatient facilities and nursing homes.
 (F) EMERGENCY SITUATIONS- The agency shall make provisions to respond
 to emergency situations, including first-time requests and consumers who
 are receiving ongoing services and who have a sudden change of status
 or condition.
 (G) COST-EFFICIENT APPROACHES- States shall have the flexibility to develop
 cost-efficient approaches to respond to requests for limited home and
 community-based services.
 (H) COORDINATION- State long-term care coordination agencies shall ensure
 coordination and continuity of care between service levels and different
 settings if applicable, which includes the ability to respond to crisis
 situations.
 (I) QUALIFICATION STANDARDS- Care coordination provided under this subsection
 shall meet defined qualification standards.
 (J) OTHER HEALTH CARE DISCIPLINES- Care coordinators shall utilize the
 services of other health care disciplines, and interdisciplinary teams
 if appropriate.
 (K) CONSUMER INVOLVEMENT- Consumers shall, to the extent the consumers
 are able, be involved in all decisions regarding long-term care services.
 Family or caregiver involvement shall occur if appropriate.
 (3) CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- State long-term care coordination agencies shall, with
 respect to the geographic area served by the agencies--
 (i) enter into contracts or agreements with providers of long-term care
 services; and
 (ii) authorize and disburse all funds for long-term care services.
 (B) CRITERIA- The contracts or agreements shall require performance criteria
 in accordance with Federal guidelines. Criteria shall address such issues
 as certification and licensure of the health care provider, expected level
 of service, staff qualifications, supervision, role of the long-term care
 coordination agency, rights of the consumer and health care providers,
 and provisions for necessary changes in level of care.
 (4) INDEPENDENCE- State long-term care coordination agencies shall be
 independent from any providers of long-term care services.
SEC. 214. INCORPORATION OF MISCELLANEOUS MEDICARE-RELATED PROVISIONS.
 (a) PROVISIONS IN TITLE XVIII- Except as otherwise specifically provided in
 this Act, the following provisions of the Social Security Act shall apply
 to this Act in the same manner as the provisions applied to title XVIII
 of the Social Security Act as of the day before the date of the enactment
 of this Act:
 (1) Section 1819 (relating to requirements for, and assuring quality of care
 in, skilled nursing facilities), except that any reference in the section to
 a `skilled nursing facility' is deemed a reference to a `nursing facility'.
 (2) Section 1846 (relating to intermediate sanctions for providers of
 clinical diagnostic laboratory tests).
 (3) Sections 1863 through 1865 (relating to consultation with State agencies
 and other organizations to develop conditions of participation for providers
 of services, use of State agencies to determine compliance by providers
 of services with conditions of participation, and effect of accreditation).
 (4)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), section 1866 (relating to agreements
 with providers of services).
 (B)(i) The provisions of section 1866(a)(1)(N) shall not apply.
 (ii) Under section 1866(a)(2), a health care provider may not impose any
 charge for covered services under this Act.
 (iii) In the case of a hospital, the provider agreement under section 1866
 shall prohibit a hospital from denying care to any eligible individual on
 any ground other than the hospital's inability to provide the care required.
 (5) Section 1867 (relating to examination and treatment for emergency
 medical conditions and women in labor).
 (6) Section 1869 (relating to determinations and appeals).
 (7) Section 1870 (relating to overpayment on behalf of individuals and
 settlement of claims for covered services on behalf of deceased individuals).
 (8) Sections 1871 through 1874 (relating to regulations, application of
 certain provisions of title II of the Social Security Act, designation of
 organization or publication by name, and administration).
 (9)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), section 1876 (relating to payments to
 health maintenance organizations and competitive medical plans) shall apply
 to eligible individuals under this Act in the same manner as it applies to
 individuals entitled to benefits under part A, and enrolled under part B,
 of title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
 (B) In applying section 1876 under this Act--
 (i) the provisions of such section relating only to individuals enrolled
 under part B of title XVIII of the Social Security Act shall not apply;
 (ii) subject to subparagraph (C), any reference to a Trust Fund established
 under title XVIII of such Act and to benefits under such title is deemed
 a reference to the National Health Care Trust Fund and to covered services
 under this Act;
 (iii) subject to subparagraph (C), the adjusted average per capita cost
 and adjusted community rate shall be determined on the basis of covered
 services under this Act; and
 (iv) subsection (f) shall not apply.
 (C) For purposes of subparagraph (B), covered services under this Act may,
 at the option of an eligible organization, not include benefits for nursing
 facility services that are not post-hospital extended care services and
 benefits for home and community-based services.
 (10) Section 1877 (relating to limitation on certain physician referrals).
 (11) Section 1878 (relating to the provider reimbursement review board),
 except that the hearings pursuant to such section shall be on the approval
 of budgets under section 312 rather than the determination of payment
 amounts under title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
 (12) Section 1891 (relating to conditions of participation for home health
 agencies; home health quality).
 (13) Section 1892 (relating to offset of payments to individuals to collect
 past-due obligations arising from breach of scholarship and loan contract).
 (b) TITLE XI PROVISIONS- The following provisions of the Social Security
 Act shall apply to this Act in the same manner as they applied to title
 XVIII of the Social Security Act:
 (1) Sections 1124, 1126, and 1128 through 1128B (relating to fraud and
 abuse).
 (2) Section 1134 (relating to nonprofit hospital philanthropy).
 (3) Section 1138 (relating to hospital protocols for organ procurement
 and standards for organ procurement agencies).
 (4) Section 1142 (relating to research on outcomes of health care services
 and procedures), except that any reference in such section to a Trust Fund
 is deemed a reference to the National Health Care Trust Fund.
 (5) Part B of title XI of the Social Security Act (relating to peer review
 of the utilization and quality of health care services).
SEC. 215. NONDISCRIMINATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- No individual with responsibility for the administration
 of a State plan that receives assistance under this Act shall discriminate
 in the provision of covered services to eligible individuals on the basis
 of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, health condition,
 sexual preference, income, language, or geographic residence in an urban
 or rural area within the State.
 (b) RULES AND REGULATIONS- The Administrator shall promulgate rules and
 regulations to provide for the enforcement of this section, including
 provisions for summary suspension of assistance for not more than 30 days,
 on an emergency basis, until the Administration can provide notice and an
 opportunity to be heard.
TITLE III--REVENUE
Subtitle A--Budget Process
SEC. 301. NATIONAL AND STATE HEALTH BUDGETS.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) EXPENDITURES AND REVENUES- For each calendar year the Administrator
 shall establish a national health budget and, for each State, a State
 health budget that specifies--
 (A) the level and application of expenditures to be made under this Act
 in the year in the United States and in the State, respectively; and
 (B) the amount in and source of revenues of the Trust Fund in such year.
 (2) BASIS- Each State health budget established by the Administrator under
 this subsection shall--
 (A) be based on--
 (i) the population of the State;
 (ii) reasonable differences in the prices for goods and services;
 (iii) any special social, environmental, or other condition affecting
 health conditions or the need for health care services; and
 (iv) the geographic distribution of the population of the State population,
 including the proportion of the population residing in rural or health
 professional shortage areas;
 (B) be adjusted to account for States--
 (i) with large populations;
 (ii) with substantial numbers of residents in age categories that make
 disproportionately greater use of covered services;
 (iii) with substantial numbers of residents below the income official
 poverty line, as defined by the Office of Management and Budget, and
 revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget
 Reconciliation Act of 1981 (42 U.S.C. 9902(2)); and
 (iv) whose residents exhibit a high incidence of certain health conditions,
 such as a high incidence of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome or infant
 mortality; and
 (C) not disproportionately discriminate against States with substantial
 rural populations.
 (b) EXPENDITURE LEVEL- The total level of expenditures to be specified in
 the national health budget under subsection (a) for a year may not exceed
 the level of expenditures for covered services under this Act made in the
 year preceding the effective date of this Act increased in a compounded
 manner for each succeeding year (up to the year involved) by the annual
 percentage increase in the gross national product for the preceding year.
 (c) INSTITUTIONAL CAPITAL BUDGET-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Each national health budget established under subsection (a)
 shall include an amount for total expenditures for capital-related items,
 provide for State capital budgets and specify the general manner in which
 such expenditures for capital-related items are to be distributed among
 the different types of health care facilities.
 (2) FACTORS- Each State capital budget under this section shall be
 established based solely on--
 (A) the factors described in subparagraphs (A) and (C) through of subsection
 (a)(2); and
 (B) reasonable differences in the prices for goods and services, as such
 differences affect the prices of the appropriate capital goods.
 (d) HEALTH TRAINING BUDGET- Each national health budget established under
 subsection (a) shall include an amount for total expenditures for direct
 medical education expenses for institutions receiving payments under
 section 312. Such budgets shall specify the general manner in which such
 expenditures are to be taken into account, shall be based on a national
 plan for training of medical personnel developed by the Administrator
 that shall emphasize training for primary and preventive care, and shall
 provide for State budgets for direct medical education expenses. Payments
 under such budgets for such expenditures shall take into account the method
 for payment for direct medical education expenses as described in section
 1886(h) of the Social Security Act.
SEC. 302. PAYMENTS TO STATES.
 The Administrator shall make payments from amounts in the Trust Fund to
 States with approved State programs.
SEC. 303. ESTABLISHMENT OF EXCHANGE PROGRAM.
 The Administration shall establish a program under which a State that
 furnishes covered services to residents of another State receives credit
 for payments for the services against the amounts to which the other State
 is otherwise entitled to receive.
Subtitle B--Payments to Health Care Providers
SEC. 311. PAYMENTS TO HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State program shall provide for a timely and
 administratively simple mechanism for the payment and reimbursement of
 health care providers in a manner consistent with this subtitle and in
 accordance with regulations prescribed under section 401(e)(1)(E).
 (b) MANDATORY ASSIGNMENT-
 (1) ACCEPTANCE OF PAYMENTS- Each health care provider that receives funding
 under the national health care program shall accept the payment amount
 recognized under the State program for covered services as payment in
 full for such services, provided to consumers, or to individuals entering
 into an arrangement described in section 205(c), and may not impose any
 charges for such services other than charges permitted with respect to
 such services under section 323.
 (2) PROHIBITION ON ADDITIONAL BILLING- Health care providers shall only
 bill consumers for services that are not covered services.
 (c) CONTINUUM OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES- State programs, in order to avoid
 fragmented care and promote a continuum of health care services, shall
 develop financial incentives in the payment methods provided under this
 subtitle.
 (d) EQUIPMENT AND CONSTRUCTION-
 (1) LIMITATIONS- A State program shall, in accordance with regulations
 prescribed by the Administrator--
 (A) limit acquisition of highly specialized or expensive medical equipment,
 which shall be carefully regulated to ensure appropriate and equitable
 utilization and distribution; and
 (B) eliminate acquisition of expensive, highly specialized equipment by
 individual physicians and group practices, although the State program may
 make exceptions in rural health professional shortage areas.
 (2) APPROVAL- Approval for construction and renovation funds shall only
 be considered on the basis of utilization data and within the context of
 the State planning process under section 412.
 (e) RURAL AND HEALTH PROFESSIONAL SHORTAGE AREAS- In establishing the
 mechanism for payment and reimbursement of health care providers under this
 subtitle the State program shall establish schedules and incentives in a
 manner that will encourage health care providers to practice or locate in
 rural and health professional shortage areas.
SEC. 312. PAYMENTS TO INSTITUTIONAL HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (c), payment for
 institutional care, including hospital services, shall be made in each
 State on the basis of an annual prospective budgeting system, established
 by the State consistent with the State health budget established under
 section 301 and after negotiations with institutional health care providers.
 (b) HOSPITALS-
 (1) BUDGET-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Each hospital shall receive prospectively a global
 budget. The budget will be developed through annual negotiations between
 the State agency and the hospital.
 (B) FACTORS- In developing the budget, the State agency shall consider the
 health needs of the area, the past expenditures of the hospital, inflation,
 previous financial and clinical performance (based on utilization data
 collected through the national health care data base), projected levels
 of services, technological advances or changes, wages and other costs,
 proposed new programs, type of hospital, and costs associated with meeting
 Federal and State regulations.
 (C) ADJUSTMENTS- End-of-the-year adjustments may be made to hospital
 budgets based on unforeseen factors, such as an increase or decrease in
 consumer load.
 (2) OPERATING EXPENSES- Global hospital budgets shall be used for operating
 expenses. Operating expenses shall include replacement of standard
 equipment and funds to promote innovation in health services. None of the
 operating budget may be used for physical expansion, profit, marketing,
 or the purchase of expensive, highly specialized equipment.
 (3) CAPITAL EXPANSION AND EQUIPMENT- Separate funds for capital expansion
 and purchase of expensive equipment shall be subject to approval by the
 State agency, and consistent with the State capital budgets described in
 section 301(c)(1).
 (4) FUNDRAISING- Under Federal guidelines, hospitals may raise funds from
 private sources to pay for special services. Such additional funds may not
 change the operating budget. Any anticipated changes in the operating budget
 as a result of special services shall be negotiated with the State agency.
 (5) HEALTH PROFESSIONAL SHORTAGE AREAS- State programs shall provide
 subsidies to rural and urban hospitals in health professional shortage
 areas, including teaching hospitals, to ensure the viability of the health
 care facilities.
 (c) OTHER HEALTH CARE FACILITIES-
 (1) DEFINITION- As used in this subsection, the term `other health care
 facilities' shall include community clinics, migrant health centers, nursing
 homes, community-based programs, home health agencies, rehabilitation
 facilities, and renal dialysis facilities.
 (2) PAYMENT- States may determine whether other health care facilities
 shall be paid on the basis of a prospective global budget or per capita
 fee. Certain services, such as day health care centers, may be reimbursed
 on a per diem basis. The Administration shall determine whether the States
 may determine the per capita fee rates, or whether the rates shall be set
 by the Administration with regional variations.
 (3) LIMITATIONS- The same limitations described in subsection (b) regarding
 capital expenditures and operating expenses for hospitals shall apply to
 other health care facilities.
 (4) HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS- Health care providers employed in other health
 care facilities shall be salaried. Contractual arrangements shall be
 permitted for specialists that are not on the staff of such a facility.
 (5) RURAL FACILITIES- State programs shall provide special State subsidies
 for other health care facilities that are essential facilities in rural
 areas, to ensure the viability of the facilities.
SEC. 313. PAYMENTS FOR SERVICES BY INDIVIDUAL HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.
 (a) FEE SCHEDULES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this section, payment for
 services by individual health care providers shall be on a fee-for-service
 basis and based on payment schedules established by each State program in
 accordance with regulations prescribed under section 401(e)(1)(F).
 (2) SCHEDULES- Such schedules--
 (A) shall be established after negotiations with organizations representing
 physicians and other health care providers;
 (B) shall be based on a national relative value scale, developed by the
 Administration taking into account the relative value scale developed under
 section 1848 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-4), as in effect
 on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act;
 (C) shall take into consideration regional variations; and
 (D) shall be in amounts consistent with the State health budget adopted
 under section 301.
 (3) TARGETS- Expenditure targets on the annual State allocation of
 fee-for-service payments for each category of health care provider
 shall be established under the State programs. If a group of health care
 providers exceeds the annual expenditure target, State agencies shall
 have the flexibility to negotiate with the Administration and the health
 care provider group to modify the fee schedule for the following year to
 correct for overspending in the previous budget year.
 (b) ALTERNATIVE PAYMENT MECHANISMS- Payment for services by individual
 health care providers may be based on alternative payment methodologies,
 including capitation methods, annual salary and hourly payments, so long
 as the amount of payments under such methodology do not exceed, in the
 aggregate, the amount of payments that would otherwise be made under the
 methodology described in subsection (a).
 (c) BILLING- Individual health care providers shall submit bills to the
 State agency.
 (d) COVERED EXPENSES- Payment to individual health care providers shall
 cover health care provider earnings and basic operating expenses, and shall
 not include reimbursement for expensive, highly specialized equipment.
 Operating expenses shall include administrative overhead, employee wages,
 and replacement of standard equipment.
 (e) GROUP PRACTICES- Group practices may elect to be paid prospectively
 on a per capita basis rather than on a fee-for-service basis.
SEC. 314. PAYMENTS TO INTEGRATED HEALTH SERVICE PLANS.
 (a) PAYMENT- Integrated Health Service Plans shall be paid prospectively on
 a per capita basis or by means of a negotiated global budget, as determined
 by the State agency.
 (b) INPATIENT CARE- Such payment shall not cover inpatient care
 services. Inpatient facilities operated by the Integrated Health Service
 Plans will be paid for covered services on the same basis as all other
 inpatient facilities.
 (c) HOSPITALS- Integrated Health Service Plan-operated hospitals shall be
 paid for covered services on the same basis as all other hospitals under
 section 312.
 (d) HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS- All health care providers employed by the
 Integrated Health Service Plans shall be salaried. An Integrated Health
 Service Plan may enter into contractual arrangements with specialty health
 care providers not available on staff.
 (e) DEVELOPMENT- State programs shall provide incentives for the development
 of Integrated Health Service Plans.
SEC. 315. GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.
 (a) BOARD- The head of each State agency shall establish a State Payment
 Grievance Board. In selecting members of the State Payment Grievance Board,
 the head of the State agency shall ensure that members shall not perform
 duties inconsistent with their duties and responsibilities as members,
 and shall ensure that an employee or agent engaged in the performance of
 investigative or prosecuting functions for the State agency in a case shall
 not, in the case or a factually related case, participate or advise in the
 decision, recommended decision, or State agency review of the decision,
 except as witness or counsel in public proceedings.
 (b) APPEALS-
 (1) HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS- A health care provider who is denied payment
 by an employee of a State agency, or a State long-term care coordination
 agency, for covered services may appeal the decision of the State agency, not
 later than 30 days after the decision, to a State Payment Grievance Board.
 (2) PATIENTS- In any case in which a health care provider determines that
 a requested service is not medically necessary with respect to a consumer,
 the health care provider shall inform the consumer of the opportunity to
 appeal the decision of the health care provider, not later than 30 days
 after the decision, to a State Payment Grievance Board.
 (c) PROCEDURES- Each State agency shall provide for effective procedures
 for the State Payment Grievance Board for hearing and resolving appeals
 brought under subsection (b) and for State agency review of the appeals.
Subtitle C--Sources of Revenue
SEC. 321. FEDERAL SOURCES OF REVENUE.
 (a) PERSONAL INCOME TAX RATE INCREASE-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subsections (a) through (e) of section 1 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to tax imposed) are each amended by striking
 `15%', `28%', and `31%' each place they appear and inserting `20%', `31%',
 and `39%', respectively.
 (2) TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS-
 (A) Subsection (f) of section 1 of such Code is amended--
 (i) by striking `1990' in paragraph (1) and inserting `1994', and
 (ii) by striking `1989' in paragraph (3)(B) and inserting `1993'.
 (B) Subparagraph (B) of section 32(i)(1) of such Code is amended by striking
 `1989' and inserting `1993'.
 (C) Subparagraph (C) of section 41(e)(5) of such Code is amended by striking
 `1989' each place it appears and inserting `1993'.
 (D) Subparagraph (B) of section 63(c)(4) of such Code is amended by striking
 `1989' and inserting `1993'.
 (E) Clause (ii) of section 135(b)(2)(B) of such Code is amended by striking
 `1989' and inserting `1993'.
 (F) Subparagraphs (A)(ii) and (B)(ii) of section 151(d)(4) of such Code
 are each amended by striking `1989' and inserting `1993'.
 (G) Clause (ii) of section 513(h)(2)(C) of such Code is amended by striking
 `1989' each place it appears and inserting `1993'.
 (3) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
 (b) CORPORATE INCOME TAX RATE INCREASE-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subsection (b) of section 11 of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 (relating to tax imposed on corporations) is amended by striking
 `34 percent' each place it appears and inserting `39 percent'.
 (2) Conforming amendments-
 (A) Section 852(b)(3)(D)(iii) of such Code is amended by striking `66
 percent' and inserting `61 percent'.
 (B) Section 1201(a) of such Code is amended by striking `34 percent'
 each place it appears and inserting `39 percent'.
 (C) Paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 1445(e) of such Code are each amended
 by striking `34 percent' and inserting `39 percent'.
 (D) Section 7518(g)(6)(A) of such Code and section 607(h)(6)(A) of the
 Merchant Marine Act, 1936 are each amended by striking `34 percent' and
 inserting `39 percent'.
 (3) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
 (c) ALTERNATIVE MINIMUM TAX INCREASE-
 (1) GENERAL RULE- Subparagraph (A) of section 55(b)(1) (relating to
 tentative minimum tax) is amended by striking `20 percent (24 percent'
 and inserting `23 percent (27 percent'.
 (2) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Paragraph (2) of section 897(a) is amended by
 striking `21' in the heading of such paragraph and in subparagraph (A)
 and inserting `27'.
 (3) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
 (d) INCREASE IN TAX ON CIGARETTES-
 (1) RATE OF TAX- Subsection (b) of section 5701 of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (relating to rate of tax on cigarettes) is amended--
 (A) by striking `$12 per thousand ($10 per thousand on cigarettes removed
 during 1991 or 1992)' in paragraph (1) and inserting `$20 per thousand'; and
 (B) by striking `$25.20 per thousand ($21 per thousand on cigarettes removed
 during 1991 or 1992)' in paragraph (2) and inserting `$42 per thousand'.
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall apply
 with respect to articles removed after December 31, 1993.
 (3) FLOOR STOCKS-
 (A) IMPOSITION OF TAX- On cigarettes manufactured in or imported into the
 United States which are removed before January 1, 1994, and held on such
 date for sale by any person, there shall be imposed the following taxes:
 (i) SMALL CIGARETTES- On cigarettes, weighing not more than 3 pounds per
 thousand, $10 per thousand;
 (ii) LARGE CIGARETTES- On cigarettes, weighing more than 3 pounds per
 thousand, $21 per thousand; except that, if more than 6 1/2 inches
 in length, they shall be taxable at the rate prescribed for cigarettes
 weighing not more than 3 pounds per thousand, counting each 2 3/4 inches,
 or fraction thereof, of the length of each as one cigarette.
 (B) LIABILITY FOR TAX AND METHOD OF PAYMENT-
 (i) LIABILITY FOR TAX- A person holding cigarettes on January 1, 1994,
 to which any tax imposed by subparagraph (A) applies shall be liable for
 such tax.
 (ii) METHOD OF PAYMENT- The tax imposed by subparagraph (A) shall be treated
 as a tax imposed under section 5701 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
 and shall be due and payable on February 15, 1994, in the same manner as
 the tax imposed under such section is payable with respect to cigarettes
 removed on January 1, 1994.
 (C) CIGARETTE- For purposes of this paragraph, the term `cigarette' shall
 have the meaning given to such term by subsection (b) of section 5702 of
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (D) EXCEPTION FOR RETAIL STOCKS- The taxes imposed by subparagraph (A)
 shall not apply to cigarettes in retail stocks held on January 1, 1994,
 at the place where intended to be sold at retail.
 (E) FOREIGN TRADE ZONES- Notwithstanding the Act of June 18, 1934 (19
 U.S.C. 81a et seq.) or any other provision of law--
 (i) cigarettes--
 (I) on which taxes imposed by Federal law are determined, or customs duties
 are liquidated, by a customs officer pursuant to a request made under the
 first proviso of section 3(a) of the Act of June 18, 1934 (19 U.S.C. 81c(a))
 before January 1, 1994, and
 (II) which are entered into the customs territory of the United States on
 or after January 1, 1994, from a foreign trade zone, and
 (ii) cigarettes which--
 (I) are placed under the supervision of a customs officer pursuant to the
 provisions of the second proviso of section 3(a) of the Act of June 18,
 1934 (19 U.S.C. 81c(a)) before January 1, 1994, and
 (II) are entered into the customs territory of the United States on or
 after January 1, 1994, from a foreign trade zone,
shall be subject to the tax imposed by subparagraph (A) and such cigarettes
shall, for purposes of subparagraph (A), be treated as being held on January
1, 1994, for sale.
 (e) INCREASE IN EXCISE TAXES ON DISTILLED SPIRITS, WINE, AND BEER-
 (1) DISTILLED SPIRITS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Paragraphs (1) and (3) of section 5001(a) of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to rate of tax on distilled spirits) are
 each amended by striking `$13.50' and inserting `$29.00'.
 (B) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- Paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 5010(a) of
 such Code (relating to credit for wine content and for flavors content)
 are each amended by striking `$13.50' and inserting `$29.00'.
 (2) WINE-
 (A) WINES CONTAINING NOT MORE THAN 14 PERCENT ALCOHOL- Paragraph (1)
 of section 5041(b) of such Code (relating to rates of tax on wines) is
 amended by striking `$1.07' and inserting `$6.00'.
 (B) WINES CONTAINING MORE THAN 14 (BUT NOT MORE THAN 21) PERCENT ALCOHOL-
 Paragraph (2) of section 5041(b) of such Code is amended by striking
 `$1.57' and inserting `$8.50'.
 (C) WINES CONTAINING MORE THAN 21 (BUT NOT MORE THAN 24) PERCENT ALCOHOL-
 Paragraph (3) of section 5041(b) of such Code is amended by striking
 `$3.15' and inserting `$11.00'.
 (D) ARTIFICIALLY CARBONATED WINES- Paragraph (5) of section 5041(b) of
 such Code is amended by striking `$3.30' and inserting `$11.00'.
 (3) BEER-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Paragraph (1) of section 5051(a) of such Code (relating
 to imposition and rate of tax on beer) is amended by striking `$18' and
 inserting `$81'.
 (B) SMALL BREWERS- Subparagraph (A) of section 5051(a)(2) of such Code
 (relating to reduced rate for certain domestic production) is amended by
 striking `$7' each place it appears and inserting `$31.50'.
 (4) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall take
 effect on January 1, 1994.
 (5) FLOOR STOCKS TAXES-
 (A) IMPOSITION OF TAX-
 (i) IN GENERAL- In the case of any tax-increased article--
 (I) on which tax was determined under part I of subchapter A of chapter 51
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 or section 7652 of such Code before
 January 1, 1994, and
 (II) which is held on such date for sale by any person,
there shall be imposed a tax at the applicable rate on each such article.
 (ii) APPLICABLE RATE- For purposes of clause (i), the applicable rate is--
 (I) $15.50 per proof gallon in the case of distilled spirits,
 (II) $4.93 per wine gallon in the case of wine described in paragraph (1)
 of section 5041(b) of such Code, and
 (III) $6.93 per wine gallon in the case of wine described in paragraph
 (2) of section 5041(b) of such Code, and
 (IV) $7.85 per wine gallon in the case of wine described in paragraph (3)
 of section 5041(b) of such Code, and
 (V) $7.70 per wine gallon in the case of wine described in paragraph (5)
 of section 5041(b) of such Code,
 (VI) $63 per barrel in the case of beer described in paragraph (1) of
 section 5051(a) of such Code, and
 (VII) $13.50 per barrel in the case of beer described in subparagraph (A)
 of section 5051(a)(2) of such Code.
In the case of a fraction of a gallon or barrel, the tax imposed by clause
(i) shall be the same fraction as the amount of such tax imposed on a whole
gallon or barrel.
 (iii) TAX-INCREASED ARTICLE- For purposes of this paragraph, the term
 `tax-increased article' means distilled spirits, wine described in paragraph
 (1), (2), (3), or (5) of section 5041(b) of such Code, and beer.
 (B) EXCEPTION FOR CERTAIN SMALL WHOLESALE OR RETAIL DEALERS- No tax shall
 be imposed by subparagraph (A) on tax-increased articles held on January 1,
 1994, by any dealer if--
 (i) the aggregate liquid volume of tax-increased articles held by such
 dealer on such date does not exceed 500 wine gallons, and
 (ii) such dealer submits to the Secretary (at the time and in the manner
 required by the Secretary) such information as the Secretary shall require
 for purposes of this subparagraph.
 (C) LIABILITY FOR TAX AND METHOD OF PAYMENT-
 (i) LIABILITY FOR TAX- A person holding any tax-increased article on
 January 1, 1994, to which the tax imposed by subparagraph (A) applies
 shall be liable for such tax.
 (ii) METHOD OF PAYMENT- The tax imposed by subparagraph (A) shall be paid
 in such manner as the Secretary shall prescribe by regulations.
 (iii) TIME FOR PAYMENT- The tax imposed by subparagraph (A) shall be paid
 on or before June 30, 1994.
 (D) CONTROLLED GROUPS-
 (i) CORPORATIONS- In the case of a controlled group the 500 wine gallon
 amount specified in subparagraph (B), shall be apportioned among the dealers
 who are component members of such group in such manner as the Secretary
 shall by regulations prescribe. For purposes of the preceding sentence,
 the term `controlled group' has the meaning given to such term by subsection
 (a) of section 1563 of such Code; except that for such purposes the phrase
 `more than 50 percent' shall be substituted for the phrase `at least 80
 percent' each place it appears in such subsection.
 (ii) NONINCORPORATED DEALERS UNDER COMMON CONTROL- Under regulations
 prescribed by the Secretary, principles similar to the principles of clause
 (i) shall apply to a group of dealers under common control where 1 or more
 of such dealers is not a corporation.
 (E) OTHER LAWS APPLICABLE-
 (i) IN GENERAL- All provisions of law, including penalties, applicable to
 the comparable excise tax with respect to any tax-increased article shall,
 insofar as applicable and not inconsistent with the provisions of this
 paragraph, apply to the floor stocks taxes imposed by subparagraph (A) to
 the same extent as if such taxes were imposed by the comparable excise tax.
 (ii) COMPARABLE EXCISE TAX- For purposes of clause (i), the term `comparable
 excise tax' means--
 (I) the tax imposed by section 5001 of such Code in the case of distilled
 spirits,
 (II) the tax imposed by section 5041 of such Code in the case of wine, and
 (III) the tax imposed by section 5051 of such Code in the case of beer.
 (F) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this paragraph--
 (i) IN GENERAL- Terms used in this paragraph which are also used in
 subchapter A of chapter 51 of such Code shall have the respective meanings
 such terms have in such part.
 (ii) PERSON- The term `person' includes any State or political subdivision
 thereof, or any agency or instrumentality of a State or political subdivision
 thereof.
 (iii) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of the Treasury
 or his delegate.
 (G) TREATMENT OF IMPORTED PERFUMES CONTAINING DISTILLED SPIRITS- For
 purposes of this paragraph, any article described in section 5001(a)(3)
 of such Code shall be treated as distilled spirits; except that the tax
 imposed by subparagraph (A) shall be imposed on a wine gallon basis in lieu
 of a proof gallon basis. To the extent provided by regulations prescribed
 by the Secretary, the preceding sentence shall not apply to any article
 held on January 1, 1994, on the premises of a retail establishment.
 (f) PAYROLL TAXES-
 (1) TAX ON EMPLOYEES- Section 3101 of the Internal Revenue Code of
 1986 (relating to rate of tax on employees) is amended by redesignating
 subsections (c) and (d) as subsections (d) and (e) and by inserting after
 subsection (b) the following new subsection:
 `(c) NATIONAL HEALTH CARE PROGRAM- In addition to the taxes imposed by
 the preceding subsections, there is hereby imposed on the income of every
 individual a tax equal to 1.45 percent of the wages (as defined in section
 3121(a)) received by such individual after December 31, 1994, with respect
 to employment (as defined in section 3121(b)).'.
 (2) TAX ON EMPLOYERS- Section 3111 of such Code (relating to rate of tax
 on employers) is amended by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection
 (d) and by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection:
 `(c) NATIONAL HEALTH CARE PROGRAM- In addition to the taxes imposed by
 the preceding subsections, there is hereby imposed on every employer an
 excise tax, with respect to having individuals in such employer's employ,
 equal to 7.45 percent of the wages (as defined in section 3121(a)) paid
 by such employer during each calendar year beginning after December 31,
 1994, with respect to employment (as defined in section 3121(b)).'.
 (3) TAX ON SELF-EMPLOYMENT INCOME- Section 1401 of such Code (relating to
 rate of tax on self-employment income for hospital insurance) is amended
 by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d) and by inserting after
 subsection (b) the following new subsection:
 `(c) NATIONAL HEALTH CARE PROGRAM- In addition to the taxes imposed by the
 preceding subsections, there shall be imposed for each taxable year, on
 the self-employment income of every individual, a tax equal to the sum of--
 `(1) 1.45 percent, plus
 `(2) 7.45 percent
of the amount of the self-employment income for such taxable year.'.
 (4) RAILROAD RETIREMENT TAXES- Sections 3201(a), 3211(a), and 3221(a) of such
 Code (relating to tier 1 taxes) are each amended by striking `subsections (a)
 and (b)' each place it appears and inserting `subsections (a), (b), and (c)'.
 (5) ELIMINATION OF LIMIT ON EMPLOYER-PORTION OF WAGES OR SELF-EMPLOYMENT
 INCOME SUBJECT TO NATIONAL HEALTH CARE PROGRAM TAX-
 (A) WAGES- Subsection (x) of section 3121 of the Internal Revenue Code of
 1986 (relating to applicable contribution base) is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(3) NATIONAL HEALTH CARE PROGRAM- For purposes of the taxes imposed by
 section 3111(c), the applicable contribution base for any calendar year
 is equal to the remuneration for employment paid to an individual for such
 calendar year.'.
 (B) SELF-EMPLOYMENT INCOME- Subsection (k) of section 1402 of such Code
 (relating to applicable contribution base) is amended by adding at the
 end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(3) NATIONAL HEALTH CARE PROGRAM- For purposes of the tax imposed by
 section 1401(c)(2), the applicable contribution base for any calendar year
 is equal to the individual's net earnings from self-employment for such
 calendar year.'.
 (C) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS
 (i) Paragraph (2) of section 3121(x) of such Code is amended--
 (I) by striking `section 3101(b) and 3111(b)' and inserting `sections
 3101(b), 3111(b), and 3101(c)', and
 (II) by striking `HOSPITAL INSURANCE' in the heading and inserting
 `HEALTH CARE'.
 (ii) Paragraph (2) of section 1402(k) of such Code is amended--
 (I) by striking `section 1401(b)' and inserting `sections 1401(b) and
 1401(c)(1)', and
 (II) by striking `HOSPITAL INSURANCE' in the heading and inserting
 `HEALTH CARE'.
 (iii) Clause (i) of section 3231(e)(2)(B) of such Code is amended--
 (I) by striking `subclause (II)' in subclause (I) and inserting `subclauses
 (II) and (III)', and
 (II) by adding at the end thereof the following new subclauses:
 `(III) EMPLOYER-PORTION OF NATIONAL HEALTH CARE PROGRAM- For purposes of
 applying so much of the rate applicable under section 3221(a) as does not
 exceed the rate of tax in effect under section 3111(c), and for purposes
 of applying so much of the rate of tax applicable under section 3211(a)(1)
 as does not exceed the rate of tax in effect under section 1401(c)(2),
 the term `applicable base' means for any calendar year the applicable
 contribution base determined under section 3121(x)(3) or 1401(k)(3)
 (as the case may be) for such calendar year.
 `(IV) EMPLOYEE-PORTION OF NATIONAL HEALTH CARE PROGRAM- For purposes of
 applying so much of the rate applicable under section 3201(a) as does not
 exceed the rate of tax in effect under section 3101(c), and for purposes
 of applying so much of the rate of tax applicable under section 3211(a)(1)
 as does not exceed the rate of tax in effect under section 1401(c)(1),
 the term `applicable base' means for any calendar year the applicable
 contribution base determined under section 3121(x)(2) or 1401(k)(2)
 (as the case may be) for such calendar year.'.
 (iv) Subsection (c) of section 6413 of such Code is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(4) SEPARATE APPLICATION FOR NATIONAL HEALTH CARE PROGRAM TAXES- In
 applying this subsection with respect to--
 `(A) the tax imposed by section 3101(c) (or any amount equivalent to such
 tax), and
 `(B) so much of the tax imposed by section 3201 as is determined at a rate
 not greater than the rate in effect under section 3101(c),
the applicable contribution base determined under section 3121(x)(3) for
any calendar year shall be substituted for `contribution and benefit base
(as determined under section 230 of the Social Security Act)' each place
it appears.'.
 (6) ADDITIONAL STATE AND LOCAL EMPLOYEES SUBJECT TO NATIONAL HEALTH CARE
 PROGRAM TAXES- Paragraph (2) of section 3121(u) of such Code is amended
 by striking subparagraphs (C) and (D).
 (7) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall apply with
 respect to remuneration paid after December 31, 1994, and with respect
 to earnings from self-employment attributable to taxable years beginning
 after such date.
 (g) TERMINATION OF HOSPITAL INSURANCE PAYROLL TAXES-
 (1) TAX ON EMPLOYEES- Section 3101(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
 (relating to rate of tax on employees for hospital insurance) is amended--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (5), and
 (B) by striking paragraph (6) and inserting the following new paragraphs:
 `(6) with respect to wages received during the calendar years 1986 through
 1994, the rate shall be 1.45 percent; and
 `(7) with respect to wages received after December 31, 1994, the rate
 shall be 0 percent.'.
 (2) TAX ON EMPLOYERS- Section 3111(b) of such Code (relating to rate of
 tax on employers for hospital insurance) is amended--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (5), and
 (B) by striking paragraph (6) and inserting the following new paragraphs:
 `(6) with respect to wages received during the calendar years 1986 through
 1994, the rate shall be 1.45 percent;
 `(7) with respect to wages received after December 31, 1994, the rate
 shall be 0 percent.'.
 (3) TAX ON SELF-EMPLOYMENT INCOME- Section 1401(b) of such Code (relating
 to rate of tax on self-employment income for hospital insurance) is amended
 by striking the table and inserting the following new table:
`In the case of a taxable year
------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------
 Beginning after: And before: Percent:
 December 31, 1985 January 1, 1995 2.90
 December 31, 1994 0.'.
------------------------------------------------------------
 (4) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall apply with
 respect to remuneration paid after December 31, 1994, and with respect
 to earnings from self-employment attributable to taxable years beginning
 after such date.
 (i) EMPLOYERS' MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT FOR RETIREES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of
 1986 (relating to normal taxes and surtaxes) is amended by adding at the
 end thereof the following new part:
`PART VIII--HEALTH CARE TAXES
`Sec. 59B. Employers health care tax.
`SEC. 59B. EMPLOYERS HEALTH CARE TAX.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- In the case of an employer, there is imposed (in addition
 to any other tax imposed by this subtitle) a tax equal to the actuarially
 equivalent aggregate amount which would have been paid or incurred by the
 employer (or predecessor employer) during the taxable year for individual
 or family coverage of retired employees with respect to whom such employer
 had a contractual obligation on December 31, 1993, under group health plans
 (as defined in section 5000(b)(1)) in existence on such date.
 `(b) TERMINATION- This section shall not apply in any taxable year beginning
 after December 31, 2012.'.
 (2) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- The table of parts of subchapter A of chapter 1
 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`Part VIII. Health care taxes.'.
 (3) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
 (j) TREATMENT OF HEALTH CARE DEDUCTIONS, EXCLUSIONS, AND CREDITS-
 (1) LIMITATION ON EXCLUSION OF COMPENSATION FOR INJURIES OR SICKNESS-
 Subsection (a) of section 104 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating
 to compensation for injuries or sickness) is amended--
 (A) by striking paragraph (3) and inserting the following new paragraph:
 `(3) amounts received through the national health care program for personal
 injuries or sickness;', and
 (B) by striking the second sentence thereof.
 (2) TERMINATION OF EXCLUSION FOR AMOUNTS RECEIVED UNDER ACCIDENT AND
 HEALTH PLANS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Section 105 of such Code (relating to amounts received
 under accident and health plans) is amended--
 (i) by striking `income' and all that follows in subsection (a) and inserting
 `income.',
 (ii) by striking subsections (b), (e), (f), (g), and (h), and
 (iii) by redesignating subsections (c) and (i) as subsections (b) and
 (c), respectively.
 (B) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Paragraph (6) of section 7871(a)(6) of such Code
 is amended by striking subparagraph (A) and by redesignating subparagraphs
 (B), (C), and (D) as subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C), respectively.
 (3) TERMINATION OF EXCLUSION FOR CONTRIBUTIONS BY EMPLOYER TO ACCIDENT
 AND HEALTH PLANS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Section 106 of such Code (relating to contributions by
 employer to accident and health plans) is repealed.
 (B) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (i) Subsection (c) of section 104 of such Code is amended to read as follows:
 `(c) Cross Reference-
 `For exclusion of part of disability retirement pay from the application
 of subsection (a)(4) of this section, see section 1403 of title 10, United
 States Code (relating to career compensation laws).'.
 (ii) Sections 414(n)(3)(C), 414(t)(2), and 6039D(d)(1) of such Code are
 each amended by striking `106,'.
 (4) LIMITATION ON CAFETERIA PLANS- Subsection (g) of section 125 of such Code
 (relating to cafeteria plans) is amended by striking paragraph (2) and by
 redesignating paragraphs (3) and (4) as paragraphs (2) and (3), respectively.
 (5) BUSINESS EXPENSE DEDUCTION FOR EMPLOYER-PROVIDED FIRST AID ASSISTANCE-
 Subsection (l) of section 162 of such Code (relating to trade or business
 expenses) is amended to read as follows:
 `(l) FIRST AID ASSISTANCE- The expenses paid or incurred by an employer
 for on-site first aid assistance provided to the employees of such employer
 shall be allowed as a deduction under this section.'.
 (6) TERMINATION OF DEDUCTION FOR MEDICAL EXPENSES-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Section 213 of such Code (relating to medical, dental,
 etc., expenses) is repealed.
 (B) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (i) Paragraph (1) of section 56 of such Code is amended by striking
 subparagraph (B) and by redesignating subparagraph (C), (D), (E), and (F)
 as subparagraphs (B), (C), (D), and (E), respectively.
 (ii) Subsection (b) of section 67 of such Code is amended by striking
 paragraph (5) and by redesignating paragraphs (6) through (13) as paragraphs
 (5) through (12), respectively.
 (iii) Subsection (t) of section 72 of such Code is amended--
 (I) in paragraph (2), by striking subparagraph (B) and by redesignating
 subparagraph (C) as subparagraph (B), and
 (II) by striking `(B), and (C)' in paragraph (3)(A) and inserting `and (B)'.
 (iv) Subsection (e) of section 152 of such Code is amended by striking
 paragraph (6).
 (7) TERMINATION OF PENSION PAYMENT OF MEDICAL BENEFITS- Subsection (h) of
 section 401 of such Code (relating to qualified pension, profit-sharing,
 and stock bonus plans) is repealed.
 (8) TERMINATION OF CHILD HEALTH INSURANCE CREDIT- Clause (i) of section
 32(b)(2)(A) of such Code (relating to health insurance credit) is amended
 by inserting `(0 percent for taxable years beginning after December 31,
 1993)' after `6 percent'.
 (9) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall apply
 with respect to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
 (k) Increase in Income Taxes on Social Security Benefits-
 (1) INCREASE IN AMOUNT OF BENEFITS TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT- Subsections (a)
 and (b) of section 86 of such Code (relating to social security and tier
 1 railroad retirement benefits) are each amended by striking `one-half'
 each place it appears and inserting `85 percent'.
 (2) INCOME THRESHOLDS REDUCED- Subsection (c) of section 86 of such Code
 (defining base amount) is amended--
 (A) by striking `$25,000' in paragraph (1) and inserting `$8,000', and
 (B) by striking `$32,000' in paragraph (2) and inserting `$16,000'.
 (3) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
 (l) SECTION 15 NOT TO APPLY- No amendment made by this section shall be
 treated as a change in a rate of tax for purposes of section 15 of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (k) National Health Care Program Premium for the Elderly-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), each individual who at
 any time in a month beginning after December 31, 1994, is 65 years of age
 or older and is eligible for benefits under this Act in the month shall
 pay a national health care program premium equal to the sum of:
 (A) the amount of the premium for such month determined under section
 1839 of the Social Security Act, determined as if such section had not
 been repealed under this Act, plus
 (B) $25.
 (2) REDUCTION FOR LOW-INCOME ELDERLY- Individuals with an adjusted gross
 income (as defined in section 62 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986)
 which does not exceed 120 percent of the income official poverty line
 (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget, and revised annually
 in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
 Act of 1981) are not liable for the premium imposed under paragraph (1)(B).
 (3) COLLECTION OF PREMIUM- The premium imposed under this subsection shall
 be collected in the same manner (including deduction from Social Security
 checks) as the premium imposed under part B of title XVIII of the Social
 Security Act was collected under section 1840 of such Act as of the date
 of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 322. STATE SOURCES OF REVENUE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State shall be responsible for establishing a financing
 program for the implementation of the State program in the State. Such
 financing program may include State funding from general revenues,
 earmarked taxes, sales taxes, and such other measures consistent with
 this Act, including regulations prescribed under section 401(e)(1)(D),
 as the State may provide.
 (b) MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT-
 (1) CONDITION OF COVERAGE- Notwithstanding any other provision of this
 Act, no individual who is a resident of a State is eligible for covered
 services under this Act for a month in a calendar year, unless the State
 makes available under the financing program (in a manner and at a time
 specified by the Administrator), in addition to funds made available under
 subsection (c), in the month of the sum of--
 (A) the product of $7.083 and the number of residents who are residents
 of the State and otherwise eligible for covered services under this Act
 in the month; and
 (B) 85 percent of 1/12 of the amount specified in paragraph (2) for
 the year;
or, if less, 1/12 of the limiting amount specified in paragraph (3).
 (2) MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT AMOUNT- The amount of payment specified in this
 paragraph for a State for a year is equal to the amount of payment (net
 of Federal payments) made by a State under its State plan under title XIX
 of the Social Security Act for the year preceding the effective date of
 this Act, increased for the year involved by the compounded sum of the
 percentage increase in the gross national product of the State for each
 year after that year and up to the year before the year involved.
 (3) LIMITING AMOUNT- For purposes of paragraph (1), the limiting amount
 specified in this paragraph--
 (A) for 1995, is the total amount of payment made by a State (net of any
 Federal payments made to the State) for health care services in 1994; or
 (B) for any subsequent year, is the amount specified in this paragraph for
 the State for the previous year increased for the year involved by the
 compounded sum of the percentage increase in the gross national product
 of the State for each year after 1992 and up to the year before the year
 involved.
 (c) BLOCK GRANT FUNDS- Under the financing program, each State shall make
 available all State health block grant funds, including maternal and child
 health block grant funds made available under title V of the Social Security
 Act (42 U.S.C. 701 et seq.).
SEC. 323. COST-SHARING.
 (a) MINIMUM COST-SHARING REQUIREMENTS- Except as provided in subsection
 (b), each State program shall impose cost-sharing for payment to a health
 care facility of a portion (not to exceed 25 percent) of the cost of room
 and board for consumers receiving--
 (1) the long-term care services described in section 201(b)(6)(C);
 (2) the mental health services described in section 201(b)(7)(E);
 (3) the rehabilitation services described in subparagraphs (D) and (E)
 of section 201(b)(13); and
 (4) the substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services described
 in section 201(b)(14)(F).
 (b) WAIVER- Each State agency shall waive the cost-sharing requirements
 described in subsection (a) for consumers below the income official
 poverty line, as defined by the Office of Management and Budget, and
 revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget
 Reconciliation Act of 1981 (42 U.S.C. 9902(2)).
SEC. 324. NATIONAL HEALTH CARE TRUST FUND.
 (a) TRUST FUND ESTABLISHED-
 (1) IN GENERAL- There is hereby created on the books of the Treasury of
 the United States a trust fund to be known as the `National Health Care
 Trust Fund'. The Trust Fund shall consist of such gifts and bequests as
 may be made and such amounts as may be deposited in, or appropriated to,
 such Trust Fund as provided in this Act.
 (2) TRANSFER OF AMOUNTS EQUIVALENT TO CERTAIN TAXES AND PREMIUMS-
 (A) TAX AND PREMIUM REVENUES- There are hereby appropriated to the Trust
 Fund amounts equivalent to the additional revenues received in the Treasury
 as the result of the provisions of, and amendments made by, section 321.
 (B) TRANSFERS BASED ON ESTIMATES- The amounts appropriated by subparagraph
 (A) shall be transferred from time to time (not less frequently than
 monthly) from the general fund in the Treasury to the Trust Fund, such
 amounts to be determined on the basis of estimates by the Secretary of the
 Treasury of the taxes and premiums, specified in such subparagraph, paid
 to or deposited into the Treasury; and proper adjustments shall be made in
 amounts subsequently transferred to the extent prior estimates were in excess
 of or were less than the taxes and premiums specified in such subparagraph.
 (3) TRANSFER OF FUNDS- All amounts, not otherwise obligated, that remain
 in the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Supplemental
 Medical Insurance Trust Fund on January 1, 1995 shall be transferred to
 the Trust Fund.
 (4) INCORPORATION OF TRUST FUND PROVISIONS- The provisions of subsections (b)
 through (i) of section 1841 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395t),
 as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act,
 shall apply to the Trust Fund in the same manner as such provisions apply
 to the Federal Supplemental Medical Insurance Trust Fund, except that any
 reference to the Secretary of Health and Human Services or the Administrator
 of the Health Care Financing Administration shall be deemed a reference
 to the Administration.
 (5) APPROPRIATION OF ADDITIONAL SUMS- There are hereby authorized to be
 appropriated to the Trust Fund such additional sums as may be required to
 make expenditures referred to in subsection (b).
 (b) Expenditures-
 (1) TO STATES- Payments in each calendar year to each State from the Trust
 Fund under section 302 are hereby authorized and appropriated.
 (2) OTHER GRANT PROGRAMS- Amounts in the Trust Fund shall be available,
 as provided by appropriation Acts, for grant programs relating to health
 care services.
 (3) ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES- There are hereby authorized and appropriated
 such sums as are necessary for the administrative expenses of the
 Administration for each fiscal year, not to exceed 3 percent of the total
 payments made to the States for such fiscal year under section 302.
 (c) TRUST FUND OFF-BUDGET- The receipts and disbursements of the Trust
 Fund and the taxes described in subsection (a)(2) shall not be included
 in the totals of the budget of the United States Government as submitted
 by the President or of the congressional budget and shall be exempt from
 any general budget limitation imposed by statute on expenditures and net
 lending (budget outlays) of the United States Government.
TITLE IV--ADMINISTRATION
Subtitle A--Federal Administration
SEC. 401. NATIONAL HEALTH CARE ADMINISTRATION.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is established a National Health Care
 Administration that shall administer the programs established under this
 Act. The Administration shall be an independent establishment, as defined
 in section 104 of title 5, United States Code.
 (b) ADMINISTRATOR OF HEALTH CARE-
 (1) APPOINTMENT- There shall be in the Administration an Administrator of
 Health Care who shall be appointed by the President, with the advice and
 consent of the Senate.
 (2) COMPENSATION- The Administrator shall be compensated at the rate
 provided for level I of the Executive Schedule.
 (3) TERM- The Administrator shall be appointed for a term of 4 years
 coincident with the term of the President, or until the appointment of a
 qualified successor.
 (4) QUALIFICATIONS- The Administrator shall be selected on the basis of
 proven competence as a manager.
 (5) POWERS- The Administrator shall be responsible for the exercise of
 all powers and the discharge of all duties of the Administration, and
 shall have authority and control over all personnel and activities of
 the Administration.
 (6) DELEGATION- The Administrator may, with respect to the administration of
 the national health care program, assign duties, and delegate, or authorize
 successive redelegations of, authority to act and to render decisions, to
 such officers and employees as the Administrator may find necessary. Within
 the limitations of such delegations, redelegations, or assignments, all
 official acts and decisions of such officers and employees shall have the
 same force and effect as though performed or rendered by the Administrator.
 (7) COORDINATION- The Administrator and the Secretary of Health and Human
 Services shall consult, on an ongoing basis, to ensure the coordination
 of the programs administered by the Administrator under this Act with
 the programs administered by the Secretary under the Social Security Act
 (42 U.S.C. 301 et seq.) and the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 201
 et seq.).
 (c) PERSONNEL- The Administrator shall appoint such additional officers and
 employees as the Administrator considers necessary to carry out the functions
 of the Administration under this Act. Except as otherwise provided in any
 other provision of law, such officers and employees shall be appointed,
 and their compensation shall be fixed, in accordance with title 5, United
 States Code.
 (d) EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS- The Administrator may procure the services
 of experts and consultants in accordance with the provisions of section
 3109 of title 5, United States Code.
 (e) REGULATIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Administrator may prescribe such policies and regulations
 regarding the national health care program as the Administrator determines to
 be necessary or appropriate, including policies and regulations relating to--
 (A) eligibility;
 (B) enrollment;
 (C) covered services;
 (D) State funding levels;
 (E) payment of health care providers;
 (F) fee schedules for health care providers;
 (G) quality assurance standards for health care facilities, other health
 care providers, and covered services;
 (H) certification and licensing of health care providers;
 (I) consumer protection standards;
 (J) cost-sharing, as described in section 323;
 (K) health care goals and priorities in consultation with the Public Health
 Service; and
 (L) education and training programs for health care providers.
 (2) QUALITY ASSURANCE, CERTIFICATION, AND LICENSING-
 (A) BASIS-
 (i) INFORMATION- In developing regulations under paragraph (1)(G), the
 Administrator shall take into consideration information from the national
 health care data base.
 (ii) PROFESSIONAL OPINIONS- In developing regulations under subparagraphs
 (G) and (H) of paragraph (1), the Administrator shall consider the opinions
 of all appropriate professional organizations.
 (iii) PEER REVIEW ORGANIZATIONS- In developing regulations under paragraph
 (1)(G), the Administrator shall consider the recommendations of utilization
 and quality control peer review organizations established under section
 1152 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-1).
 (iv) COUNCIL- In developing regulations under subparagraphs (G) and (I)
 of paragraph (1), the Administrator shall consider the recommendations of
 the National Council on Quality Assurance and Consumer Protection.
 (B) FACILITIES AND SERVICES- The Administrator shall prescribe regulations
 under paragraph (1)(G) covering all covered services and all health
 care facilities and other health care providers participating in the
 national health care program, including individual and group practitioners,
 hospitals, other inpatient and outpatient facilities, ambulatory facilities
 and services, home health agencies, care coordination services, and hospital
 discharge planning services.
 (f) PLANNING FUNCTIONS- The Administration shall--
 (1) ensure that State health budgets under section 301 reflect the goals
 and priorities recommended by State and local planning boards; and
 (2) meet at least biannually with representatives of State and local
 planning boards to--
 (A) assess implementation;
 (B) assist the boards in determining the goals and priorities for meeting
 health care needs; and
 (C) assist the boards in planning, on the basis of cost and utilization
 data available through the national health care data base, for the efficient
 and effective use of existing health resources,
within each State and local planning area.
 (g) PROGRAMS- The Administration shall establish and carry out, directly
 or through grants or contracts, Federal--
 (1) ombudsman programs;
 (2) hotlines for complaints; and
 (3) consumer and health care provider information and education programs
 designed to increase public understanding of the national health care
 program, including programs to distribute information from the national
 health care data base.
 (h) NATIONAL HEALTH CARE DATA BASE- The Administration shall establish and
 maintain a national health care data base, which shall include information
 regarding the quality, effectiveness, utilization, and cost of all covered
 services.
SEC. 402. NATIONAL HEALTH BOARD.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD- There shall be established in the Administration
 a National Health Board.
 (b) FUNCTIONS OF THE BOARD-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall advise the Administrator on policies
 related to the national health care program established under this Act.
 (2) SPECIFIC FUNCTIONS- Specific functions of the Board shall include--
 (A) studying and making recommendations regarding implementation of this Act
 and the most effective methods of providing covered services under this Act;
 (B) studying and making recommendations relating to the coordination of
 other programs that provide health care services;
 (C) reviewing and assessing the quality of service that the Administration
 provides to the public;
 (D) reviewing and assessing the progress of the Administration in developing
 needed improvements in the management of programs;
 (E) in consultation with the Administrator, reviewing the development and
 implementation of a long-range research and program evaluation plan for
 the Administration;
 (F) reviewing and assessing any major studies of health care services as
 may come to the attention of the Board;
 (G) assessing, for each region of the country, the information described
 in section 412(b)(1); and
 (H) conducting such other reviews and assessments as the Board determines
 to be appropriate.
 (c) STRUCTURE AND MEMBERSHIP OF THE BOARD- The Board shall be composed of
 25 members who shall be appointed by the President, with the advice and
 consent of the Senate, including--
 (1) 4 members representing consumers;
 (2) 4 members representing health care providers, each of whom shall
 represent a different provider group;
 (3) 4 representatives of Federal departments and agencies, including at
 least one individual representing a public health agency;
 (4) 4 representatives of State and local governments, including at least
 one individual representing a public health agency;
 (5) 1 member of the National Council on Quality Assurance and Consumer
 Protection;
 (6) 1 member representing the business community; and
 (7) 1 member representing organized labor.
 (d) TERMS OF APPOINTMENT- Each member of the Board shall serve for a term
 of 5 years, except that--
 (1) a member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration
 of the term for which a predecessor was appointed, shall be appointed for
 the remainder of such term; and
 (2) the terms of service of the members initially appointed shall be
 (as specified by the President) for such fewer number of years as will
 provide for the expiration of terms on a staggered basis.
 (e) VACANCIES- Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the Board shall be
 filled in the same manner as the original appointment. The vacancy shall not
 affect the power of the remaining members to execute the duties of the Board.
 (f) CHAIRPERSON- The Board shall select a Chairperson from among its members.
 (g) COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES-
 (1) COMPENSATION- Each member of the Board who is not an employee of the
 Federal Government shall receive compensation at the daily equivalent of 120
 percent of the rate specified for GS-15 of the General Schedule under section
 5332 of title 5, United States Code, for each day the member is engaged in
 the performance of duties for the Board, including attendance at meetings
 and conferences of the Board, and travel to conduct the duties of the Board.
 (2) TRAVEL EXPENSES- Each member of the Board shall receive travel expenses,
 including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees
 of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code,
 for each day the member is engaged in the performance of duties away from
 the home or regular place of business of the member.
 (h) PERSONNEL-
 (1) STAFF DIRECTOR- The Chairperson of the Board shall, without regard to
 title 5, United States Code, appoint a staff director who shall be paid
 at a rate equivalent to the rate for the Senior Executive Service.
 (2) ADDITIONAL STAFF- The Chairperson of the Board is authorized, without
 regard to title 5, United States Code, to appoint and fix the compensation
 of such staff as the Board determines to be necessary to carry out the
 functions of the Board.
 (3) LIMITATIONS- The rate of compensation for each staff member appointed
 under paragraph (2) shall not exceed the daily equivalent of 120 percent of
 the rate specified for GS-15 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of
 title 5, United States Code, for each day the staff member is engaged in
 the performance of duties for the Board. The Board may otherwise appoint
 and determine the compensation of staff without regard to the provisions
 of title 5, United States Code, that govern appointments in the competitive
 service, and the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53
 of title 5, United States Code, that relate to classification and General
 Schedule pay rates.
 (i) TERMINATION- Section 14 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5
 U.S.C. App.) shall not apply with respect to the Commission.
SEC. 403. NATIONAL COUNCIL ON QUALITY ASSURANCE AND CONSUMER PROTECTION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Administrator shall establish a National Council on
 Quality Assurance and Consumer Protection (referred to in this section as the
 `Council'), to conduct studies and oversight, and prepare recommendations
 concerning quality assurance and consumer protection procedures.
 (b) DUTIES-
 (1) STUDY AND REPORT- The Council shall conduct a study of quality
 assurance and consumer protection procedures. The Council shall submit a
 report to the Administrator containing the results of the study, including
 recommendations for regulations prescribed under subparagraphs (G) and
 (I) of section 401(e)(1).
 (2) OVERSIGHT- The Council shall collect information regarding the
 implementation of the regulations on a regular basis. The Council shall
 submit a report to the Administrator containing the information and
 recommendations for reform.
 (c) MEMBERSHIP- The Council shall be composed of 18 members appointed by
 the Administrator, including--
 (1) 6 individuals with expertise regarding quality assurance in medical
 and mental health fields;
 (2) 6 individuals representing consumers; and
 (3) 4 individuals representing health care providers.
 (d) TERM OF OFFICE- Each member of the Council shall serve for a term of
 5 years, except that--
 (1) a member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration
 of the term for which a predecessor was appointed, shall be appointed for
 the remainder of such term; and
 (2) the term of service of the members initially appointed shall be (as
 specified by the Administrator) for such fewer number of years as will
 provide for the expiration of terms on a staggered basis.
 (e) VACANCIES- Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the Council shall
 be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the position
 being vacated. The vacancy shall not affect the power of the remaining
 members to execute the duties of the Council.
 (f) CHAIRPERSON- The Council shall select a Chairperson from among its
 members.
 (g) COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES-
 (1) COMPENSATION- Each member of the Council who is not an employee of the
 Federal Government shall receive compensation at the daily equivalent of
 120 percent of the rate specified for GS-15 of the General Schedule under
 section 5332 of title 5, United States Code, for each day the member is
 engaged in the performance of duties for the Council, including attendance
 at meetings and conferences of the Council, and travel to conduct the
 duties of the Council.
 (2) TRAVEL EXPENSES- Each member of the Council shall receive travel
 expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized
 for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5,
 United States Code, for each day the member is engaged in the performance
 of duties away from the home or regular place of business of the member.
 (h) POWERS- The Council is authorized to--
 (1) hold such hearings and sit and act at such times;
 (2) take such testimony;
 (3) have such printing and binding done;
 (4) enter into such contracts and other arrangements;
 (5) make such expenditures; and
 (6) take such other actions,
as the Council may determine to be necessary to carry out the duties of
the Council.
 (i) OATHS- Any member of the Council may administer oaths or affirmations
 to witnesses appearing before the Council.
 (j) OBTAINING INFORMATION FROM FEDERAL AGENCIES- The Chairperson of the
 Council may secure directly from any Federal agency, information necessary
 to enable the Council to carry out the duties of the Council, if the
 information may be disclosed under section 552 of title 5, United States
 Code. Subject to the previous sentence, on the request of the Chairperson,
 the head of the agency shall furnish the information to the Council.
 (k) VOLUNTARY SERVICE- Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, United
 States Code, the Chairperson of the Council may accept for the Council
 voluntary services provided by a member of the Council.
 (l) GIFTS AND DONATIONS- The Council may accept, use, and dispose of gifts
 or donations of property in order to carry out the duties of the Council.
 (m) USE OF MAIL- The Council may use the United States mails in the same
 manner and under the same conditions as Federal agencies.
 (n) STAFF-
 (1) APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION- The Council may appoint and determine
 the compensation of such staff as the Council determines to be necessary
 to carry out the duties of the Council.
 (2) LIMITATIONS- The rate of compensation for each staff member shall not
 exceed the daily equivalent of 120 percent of the rate specified for GS-15
 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code,
 for each day the staff member is engaged in the performance of duties for the
 Council. The Council may otherwise appoint and determine the compensation
 of staff without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code,
 that govern appointments in the competitive service, and the provisions of
 chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code,
 that relate to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
 (o) EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS- The Chairperson of the Council may obtain
 such temporary and intermittent services of experts and consultants and
 compensate the experts and consultants in accordance with section 3109(b)
 of title 5, United States Code, as the Council determines to be necessary
 to carry out the duties of the Council.
 (p) DETAIL OF FEDERAL EMPLOYEES- On the request of the Chairperson of the
 Council, the head of any Federal agency shall detail, without reimbursement,
 any of the personnel of the agency to the Council to assist the Council
 in carrying out its duties. Any detail shall not interrupt or otherwise
 affect the civil service status or privileges of the Federal employee.
 (q) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE- On the request of the Chairperson of the Council,
 the head of a Federal agency shall provide such technical assistance to the
 Council as the Council determines to be necessary to carry out its duties.
 (r) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to the Council such sums as may be necessary to carry out the provisions
 of this subtitle. The sums shall remain available until expended, without
 fiscal year limitation.
 (s) TERMINATION- Section 14 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5
 U.S.C. App.) shall not apply with respect to the Council.
SEC. 404. MEDICAL MALPRACTICE COMMISSION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Administrator shall establish a Medical Malpractice
 Commission (referred to in this section as the `Commission'), to conduct
 a study and prepare recommendations concerning medical malpractice.
 (b) MALPRACTICE STUDY-
 (1) STUDY- The Commission shall conduct a study of medical malpractice.
 In conducting the study, the Commission shall examine methods for--
 (A) reducing costs associated with malpractice insurance;
 (B) reducing the basis for malpractice claims;
 (C) targeting physicians and other health care providers who are incompetent;
 and
 (D) developing mechanisms that will protect consumers who are victims
 of malpractice.
 (2) REPORT- Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of
 this subtitle, the Commission shall prepare and submit to the President
 and the appropriate committees of Congress a written report containing--
 (A) the findings and conclusions of the Commission resulting from the
 study conducted under paragraph (1); and
 (B) recommendations for medical malpractice reform, based on the findings
 and conclusions described in subparagraph (A).
 (c) MEMBERSHIP- The Commission shall be composed of 18 members appointed
 by the Administrator, including--
 (1) 3 individuals with expertise regarding health care services;
 (2) 3 individuals representing persons receiving health care services;
 (3) 3 individuals representing public payers;
 (4) 3 individuals representing private payers; and
 (5) 3 individuals representing providers of health care services.
 (d) TERM OF OFFICE- Members shall be appointed for the life of the
 Commission.
 (e) VACANCIES- Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the Commission
 shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the
 position being vacated. The vacancy shall not affect the power of the
 remaining members to execute the duties of the Commission.
 (f) CHAIRPERSON- The Commission shall select a Chairperson from among
 its members.
 (g) COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES-
 (1) COMPENSATION- Each member of the Commission who is not an employee of
 the Federal Government shall receive compensation at the daily equivalent
 of 120 percent of the rate specified for GS-15 of the General Schedule
 under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code, for each day the member
 is engaged in the performance of duties for the Commission, including
 attendance at meetings and conferences of the Commission, and travel to
 conduct the duties of the Commission.
 (2) TRAVEL EXPENSES- Each member of the Commission shall receive travel
 expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized
 for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5,
 United States Code, for each day the member is engaged in the performance
 of duties away from the home or regular place of business of the member.
 (h) POWERS- The Commission is authorized to--
 (1) hold such hearings and sit and act at such times;
 (2) take such testimony;
 (3) have such printing and binding done;
 (4) enter into such contracts and other arrangements;
 (5) make such expenditures; and
 (6) take such other actions,
as the Commission may determine to be necessary to carry out the duties of
the Commission.
 (i) OATHS- Any member of the Commission may administer oaths or affirmations
 to witnesses appearing before the Commission.
 (j) OBTAINING INFORMATION FROM FEDERAL AGENCIES- The Chairperson of the
 Commission may secure directly from any Federal agency, information necessary
 to enable the Commission to carry out the duties of the Commission, if the
 information may be disclosed under section 552 of title 5, United States
 Code. Subject to the previous sentence, on the request of the Chairperson,
 the head of the agency shall furnish the information to the Commission.
 (k) VOLUNTARY SERVICE- Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, United
 States Code, the Chairperson of the Commission may accept for the Commission
 voluntary services provided by a member of the Commission.
 (l) GIFTS AND DONATIONS- The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts
 or donations of property in order to carry out the duties of the Commission.
 (m) USE OF MAIL- The Commission may use the United States mails in the
 same manner and under the same conditions as Federal agencies.
 (n) STAFF-
 (1) APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION- The Commission may appoint and determine
 the compensation of such staff as the Commission determines to be necessary
 to carry out the duties of the Commission.
 (2) LIMITATIONS- The rate of compensation for each staff member shall not
 exceed the daily equivalent of 120 percent of the rate specified for GS-15
 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code
 for each day the staff member is engaged in the performance of duties for
 the Commission. The Commission may otherwise appoint and determine the
 compensation of staff without regard to the provisions of title 5, United
 States Code, that govern appointments in the competitive service, and the
 provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United
 States Code, that relate to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
 (o) EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS- The Chairperson of the Commission may obtain
 such temporary and intermittent services of experts and consultants and
 compensate the experts and consultants in accordance with section 3109(b)
 of title 5, United States Code, as the Commission determines to be necessary
 to carry out the duties of the Commission.
 (p) DETAIL OF FEDERAL EMPLOYEES- On the request of the Chairperson of
 the Commission, the head of any Federal agency shall detail, without
 reimbursement, any of the personnel of the agency to the Commission to
 assist the Commission in carrying out its duties. Any detail shall not
 interrupt or otherwise affect the civil service status or privileges of
 the Federal employee.
 (q) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE- On the request of the Chairperson of the
 Commission, the head of a Federal agency shall provide such technical
 assistance to the Commission as the Commission determines to be necessary
 to carry out its duties.
 (r) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to the Commission such sums as may be necessary to carry out the provisions
 of this subtitle. The sums shall remain available until expended, without
 fiscal year limitation.
 (s) TERMINATION- Notwithstanding section 14 of the Federal Advisory Committee
 Act (5 U.S.C. App.), the Commission shall terminate 3 years after the date
 of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 405. UTILIZATION AND QUALITY CONTROL PEER REVIEW ORGANIZATIONS.
 (a) ORGANIZATION- Section 1152 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C
 1320c-1) is amended by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the following
 new paragraph:
 `(1)(A) is composed of a substantial number of licensed health care
 providers who are--
 `(i) engaged in the practice of providing covered services under the
 National Health Care Act of 1992;
 `(ii) representative of the practicing health care providers in the area,
 designated by the Secretary under section 1153, with respect to which the
 entity shall perform services under this part; and
 `(iii) representative of the groups of health care providers providing
 services under the Act, with no group providing a majority of the membership
 of the organization; or
 `(B) has available to it, by arrangement or otherwise, the services of
 a sufficient number of the licensed health care providers described in
 subparagraph (A) to ensure adequate peer review of the services provided by
 the various medical specialties and subspecialties of health care providers
 under the Act;'.
 (b) FUNCTIONS- Section 1154(a) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1320c-2(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new
 paragraphs:
 `(17) The organization shall make recommendations to the Administrator
 of the National Health Care Administration regarding establishment and
 revision of regulations prescribed under section 401(e)(1)(G) of the
 National Health Care Act of 1992.
 `(18) The organization shall submit such reports to a Consumer Board
 established under section 1165(a) as the Secretary may by regulation
 require.'.
 (c) CONSUMER BOARDS- Part B of title XI of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1301 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new
 section:
`SEC. 1165. CONSUMER BOARDS.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Administrator shall establish Peer Review
 Organization Consumer Boards (referred to individually within this section
 as a `Board') within geographic regions specified by the Administrator.
 `(b) DUTIES-
 `(1) STUDY AND REPORT- A Board shall conduct annual evaluations of the
 organizations described in section 1152 within the geographic region served
 by the Board. The Board shall submit a report to the Administrator of the
 National Health Care Administration (hereafter in this section referred
 to as the `Administrator'), the National Board on Quality Assurance and
 Consumer Protection, and each Governor of a State within the region,
 containing the results of the evaluation, including recommendations for
 awards of contracts under this part.
 `(2) EDUCATION PROGRAMS- A Board shall establish and carry out education
 programs for consumers to provide information related to--
 `(A) implementation of the quality assurance regulations prescribed under
 section 401(e)(1)(G) of the National Health Care Act of 1992; and
 `(B) availability of assistance for consumers.
 `(c) MEMBERSHIP-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall be composed of 5 to 11 members, depending
 on the size of the region, appointed by the Administrator.
 `(2) REPRESENTATION- In appointing members to the Board, the Administrator
 shall ensure that the members are representative of the racial and ethnic
 composition of the geographic region served by the Board.
 `(3) ORGANIZATION REPRESENTATIVES- The Administrator shall appoint to each
 Board not fewer than two members who shall serve on the Board of Directors
 of an organization described in section 1152 within the region and who
 shall not be health care providers.
 `(d) TERM OF OFFICE- Each member of the Board shall serve for a term of
 3 years, except that--
 `(1) a member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration
 of the term for which a predecessor was appointed, shall be appointed for
 the remainder of such term; and
 `(2) the terms of service of the members initially appointed shall be
 (as specified by the Administrator) for such fewer number of years as will
 provide for the expiration of terms on a staggered basis.
 `(e) VACANCIES- Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the Board shall
 be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the position
 being vacated. The vacancy shall not affect the power of the remaining
 members to execute the duties of the Board.
 `(f) CHAIRPERSON- The Board shall select a Chairperson from among its
 members.
 `(g) COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES-
 `(1) COMPENSATION- Each member of the Board who is not an employee of the
 Federal Government shall receive compensation at the daily equivalent of 120
 percent of the rate specified for GS-15 of the General Schedule under section
 5332 of title 5, United States Code, for each day the member is engaged in
 the performance of duties for the Board, including attendance at meetings
 and conferences of the Board, and travel to conduct the duties of the Board.
 `(2) TRAVEL EXPENSES- Each member of the Board shall receive travel expenses,
 including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees
 of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code,
 for each day the member is engaged in the performance of duties away from
 the home or regular place of business of the member.
 `(h) POWERS- The Board is authorized to--
 `(1) hold such hearings and sit and act at such times;
 `(2) take such testimony;
 `(3) have such printing and binding done;
 `(4) enter into such contracts and other arrangements;
 `(5) make such expenditures; and
 `(6) take such other actions,
as the Board may determine to be necessary to carry out the duties of
the Board.
 `(i) OATHS- Any member of the Board may administer oaths or affirmations
 to witnesses appearing before the Board.
 `(j) OBTAINING INFORMATION FROM FEDERAL AGENCIES- The Chairperson of the
 Board may secure directly from any Federal agency, information necessary to
 enable the Board to carry out the duties of the Board, if the information
 may be disclosed under section 552 of title 5, United States Code. Subject
 to the previous sentence, on the request of the Chairperson, the head of
 the agency shall furnish the information to the Board.
 `(k) VOLUNTARY SERVICE- Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, United
 States Code, the Chairperson of the Board may accept for the Board voluntary
 services provided by a member of the Board.
 `(l) GIFTS AND DONATIONS- The Board may accept, use, and dispose of gifts
 or donations of property in order to carry out the duties of the Board.
 `(m) USE OF MAIL- The Board may use the United States mails in the same
 manner and under the same conditions as Federal agencies.
 `(n) STAFF-
 `(1) APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION- The Board may appoint and determine
 the compensation of such staff as the Board determines to be necessary to
 carry out the duties of the Board.
 `(2) LIMITATIONS- The rate of compensation for each staff member shall not
 exceed the daily equivalent of 120 percent of the rate specified for GS-15
 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code,
 for each day the staff member is engaged in the performance of duties for
 the Board. The Board may otherwise appoint and determine the compensation
 of staff without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code,
 that govern appointments in the competitive service, and the provisions of
 chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code,
 that relate to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
 `(o) EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS- The Chairperson of the Board may obtain
 such temporary and intermittent services of experts and consultants and
 compensate the experts and consultants in accordance with section 3109(b)
 of title 5, United States Code, as the Board determines to be necessary
 to carry out the duties of the Board.
 `(p) DETAIL OF FEDERAL EMPLOYEES- On the request of the Chairperson of the
 Board, the head of any Federal agency shall detail, without reimbursement,
 any of the personnel of the agency to the Board to assist the Board in
 carrying out its duties. Any detail shall not interrupt or otherwise affect
 the civil service status or privileges of the Federal employee.
 `(q) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE- On the request of the Chairperson of the Board,
 the head of a Federal agency shall provide such technical assistance to
 the Board as the Board determines to be necessary to carry out its duties.
 `(r) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to the Board such sums as may be necessary to carry out the provisions
 of this subtitle. The sums shall remain available until expended, without
 fiscal year limitation.
 `(s) TERMINATION- Section 14 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5
 U.S.C. App.) shall not apply with respect to the Board.'.
 (d) TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this subsection,
 sections 1153, 1154, 1155, 1160, and 1164 of the Social Security Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1320c-2, 1320c-3, 1320c-4, 1320c-9, and 1320c-13) are amended
 by striking `title XVIII' each place the term appears and inserting `the
 National Health Care Act of 1992'.
 (2) Section 1153(a)(2)(B) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1320c-2(a)(2)(B)) is amended by striking `title XIX' and inserting
 `the National Health Care Act of 1992'.
 (3) Section 1154(a)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1320c-3(a)(3)(A)) is amended by striking `title XVIII of this Act'
 and inserting `the National Health Care Act of 1992'.
 (4) Section 1154(a)(14) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-3(a)(14))
 is amended by striking `under such title' and inserting `under the National
 Health Care Act of 1992'.
 (5) Section 1156 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-5) is amended
 by striking `under this Act' each place the term appears and inserting
 `under the National Health Care Act of 1992'.
 (6) Section 1158(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-7(a)) is
 amended by striking `title XIX of this Act' and inserting `the National
 Health Care Act of 1992'.
 (7) Section 1161(5) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-12(5))
 is amended by striking `title XVIII and XIX of this Act' and inserting
 `the National Health Care Act of 1992'.
 (8) Section 1164(c)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-13(c)(2))
 is amended by striking `part A or part B of title XVIII' and inserting
 `the National Health Care Act of 1992'.
SEC. 406. PUBLIC HEALTH FUNCTIONS AND ACTIVITIES COMMISSION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Administrator shall establish a Public Health Functions
 and Activities Commission (referred to in this section as the `Commission').
 (b) DUTIES-
 (1) STUDY AND RECOMMENDATIONS- Not later than 6 months after the members
 of the Commission are appointed under subsection (c), the Commission shall
 conduct studies and prepare recommendations concerning--
 (A) public health functions and activities that should remain separate
 from the national health care program; and
 (B) the integration of public health programs into the national health
 care program.
 (2) REPORT- The Commission shall prepare and submit to the Administrator
 a report containing the recommendations described in paragraph (1).
 (c) MEMBERSHIP- The Commission shall be composed of 9 members appointed
 by the Administrator, including--
 (1) 4 individuals representing public health agencies at the Federal,
 State, and local levels;
 (2) 1 health economist; and
 (3) 3 other health professionals.
 (d) TERM OF OFFICE- Each member of the Commission shall serve for the life
 of the Commission.
 (e) VACANCIES- Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the Commission
 shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the
 position being vacated. The vacancy shall not affect the power of the
 remaining members to execute the duties of the Commission.
 (f) CHAIRPERSON- The Commission shall select a Chairperson from among
 its members.
 (g) COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES-
 (1) COMPENSATION- Members of the Commission shall not receive compensation
 for service on the Commission.
 (2) TRAVEL EXPENSES- Each member of the Commission shall receive travel
 expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized
 for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5,
 United States Code, for each day the member is engaged in the performance
 of duties away from the home or regular place of business of the member.
 (h) POWERS- The Commission is authorized to--
 (1) hold such hearings and sit and act at such times;
 (2) take such testimony;
 (3) have such printing and binding done;
 (4) enter into such contracts and other arrangements;
 (5) make such expenditures; and
 (6) take such other actions,
as the Commission may determine to be necessary to carry out the duties of
the Commission.
 (i) OATHS- Any member of the Commission may administer oaths or affirmations
 to witnesses appearing before the Commission.
 (j) OBTAINING INFORMATION FROM FEDERAL AGENCIES- The Chairperson of the
 Commission may secure directly from any Federal agency, information necessary
 to enable the Commission to carry out the duties of the Commission, if the
 information may be disclosed under section 552 of title 5, United States
 Code. Subject to the previous sentence, on the request of the Chairperson,
 the head of the agency shall furnish the information to the Commission.
 (k) VOLUNTARY SERVICE- Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, United
 States Code, the Chairperson of the Commission may accept for the Commission
 voluntary services provided by a member of the Commission.
 (l) GIFTS AND DONATIONS- The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts
 or donations of property in order to carry out the duties of the Commission.
 (m) USE OF MAIL- The Commission may use the United States mails in the
 same manner and under the same conditions as Federal agencies.
 (n) STAFF-
 (1) APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION- The Commission may appoint and determine
 the compensation of such staff as the Commission determines to be necessary
 to carry out the duties of the Commission.
 (2) LIMITATIONS- The rate of compensation for each staff member shall not
 exceed the daily equivalent of 120 percent of the rate specified for GS-15
 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code
 for each day the staff member is engaged in the performance of duties for
 the Commission. The Commission may otherwise appoint and determine the
 compensation of staff without regard to the provisions of title 5, United
 States Code, that govern appointments in the competitive service, and the
 provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United
 States Code, that relate to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
 (o) EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS- The Chairperson of the Commission may obtain
 such temporary and intermittent services of experts and consultants and
 compensate the experts and consultants in accordance with section 3109(b)
 of title 5, United States Code, as the Commission determines to be necessary
 to carry out the duties of the Commission.
 (p) DETAIL OF FEDERAL EMPLOYEES- On the request of the Chairperson of
 the Commission, the head of any Federal agency shall detail, without
 reimbursement, any of the personnel of the agency to the Commission to
 assist the Commission in carrying out its duties. Any detail shall not
 interrupt or otherwise affect the civil service status or privileges of
 the Federal employee.
 (q) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE- On the request of the Chairperson of the
 Commission, the head of a Federal agency shall provide such technical
 assistance to the Commission as the Commission determines to be necessary
 to carry out its duties.
 (r) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to the Commission such sums as may be necessary to carry out the provisions
 of this subtitle. The sums shall remain available until expended, without
 fiscal year limitation.
 (s) TERMINATION- The Commission shall terminate on submission of the report
 described in subsection (b)(2).
SEC. 407. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CENTERS.
 (a) CENTERS- The Administration shall provide on a regional basis (either
 directly or through contracts with nonprofit organizations) technical
 assistance centers for States and localities in--
 (1) health program planning, development, and implementation;
 (2) training;
 (3) quality assurance, monitoring, and evaluation;
 (4) budgeting;
 (5) payment procedures; and
 (6) development of integrated automated data processing systems.
 (b) STATES WITH LIMITED CAPACITY- The technical assistance centers shall
 provide resources to assist States that lack the capacity to implement
 certain aspects of the national health care program.
Subtitle B--State and Local Administration
SEC. 411. STATE AGENCY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- In order for a State to be eligible to receive payments under
 section 302, the State shall, in accordance with regulations established
 by the Administration, designate a State agency to be the sole State agency
 to carry out a State program under this Act.
 (b) PLANNING FUNCTIONS- The State agency shall develop, on the basis of
 recommendations made by State and local planning boards under section
 412(c)--
 (1) goals and priorities for developing health policy and programs;
 (2) a plan for the equitable distribution of health resources, including
 the development of specialty health centers that--
 (A) concentrate highly specialized medical procedures, equipment, and
 trained specialists; and
 (B) avoid duplication of services; and
 (3) a plan for the integration of health services with appropriate social
 and human services.
SEC. 412. STATE AND LOCAL PLANNING BOARDS.
 (a) PLANNING BOARDS-
 (1) STATE BOARD- Each State agency shall establish, in accordance with
 regulations established by the Administration, a State planning board,
 which shall be composed of 12 members who shall be appointed by the head
 of the State program, including--
 (A) 4 members representing consumers, who shall be representative of the
 population of the State;
 (B) 3 members representing health care providers;
 (C) 1 member representing the business community;
 (D) 1 member representing organized labor; and
 (E) 2 representatives of appropriate State agencies, including health, public
 health, social services, education, public welfare, and employment agencies.
 (2) LOCAL BOARDS- Each State shall establish, in accordance with regulations
 established by the Administration, local planning boards, which shall
 be composed of 7 members who shall be appointed by the head of the State
 program, including--
 (A) 2 members representing consumers, who shall be representative of the
 population of the local planning area;
 (B) 2 members representing health care providers; and
 (C) 2 representatives of appropriate local agencies, including health, public
 health, social services, education, public welfare, and employment agencies.
 (3) TERMS OF APPOINTMENT- Each member of a State or local planning board
 shall serve for a term of 3 years, except that a member appointed to
 fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the term for which a
 predecessor was appointed, shall be appointed for the remainder of such term.
 (4) VACANCIES- Any vacancy occurring in the membership of a State or
 local planning board shall be filled in the same manner as the original
 appointment. The vacancy shall not affect the power of the remaining
 members to execute the duties of the board.
 (b) ASSESSMENT-
 (1) INFORMATION- The State and local planning boards shall assess, for
 each State or local planning area, respectively--
 (A) the demand for, and quality, supply, and distribution of, health
 resources, including--
 (i) acute care hospitals;
 (ii) specialized inpatient facilities;
 (iii) outpatient facilities;
 (iv) health care providers;
 (v) specialized medical equipment; and
 (vi) home and community-based health programs; and
 (B) the medical, mental, and psychosocial health needs.
 (2) EMPHASIS- In conducting the assessment described in paragraph (1),
 the State and local planning boards shall give special attention to health
 professional shortage areas and special populations of consumers.
 (3) DATA- In conducting the assessment, the State and local planning
 boards shall consider utilization and cost data from the national health
 care data base.
 (c) RECOMMENDATIONS- The State and local planning boards shall make
 recommendations to the State agency regarding the goals, priorities, and
 plans described in section 411(b), and shall make recommendations to the
 Administration regarding the State budget described in section 301.
TITLE V--TRANSITION AND RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER PROGRAMS
SEC. 501. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 The national health care program shall first apply to covered services
 furnished after January 1, 1995.
SEC. 502. REPEALS AND INCORPORATIONS.
 (a) REPEAL OF MEDICARE AND MEDICAID-
 (1) REPEAL- Titles XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395
 et seq. and 1396 et seq.) are repealed.
 (b) REPEAL OF CHAMPUS PROVISIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL-
 (A) AMENDMENTS TO CHAPTER 55 OF TITLE 10- Sections 1079 through 1083,
 1086, and 1097 through 1100 of title 10, United States Code, are repealed.
 (B) TABLE OF SECTIONS- The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 55
 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by striking the items relating
 to the sections referred to in subparagraph (A).
 (2) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code,
 is amended as follows:
 (A) DEFINITION- Section 1072 is amended by striking paragraph (4).
 (B) REIMBURSEMENT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS- Section 1104(b)
 is amended--
 (i) in the subsection heading, by striking `from CHAMPUS funds'; and
 (ii) by striking `from funds' and all that follows and inserting `for
 medical care provided by the Department of Veterans Affairs pursuant to
 such agreement.'.
 (3) IMPLEMENTATION-
 (A) TERMINATION OF HEALTH CARE- No health care may be provided under a
 CHAMPUS contract on or after the effective date of this section.
 (B) SAVINGS PROVISION- Payments for health care provided pursuant to a
 CHAMPUS contract before such date shall be made in accordance with such
 contract and the provisions of law referred to in paragraphs (1)(A) and
 (2), as such provisions of law were in effect on the day before such
 effective date.
 (C) DEFINITION- As used in this subsection, the term `CHAMPUS contract'
 means--
 (i) a contract for an insurance, medical service, or health care plan
 entered into pursuant to section 1079(a) of title 10, United States Code;
 (ii) a contract for health benefits under such a plan entered into pursuant
 to section 1086(a) of such title; and
 (iii) a contract for the delivery of health care entered into pursuant to
 section 1097 of such title.
 (c) REPEAL OF DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS MEDICAL CARE PROVISIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Title 38, United States Code, is amended as follows:
 (A) CHAPTER 17- Chapter 17 is repealed.
 (B) CHAPTER 73- Chapter 73 is repealed.
 (C) CHAPTER 81- Chapter 81 is repealed.
 (D) CHAPTER 82- Chapter 82 is repealed.
 (2) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (A) RELATING TO CHAPTER 17- The table of chapters at the beginning of title
 38, United States Code, and part II of such title are amended by striking
 out the item relating to chapter 17.
 (B) RELATING TO CHAPTER 73- The table of chapters at the beginning of
 such title and part V of such title are amended by striking out the item
 relating to chapter 73.
 (C) RELATING TO CHAPTERS 81 AND 82- The table of chapters at the beginning
 of such title and part VI of such title are amended by striking out the
 items relating to chapter 81 and 82.
 (3) IMPLEMENTATION-
 (A) TERMINATION OF HEALTH CARE AND OTHER ASSISTANCE- No health care,
 nursing home care, domiciliary care, other medical care, or financial
 or other assistance related to such care may be provided by contract or
 otherwise under chapter 17, 73, 81, or 82 of title 38, United States Code,
 on or after the effective date of this section.
 (B) SAVINGS PROVISION-
 (i) IN GENERAL- Payments pursuant to contracts and agreements referred
 to in clause (ii) before such date shall be made in accordance with such
 contracts and agreements and the provisions of law referred to in paragraph
 (1) as such provisions were in effect on the day before such effective date.
 (ii) CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS- Contracts and agreements referred to in clause
 (i) are contracts and agreements under title 38, United States Code that are:
 (I) contracts for hospital care and medical services in non-Department of
 Veterans Affairs facilities under section 603;
 (II) contracts with organizations for emergency medical services under
 section 611;
 (III) contracts for medical treatment in such facilities under section
 612(a)(6);
 (IV) contracts for counseling and related medical health services under
 section 612A(e);
 (V) contracts for prosthetic appliances under section 614(a);
 (VI) contracts for therapeutic and rehabilitative services under section
 618(b);
 (VII) contracts for nursing home care and adult day health care under
 section 620(d)(1);
 (VIII) contracts for treatment of alcohol, drug abuse, or abuse disabilities
 under section 620A(a)(1);
 (IX) contracts for hospital care, medical services and nursing home care
 abroad under section 624(c);
 (X) contracts to provide care and treatment by the Veterans Memorial
 Medical Center of the Philippines under section 632(a);
 (XI) contracts for activities conducted by employees of the Federal
 Government other than employees of the Department of Veterans Affairs
 under section 5010(c);
 (XII) sharing agreements with the Department of Defense under section
 5011(d);
 (XIII) contracts for furnishing health-care services to members of the
 Armed Forces under section 5011(b);
 (XIV) contracts for prosthetic appliances under section 5023;
 (XV) contracts for procurement of health-care items under section 5025(b);
 and
 (XVI) contracts for securing specialized medical resources under section
 5053(a).
 (d) REPEAL OF FEDERAL EMPLOYEES HEALTH BENEFITS PROGRAM- Chapter 89 of
 title 5, United States Code, is repealed.
 (e) PROVISION OF SERVICES BY INDIAN HEALTH SERVICE- Notwithstanding
 any other provision of law, the Secretary of Health and Human Services
 shall provide covered services to eligible individuals not enrolled in
 the Program through the Indian Health Service in lieu of health services
 provided by the Service on the date of the enactment of this Act, including
 services provided under sections 201 through 204 of the Indian Health Care
 Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1621 et seq.).
 (f) EFFECTIVE DATE- Except as provided in section 503(b), this section
 and the amendments made by this section shall take effect on January 1, 1995.
SEC. 503. TRANSITION.
 (a) STATE PROGRAM GRANTS-
 (1) ESTABLISHMENT- The Administrator shall award grants to States to enable
 the States to plan and develop State programs.
 (2) ELIGIBILITY- To be eligible to receive a grant under paragraph (1), a
 State shall submit an application to the Administrator at such time, in such
 manner, and containing such information as the Administrator may require.
 (3) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to carry out this subsection such sums as may be necessary for each of
 the 1993 through 1995 fiscal years.
 (b) STUDY AND REPORT-
 (1) STUDY- The Administrator shall, in consultation with the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services, the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of
 Veterans Affairs, and the Director of the Office of Personnel Management
 examine possible strategies for accomplishing the transition and provision
 of services described in section 502.
 (2) REPORT- Not later than January 1, 1993, the Administrator shall submit
 to the appropriate committees of Congress a report containing--
 (A) the recommendations of the Public Health Functions and Activities
 Commission set forth in the report described in section 406(b)(2);
 (B) the findings and conclusions of the Administrator, based on the study
 described in paragraph (1); and
 (C) recommendations for legislative reform to accomplish the transition
 and provision of services described in section 502.
 (3) MODIFICATION- Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act and to
 the extent the Administration determines it is appropriate and fiscally
 responsible, the Administration may include in the report recommendations
 to reduce the period between the date of the enactment of this Act and
 the effective dates otherwise provided in this Act.
 (4) EFFECT OF RECOMMENDATIONS- Unless the Congress enacts a disapproval
 resolution under the procedures described in section 504 not later than
 the date that is 60 days after the submission of the report described in
 paragraph (2), on such date--
 (A) the recommendations contained within the report shall have the force
 of law; and
 (B) the Secretary shall, in accordance with this Act, provide covered
 services to all individuals that received the services under the provisions
 of law specified in section 502.
 (c) REGULATIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Administrator shall issue such regulations as are
 necessary to provide for a transition to the national health care program
 from the programs that are repealed under subsections (a) through (c) of
 section 502, and the provisions of services by the Indian Health Service
 under section 502(d).
 (2) CONSIDERATIONS- In promulgating the regulations described in paragraph
 (1) the Administrator shall take into consideration the findings and
 conclusions of the study described in subsection (b)(1).
SEC. 504. RULES GOVERNING CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION.
 (a) RULES OF HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES AND SENATE- This section is enacted
 by the Congress--
 (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the House of Representatives
 and the Senate, respectively, and as such is deemed a part of the rules of
 each House, respectively, but applicable only with respect to the procedure
 to be followed in that House in the case of disapproval resolutions described
 in subsection (b), and supersedes other rules only to the extent that such
 rules are inconsistent therewith; and
 (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House
 to change the rules (so far as relating to the procedure of that House)
 at any time, in the same manner and to the same extent as in the case of
 any other rule of that House.
 (b) TERMS OF THE RESOLUTION- For purposes of this Act, the term `disapproval
 resolution' means only a joint resolution of the two Houses of the Congress,
 providing in--
 (1) the matter after the resolving clause of which is as follows: `That the
 Congress disapproves the action of the National Health Care Administration
 as submitted by the Administration on XXXXXXXXXXXXXX', the blank space
 being filled in with the appropriate date; and
 (2) the title of which is as follows: `Joint Resolution disapproving the
 action of the National Health Care Administration'.
 (c) INTRODUCTION AND REFERRAL- On the day on which the action of the
 Administration is transmitted to the House of Representatives and the
 Senate, a disapproval resolution with respect to such action shall be
 introduced (by request) in the House of Representatives by the Majority
 Leader of the House, for himself and the Minority Leader of the House,
 or by Members of the House designated by the Majority Leader of the
 House, for himself and the Minority Leader of the House, or by Members
 of the House designated by the Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the
 House; and shall be introduced (by request) in the Senate by the Majority
 Leader of the Senate, for himself and the Minority Leader of the Senate,
 or by Members of the Senate designated by the Majority Leader and Minority
 Leader of the Senate. If either House is not in session on the day on which
 such an action is transmitted, the disapproval resolution with respect to
 such action shall be introduced in the House, as provided in the preceding
 sentence, on the first day thereafter on which the House is in session. The
 disapproval resolution introduced in the House of Representatives and the
 Senate shall be referred to the appropriate committees of each House.
 (d) AMENDMENTS PROHIBITED- No amendment to a disapproval resolution
 shall be in order in either the House of Representatives or the Senate;
 and no motion to suspend the application of this subsection shall be in
 order in either House, nor shall it be in order in either House for the
 Presiding Officer to entertain a request to suspend the application of
 this subsection by unanimous consent.
 (e) PERIOD FOR COMMITTEE AND FLOOR CONSIDERATION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), if the committee
 or committees of either House to which a disapproval resolution has
 been referred have not reported it at the close of the 45th day after
 its introduction, such committee or committees shall be automatically
 discharged from further consideration of the disapproval resolution and
 it shall be placed on the appropriation calendar. A vote on final passage
 of the disapproval resolution shall be taken in each House on or before
 the close of the 45th day after the disapproval resolution is reported
 by the committees or committee of that House to which it was referred,
 or after such committee or committees have been discharged from further
 consideration of the disapproval resolution. If prior to the passage by
 one House of a disapproval resolution of that House, that House receives
 the same disapproval resolution from the other House then--
 (A) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if no disapproval
 resolution had been received from the other House; but
 (B) the vote on final passage shall be on the disapproval resolution of
 the other House.
 (2) COMPUTATION OF DAYS- For purposes of paragraph (1), in computing a
 number of days in either House, there shall be excluded any day on which
 the House is not in session.
 (f) FLOOR CONSIDERATION IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES-
 (1) MOTION TO PROCEED- A motion in the House of Representatives to proceed
 to the consideration of a disapproval resolution shall be highly privileged
 and not debatable. An amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor
 shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion
 is agreed to or disagreed to.
 (2) DEBATE- Debate in the House of Representatives on a disapproval
 resolution shall be limited to not more than 20 hours, which shall be
 divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the disapproval
 resolution. A motion further to limit debate shall not be debatable. It
 shall not be in order to move to recommit a disapproval resolution or to
 move to reconsider the vote by which a disapproval resolution is agreed
 to or disagreed to.
 (3) MOTION TO POSTPONE- Motions to postpone, made in the House of
 Representatives with respect to the consideration of a disapproval
 resolution, and motions to proceed to the consideration of other business,
 shall be decided without debate.
 (4) APPEALS- All appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the
 application of the Rules of the House of Representatives to the procedure
 relating to a disapproval resolution shall be decided without debate.
 (5) GENERAL RULES APPLY- Except to the extent specifically provided in the
 preceding provisions of this subsection, consideration of a disapproval
 resolution shall be governed by the Rules of the House of Representatives
 applicable to other bills and resolutions in similar circumstances.
 (g) FLOOR CONSIDERATION IN THE SENATE-
 (1) MOTION TO PROCEED- A motion in the Senate to proceed to the consideration
 of a disapproval resolution shall be privileged and not debatable. An
 amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor shall it be in order to
 move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
 (2) GENERAL DEBATE- Debate in the Senate on a disapproval resolution,
 and all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall
 be limited to not more than 20 hours. The time shall be equally divided
 between, and controlled by, the Majority Leader and the Minority Leader
 or their designees.
 (3) DEBATE OF MOTIONS AND APPEALS- Debate in the Senate on any debatable
 motion or appeal in connection with a disapproval resolution shall be
 limited to not more than 1 hour, to be equally divided between, and
 controlled by, the mover and the manager of the disapproval resolution,
 except that in the event the manager of the disapproval resolution is
 in favor of any such motion or appeal, the time in opposition thereto,
 shall be controlled by the Minority Leader or his designee. Such leaders,
 or either of them, may, from time under their control on the passage of
 a disapproval resolution, allot additional time to any Senator during the
 consideration of any debatable motion or appeal.
 (4) OTHER MOTIONS- A motion in the Senate to further limit debate is not
 debatable. A motion to recommit a disapproval resolution is not in order.
 (h) POINT OF ORDER REQUIRING SUPERMAJORITY FOR MODIFICATIONS TO ACTIONS
 ONCE APPROVED-
 (1) IN GENERAL- It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives
 or the Senate to consider any amendment to the actions of the National
 Health Care Administration except as provided in paragraph (2).
 (2) WAIVER- The point of order described in paragraph (1) may be waived
 or suspended in the House of Representatives or the Senate only, by the
 affirmative vote of three-fifths of the Members duly chosen and sworn.
SEC. 505. RELATION TO EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT INCOME SECURITY ACT OF 1974.
 The provisions of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (29 U.S.C. 1001
 et seq.) are superseded to the extent inconsistent with the requirements
 of this Act.
TITLE VI--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SEC. 601. BILL OF RIGHTS.
 (a) SENSE OF CONGRESS- It is the sense of Congress that consumers in the
 national health care program shall have the rights specified in the bill
 of rights set forth in subsection (b).
 (b) BILL OF RIGHTS-
 (1) Consumers shall have the right to--
 (A) receive timely health-related information; and
 (B) be involved in decisions affecting their health;
 (C) receive prompt evaluation, humane care, and professional treatment;
 (D) receive services without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national
 origin, age, health condition, sexual preference, income, language, or
 geographic residence in an urban or rural area;
 (E) refuse treatment or prescribed services and know the consequences of
 such refusal;
 (F) be treated with dignity and respect;
 (G) maintain privacy and confidentiality;
 (H) maintain confidentiality of financial and health records;
 (I) obtain access to medical records;
 (J) obtain treatment in the least restrictive setting;
 (K) express or file grievances;
 (L) be informed if treatment or services are denied, reduced, or terminated;
 (M) obtain information and forms that are easily understood and that are
 written in a language understood by the consumer or health care provider;
 (N) obtain health care services that are sensitive to the cultural attitudes
 of the consumer population being served; and
 (O) receive quality health care services in any penal institution.
SEC. 602. RESEARCH AND DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Administrator shall establish and carry out, directly
 or by grant, research and demonstration projects that will examine--
 (1)(A) ways of better providing covered services through the national
 health care program to consumers residing in rural, central city, and
 other health professional shortage areas; and
 (B) alternative models for delivering primary health and mental health
 services to medically underserved populations;
 (2) the effectiveness of the national health care program in enabling
 access to health care services for minorities, women, and other special
 populations who have traditionally had problems with access to health care
 (to be initiated 2 years from the date of implementation);
 (3) the relationship between psychosocial well-being and illness and disease;
 (4) successful health education and treatment approaches in avoiding
 preventable illnesses and diseases;
 (5) innovative prevention, treatment, and service delivery approaches to
 health and mental health care delivery to mentally impaired persons;
 (6) innovative prevention, treatment, and service delivery approaches to
 improve the mental health and psychosocial well-being of the elderly;
 (7) the impact of interprofessional collaboration on the effectiveness
 of care coordination in inpatient and outpatient health care settings,
 including long-term care settings;
 (8) quality assurance and program effectiveness with respect to mental
 health care services;
 (9) the development of quality indicators for measuring treatment
 effectiveness; and
 (10) the effectiveness and cost of selective, widely used diagnostic and
 treatment procedures.
 (b) APPLICATION- To be eligible to receive a grant under this section,
 an entity shall submit an application to the Administrator at such time,
 in such manner, and containing such information as the Administrator
 may require, including an assurance that the entity shall submit to the
 Administrator such information as the Administrator may require to comply
 with subsection (c).
 (c) ANNUAL REPORT- The Administrator shall prepare and submit a report
 to Congress by not later than April 1 of each year (beginning with 1995)
 concerning the progress of the research and demonstration projects conducted
 under this section.
SEC. 603. PREVENTION, HEALTH PROMOTION, AND HEALTH AWARENESS PROGRAM GRANTS.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Administrator shall make grants to eligible entities
 to establish--
 (1) innovative statewide or local prevention and health promotion programs,
 such as community-based wellness and outreach programs and school-based
 programs; and
 (2) health awareness programs in schools, workplaces, health and social
 agencies.
 (b) APPLICATION- To be eligible to receive a grant under this section, an
 entity shall submit an application to the Administrator at such time, in such
 manner, and containing such information as the Administrator may require.