102d CONGRESS
1st Session
H. R. 1
AN ACT
To amend the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to restore and strengthen civil rights
laws that ban discrimination in employment, and for other purposes.
HR 1 EH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1
AN ACT
To amend the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to restore and strengthen civil rights
laws that ban discrimination in employment, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Civil Rights and Women's Equity in Employment
 Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
 (a) FINDINGS- Congress finds that--
 (1) in a series of recent decisions addressing employment discrimination
 claims under Federal law, the Supreme Court cut back dramatically on the
 scope and effectiveness of civil rights protections; and
 (2) existing protections and remedies under Federal law are not adequate
 to deter unlawful discrimination or to compensate victims of such
 discrimination.
 (b) PURPOSES- The purposes of this Act are to--
 (1) respond to the Supreme Court's recent decisions by restoring the civil
 rights protections that were dramatically limited by those decisions; and
 (2) strengthen existing protections and remedies available under Federal
 civil rights laws to provide more effective deterrence and adequate
 compensation for victims of discrimination.
TITLE I
SEC. 101. DEFINITIONS.
 Section 701 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e) is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(l) The term `complaining party' means the Commission, the Attorney General,
 or a person who may bring an action or proceeding under this title.
 `(m) The term `demonstrates' means meets the burdens of production and
 persuasion.
 `(n) The term `group of employment practices' means a combination of
 employment practices that produces one or more decisions with respect to
 employment, employment referral, or admission to a labor organization,
 apprenticeship or other training or retraining program.
 `(o)(1) The term `required by business necessity' means the practice or
 group of practices must bear a significant and manifest relationship to
 the requirements for effective job performance.
 `(2) Paragraph (1) is meant to codify the meaning of, and the type and
 sufficiency of evidence required to prove, `business necessity' as used in
 Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U.S. 424 (1971), and to overrule the treatment
 of business necessity as a defense in Wards Cove Packing Co. Inc., v. Atonio,
 490 U.S. 642 (1989).
 `(p) The term `requirements for effective job performance' may include,
 in addition to effective performance of the actual work activities,
 factors which bear on such performance, such as attendance, punctuality,
 and not engaging in misconduct or insubordination.
 `(q) The term `respondent' means an employer, employment agency, labor
 organization, joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship
 or other training or retraining programs, including on-the-job training
 programs, or those Federal entities subject to the provisions of section
 717 (or the heads thereof).'.
SEC. 102. RESTORING THE BURDEN OF PROOF IN DISPARATE IMPACT CASES.
 Section 703 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-2) is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(k) PROOF OF UNLAWFUL EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES IN DISPARATE IMPACT CASES- (1)(A)
 An unlawful employment practice based on disparate impact is established
 under this title if a complaining party demonstrates that a disparate impact
 on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin results
 from an employment practice or group of employment practices, and the
 respondent fails to demonstrate that such practice or group of practices
 is required by business necessity, except that an employment practice or
 group of practices demonstrated to be required by business necessity shall
 be unlawful if the complaining party demonstrates that another available
 practice or group of practices with less disparate impact (which difference
 is more than merely negligible) would serve the respondent as well.
 `(B) If a complaining party demonstrates that a disparate impact results from
 a group of employment practices, such party shall be required after discovery
 to demonstrate which specific practice or practices within the group results
 in disparate impact unless the court finds that the complaining party
 after diligent effort cannot identify, from records or other information
 of the respondent reasonably available (through discovery or otherwise),
 which specific practice or practices contributed to the disparate impact.
 `(C) If the respondent demonstrates that a specific employment practice
 within a group of employment practices does not contribute in a meaningful
 way to the disparate impact, the respondent shall not be required to
 demonstrate that such practice is required by business necessity.
 `(2) A demonstration that an employment practice is required by business
 necessity may be used as a defense only against a claim under this
 subsection.
 `(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, a rule barring the
 employment of an individual who currently and knowingly uses or possesses
 an illegal drug as defined in Schedules I and II of section 102(6) of
 the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802(6)), other than the use or
 possession of a drug taken under the supervision of a licensed health care
 professional, or any other use or possession authorized by the Controlled
 Substances Act or any other provision of Federal law, shall be considered
 an unlawful employment practice under this title only if such rule is
 adopted or applied with an intent to discriminate because of race, color,
 religion, sex, or national origin.
 `(4) The mere existence of a statistical imbalance in an employer's workforce
 on account of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin is not alone
 sufficient to establish a prima facie case of disparate impact violation.
 `(5) For purposes of this subsection, a respondent may rely upon relative
 qualifications or skills as determined by relative performance or degree
 of success on a selection factor, criterion, or procedure: Provided,
 That if such reliance results in a disparate impact based on race, color,
 religion, sex, or national origin, such reliance must be demonstrated by
 the respondent to be required by business necessity.'.
SEC. 103. CLARIFYING PROHIBITION AGAINST IMPERMISSIBLE CONSIDERATION OF RACE,
COLOR, RELIGION, SEX, OR NATIONAL ORIGIN IN EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 703 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42
 U.S.C. 2000e-2), as amended by section 102, is amended by adding at the
 end thereof the following:
 `(l) DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE NEED NOT BE SOLE MOTIVATING FACTOR- Except
 as otherwise provided in this title, an unlawful employment practice
 is established when the complaining party demonstrates that race, color,
 religion, sex, or national origin was a motivating factor for such employment
 practice, even though other factors also contributed to such practice.'.
 (b) ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS- Section 706(g) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(g))
 is amended by inserting before the period in the last sentence the following:
 `or, in a case where a violation is established under section 703(l),
 if the respondent demonstrates that it would have taken the same action
 in the absence of any discrimination. In any case in which a violation is
 established under section 703(l), damages may be awarded only for injury
 that is attributable to the unlawful employment practice'.
SEC. 104. FACILITATING PROMPT AND ORDERLY RESOLUTION OF CHALLENGES TO
EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES IMPLEMENTING LITIGATED OR CONSENT JUDGMENTS OR ORDERS.
 Section 703 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-2), as
 amended by sections 102 and 103, is amended by adding at the end thereof
 the following:
 `(m) FINALITY OF LITIGATED OR CONSENT JUDGMENTS OR ORDERS- (1)
 Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and except as provided in
 paragraph (2), an employment practice that implements and is within the
 scope of a litigated or consent judgment or order resolving a claim of
 employment discrimination under the United States Constitution or Federal
 civil rights laws may not be challenged in a claim under the United States
 Constitution or Federal civil rights laws--
 `(A) by a person who, prior to the entry of such judgment or order, had--
 `(i) actual notice from any source of the proposed judgment or order
 sufficient to apprise such person that such judgment or order might affect
 the interests of such person and that an opportunity was available to
 present objections to such judgment or order; and
 `(ii) a reasonable opportunity to present objections to such judgment
 or order;
 `(B) by a person with respect to whom the requirements of subparagraph
 (A) are not satisfied, if the court determines that the interests of such
 person were adequately represented by another person who challenged such
 judgment or order prior to or after the entry of such judgment or order; or
 `(C) if the court that entered the judgment or order determines that
 reasonable efforts were made to provide notice to interested persons.
A determination under subparagraph (C) shall be made prior to the entry of
the judgment or order, except that if the judgment or order was entered
prior to the date of the enactment of this subsection, the determination
may be made at any reasonable time.
 `(2) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to--
 `(A) alter the standards for intervention under rule 24 of the Federal Rules
 of Civil Procedure or apply to the rights of parties who have successfully
 intervened pursuant to such rule in the original proceeding;
 `(B) apply to the rights of parties to the action in which the litigated or
 consent judgment or order was entered, or of members of a class represented
 or sought to be represented in such action, or of members of a group on
 whose behalf relief was sought in such action by the Federal Government;
 `(C) prevent challenges to a litigated or consent judgment or order on
 the ground that such judgment or order was obtained through collusion
 or fraud, or is transparently invalid or was entered by a court lacking
 subject matter jurisdiction; or
 `(D) authorize or permit the denial to any person of the due process of
 law required by the United States Constitution.
 `(3) Any action, not precluded under this subsection, that challenges an
 employment practice that implements and is within the scope of a litigated or
 consent judgment or order of the type referred to in paragraph (1) shall be
 brought in the court, and if possible before the judge, that entered such
 judgment or order. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude a transfer
 of such action pursuant to section 1404 of title 28, United States Code.'.
SEC. 105. STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS; APPLICATION TO CHALLENGES TO SENIORITY
SYSTEMS.
 (a) STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS- Section 706(e) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(e)) is amended--
 (1) by striking out `one hundred and eighty days' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `540 days';
 (2) by inserting after `occurred' the first time it appears `or has been
 applied to affect adversely the person aggrieved, whichever is later,';
 (3) by striking out `, except that in' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `. In'; and
 (4) by striking out `such charge shall be filed' and all that follows
 through `whichever is earlier, and'.
 (b) APPLICATION TO CHALLENGES TO SENIORITY SYSTEMS- Section 703(h) of such
 Act (42 U.S.C. 2000e-2) is amended by inserting after the first sentence
 the following: `Where a seniority system or seniority practice is part of
 a collective bargaining agreement and such system or practice was included
 in such agreement with the intent to discriminate on the basis of race,
 color, religion, sex, or national origin, the application of such system
 or practice during the period that such collective bargaining agreement
 is in effect shall be an unlawful employment practice.'.
SEC. 106. PROVIDING FOR DAMAGES IN CASES OF INTENTIONAL DISCRIMINATION.
 (a) DAMAGES GENERALLY- Section 706(g) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42
 U.S.C. 2000e-5(g)) is amended by inserting before the last sentence the
 following: `With respect to an unlawful employment practice (other than
 an unlawful employment practice established in accordance with section
 703(k)) or in the case of an unlawful employment practice under the
 Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (other than an unlawful employment
 practice established in accordance with paragraph (3)(A) or paragraph (6)
 of section 102(b) of that Act as it relates to standards and criteria that
 tend to screen out individuals with disabilities)--
 `(A) compensatory damages may be awarded; and
 `(B) if the respondent (other than a government, government agency, or a
 political subdivision) engaged in the unlawful employment practice with
 malice, or with reckless or callous indifference to the federally protected
 rights of others, punitive damages may be awarded against such respondent;
in addition to the relief authorized by the preceding sentences of this
subsection, except that compensatory damages shall not include backpay or
any interest thereon. Compensatory and punitive damages and jury trials
shall be available only for claims of intentional discrimination. If
compensatory or punitive damages are sought with respect to a claim of
intentional discrimination arising under this title, any party may demand
a trial by jury.'.
 (b) LIMITATION ON PUNITIVE DAMAGES- Section 706(g) of the Civil Rights
 Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-(g)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(1)' after `(g)'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 `(2) The amount of punitive damages that may be awarded under paragraph
 (1)(B) to an individual against a respondent shall not exceed--
 `(A) $150,000; or
 `(B) an amount equal to the sum of compensatory damages awarded under
 paragraph (1)(A) and equitable monetary relief awarded under paragraph (1);
whichever is greater.'.
SEC. 107. CLARIFYING ATTORNEY'S FEE PROVISION.
 Section 706(k) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5(k))
 is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(1)' after `(k)';
 (2) by inserting `(including expert fees and other litigation expenses)
 and' after `attorney's fee';
 (3) by striking out `as part of the'; and
 (4) by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(2) No waiver of all or substantially all of an attorney's fee shall
 be compelled as a condition of a settlement of a claim under this title,
 except that nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the right
 to negotiate a settlement in which an attorney's fee is voluntarily waived
 in whole or in part.
 `(3) In any action or proceeding in which any judgment or order granting
 relief under this title is challenged, the court, in its discretion and in
 order to promote fairness, may allow the prevailing party in the original
 action (other than the Commission or the United States) to recover from
 either an unsuccessful party challenging such relief or a party against
 whom relief was granted in the original action or from more than one such
 party under an equitable allocation determined by the court, a reasonable
 attorney's fee (including expert fees and other litigation expenses) and
 costs reasonably incurred in defending (as a party, intervenor or otherwise)
 such judgment or order. In determining whether to allow recovery of fees
 from the party challenging the initial judgment or order, the court should
 consider not only whether such challenge was unsuccessful, but also whether
 the award of fees against the challenging party promotes fairness, taking
 into consideration such factors as the reasonableness of the challenging
 party's legal and factual position and whether other special circumstances
 make an award unjust.'.
SEC. 108. PROVIDING FOR INTEREST, AND EXTENDING THE STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS,
IN ACTIONS AGAINST THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
 Section 717 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-16) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (c), by striking out `thirty days' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `ninety days'; and
 (2) in subsection (d), by inserting before the period `, and the same
 interest to compensate for delay in payment shall be available as in cases
 involving non-public parties, except that prejudgment interest may not be
 awarded on compensatory damages'.
SEC. 109. CONSTRUCTION.
 Title XI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000h et seq.) is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following:
`SEC. 1107. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION FOR CIVIL RIGHTS LAWS.
 `(a) EFFECTUATION OF PURPOSE- All Federal laws protecting the civil rights
 of persons shall be interpreted consistent with the intent of such laws,
 and shall be broadly construed to effectuate the purpose of such laws to
 provide equal opportunity and provide effective remedies.
 `(b) NONLIMITATION- Except as expressly provided, no Federal law protecting
 the civil rights of persons shall be construed to repeal or amend by
 implication any other Federal law protecting such civil rights.
 `(c) INTERPRETATION- In interpreting Federal civil rights laws, including
 laws protecting against discrimination on the basis of race, color, national
 origin, sex, religion, age, and disability, courts and administrative
 agencies shall not rely on the amendments made by the Civil Rights and
 Women's Equity in Employment Act of 1991 as a basis for limiting the
 theories of liability, rights, and remedies available under civil rights
 laws not expressly amended by such Act.'.
SEC. 110. RESTORING PROHIBITION AGAINST ALL RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN THE
MAKING AND ENFORCEMENT OF CONTRACTS.
 Section 1977 of the Revised Statutes of the United States (42 U.S.C. 1981)
 is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(a)' before `All persons within'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following:
 `(b) For purposes of this section, the right to `make and enforce contracts'
 shall include the making, performance, modification and termination
 of contracts, and the enjoyment of all benefits, privileges, terms and
 conditions of the contractual relationship.
 `(c) The rights protected by this section are protected against impairment
 by nongovernmental discrimination as well as against impairment under
 color of State law.'.
SEC. 111. VOLUNTARY AND COURT-ORDERED AFFIRMATIVE ACTION APPROVED; QUOTAS
DEEMED UNLAWFUL EMPLOYMENT PRACTICE.
 (a) RULES OF CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in the amendments made by this Act
 shall be construed--
 (1) to limit an employer in establishing its job requirements if such
 requirements are lawful under title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964,
 as amended; or
 (2) to require, encourage, or permit an employer to adopt hiring or promotion
 quotas on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin,
 and the use of such quotas shall be deemed to be an unlawful employment
 practice under such title: Provided, That the amendments made by this Act
 shall be construed to approve the lawfulness of voluntary or court-ordered
 affirmative action that is--
 (A) consistent with the decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States
 in employment discrimination cases; or
 (B) in the absence of such decisions, otherwise in accordance with employment
 discrimination law;
as in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) DEFINITION- For purposes of subsection (a), the term `quota' means a
 fixed number or percentage of persons of a particular race, color, religion,
 sex, or national origin which must be attained, or which cannot be exceeded,
 regardless of whether such persons meet necessary qualifications to perform
 the job.
SEC. 112. SEVERABILITY.
 If any provision of this Act, or an amendment made by this Act, or the
 application of such provision to any person or circumstances is held to
 be invalid, the remainder of this Act and the amendments made by this Act,
 and the application of such provision to other persons and circumstances,
 shall not be affected thereby.
SEC. 113. APPLICATION OF AMENDMENTS AND TRANSITION RULES.
 (a) APPLICATION OF AMENDMENTS- The amendments made by--
 (1) section 102 shall apply to all proceedings pending on or commenced
 after June 5, 1989;
 (2) section 103 shall apply to all proceedings pending on or commenced
 after May 1, 1989;
 (3) section 104 shall apply to all proceedings pending on or commenced
 after June 12, 1989;
 (4) sections 105(a)(1), 105(a)(3) and 105(a)(4), 105(b), 106, 107, 108,
 and 109 shall apply to all proceedings pending on or commenced after the
 date of enactment of this Act;
 (5) section 105(a)(2) shall apply to all proceedings pending on or commenced
 after June 12, 1989; and
 (6) section 110 shall apply to all proceedings pending on or commenced
 after June 15, 1989.
 (b) TRANSITION RULES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Any orders entered by a court between the effective dates
 described in subsection (a) and the date of enactment of this Act that are
 inconsistent with the amendments made by sections 102, 103, 105(a)(2), or
 110 shall be vacated if, not later than 1 year after such date of enactment,
 a request for such relief is made.
 (2) SECTION 104- Any orders entered between June 12, 1989 and the date of
 enactment of this Act, that permit a challenge to an employment practice that
 implements a litigated or consent judgment or order and that is inconsistent
 with the amendment made by section 104, shall be vacated if, not later
 than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, a request for such
 relief is made. For the 1-year period beginning on the date of enactment
 of this Act, an individual whose challenge to an employment practice that
 implements a litigated or consent judgment or order is denied under the
 amendment made by section 104, or whose order or relief obtained under
 such challenge is vacated under such section, shall have the same right
 of intervention in the case in which the challenged litigated or consent
 judgment or order was entered as that individual had on June 12, 1989.
 (3) FINAL JUDGMENTS- Pursuant to paragraphs (1) and (2), any final judgment
 entered prior to the date of the enactment of this Act as to which the
 rights of any of the parties thereto have become fixed and vested, where
 the time for seeking further judicial review of such judgment has otherwise
 expired pursuant to title 28 of the United States Code, the Federal Rules
 of Civil Procedure, and the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure, shall be
 vacated in whole or in part if justice requires, pursuant to rule 60(b)(6)
 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure or other appropriate authority,
 and consistent with the constitutional requirements of due process of law.
 (c) PERIOD OF LIMITATIONS- The period of limitations for the filing of
 a claim or charge shall be tolled from the applicable effective date
 described in subsection (a) until the date of enactment of this Act, on a
 showing that the claim or charge was not filed because of a rule or decision
 altered by the amendments made by sections 102, 103, 105(a)(2), or 110.
SEC. 114. COVERAGE OF CONGRESS AND THE AGENCIES OF THE LEGISLATIVE BRANCH.
 (a) COVERAGE OF THE SENATE-
 (1) COMMITMENT TO RULE XLII- The Senate reaffirms its commitment to Rule
 XLII of the Standing Rules of the Senate which provides as follows:
 `No member, officer, or employee of the Senate shall, with respect to
 employment by the Senate or any office thereof--
 `(a) fail or refuse to hire an individual;
 `(b) discharge an individual; or
 `(c) otherwise discriminate against an individual with respect to promotion,
 compensation, or terms, conditions, or privileges of employment;
on the basis of such individual's race, color, religion, sex, national origin,
age, or state of physical handicap.'.
 (2) APPLICATION TO SENATE EMPLOYMENT- The rights and protections provided
 pursuant to this Act, the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Americans with
 Disabilities Act of 1990, the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967,
 and the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 shall apply with respect to employment
 by the United States Senate.
 (3) INVESTIGATION AND ADJUDICATION OF CLAIMS- All claims raised by any
 individual with respect to Senate employment, pursuant to the Acts referred
 to in paragraph (2), shall be investigated and adjudicated by the Select
 Committee on Ethics, pursuant to S. Res. 338, 88th Congress, as amended,
 or such other entity as the Senate may designate.
 (4) RIGHTS OF EMPLOYEES- The Committee on Rules and Administration shall
 ensure that Senate employees are informed of their rights under the Acts
 referred to in paragraph (2).
 (5) APPLICABLE REMEDIES- When assigning remedies to individuals found to
 have a valid claim under the Acts referred to in paragraph (2), the Select
 Committee on Ethics, or such other entity as the Senate may designate,
 should to the extent practicable apply the same remedies applicable to
 all other employees covered by the Acts referred to in paragraph (2). Such
 remedies shall apply exclusively.
 (6) MATTERS OTHER THAN EMPLOYMENT-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The rights and protections under the Americans with
 Disabilities Act of 1990 shall, subject to subparagraph (B), apply with
 respect to the conduct of the Senate regarding matters other than employment.
 (B) REMEDIES- The Architect of the Capitol shall establish remedies and
 procedures to be utilized with respect to the rights and protections
 provided pursuant to subparagraph (A). Such remedies and procedures shall
 apply exclusively, after approval in accordance with subparagraph (C).
 (C) PROPOSED REMEDIES AND PROCEDURES- For purposes of subparagraph (B),
 the Architect of the Capitol shall submit proposed remedies and procedures
 to the Senate Committee on Rules and Administration. The remedies and
 procedures shall be effective upon the approval of the Committee on Rules
 and Administration.
 (7) EXERCISE OF RULEMAKING POWER- Notwithstanding any other provision of
 law, enforcement and adjudication of the rights and protections referred
 to in paragraphs (2) and (6)(A) shall be within the exclusive jurisdiction
 of the United States Senate. The provisions of paragraphs (1), (3), (4),
 (5), (6)(B), and (6)(C) are enacted by the Senate as an exercise of the
 rulemaking power of the Senate, with full recognition of the right of the
 Senate to change its rules, in the same manner, and to the same extent,
 as in the case of any other rule of the Senate.
 (b) COVERAGE OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any provision of title VII of the Civil
 Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.) or of other law, the purposes
 of such title shall, subject to paragraph (2), apply in their entirety to
 the House of Representatives.
 (2) EMPLOYMENT IN THE HOUSE-
 (A) APPLICATION- The rights and protections under title VII of the Civil
 Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.) shall, subject to subparagraph
 (B), apply with respect to any employee in an employment position in
 the House of Representatives and any employing authority of the House
 of Representatives.
 (B) ADMINISTRATION-
 (i) IN GENERAL- In the administration of this paragraph, the remedies and
 procedures made applicable pursuant to the resolution described in clause
 (ii) shall apply exclusively.
 (ii) RESOLUTION- The resolution referred to in clause (i) is the Fair
 Employment Practices Resolution (House Resolution 558 of the One Hundredth
 Congress, as agreed to October 4, 1988), as incorporated into the Rules
 of the House of Representatives of the One Hundred Second Congress as
 Rule LI, or any other provision that continues in effect the provisions
 of such resolution.
 (C) EXERCISE OF RULEMAKING POWER- The provisions of subparagraph (B) are
 enacted by the House of Representatives as an exercise of the rulemaking
 power of the House of Representatives, with full recognition of the right
 of the House to change its rules, in the same manner, and to the same
 extent as in the case of any other rule of the House.
 (c) INSTRUMENTALITIES OF CONGRESS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The rights and protections under this Act and title VII of
 the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.) shall, subject to
 paragraph (2), apply with respect to the conduct of each instrumentality
 of the Congress.
 (2) ESTABLISHMENT OF REMEDIES AND PROCEDURES BY INSTRUMENTALITIES- The chief
 official of each instrumentality of the Congress shall establish remedies
 and procedures to be utilized with respect to the rights and protections
 provided pursuant to paragraph (1). Such remedies and procedures shall
 apply exclusively.
 (3) REPORT TO CONGRESS- The chief official of each instrumentality of the
 Congress shall, after establishing remedies and procedures for purposes
 of paragraph (2), submit to the Congress a report describing the remedies
 and procedures.
 (4) DEFINITION OF INSTRUMENTALITIES- For purposes of this section,
 instrumentalities of the Congress include the following: the Architect
 of the Capitol, the Congressional Budget Office, the General Accounting
 Office, the Government Printing Office, the Office of Technology Assessment,
 and the United States Botanic Garden.
 (5) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this section shall alter the enforcement
 procedures for individuals protected under section 717 of title VII of
 the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-16).
SEC. 115. DISCRIMINATORY USE OF TESTS.
 The first sentence of section 703(h) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-2(h)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `to give and to' and inserting `, labor organization,
 employment agency, or joint labor-management committee controlling
 apprenticeship or other training or retraining (including on-the-job
 training programs) to give, use, or',
 (2) by striking `test provided that' and inserting `test provided that
 (1)'; and
 (3) by striking the period at the end and inserting the following:
`and (2) such test validly and fairly predicts without regard to the race,
color, religion, sex, or national origin of such test takers, the ability
of such test takers to perform the job with respect to which such test is
used. If such test does not meet the criteria specified in paragraphs (1) and
(2) of the preceding sentence, an employer, labor organization, employment
agency, or joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or
other training or retraining (including on-the-job training programs) may
develop, give, use, or act upon the results of a test which satisfies such
criteria or may use other non-discriminatory selection criteria, in a manner
consistent with this title, which measure qualifications to perform the job.'.
SEC. 116. PROHIBITION OF DISCRIMINATORY USE OF TEST SCORES.
 Section 704 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-3) is amended
 by adding at the end the following:
 `(c) It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer, labor
 organization, employment agency, or joint labor-management committee
 controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining (including
 on-the-job training programs) in connection with the selection or referral of
 applicants or candidates for employment or promotion to adjust test scores
 of, or use different cut-off scores for, a written employment test on the
 basis of the race, color, religion, sex, or national origin of individual
 test takers.'.
SEC. 117. ADEA STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS; NOTICE OF RIGHT TO SUE.
 (a) STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS- Section 7(d) of the Age Discrimination in
 Employment Act of 1967 (29 U.S.C. 626(d)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) by striking out `180 days' and inserting in lieu thereof `540 days'; and
 (B) by inserting `or has been applied to affect adversely the person
 aggrieved, whichever is later' after `occurred'; and
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking out `within 300 days' and all that
 follows through `whichever is earlier' and inserting in lieu thereof `a
 copy of such charge shall be filed by the Commission with the State agency'.
 (b) NOTICE OF RIGHT TO SUE- Section 7(e) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 626(e))
 is amended--
 (1) by striking out paragraph (2);
 (2) by striking out the paragraph designation in paragraph (1);
 (3) by striking out `Sections 6 and' and inserting `Section'; and
 (4) by adding at the end thereof the following: `If a charge filed with
 the Commission is dismissed by the Commission, the Commission shall so
 notify the person aggrieved and within 90 days after the giving of such
 notice a civil action may be brought against the respondent named in the
 charge by a person defined in section 11.'.
SEC. 118. ALTERNATIVE MEANS OF DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
 Where appropriate and to the extent authorized by law, the use of alternative
 means of dispute resolution, including settlement negotiations, conciliation,
 facilitation, mediation, factfinding, minitrials, and arbitration, is
 encouraged to resolve disputes arising under the Acts amended by this Act.
SEC. 119. PROTECTION OF EXTRATERRITORIAL EMPLOYMENT.
 (a) DEFINITION OF EMPLOYEE- Section 701(f) of the Civil Rights Act of
 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e(f)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `With respect to employment in a foreign country, such term includes an
 individual who is a citizen of the United States.'.
 (b) EXEMPTION- Section 702 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42
 U.S.C. 2000e-1) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(a)' after `SEC. 702.', and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 `(b) It shall not be unlawful under section 703 or 704 for an employer
 (or a corporation controlled by an employer) labor organization, employment
 agency, or joint management committee controlling apprenticeship or other
 training or retraining (including on-the-job training programs) to take any
 action otherwise prohibited by such section, with respect to an employee
 in a workplace in a foreign country if compliance with such section would
 cause such employer (or such corporation), such organization, such agency,
 or such committee to violate the law of the foreign country in which such
 workplace is located.
 `(c)(1) If an employer controls a corporation whose place of incorporation
 is a foreign country, any practice prohibited by section 703 or 704 engaged
 in by such corporation shall be presumed to be engaged in by such employer.
 `(2) Sections 703 and 704 shall not apply with respect to the foreign
 operations of an employer that is a foreign person not controlled by an
 American employer.
 `(3) For purposes of this subsection, the determination of whether an
 employer controls a corporation shall be based on--
 `(A) the interrelation of operations;
 `(B) the common management;
 `(C) the centralized control of labor relations; and
 `(D) the common ownership or financial control;
of the employer and the corporation.'.
 (c) APPLICATION OF AMENDMENTS- The amendments made by this section shall
 not apply with respect to conduct occurring before the date of the enactment
 of this Act.
SEC. 120. CLARIFYING OTHER ATTORNEY'S FEE PROVISION.
 The last sentence of section 722 of the Revised Statutes (42 U.S.C. 1988)
 is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(including expert fees and other litigation expenses)
 and' after `attorney's fee'; and
 (2) by striking out `as part of the'.
TITLE II
SEC. 201. GLASS CEILING COMMISSION.
 (a) FINDINGS AND PURPOSE-
 (1) FINDINGS- Congress finds that--
 (A) despite a dramatically growing presence in the workplace, women and
 minorities remain underrepresented in executive, management and senior
 decisionmaking positions in business;
 (B) artificial barriers exist to the advancement of women and minorities
 in employment;
 (C) enforcement of Federal equal employment opportunity laws by Federal
 agencies has not effectively addressed such underrepresentation or eliminated
 such artificial barriers;
 (D) the `Glass Ceiling Initiative' recently undertaken by the Department
 of Labor has been instrumental in raising public awareness of--
 (i) the underrepresentation of women and minorities at the executive,
 management and senior decisionmaking levels in the United States work
 force; and
 (ii) the desirability of eliminating artificial barriers to the advancement
 of women and minorities to such levels;
 (E) the establishment of a commission to examine issues raised by the
 Glass Ceiling Initiative would help--
 (i) focus greater attention on the importance of eliminating artificial
 barriers to the advancement of women and minorities to executive, management
 and senior decisionmaking positions in business; and
 (ii) promote work force diversity; and
 (F) a comprehensive study that includes analysis of the manner in which
 executive, management and senior decisionmaking positions are filled,
 the developmental and skill-enhancing practices used to foster the
 necessary qualifications for advancement, and the compensation programs
 and reward structures utilized in the corporate sector would assist in
 the establishment of practices and policies promoting opportunities for,
 and eliminating artificial barriers to, the advancement of women and
 minorities to executive, management and senior decisionmaking positions.
 (2) PURPOSE- The purpose of this section is to establish a Glass Ceiling
 Commission to study--
 (A) the manner in which business fills executive, management and senior
 decisionmaking positions;
 (B) the developmental and skill-enhancing practices used to foster the
 necessary qualifications for advancement into such positions; and
 (C) the compensation programs and reward structures currently utilized in
 the workplace.
 (b) ESTABLISHMENT- There is established a Glass Ceiling Commission (referred
 to in this section as the `Commission'), to conduct a study and prepare
 recommendations concerning--
 (1) eliminating artificial barriers to the advancement of women and
 minorities in employment; and
 (2) increasing the opportunities and developmental experiences of women
 and minorities to foster advancement of women and minorities to executive,
 management and senior decisionmaking positions in business.
 (c) MEMBERSHIP-
 (1) COMPOSITION- The Commission shall be composed of 19 members--
 (A) 3 individuals appointed by the President;
 (B) 4 individuals appointed jointly by the Speaker of the House of
 Representatives and the majority leader of the Senate;
 (C) 2 individuals appointed by the majority leader of the House of
 Representatives;
 (D) 1 individual appointed by the minority leader of the House of
 Representatives;
 (E) 2 individuals appointed by the majority leader of the Senate;
 (F) 1 individual appointed by the minority leader of the Senate;
 (G) 2 Members of the House of Representatives appointed jointly by the
 majority leader and the minority leader of the House of Representatives;
 (H) 2 Members of the Senate appointed jointly by the majority leader and
 the minority leader of the Senate;
 (I) the Secretary of Labor; and
 (J) the Chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
 (2) CONSIDERATIONS- In making appointments under subparagraphs (A) and (B)
 of paragraph (1), the appointing authority shall consider the background
 of the individuals, including whether the individuals--
 (A) are members of organizations representing women and minorities, and
 other related interest groups;
 (B) hold executive, management or senior decisionmaking positions in
 corporations or other business entities; and
 (C) possess academic expertise or other recognized ability regarding
 employment and discrimination issues.
 (d) CO-CHAIRPERSONS- The Secretary of Labor, and one individual appointed
 under subsection (c)(1)(B) who is designated jointly by the appointing
 authority, shall serve as the Co-chairpersons of the Commission.
 (e) TERM OF OFFICE- Members and Co-chairpersons shall be appointed for
 the life of the Commission.
 (f) VACANCIES- Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the Commission
 shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the
 position being vacated. The vacancy shall not affect the power of the
 remaining members to execute the duties of the Commission.
 (g) MEETINGS-
 (1) MEETINGS PRIOR TO COMPLETION OF REPORT- The Commission shall meet
 not fewer than five times in connection with and pending the completion
 of the report described in subsection (j)(2). The Commission shall hold
 additional meetings if the Co-chairpersons or a majority of the members
 of the Commission request the additional meetings in writing.
 (2) MEETINGS AFTER COMPLETION OF REPORT- The Commission shall meet once each
 year after the completion of the report described in subsection (j)(2). The
 Commission shall hold additional meetings if the Co-chairpersons or a
 majority of the members of the Commission request the additional meetings
 in writing.
 (h) QUORUM- A majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for
 the transaction of business.
 (i) COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES-
 (1) COMPENSATION- Each member of the Commission who is not an employee of
 the Federal Government shall receive compensation at the daily equivalent
 of the rate specified for GS-18 of the General Schedule under section 5332
 of title 5, United States Code, for each day the member is engaged in the
 performance of duties for the Commission, including attendance at meetings
 and conferences of the Commission and travel.
 (2) TRAVEL EXPENSES- Each member of the Commission shall receive travel
 expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by
 sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
 (3) EMPLOYMENT STATUS- A member of the Commission, who is not otherwise an
 employee of the Federal Government, shall not be deemed to be an employee
 of the Federal Government except for the purposes of--
 (A) the tort claims provisions of chapter 171 of title 28, United States
 Code, and
 (B) subchapter I of chapter 81 of title 5, United States Code, relating
 to compensation for work injuries.
 (j) STUDIES OF ADVANCEMENT OF WOMEN AND MINORITIES TO EXECUTIVE, MANAGEMENT
 AND SENIOR DECISIONMAKING POSITIONS IN BUSINESS-
 (1) STUDY- The Commission shall conduct a study of opportunities for,
 and artificial barriers to, the advancement of women and minorities to
 executive, management and senior decisionmaking positions in business. In
 conducting the study, the Commission shall--
 (A) examine the preparedness of women and minorities to advance to executive,
 management and senior decisionmaking positions in business;
 (B) examine the opportunities for women and minorities to advance to
 executive, management and senior decisionmaking positions in business;
 (C) conduct basic research into the practices, policies, and manner in
 which executive, management and senior decisionmaking positions in business
 are filled;
 (D) conduct comparative research of businesses and industries in which
 women and minorities are promoted to executive, management and senior
 decisionmaking positions, and businesses and industries in which women
 and minorities are not promoted to executive, management and senior
 decisionmaking positions;
 (E) evaluate the efficacy of enforcement (including, but not limited to, such
 enforcement techniques as litigation, complaint investigations, compliance
 reviews, conciliation, administrative regulations, policy guidance,
 technical assistance, training, and public education) of Federal equal
 employment opportunity laws by Federal agencies as a means of eliminating
 artificial barriers to the advancement of women and minorities in employment;
 (F) compile a synthesis of available research on programs and practices
 that have successfully led to the advancement of women and minorities
 to executive, management and senior decisionmaking positions in business,
 including training programs, rotational assignments, developmental programs,
 reward programs, employee benefit structures, and family leave policies; and
 (G) examine any other issues and information relating to the advancement
 of women and minorities to executive, management and senior decisionmaking
 positions in business.
 (2) REPORT- Not later than 15 months after the date of the enactment of
 this Act, the Commission shall prepare and submit to the President and
 the appropriate committees of Congress a written report containing--
 (A) the findings and conclusions of the Commission resulting from the
 study conducted under paragraph (1); and
 (B) recommendations based on the findings and conclusions described
 in subparagraph (A) relating to the promotion of opportunities for,
 and elimination of artificial barriers to, the advancement of women and
 minorities to executive, management and senior decisionmaking positions
 in business, including recommendations for--
 (i) policies and practices to fill vacancies at the executive, management
 and senior decisionmaking levels;
 (ii) developmental practices and procedures to ensure that women and
 minorities have access to opportunities to gain the exposure, skills,
 and expertise necessary to assume executive, management and senior
 decisionmaking positions;
 (iii) compensation programs and reward structures utilized to reward and
 retain key employees; and
 (iv) strategies for enforcement of Federal equal employment opportunity
 laws by Federal agencies as a means of eliminating artificial barriers to
 the advancement of women and minorities in employment.
 (3) ADDITIONAL STUDY- The Commission may conduct such additional study
 of the advancement of women and minorities to executive, management and
 senior decisionmaking positions in business as a majority of the members
 of the Commission determines to be necessary.
 (k) POWERS OF THE COMMISSION- The Commission is authorized to--
 (1) hold such hearings and sit and act at such times;
 (2) take such testimony;
 (3) have such printing and binding done;
 (4) enter into such contracts and other arrangements in any fiscal year only
 to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in appropriations Acts;
 (5) make such expenditures; and
 (6) take such other actions;
as the Commission may determine to be necessary to carry out the duties of
the Commission.
 (l) OATHS- Any member of the Commission may administer oaths or affirmations
 to witnesses appearing before the Commission.
 (m) OBTAINING INFORMATION FROM FEDERAL AGENCIES- The Commission may secure
 directly from any Federal agency such information as the Commission may
 require to carry out its duties.
 (n) VOLUNTARY SERVICE- Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, United
 States Code, the Co-chairpersons of the Commission may accept for the
 Commission voluntary services provided by a member of the Commission.
 (o) GIFTS AND DONATIONS- The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts
 or donations of property in order to carry out the duties of the Commission.
 (p) USE OF MAIL- The Commission may use the United States mails in the
 same manner and under the same conditions as Federal agencies.
 (q) Confidentiality of Information-
 (1) INDIVIDUAL BUSINESS INFORMATION- Except as provided in paragraph
 (2), and notwithstanding section 552 of title 5, United States Code, in
 carrying out the duties of the Commission, including the duties described
 in subsection (j), the Commission shall maintain the confidentiality of
 all information that concerns--
 (A) the employment practices and procedures of individual businesses; or
 (B) individual employees of the businesses.
 (2) CONSENT- The content of any information described in paragraph (1) may
 be disclosed with the prior written consent of the business or employee,
 as the case may be, with respect to which the information is maintained.
 (3) AGGREGATE INFORMATION- In carrying out the duties of the Commission,
 the Commission may disclose--
 (A) information about the aggregate employment practices or procedures of
 a class or group of businesses; and
 (B) information about the aggregate characteristics of employees of the
 businesses, and related aggregate information about the employees.
 (r) STAFF AND CONSULTANTS-
 (1) STAFF-
 (A) APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION- The Commission may appoint and determine
 the compensation of such staff as the Commission determines to be necessary
 to carry out the duties of the Commission.
 (B) LIMITATIONS- The rate of compensation for each staff member shall
 not exceed the daily equivalent of the rate specified for GS-18 of the
 General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code, for
 each day the staff member is engaged in the performance of duties for
 the Commission. The Commission may otherwise appoint and determine the
 compensation of staff without regard to the provisions of title 5, United
 States Code, that govern appointments in the competitive service, and the
 provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United
 States Code, that relate to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
 (s) EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS- The Co-chairpersons of the Commission may
 obtain such temporary and intermittent services of experts and consultants
 and compensate the experts and consultants in accordance with section
 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, as the Commission determines to
 be necessary to carry out the duties of the Commission.
 (t) DETAIL OF FEDERAL EMPLOYEES- On the request of the Co-chairpersons
 of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency shall detail, without
 reimbursement, any of the personnel of the agency to the Commission to
 assist the Commission in carrying out its duties. Any detail shall not
 interrupt or otherwise affect the civil service status or privileges of
 the Federal employee.
 (u) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE- On the request of the Co-chairpersons of the
 Commission, the head of a Federal agency shall provide such technical
 assistance to the Commission as the Commission determines to be necessary
 to carry out its duties.
 (v) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be
 appropriated to the Commission such sums as may be necessary to carry out
 this section. Such sums shall remain available until expended, without
 fiscal year limitation.
 (w) TERMINATION- Notwithstanding section 15 of the Federal Advisory Committee
 Act (5 U.S.C. App.), the Commission shall terminate 4 years after the date
 of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 202. PAY EQUITY TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
 (a) STATEMENT OF PURPOSE- Recognizing that the identification and elimination
 of discriminatory wage-setting practices and discriminatory wage disparities
 is in the public interest, the purpose of this section is to help eliminate
 such practices and disparities by--
 (1) providing for the development and utilization of techniques that will
 promote the establishment of wage rates based on the work performed and
 other appropriate factors, rather than the sex, race, national origin,
 or ethnicity of the employee; and
 (2) providing for the public dissemination of information relating to the
 techniques described in paragraph (1), thereby encouraging and stimulating
 public and private employers, through the use of such techniques, to correct
 wage-setting practices and eliminate wage disparities, to the extent that
 they are based on the sex, race, national origin, or ethnicity of the
 employee, rather than the work performed and other appropriate factors.
 (b) PROGRAM SPECIFICATIONS- In order to carry out the purpose of this
 section, the Secretary of Labor shall develop and carry out a continuing
 program relating to pay equity. Such program shall include--
 (1) the dissemination of information on efforts being made in the private
 and public sectors to reduce or eliminate wage disparities, to the extent
 that they are based on the sex, race, national origin, or ethnicity of
 the employee, rather than the work performed and other appropriate factors;
 (2) the undertaking and promotion of research into the development of
 techniques to reduce or eliminate wage disparities, to the extent that they
 are based on the sex, race, national origin, or ethnicity of the employee,
 rather than the work performed and other appropriate factors; and
 (3) the provision of appropriate technical assistance to any public or
 private entity requesting such assistance to correct wage-setting practices
 or to eliminate wage disparities, to the extent that they are based on the
 sex, race, national origin, or ethnicity of the employee, rather than the
 work performed and other appropriate factors.
 (c) DEFINITION- For the purpose of this section, the term `other appropriate
 factors' includes factors such as--
 (1) the skill, effort, responsibilities, and qualification requirements
 for the work involved, taken in their totality;
 (2) geographic location and working conditions; and
 (3) seniority, merit, productivity, education, and work experience.
SEC. 203. SUBMISSION OF EEOC SUMMARY AND ANALYSIS OF EQUAL EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITY DATA.
 Section 705(e) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-4(e)) is
 amended by inserting after the first sentence the following: `The Commission
 shall include in each such report a summary and analysis of data submitted by
 employers concerning employment opportunities by sex, race, national origin,
 or ethnicity occurring among and within industries and occupational groups.'.
SEC. 204. EDUCATION AND OUTREACH.
 Section 705(h) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-4(h))
 is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(1)' after `(h)'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 `(2)(A) In exercising its powers under this title, the Commission shall
 carry out educational and outreach activities (including dissemination of
 information in languages other than English) targeted to--
 `(i) individuals who historically have been victims of employment
 discrimination and have not been equitably served by the Commission; and
 `(ii) individuals on whose behalf the Commission has authority to enforce
 any other law prohibiting employment discrimination;
concerning rights and obligations under this title or such law, as the case
may be.
 `(B) As one means of satisfying the requirements specified in subparagraph
 (A), the Commission may make grants to State or local governmental entities,
 or public or nonprofit private organizations.'.
SEC. 205. ANNUAL REPORT BY OFFICE OF FEDERAL CONTRACT COMPLIANCE PROGRAMS.
 Section 718 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-17) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `Programs' after `Compliance'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
`At the close of each fiscal year, the Office of Federal Contract Compliance
Programs shall submit to the Congress and to the President a report that
includes--
 `(1) a summary and analysis of affirmative action reports submitted to
 such Office by employers who enter into Government contracts; and
 `(2) an analysis of employment opportunities and wage differentials by sex,
 race, national origin, or ethnicity occurring among and within industries,
 occupations, job groups, and job titles.'.
Passed the House of Representatives June 5, 1991.
Attest:
Clerk.
HR 1 EH----2
HR 1 EH----3
HR 1 EH----4
HR 1 EH----5