[Congressional Bills 107th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 1990 Introduced in House (IH)]

107th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 1990

 To leave no child behind.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 May 24, 2001

Mr. George Miller of California (for himself, Mr. Gilman, Mr. Sanders, 
 Mr. Kildee, Mrs. Morella, Mr. Scott, Mrs. Davis of California, Mr. 
 Stark, Ms. Norton, Mr. Frank, Mrs. Mink of Hawaii, Mr. Bonior, Ms. 
 Brown of Florida, Ms. DeLauro, Mr. Cummings, Mr. LaTourette, Mr. 
 Kucinich, Mr. Kennedy of Rhode Island, Mr. Bishop, Mr. Hinojosa, Mr. 
 Jackson of Illinois, Mr. Rodriguez, Ms. Jackson-Lee of Texas, Ms. 
 Schakowsky, Mr. Gutierrez, and Mr. Owens) introduced the following 
 bill; which was referred to the Committee on Ways and Means, and in 
 addition to the Committees on Energy and Commerce, Education and the 
 Workforce, Agriculture, the Judiciary, and Financial Services, for a 
 period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for 
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the 
 committee concerned

 May 26 (legislative day, May 25), 2001

Deleted sponsors: Mr. Bishop, Mr. Gutierrez, Mr. Kucinich, Mrs. Mink of 
 Hawaii, Ms. Norton, Ms. Schakowsky, Mr. Bonior, Mr. Cummings, Mr. 
 Gilman, Mr. Hinojosa, Ms. Jackson-Lee of Texas, Mr. LaTourette, Mrs. 
 Morella, Mr. Owens, and Mr. Scott (added May 24, 2001; deleted May 26 
 (legislative day, May 25), 2001)

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To leave no child behind.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Leave No Child Behind Act of 2001''.

SEC. 2. TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 The table of contents for this Act is as follows:

 TITLE I--HEALTHY START--CHILDREN'S HEALTH INSURANCE

 Subtitle A--Children's Health Insurance

Sec. 1001. MediKids health insurance.
Sec. 1002. Benefits for all children born after 2002.
Sec. 1003. MediKids premium.
Sec. 1004. Refundable credit for cost-sharing expenses under MediKids 
 program.
Sec. 1005. Report on long-term revenues.
 Subtitle B--Children's Health Insurance Eligibility Expansion and 
 Enrollment Improvements

 Csubchapter a--medicaid and schip
Sec. 1101. Expansion of children's eligibility for medicaid and SCHIP.
Sec. 1102. Optional coverage of legal immigrants under the medicaid 
 subchapter b--family opportunity act
Sec. 1111. Short title; amendments to Social Security Act.
Sec. 1112. Opportunity for families of disabled children to purchase 
 medicaid coverage for such children.
Sec. 1113. Treatment of inpatient psychiatric hospital services for 
 individuals under age 21 in home or 
 community-based services waivers.
Sec. 1114. Demonstration of coverage under the medicaid program of 
 children with potentially severe 
 disabilities.
Sec. 1115. Development and support of family-to-family health 
 information centers.
Sec. 1116. Restoration of medicaid eligibility for certain SSI 
 beneficiaries.
 Chapter 2--Enrollment Improvements

Sec. 1121. Application of simplified title XXI procedures under the 
 medicaid program.
Sec. 1122. Automatic enrollment of children born to title XXI parents.
 Chapter 3--Effective Date

Sec. 1131. Effective date.
 Subtitle C--Improving Access to Care

 Chapter 1--Commission

Sec. 1201. Commission on Children's Access to Care.
 Chapter 2--Children's Health Insurance Accountability

Sec. 1211. Short title.
Sec. 1212. Findings.
Sec. 1213. Amendments to the Public Health Service Act.
Sec. 1214. Amendments to the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
 1974.
Sec. 1215. Studies.
 Chapter 3--EPSDT

Sec. 1221. Collection of data regarding the delivery of EPSDT services.
 Subtitle D--Reducing Public Health Risks

 Chapter 1--Asthma Treatments

Sec. 1301. Findings.
Sec. 1302. Asthma, vision, and hearing screening for early Head Start 
 and Head Start programs.
Sec. 1303. Asthma, vision, and hearing screening and treatment for 
 children enrolled in public schools.
Sec. 1304. General effective date.
 Chapter 2--Increase in HUD Programs

Sec. 1311. Lead-based paint hazard control grants.
Sec. 1312. Healthy Homes Initiative program.
 Chapter 3--Youth Smoking Cessation and Education

Sec. 1321. subchapter a--protection of children from tobacco
Part I--Food and Drug Administration Jurisdiction and General Authority

Sec. 1331. Reference.
Sec. 1332. Statement of general authority.
Sec. 1333. Nonapplicability to other drugs or devices.
Sec. 1334. Conforming amendments to confirm jurisdiction.
Sec. 1335. General rule.
Sec. 1336. Safety and efficacy standard and recall authority.
 Part II--Regulation of Tobacco Products

Sec. 1341. Performance standards.
Sec. 1342. Application of Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to 
 tobacco products.
Sec. 1343. Funding.
Sec. 1344. Repealsubchapter b--miscellaneous provisions
Sec. 1351. Nonapplication to tobacco producers.
Sec. 1352. Equal treatment of retail outlets.
 Chapter 4--Coverage of Childhood Immunizations

Sec. 1361. Short title.
Sec. 1362. Amendments to the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
 1974.
Sec. 1363. Amendments to the Public Health Service Act.
Sec. 1364. Amendments to the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Sec. 1365. Effective dates.
 Subtitle E--Reducing Environmental Health Risks

 Chapter 1--Environmental Protection of Children

Sec. 1401. Short title.
Sec. 1402. Environmental protection for children and other vulnerable 
 subpopulations.
Sec. 1403. Conforming amendment.
 Chapter 2--School Environmental Protection

Sec. 1411. Short title.
Sec. 1412. Integrated pest management systems for schools.
Sec. 1413. Conforming amendment.
Sec. 1414. Effective date.
 TITLE II--HEALTHY START--SUPPORT FOR HEALTHY DEVELOPMENT

 Subtitle A--Promotion of State and Local Support

Sec. 2001. State and local parenting support and education grant 
 program.
 Subtitle B--Support for Parents Caring for Children

Sec. 2101. Short title.
Sec. 2102. Findings.
Sec. 2103. Coverage of employees.
 Subtitle C--Paid Family Leave

Sec. 2201. Short title.
Sec. 2202. Findings.
Sec. 2203. Purposes.
Sec. 2204. Definitions.
Sec. 2205. Demonstration projects.
Sec. 2206. Evaluations and reports.
Sec. 2207. Authorization of appropriations.
 Subtitle D--Health Care for the Uninsured

Sec. 2301. Familycare coverage of parents under the medicaid program 
 and title XXI.
 Subtitle E--Awareness of Environmental Risks to Children

Sec. 2401. Short title.
Sec. 2402. Finding.
 subchapter a--disclosure of industrial releases that present a 
 significant risk to children
Ssubchapter b--disclosure of high health risk chemicals in children's 
 consumer products
Sec. 2421. List of toxic chemicals.
Sec. 2422. Reporting of toxic chemicals in consumer products.
Sec. 2423. Exemptions.
Sec. 2424. Private citizen enforcement.
 Chapter 2--Public Right To Know About Toxic Chemical Use

Sec. 2431. Disclosure of toxic chemical use by comparable facilities.
Sec. 2432. Disclosure of toxic chemical use.
Sec. 2433. Streamlined data collection and dissemination.
Sec. 2434. Trade secret protection.
 Subtitle F--Promoting Responsible Fatherhood

 Chapter 1--Block Grants

Sec. 2501. Block grants to States to encourage media campaigns.
Sec. 2502. Responsible fatherhood block grant.
 Chapter 2--National Clearinghouse

Sec. 2511. National clearinghouse for responsible fatherhood programs.
 TITLE III--HEAD START AND CHILD CARE

 Subtitle A--Infants and Toddlers

Sec. 3001. Reservation of Head Start Act funds for infants and 
 toddlers.
Sec. 3002. Reservation of child care and development block grant funds 
 for infants and toddlers.
 Subtitle B--Child Care Access

 Chapter 1--Improving Access to Child Care

Sec. 3101. Payment rates.
 Chapter 2--Improvements to the Child Care and Development Block Grant 
 Program

Sec. 3111. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 3112. State plan requirements.
Sec. 3113. Definitions.
 Subtitle C--Child Care Quality Improvement

 Chapter 1--Focus on Committed and Underpaid Staff for Children's Sake

Sec. 3201. Short title.
Sec. 3202. Findings and purpose.
Sec. 3203. Definitions.
Sec. 3204. Funds for child care provider development and retention 
 grants and for child care provider 
 scholarships.
Sec. 3205. Allotments to States.
Sec. 3206. Application and plan.
Sec. 3207. Child care provider development and retention grant program.
Sec. 3208. Child care provider scholarship program.
Sec. 3209. Annual report.
Sec. 3210. Authorization of appropriations.
Chapter 2--Strengthening Quality Through the Child Care and Development 
 Block Grant

Sec. 3231. State plan.
Sec. 3232. Child care quality improvements.
Sec. 3233. Administration and enforcement.
 Chapter 3--Child Care Centers in Federal Facilities

Sec. 3241. Short title.
Sec. 3242. Definitions.
Sec. 3243. Providing quality child care in Federal facilities.
Sec. 3244. Federal child care evaluation.
Sec. 3245. Child care services for Federal employees.
Sec. 3246. Miscellaneous provisions relating to child care provided by 
 Federal agencies.
 Chapter 4--Early Learning

Sec. 3251. Short title; findings.
Sec. 3252. Purposes.
Sec. 3253. Definitions.
Sec. 3254. Prohibitions.
Sec. 3255. Authorization and appropriation of funds.
Sec. 3256. Allotments to States.
Sec. 3257. Administrative costs.
Sec. 3258. State requirements.
Sec. 3259. State administration.
Sec. 3260. Local application.
Sec. 3261. Local administration.
Sec. 3262. Use of funds.
Sec. 3263. Repealer.
Sec. 3264. Effective date.
 Chapter 5--Child Care Facilities Financing

Sec. 3271. Short title.
Sec. 3272. Technical and financial assistance grants.
 Subtitle D--Head Start Access and Improvement

Sec. 3301. Authorization of appropriations.
 Subtitle E--Education Improvements

 Chapter 1--Increasing Access to Quality Prekindergarten Programs

Sec. 3401. Prekindergarten programs.
 Chapter 2--Expanding Early Literacy Efforts

Sec. 3411. Early literacy.
Sec. 3412. Technical amendments.
 Chapter 3--Increasing the Availability of Books

Sec. 3421. Short title.
Sec. 3422. Findings.
Sec. 3423. Definitions.
Sec. 3424. Grants to State agencies.
Sec. 3425. Contracts to child care resource and referral agencies.
Sec. 3426. Use of funds.
Sec. 3427. Report to Congress.
Sec. 3428. Special postage stamps for child literacy.
Sec. 3429. Authorization of appropriations.
 Chapter 4--Increased Accountability

Sec. 3431. Low achieving children meet high standards.
Sec. 3432. Purpose and intent.
Sec. 3433. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 3434. Reservation and allocation.
Sec. 3435. State plans.
Sec. 3436. Local educational agency plans.
Sec. 3437. Targeted assistance schools.
Sec. 3438. School choice.
Sec. 3439. Assessment and local educational agency and school 
 improvement.
Sec. 3440. State assistance for school support and improvement.
Sec. 3441. Academic achievement awards program; improving State 
 assessments.
Sec. 3442. Parental involvement changes.
Sec. 3443. Professional development.
Sec. 3444. Requirements; records.
Sec. 3445. Coordination requirements.
 subchapter a--amendments to title ii of the elementary and secondary 
 education act of 1965
Sec. 3461. subchapter b--national board certification program
Sec. 3471. Purpose.
Sec. 3472. Grants to expand participation in the national board 
 subchapter c--student loan forgiveness for teachers
Sec. 3481. Student loan forgiveness for teachers.
 subchapter a--school modernization bonds
Sec. 3501. Short title.
Sec. 3502. Expansion of incentives for public schools.
Sec. 3503. Application of certain labor standards on construction 
 projects financed under public school 
 subchapter b--schools as centers of the community
Sec. 3551. Findings.
Sec. 3552. Purpose.
Sec. 3553. Program authorized.
Sec. 3554. Use of funds.
Sec. 3555. Applications.
Sec. 3556. Authorization of appropriations.
 Chapter 7--Child Opportunity Zone Family Centers

Sec. 3571. Child opportunity zone family centers.
 TITLE IV--FAIR START--LIFTING CHILDREN OUT OF POVERTY

 Subtitle A--Expanding the Child Tax Credit

Sec. 4001. Expansion of child tax credit; credit made partially 
 refundable.
 Subtitle B--Strengthening the Earned Income Tax Credit

Sec. 4101. Short title.
Sec. 4102. Increased earned income tax credit for 2 or more qualifying 
 children.
Sec. 4103. Simplification of definition of earned income.
Sec. 4104. Simplification of definition of child dependent.
Sec. 4105. Other modifications to earned income tax credit.
 Subtitle C--Marriage Penalty Relief

Sec. 4201. Marriage penalty relief for earned income credit.
 Subtitle D--Expanding the Dependent Care Tax Credit

Sec. 4301. Dependent care tax credit.
 TITLE V--FAIR START--SUPPORT TO PROMOTE WORK AND REDUCE POVERTY

 Subtitle A--Gateways Grant Program

Sec. 5001. Gateways grant program.
 Subtitle B--Support From Both Parents

 Chapter 1--Child Support Distribution

Sec. 5101. Shosubchapter a--distribution of child support
Sec. 5111. Distribution of child support collected by States on behalf 
 of children receiving certain welfare 
 subchapter b--review and adjustment of child support orders
Sec. 5116. Mandatory review and modification of child support orders 
 subchapter c--demonstrations of expanded information and enforcement
Sec. 5121. Guidelines for involvement of public non-IV-D child support 
 enforcement agencies in child support 
 enforcement.
Sec. 5122. Demonstrations involving establishment and enforcement of 
 child support obligations by public non-IV-
 D child support enforcement agencies.
Sec. 5123. GAO report to Congress on private child support enforcement 
 agencies.
Sec. 5124. Effectivsubchapter d--expanded enforcement
Sec. 5126. Decrease in amount of child support arrearage triggering 
 passport denial.
Sec. 5127. Use of tax refund intercept program to collect past-due 
 child support on behalf of children who are 
 not minors.
Sec. 5128. Garnishment of compensation paid to veterans for service-
 connected disabilities in order to enforce 
 subchapter e--miscellaneousions.
Sec. 5131. Report on undistributed child support payments.
Sec. 5132. Use of new hire information to assist in administration of 
 unemployment compensation programs.
Sec. 5133. Immigration provisions.
Sec. 5134. Correction of errors in conforming amendments in the 
 welfare-to-work and child support 
 amendments of 1999.
Sec. 5135. Increase in payment rate to States for expenditures for 
 short-term training of staff of certain 
 child welfare agencies.
Sec. 5136. Effective date.
 Chapter 2--Child Support Demonstration Programs

Sec. 5141. Short title.
Sec. 5142. Purposes.
Sec. 5143. Definitions.
Sec. 5144. Establishment of child support assurance demonstration 
 projects.
 Subtitle C--Fair Wages and Unemployment Insurance

 Chapter 1--Fair Minimum Wage

Sec. 5201. Short title.
Sec. 5202. Minimum wage.
Sec. 5203. Applicability of minimum wage to the Commonwealth of the 
 Northern Mariana Islands.
 Chapter 2--Livable Wages for Employees Under Federal Contracts

Sec. 5211. Short title.
Sec. 5212. Findings.
Sec. 5213. Poverty level wage.
Sec. 5214. Effective date.
 Chapter 3--Unemployment Insurance

Sec. 5221. Parity for part-time workers, fair counting of wages, and 
 use of improved technology for making wage 
 data available.
Sec. 5222. Ensuring unemployment compensation for individuals that are 
 separated from employment due to domestic 
 violence.
Sec. 5223. Loss of child care as good cause for leaving employment.
 Subtitle D--Jobs for Low-Income Parents

Sec. 5301. Disregard of months engaged in work for purposes of 5-year 
 TANF assistance limit.
Sec. 5302. Strengthening TANF education and training requirements.
Sec. 5303. Addition of poverty reduction bonus to TANF.
Sec. 5304. Participation in workforce investment boards.
Sec. 5305. Clarification of TANF purpose.
Sec. 5306. Effective date.
 Subtitle E--Incentives to Serve Families

Sec. 5401. Development of model caseworker training materials.
Sec. 5402. Exception to limit on TANF administrative expenditures for 
 caseworker bonuses and other State 
 initiatives to eliminate barriers to work.
Sec. 5403. Strengthening of TANF individual responsibility plans.
Sec. 5404. Effective date.
 Subtitle F--Addressing Work Barriers

Sec. 5501. Funding to access to jobs program.
Sec. 5502. Requirement to identify and provide services to address 
 barriers to employment of TANF recipients.
Sec. 5503. State option to establish exceptions from time limit for 
 receipt of TANF assistance based on severe 
 barriers to employment.
Sec. 5504. Effective date.
 Subtitle G--Protection for Families in Need

Sec. 5601. Earn-back of months of TANF assistance.
Sec. 5602. Establishment of a fair conciliation process for families 
 under TANF.
Sec. 5603. Effective date.
 Subtitle H--TANF Reauthorization

Sec. 5701. Reauthorization of TANF State family assistance grants.
Sec. 5702. Prohibition on supplantation of TANF funds.
 TITLE VI--FAIR START

 Subtitle A--Child and Adult Care Food Program

Sec. 6001. Participation of for-profit care centers in child and adult 
 care food program.
Sec. 6002. Categorical eligibility requirements.
Sec. 6003. Increase in administrative reimbursement rates.
Sec. 6004. Program for at-risk school children.
 Subtitle B--Food Stamp Program

Sec. 6101. Limited eligibility of food stamp benefits for qualified 
 aliens.
Sec. 6102. Conforming food stamp and medicaid income definitions; 
 simplified income calculations.
Sec. 6103. Prevention of hunger among families with children.
Sec. 6104. Encouragement of collection of child support.
Sec. 6105. Elimination of excess shelter expense deduction cap for 
 families with high shelter costs.
Sec. 6106. Periodic redetermination of eligibility.
Sec. 6107. Transitional benefits option.
Sec. 6108. Improving State incentives to serve working families.
Sec. 6109. Authorization of appropriations for additional commodities 
 under emergency food assistance program.
 TITLE VII--FAIR START HOUSING

 Subtitle A--Section 8 Vouchers

Sec. 7001. Rental assistance voucher program.
Sec. 7002. Voucher success fund.
 Subtitle B--National Affordable Housing Trust Fund

Sec. 7101. Purposes.
Sec. 7102. National Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
Sec. 7103. Administration of National Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
Sec. 7104. Regulations.
 Subtitle C--Housing Preservation Matching Grants

Sec. 7201. Short title.
Sec. 7202. Findings and purposes.
Sec. 7203. Definitions.
Sec. 7204. Authority.
Sec. 7205. Applications.
Sec. 7206. Use of grants.
Sec. 7207. Grant amount limitation.
Sec. 7208. Matching requirements.
Sec. 7209. Treatment of subsidy layering requirements.
Sec. 7210. Regulations.
Sec. 7211. Authorization of appropriations.
 TITLE VIII--SAFE START

 Subtitle A--Promotion of Permanency for Children

Sec. 8001. Reimbursement for preventive, protective, crisis, 
 permanency, independent living, and post-
 permanency services and activities.
Sec. 8002. Child and family service plan and case reviews.
Sec. 8003. Kinship guardianship assistance payments for children.
Sec. 8004. Elimination of financial eligibility requirement for foster 
 care maintenance and adoption assistance 
 payments.
Sec. 8005. Establishment of uniform Federal matching rate.
Sec. 8006. Elimination of disincentive for foster parents to adopt 
 children with special needs who have been 
 in their foster care.
Sec. 8007. Extension of adoption assistance payments.
Sec. 8008. Reimbursement for room and board in foster family homes, 
 child care institutions, or supervised 
 living arrangements for young people aging 
 out of foster care.
Sec. 8009. Funding for vouchers to assist young people aging out of 
 foster care make the transition to self-
 sufficiency.
Sec. 8010. Additional accountability.
Sec. 8011. Authority of Indian tribes to receive Federal funds for 
 foster care and adoption assistance.
 Subtitle B--Promoting Safe and Stable Families

Sec. 8101. Expansion of the promoting safe and stable families program.
 Subtitle C--Social Services Block Grant

Sec. 8201. Short title.
Sec. 8202. Findings.
Sec. 8202. Restoration of authority to transfer up to 10 percent of 
 TANF funds to the social services block 
 grant.
Sec. 8204. Restoration of funds for the social services block grant.
Sec. 8205. Requirement to submit annual report on State activities.
 Subtitle D--Child Protection and Alcohol and Drug Partnerships

Sec. 8301. Short title.
Sec. 8302. Child protection/alcohol and drug partnerships for children.
 Subtitle E--Permanency Grants

Sec. 8401. Establishment of permanency grants program.
 Subtitle F--Addressing the Needs of Children Exposed to Domestic 
 Violence

Sec. 8501. Purposes.
Sec. 8502. Definitions.
Sec. 8503. Grants to address the needs of children who are exposed to 
 domestic violence.
Sec. 8504. Training and coordination of child welfare agencies and 
 domestic violence service providers.
Sec. 8505. Research and data collection on the impact of domestic 
 violence on children.
Sec. 8506. Grants to schools and early education and child care 
 programs for prevention of violence against 
 women.
Sec. 8507. Training of law enforcement and court personnel.
 Subtitle G--Enhancing Healthy Emotional Development in Young Children

Sec. 8601. Enhancing healthy emotional development.
 TITLE IX--SUCCESSFUL TRANSITION TO ADULTHOOD

 Subtitle A--21st Century Community Learning Centers

Sec. 9001. Centers.
 Subtitle B--Youth Development

 Chapter 1--Short Title; Policy; Findings; Definitions

Sec. 9101. Short title.
Sec. 9102. A national youth policy.
Sec. 9103. Findings.
Sec. 9104. Definitions.
 Chapter 2--Coordination of National Youth Policy

Sec. 9111. Office on National Youth Policy.
Sec. 9112. Council on National Youth Policy.
 Chapter 3--Grants for State and Community Programs

Sec. 9121. Purpose.
Sec. 9122. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 9123. Allotments to States.
Sec. 9124. State agencies and planning and mobilization areas.
Sec. 9125. State plans.
Sec. 9126. Distribution of funds for State activities and local 
 allocations.
Sec. 9127. Community boards and area agencies on youth.
Sec. 9128. Area plans.
Sec. 9129. Grants and contracts to eligible entities.
Sec. 9130. Eligible entities.
Sec. 9131. Applications.
Sec. 9132. Youth development programs.
 Chapter 4--Training, Research, and Evaluation

Sec. 9141. Purpose.
Sec. 9142. Grants and contracts.
Sec. 9143. Authorization of appropriations.
 Subtitle C--Youth Programs

Sec. 9201. Americorps.
Sec. 9202. Youthbuild program.
Sec. 9203. Youth workforce investment activities.
Sec. 9204. Transition training for reintegrating youth offenders.
 TITLE X--SAFE START--JUVENILE JUSTICE

 Subtitle A--Juvenile Delinquency Prevention and Protection

Sec. 10001. Definition of juvenile.
Sec. 10002. State plan allocation.
Sec. 10003. State plan requirements.
Sec. 10004. Repeal of part H.
Sec. 10005. Funding of Federal assistance for State and local programs.
Sec. 10006. Funding of grants for prevention programs.
Sec. 10007. Authorization of appropriations.
 Subtitle B--Mental Health Juvenile Justice

Sec. 10101. Short title.
Sec. 10102. Training of justice system personnel.
Sec. 10103. Block grant funding for treatment and diversion programs.
Sec. 10104. Initiative for comprehensive, intersystem programs.
Sec. 10105. Federal Coordinating Council on the Criminalization of 
 Juveniles With Mental Disorders.
Sec. 10106. Mental health screening and treatment for prisoners.
Sec. 10107. Inapplicability of amendments.
 Subtitle C--Juvenile Justice and Accountability

Sec. 10201. Short title.
Sec. 10202. Grant program.
Sec. 10203. Increase in funding for title III of the JJDPA.
Sec. 10204. Funding for the services for youthful offenders.
Sec. 10205. Authorization for the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency 
 Prevention Act of 1974.
 TITLE XI--SAFE START--GUN SAFETY

 Subtitle A--Closing the Gun Show Loophole

Sec. 11001. Extension of Brady background checks to gun shows.
 Subtitle B--Child Safety Locks

Sec. 11101. Requirement of child handgun safety locks.
 Subtitle C--Unlawful Weapons Transfers

Sec. 11201. Unlawful weapons transfers to juveniles.
 Subtitle D--Large Capacity Ammunition Feeding Devices

Sec. 11301. Ban on importing large capacity ammunition feeding devices.
 Subtitle E--Enforcement of Gun Laws

Sec. 11401. Enhance enforcement of gun violence laws. 
 Subtitle F--Miscellaneous

Sec. 11501. Study of marketing practices of the firearms industry.
Sec. 11502. Regulation of Internet firearms transfers.
Sec. 11503. Reduction of gun trafficking.
 TITLE XII--MISCELLANEOUS

Sec. 12001. Advisory Committee on Private Sector Support for Children 
 and Families.
Sec. 12002. Improvement of data collection and reporting regarding 
 children and families.

 TITLE I--HEALTHY START--CHILDREN'S HEALTH INSURANCE

 Subtitle A--Children's Health Insurance

SEC. 1001. MEDIKIDS HEALTH INSURANCE.

 (a) Short Title of Title.--This title may be cited as the 
``MediKids Health Insurance Act of 2001''.
 (b) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) More than 11 million American children are uninsured.
 (2) Children who are uninsured receive less medical care 
 and less preventive care and have a poorer level of health, 
which result in lifetime costs to themselves and to the entire American 
economy.
 (3) Although SCHIP and Medicaid are successfully extending 
 a health coverage safety net to a growing portion of the 
 vulnerable low-income population of uninsured children, we now 
 see that they alone cannot achieve 100 percent health insurance 
 coverage for our nation's children due to inevitable gaps 
 during outreach and enrollment, fluctuations in eligibility, 
 and variations in access to private insurance at all income 
 levels.
 (4) As all segments of our society continue to become more 
 and more transient, with many changes in employment over the 
 working lifetime of parents, the need for a reliable safety net 
 of health insurance which follows children across State lines, 
 already a major problem for the children of migrant and 
 seasonal farmworkers, will become a major concern for all 
 families in the United States.
 (5) The Medicare program has successfully evolved over the 
 years to provide a stable, universal source of health insurance 
 for the nation's disabled and those over age 65, and therefore 
 provides a tested model for designing a program to reach out to 
 America's children.
 (6) The problem of insuring 100 percent of all American 
 children could be gradually solved by automatically enrolling 
 all children born after December 31, 2002, in a program modeled 
 after Medicare (and to be known as ``MediKids''), and allowing 
 those children to be transferred into other equivalent or 
 better insurance programs, including either private insurance, 
 SCHIP, or Medicaid, if they are eligible to do so, but 
 maintaining the child's default enrollment in MediKids for any 
 times when the child's access to other sources of insurance is 
 lost.
 (7) A family's freedom of choice to use other insurers to 
 cover children would not be interfered with in any way, and 
 children eligible for SCHIP and Medicaid would continue to be 
 enrolled in those programs, but the underlying safety net of 
 MediKids would always be available to cover any gaps in 
 insurance due to changes in medical condition, employment, 
 income, or marital status, or other changes affecting a child's 
 access to alternate forms of insurance.
 (8) The MediKids program can be administered without 
 impacting the finances or status of the existing Medicare 
 program.
 (9) The MediKids benefit package can be tailored to the 
 special needs of children and updated over time.
 (10) The financing of the program can be administered 
 without difficulty by a yearly payment of affordable premiums 
 through a family's tax filing (or adjustment of a family's 
 earned income tax credit).
 (11) The cost of the program will gradually rise as the 
 number of children using MediKids as the insurer of last resort 
 increases, and a future Congress always can accelerate or slow 
 down the enrollment process as desired, while the societal 
 costs for emergency room usage, lost productivity and work 
 days, and poor health status for the next generation of 
 Americans will decline.
 (12) Over time 100 percent of American children will always 
 have basic health insurance, and we can therefore expect a 
 healthier, more equitable, and more productive society.

SEC. 1002. BENEFITS FOR ALL CHILDREN BORN AFTER 2002.

 (a) In General.--The Social Security Act is amended by adding at 
the end the following new title:

 ``TITLE XXII--MEDIKIDS PROGRAM

``SEC. 2201. ELIGIBILITY.

 ``(a) Eligibility of Individuals Born After December 31, 2002; All 
Children Under 23 Years of Age in Sixth Year.--An individual who meets 
the following requirements with respect to a month is eligible to 
enroll under this title with respect to such month:
 ``(1) Age.--
 ``(A) First year.--During the first year in which 
 this title is effective, the individual has not 
 attained 6 years of age.
 ``(B) Second year.--During the second year in which 
 this title is effective, the individual has not 
 attained 11 years of age.
 ``(C) Third year.--During the third year in which 
 this title is effective, the individual has not 
 attained 16 years of age.
 ``(D) Fourth year.--During the fourth year in which 
 this title is effective, the individual has not 
 attained 21 years of age.
 ``(E) Fifth and subsequent years.--During the fifth 
 year in which this title is effective and each 
 subsequent year, the individual has not attained 23 
 years of age.
 ``(2) Citizenship.--The individual is a citizen or national 
 of the United States or is lawfully residing in the United 
 States.
 ``(b) Enrollment Process.--An individual may enroll in the program 
established under this title only in such manner and form as may be 
prescribed by regulations, and only during an enrollment period 
prescribed by the Secretary consistent with the provisions of this 
section. Such regulations shall provide a process under which--
 ``(1) individuals who are born in the United States after 
 December 31, 2002, are deemed to be enrolled at the time of 
 birth and a parent or guardian of such an individual is 
 permitted to pre-enroll in the month prior to the expected 
 month of birth;
 ``(2) individuals who are born outside the United States 
 after such date and who become eligible to enroll by virtue of 
 immigration into (or an adjustment of immigration status in) 
 the United States are deemed enrolled at the time of entry or 
 adjustment of status;
 ``(3) eligible individuals may otherwise be enrolled at 
 such other times and manner as the Secretary shall specify, 
 including the use of outstationed eligibility sites as 
 described in section 1902(a)(55)(A) and the use of presumptive 
 eligibility provisions like those described in section 1920A; 
 and
 ``(4) at the time of automatic enrollment of a child, the 
 Secretary provides for issuance to a parent or custodian of the 
 individual a card evidencing coverage under this title and for 
 a description of such coverage.
The provisions of section 1837(h) apply with respect to enrollment 
under this title in the same manner as they apply to enrollment under 
part B of title XVIII.
 ``(c) Date Coverage Begins.--
 ``(1) In general.--The period during which an individual is 
 entitled to benefits under this title shall begin as follows, 
 but in no case earlier than January 1, 2003:
 ``(A) In the case of an individual who is enrolled 
 under paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (b), the date 
 of birth or date of obtaining appropriate citizenship 
 or immigration status, as the case may be.
 ``(B) In the case of an another individual who 
 enrolls (including pre-enrolls) before the month in 
 which the individual satisfies eligibility for 
 enrollment under subsection (a), the first day of such 
 month of eligibility.
 ``(C) In the case of an another individual who 
 enrolls during or after the month in which the 
 individual first satisfies eligibility for enrollment 
 under such subsection, the first day of the following 
 month.
 ``(2) Authority to provide for partial months of 
 coverage.--Under regulations, the Secretary may, in the 
 Secretary's discretion, provide for coverage periods that 
 include portions of a month in order to avoid lapses of 
 coverage.
 ``(3) Limitation on payments.--No payments may be made 
 under this title with respect to the expenses of an individual 
 enrolled under this title unless such expenses were incurred by 
 such individual during a period which, with respect to the 
individual, is a coverage period under this section.
 ``(d) Expiration of Eligibility.--An individual's coverage period 
under this part shall continue until the individual's enrollment has 
been terminated because the individual no longer meets the requirements 
of subsection (a) (whether because of age or change in immigration 
status).
 ``(e) Entitlement to MediKids Benefits for Enrolled Individuals.--
An individual enrolled under this section is entitled to the benefits 
described in section 2202.
 ``(f) Low-Income Information.--At the time of enrollment of a child 
under this title, the Secretary shall make an inquiry as to whether or 
not the family income of the family that includes the child is less 
than 150 percent of the poverty line for a family of the size involved. 
If the family income is below such level, the Secretary shall encode in 
the identification card issued in connection with eligibility under 
this title a code indicating such fact. The Secretary also shall 
provide for a toll-free telephone line at which providers can verify 
whether or not such a child is in a family the income of which is below 
such level.
 ``(g) Construction.--Nothing in this title shall be construed as 
requiring (or preventing) an individual who is enrolled under this 
section from seeking medical assistance under a State medicaid plan 
under title XIX or child health assistance under a State child health 
plan under title XXI.

``SEC. 2202. BENEFITS.

 ``(a) Secretarial Specification of Benefit Package.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall specify the benefits 
 to be made available under this title consistent with the 
 provisions of this section and in a manner designed to meet the 
 health needs of children.
 ``(2) Updating.--The Secretary shall update the 
 specification of benefits over time to ensure the inclusion of 
 age-appropriate benefits as the enrollee population gets older.
 ``(3) Annual updating.--The Secretary shall establish 
 procedures for the annual review and updating of such benefits 
 to account for changes in medical practice, new information 
 from medical research, and other relevant developments in 
 health science.
 ``(4) Input.--The Secretary shall seek the input of the 
 pediatric community in specifying and updating such benefits.
 ``(5) Limitation on updating.--In no case shall updating of 
 benefits under this subsection result in a failure to provide 
 benefits required under subsection (b).
 ``(b) Inclusion of Certain Benefits.--
 ``(1) Medicare core benefits.--Such benefits shall include 
 (to the extent consistent with other provisions of this 
 section) at least the same benefits (including coverage, 
 access, availability, duration, and beneficiary rights) that 
 are available under parts A and B of title XVIII.
 ``(2) All required medicaid benefits.--Such benefits shall 
 also include all items and services for which medical 
 assistance is required to be provided under section 
 1902(a)(10)(A) to individuals described in such section, 
 including early and periodic screening, diagnostic services, 
 and treatment services.
 ``(3) Inclusion of prescription drugs.--Such benefits also 
 shall include (as specified by the Secretary) prescription 
 drugs and biologicals.
 ``(4) Cost-sharing.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), 
 such benefits also shall include the cost-sharing (in 
 the form of deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments) 
 applicable under title XVIII with respect to comparable 
 items and services, except that no cost-sharing shall 
 be imposed with respect to early and periodic screening 
 and diagnostic services included under paragraph (2).
 ``(B) No cost-sharing for lowest income children.--
 Such benefits shall not include any cost-sharing for 
 children in families the income of which (as determined 
 for purposes of section 1905(p)) does not exceed 150 
 percent of the official income poverty line (referred 
 to in such section) applicable to a family of the size 
 involved.
 ``(C) Refundable credit for cost-sharing for other 
 low-income children.--For a refundable credit for cost-
 sharing in the case of children in certain families, 
 see section 35 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 ``(c) Payment Schedule.--The Secretary, with the assistance of the 
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, shall develop and implement a 
payment schedule for benefits covered under this title. To the extent 
feasible, such payment schedule shall be consistent with comparable 
payment schedules and reimbursement methodologies applied under parts A 
and B of title XVIII.
 ``(d) Input.--The Secretary shall specify such benefits and payment 
schedules only after obtaining input from appropriate child health 
providers and experts.
 ``(e) Enrollment in Health Plans.--The Secretary shall provide for 
the offering of benefits under this title through enrollment in a 
health benefit plan that meets the same (or similar) requirements as 
the requirements that apply to Medicare+Choice plans under part C of 
title XVIII. In the case of individuals enrolled under this title in 
such a plan, the Medicare+Choice capitation rate described in section 
1853(c) shall be adjusted in an appropriate manner to reflect 
differences between the population served under this title and the 
population under title XVIII.

``SEC. 2203. PREMIUMS.

 ``(a) Amount of Monthly Premiums.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall, during September of 
 each year (beginning with 2002), establish a monthly MediKids 
 premium. Subject to paragraph (2), the monthly MediKids premium 
 for a year is equal to \1/12\ of the annual premium rate 
 computed under subsection (b).
 ``(2) Elimination of monthly premium for demonstration of 
 equivalent coverage (including coverage under low-income 
 programs).--The amount of the monthly premium imposed under 
 this section for an individual for a month shall be zero in the 
 case of an individual who demonstrates to the satisfaction of 
 the Secretary that the individual has basic health insurance 
 coverage for that month the actuarial value of which, as 
 determined by the Secretary, is at least actuarially equivalent 
 to the benefits available under this title. For purposes of the 
 previous sentence enrollment in a medicaid plan under title 
 XIX, a State child health insurance plan under title XXI, or 
 under the medicare program under title XVIII is deemed to 
 constitute basic health insurance coverage described in such 
 sentence.
 ``(b) Annual Premium.--
 ``(1) National, per capita average.--The Secretary shall 
 estimate the average, annual per capita amount that would be 
 payable under this title with respect to individuals residing 
 in the United States who meet the requirement of section 
 2201(a)(1) as if all such individuals were eligible for (and 
 enrolled) under this title during the entire year (and assuming 
 that section 1862(b)(2)(A)(i) did not apply).
 ``(2) Annual premium.--Subject to subsection (d), the 
 annual premium under this subsection for months in a year is 
 equal to 25 percent of the average, annual per capita amount 
 estimated under paragraph (1) for the year.
 ``(c) Payment of Monthly Premium.--
 ``(1) Period of payment.--In the case of an individual who 
 participates in the program established by this title, subject 
 to subsection (d), the monthly premium shall be payable for the 
 period commencing with the first month of the individual's 
 coverage period and ending with the month in which the 
 individual's coverage under this title terminates.
 ``(2) Collection through tax return.--For provisions 
 providing for the payment of monthly premiums under this 
 subsection, see section 59B of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986.
 ``(3) Protections against fraud and abuse.--The Secretary 
 shall develop, in coordination with States and other health 
 insurance issuers, administrative systems to ensure that claims 
 which are submitted to more than one payor are coordinated and 
 duplicate payments are not made.
 ``(d) Reduction in Premium for Certain Low-Income Families.--For 
provisions reducing the premium under this section for certain low-
income families, see section 59B(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986.

``SEC. 2204. MEDIKIDS TRUST FUND.

 ``(a) Establishment of Trust Fund.--
 ``(1) In general.--There is hereby created on the books of 
 the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as 
 the `MediKids Trust Fund' (in this section referred to as the 
 `Trust Fund'). The Trust Fund shall consist of such gifts and 
 bequests as may be made as provided in section 201(i)(1) and 
 such amounts as may be deposited in, or appropriated to, such 
 fund as provided in this title.
 ``(2) Premiums.--Premiums collected under section 2203 
 shall be transferred to the Trust Fund.
 ``(b) Incorporation of Provisions.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), subsections 
 (b) through (i) of section 1841 shall apply with respect to the 
 Trust Fund and this title in the same manner as they apply with 
 respect to the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust 
 Fund and part B, respectively.
 ``(2) Miscellaneous references.--In applying provisions of 
 section 1841 under paragraph (1)--
 ``(A) any reference in such section to `this part' 
 is construed to refer to title XXII;
 ``(B) any reference in section 1841(h) to section 
 1840(d) and in section 1841(i) to sections 1840(b)(1) 
 and 1842(g) are deemed references to comparable 
 authority exercised under this title;
 ``(C) payments may be made under section 1841(g) to 
 the Trust Funds under sections 1817 and 1841 as 
 reimbursement to such funds for payments they made for 
 benefits provided under this title; and
 ``(D) the Board of Trustees of the MediKids Trust 
 Fund shall be the same as the Board of Trustees of the 
 Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund.

``SEC. 2205. OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY.

 ``(a) Through Annual Reports of Trustees.--The Board of Trustees of 
the MediKids Trust Fund under section 2204(b)(1) shall report on an 
annual basis to Congress concerning the status of the Trust Fund and 
the need for adjustments in the program under this title to maintain 
financial solvency of the program under this title.
 ``(b) Periodic GAO Reports.--The Comptroller General of the United 
States shall periodically submit to Congress reports on the adequacy of 
the financing of coverage provided under this title. The Comptroller 
General shall include in such report such recommendations for 
adjustments in such financing and coverage as the Comptroller General 
deems appropriate in order to maintain financial solvency of the 
program under this title.

``SEC. 2206. INCLUSION OF CARE COORDINATION SERVICES.

 ``(a) In General.--
 ``(1) Program authority.--The Secretary, beginning in 2003, 
 may implement a care coordination services program in 
 accordance with the provisions of this section under which, in 
 appropriate circumstances, eligible individuals may elect to 
 have health care services covered under this title managed and 
 coordinated by a designated care coordinator.
 ``(2) Administration by contract.--The Secretary may 
 administer the program under this section through a contract 
 with an appropriate program administrator.
 ``(3) Coverage.--Care coordination services furnished in 
 accordance with this section shall be treated under this title 
 as if they were included in the definition of medical and other 
 health services under section 1861(s) and benefits shall be 
 available under this title with respect to such services 
 without the application of any deductible or coinsurance.
 ``(b) Eligibility Criteria; Identification and Notification of 
Eligible Individuals.--
 ``(1) Individual eligibility criteria.--The Secretary shall 
 specify criteria to be used in making a determination as to 
 whether an individual may appropriately be enrolled in the care 
 coordination services program under this section, which shall 
 include at least a finding by the Secretary that for cohorts of 
 individuals with characteristics identified by the Secretary, 
 professional management and coordination of care can reasonably 
 be expected to improve processes or outcomes of health care and 
 to reduce aggregate costs to the programs under this title.
 ``(2) Procedures to facilitate enrollment.--The Secretary 
 shall develop and implement procedures designed to facilitate 
 enrollment of eligible individuals in the program under this 
 section.
 ``(c) Enrollment of Individuals.--
 ``(1) Secretary's determination of eligibility.--The 
 Secretary shall determine the eligibility for services under 
 this section of individuals who are enrolled in the program 
 under this section and who make application for such services 
 in such form and manner as the Secretary may prescribe.
 ``(2) Enrollment period.--
 ``(A) Effective date and duration.--Enrollment of 
 an individual in the program under this section shall 
 be effective as of the first day of the month following 
 the month in which the Secretary approves the 
 individual's application under paragraph (1), shall 
 remain in effect for one month (or such longer period 
 as the Secretary may specify), and shall be 
 automatically renewed for additional periods, unless 
 terminated in accordance with such procedures as the 
 Secretary shall establish by regulation. Such 
 procedures shall permit an individual to disenroll for 
 cause at any time and without cause at re-enrollment 
 intervals.
 ``(B) Limitation on reenrollment.--The Secretary 
 may establish limits on an individual's eligibility to 
 reenroll in the program under this section if the 
 individual has disenrolled from the program more than 
 once during a specified time period.
 ``(d) Program.--The care coordination services program under this 
section shall include the following elements:
 ``(1) Basic care coordination services.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to the cost-
 effectiveness criteria specified in subsection (b)(1), 
 except as otherwise provided in this section, enrolled 
 individuals shall receive services described in section 
 1905(t)(1) and may receive additional items and 
 services as described in subparagraph (B).
 ``(B) Additional benefits.--The Secretary may 
 specify additional benefits for which payment would not 
 otherwise be made under this title that may be 
 available to individuals enrolled in the program under 
 this section (subject to an assessment by the care 
 coordinator of an individual's circumstance and need 
 for such benefits) in order to encourage enrollment in, 
 or to improve the effectiveness of, such program.
 ``(2) Care coordination requirement.--Notwithstanding any 
 other provision of this title, the Secretary may provide that 
 an individual enrolled in the program under this section may be 
 entitled to payment under this title for any specified health 
 care items or services only if the items or services have been 
 furnished by the care coordinator, or coordinated through the 
care coordination services program. Under such provision, the Secretary 
shall prescribe exceptions for emergency medical services as described 
in section 1852(d)(3), and other exceptions determined by the Secretary 
for the delivery of timely and needed care.
 ``(e) Care Coordinators.--
 ``(1) Conditions of participation.--In order to be 
 qualified to furnish care coordination services under this 
 section, an individual or entity shall--
 ``(A) be a health care professional or entity 
 (which may include physicians, physician group 
 practices, or other health care professionals or 
 entities the Secretary may find appropriate) meeting 
 such conditions as the Secretary may specify;
 ``(B) have entered into a care coordination 
 agreement; and
 ``(C) meet such criteria as the Secretary may 
 establish (which may include experience in the 
 provision of care coordination or primary care 
 physician's services).
 ``(2) Agreement term; payment.--
 ``(A) Duration and renewal.--A care coordination 
 agreement under this subsection shall be for one year 
 and may be renewed if the Secretary is satisfied that 
 the care coordinator continues to meet the conditions 
 of participation specified in paragraph (1).
 ``(B) Payment for services.--The Secretary may 
 negotiate or otherwise establish payment terms and 
 rates for services described in subsection (d)(1).
 ``(C) Liability.--Case coordinators shall be 
 subject to liability for actual health damages which 
 may be suffered by recipients as a result of the care 
 coordinator's decisions, failure or delay in making 
 decisions, or other actions as a care coordinator.
 ``(D) Terms.--In addition to such other terms as 
 the Secretary may require, an agreement under this 
 section shall include the terms specified in 
 subparagraphs (A) through (C) of section 1905(t)(3).

``SEC. 2207. ADMINISTRATION AND MISCELLANEOUS.

 ``(a) In General.--Except as otherwise provided in this title--
 ``(1) the Secretary shall enter into appropriate contracts 
 with providers of services, other health care providers, 
 carriers, and fiscal intermediaries, taking into account the 
 types of contracts used under title XVIII with respect to such 
 entities, to administer the program under this title;
 ``(2) individuals enrolled under this title shall be 
 treated for purposes of title XVIII as though the individual 
 were entitled to benefits under part A and enrolled under part 
 B of such title;
 ``(3) benefits described in section 2202 that are payable 
 under this title to such individuals shall be paid in a manner 
 specified by the Secretary (taking into account, and based to 
 the greatest extent practicable upon, the manner in which they 
 are provided under title XVIII);
 ``(4) provider participation agreements under title XVIII 
 shall apply to enrollees and benefits under this title in the 
 same manner as they apply to enrollees and benefits under title 
 XVIII; and
 ``(5) individuals entitled to benefits under this title may 
 elect to receive such benefits under health plans in a manner, 
 specified by the Secretary, similar to the manner provided 
 under part C of title XVIII.
 ``(b) Coordination With Medicaid and SCHIP.--Notwithstanding any 
other provision of law, individuals entitled to benefits for items and 
services under this title who also qualify for benefits under title XIX 
or XXI or any other Federally funded program may continue to qualify 
and obtain benefits under such other title or program, and in such case 
such an individual shall elect either--
 ``(1) such other title or program to be primary payor to 
 benefits under this title, in which case no benefits shall be 
 payable under this title and the monthly premium under section 
 2203 shall be zero; or
 ``(2) benefits under this title shall be primary payor to 
 benefits provided under such program or title, in which case 
 the Secretary shall enter into agreements with States as may be 
 appropriate to provide that, in the case of such individuals, 
 the benefits under titles XIX and XXI or such other program 
 (including reduction of cost-sharing) are provided on a `wrap-
 around' basis to the benefits under this title.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments to Social Security Act Provisions.--
 (1) Section 201(i)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 401(i)(1)) is amended by striking ``or the Federal 
 Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund'' and inserting 
 ``the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund, and 
 the MediKids Trust Fund''.
 (2) Section 201(g)(1)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 401(g)(1)(A)) is amended by striking `` and the Federal 
 Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund established by title 
 XVIII'' and inserting ``, the Federal Supplementary Medical 
 Insurance Trust Fund, and the MediKids Trust Fund established 
 by title VIII''.
 (3) Section 1853(c) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-23(c)) is 
 amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``and (7)'' and 
 inserting ``, (7), and (8)'', and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(8) Adjustment for medikids.--In applying this subsection 
 with respect to individuals entitled to benefits under title 
 XXII, the Secretary shall provide for an appropriate adjustment 
 in the Medicare+Choice capitation rate as may be appropriate to 
 reflect differences between the population served under such 
 title and the population under parts A and B.''.
 (c) Maintenance of Medicaid Eligibility and Benefits for 
Children.--
 (1) In general.--In order for a State to continue to be 
 eligible for payments under section 1903(a) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(a))--
 (A) the State may not reduce standards of 
 eligibility, or benefits, provided under its State 
 medicaid plan under title XIX of the Social Security 
 Act or under its State child health plan under title 
 XXI of such Act for individuals under 23 years of age 
 below such standards of eligibility, and benefits, in 
 effect on the date of the enactment of this Act; and
 (B) the State shall demonstrate to the satisfaction 
 of the Secretary of Health and Human Services that any 
 savings in State expenditures under title XIX or XXI of 
 the Social Security Act that results from children from 
 enrolling under title XXII of such Act shall be used in 
 a manner that improves services to beneficiaries under 
 title XIX of such Act, such as through increases in 
 provider payment rates, expansion of eligibility, 
 improved nurse and nurse aide staffing and improved 
 inspections of nursing facilities, and coverage of 
 additional services.
 (2) MediKids as primary payor.--In applying title XIX of 
 the Social Security Act, the MediKids program under title XXII 
 of such Act shall be treated as a primary payor in cases in 
 which the election described in section 2207(b)(2) of such Act, 
 as added by subsection (a), has been made.
 (d) Expansion of MedPAC Membership to 19.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1805(c) of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1395b-6(c)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``17'' and 
 inserting ``19''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2)(B), by inserting ``experts in 
 children's health,'' after ``other health 
 professionals,''.
 (2) Initial terms of additional members.--
 (A) In general.--For purposes of staggering the 
 initial terms of members of the Medicare 
Payment Advisory Commission under section 1805(c)(3) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395b-6(c)(3)), the initial terms of the 2 
additional members of the Commission provided for by the amendment 
under subsection (a)(1) are as follows:
 (i) One member shall be appointed for 1 
 year.
 (ii) One member shall be appointed for 2 
 years.
 (B) Commencement of terms.--Such terms shall begin 
 on January 1, 2002.

SEC. 1003. MEDIKIDS PREMIUM.

 (a) General Rule.--Subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to determination of tax liability) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new part:

 ``PART VIII--MEDIKIDS PREMIUM

 ``Sec. 59B. MediKids premium.

``SEC. 59B. MEDIKIDS PREMIUM.

 ``(a) Imposition of Tax.--In the case of an individual to whom this 
section applies, there is hereby imposed (in addition to any other tax 
imposed by this subtitle) a MediKids premium for the taxable year.
 ``(b) Individuals Subject to Premium.--
 ``(1) In general.--This section shall apply to an 
 individual if the taxpayer has a MediKid at any time during the 
 taxable year.
 ``(2) MediKid.--For purposes of this section, the term 
 `MediKid' means, with respect to a taxpayer, any individual 
 with respect to whom the taxpayer is required to pay a premium 
 under section 2203(c) of the Social Security Act for any month 
 of the taxable year.
 ``(c) Amount of Premium.--For purposes of this section, the 
MediKids premium for a taxable year is the sum of the monthly premiums 
under section 2203 of the Social Security Act for months in the taxable 
year.
 ``(d) Exceptions Based on Adjusted Gross Income.--
 ``(1) Exemption for very low-income taxpayers.--
 ``(A) In general.--No premium shall be imposed by 
 this section on any taxpayer having an adjusted gross 
 income not in excess of the exemption amount.
 ``(B) Exemption amount.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, with respect to a family, the exemption 
 amount is the amount equal to 150 percent of the income 
 official poverty line (as defined by the Office of 
 Management and Budget, and revised annually in 
 accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget 
 Reconciliation Act of 1981) applicable to a family of 
 the size involved.
 ``(C) Phaseout of exemption.--In the case of a 
 taxpayer having an adjusted gross income which exceeds 
 the exemption amount but does not exceed twice the 
 exemption amount, the premium shall be the amount which 
 bears the same ratio to the premium which would (but 
 for this subparagraph) apply to the taxpayer as such 
 excess bears to the exemption amount.
 ``(2) Premium limited to 5 percent of adjusted gross 
 income.--In no event shall any taxpayer be required to pay a 
 premium under this section in excess of an amount equal to 5 
 percent of the taxpayer's adjusted gross income.
 ``(e) Coordination With Other Provisions.--
 ``(1) Not treated as medical expense.--For purposes of this 
 chapter, any premium paid under this section shall not be 
 treated as expense for medical care.
 ``(2) Not treated as tax for certain purposes.--The premium 
 paid under this section shall not be treated as a tax imposed 
 by this chapter for purposes of determining--
 ``(A) the amount of any credit allowable under this 
 chapter, or
 ``(B) the amount of the minimum tax imposed by 
 section 55.
 ``(3) Treatment under subtitle f.--For purposes of subtitle 
 F, the premium paid under this section shall be treated as if 
 it were a tax imposed by section 1.''.
 (b) Technical Amendments.--
 (1) Subsection (a) of section 6012 of such Code is amended 
 by inserting after paragraph (9) the following new paragraph:
 ``(10) Every individual liable for a premium under section 
 59B.''.
 (2) The table of parts for subchapter A of chapter 1 of 
 such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new 
 item:

 ``Part VIII. MediKids premium.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to months beginning after December 2002, in taxable years ending 
after such date.

SEC. 1004. REFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR COST-SHARING EXPENSES UNDER MEDIKIDS 
 PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--Subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to refundable credits) 
is amended by redesignating section 35 as section 36 and by inserting 
after section 34 the following new section:

``SEC. 35. COST-SHARING EXPENSES UNDER MEDIKIDS PROGRAM.

 ``(a) Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an individual who has a 
MediKid (as defined in section 59B) at any time during the taxable 
year, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by 
this subtitle an amount equal to 50 percent of the amount paid by the 
taxpayer during the taxable year as cost-sharing under section 
2202(b)(4) of the Social Security Act.
 ``(b) Limitation Based on Adjusted Gross Income.--The amount of the 
credit which would (but for this subsection) be allowed under this 
section for the taxable year shall be reduced (but not below zero) by 
an amount which bears the same ratio to such amount of credit as the 
excess of the taxpayer's adjusted gross income for such taxable year 
over the exemption amount (as defined in section 59B(d)) bears to such 
exemption amount.''.
 (b) Technical Amendments.--
 (1) Paragraph (2) of section 1324(b) of title 31, United 
 States Code, is amended by inserting before the period ``or 
 from section 35 of such Code''.
 (2) The table of sections for subpart C of part IV of 
 subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking 
 the last item and inserting the following new items:

 ``Sec. 35. Cost-sharing expenses under 
 MediKids program.
 ``Sec. 36. Overpayments of tax.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2002.

SEC. 1005. REPORT ON LONG-TERM REVENUES.

 Within 1 year after the date of enactment of this title, the 
Secretary of the Treasury shall propose a gradual schedule of 
progressive tax changes to fund the program under title XXII of the 
Social Security Act, as the number of enrollees grows in the out-years.

 Subtitle B--Children's Health Insurance Eligibility Expansion and 
 Enrollment Improvements

 CHAPTER 1--ELIGIBILITY EXPANSIONS

 Subchapter A--Medicaid and SCHIP

SEC. 1101. EXPANSION OF CHILDREN'S ELIGIBILITY FOR MEDICAID AND SCHIP.

 (a) Expansion of Income Eligibility Under SCHIP.--Section 
2110(c)(4) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 42 U.S.C. 
1397jj(c)(4)) is amended by striking ``200'' and inserting ``300''.
 (b) Mandatory Buy-In Coverage.--
 (1) Medicaid.--Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(A)(i)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of subclause 
 (VI);
 (B) by striking the semicolon at the end of 
 subclause (VII) and insert ``, or''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(VIII) who are children in 
 families whose income exceeds 300 
 percent of the income official poverty 
 line (as defined by the Office of 
 Management and Budget, and revised 
 annually in accordance with section 
 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget 
 Reconciliation Act of 1981) applicable 
 to a family of the size involved 
 subject, notwithstanding section 1916, 
 to payment of premiums or other cost-
 sharing charges (set on a sliding scale 
 based on income) that the State may 
 determine;''.
 (2) SCHIP.--Section 2107(e)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1397gg(e)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(E) Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII) (relating to 
 buy-in coverage for children whose family income 
 exceeds 300 percent of the poverty line).''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section apply to 
medical assistance and child health assistance provided on or after 
October 1, 2001.

SEC. 1102. OPTIONAL COVERAGE OF LEGAL IMMIGRANTS UNDER THE MEDICAID 
 PROGRAM AND TITLE XXI.

 (a) Medicaid Program.--Section 1903(v) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1396b(v)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``paragraph (2)'' and 
 inserting ``paragraphs (2) and (4)''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4)(A) A State may elect (in a plan amendment under this title) 
to provide medical assistance under this title for aliens who are 
lawfully residing in the United States (including battered aliens 
described in section 431(c) of the Personal Responsibility and Work 
Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996) and who are otherwise eligible 
for such assistance, within any of the following eligibility 
categories:
 ``(i) Pregnant women.--Women during pregnancy (and during 
 the 60-day period beginning on the last day of the pregnancy).
 ``(ii) Children.--Children (as defined under such plan), 
 including optional targeted low-income children described in 
 section 1905(u)(2)(B).
 ``(B)(i) In the case of a State that has elected to provide medical 
assistance to a category of aliens under subparagraph (A), no debt 
shall accrue under an affidavit of support against any sponsor of such 
an alien on the basis of provision of assistance to such category and 
the cost of such assistance shall not be considered as an unreimbursed 
cost.
 ``(ii) The provisions of sections 401(a), 402(b), 403, and 421 of 
the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 
1996 shall not apply to a State that makes an election under 
subparagraph (A).''.
 (b) Title XXI.--Section 2107(e)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1397gg(e)(1)), as amended by section 803 of the Medicare, 
Medicaid, and SCHIP Benefits Improvement and Protection Act of 2000 (as 
enacted into law by section 1(a)(6) of Public Law 106-554), is amended 
by adding at the end the following:
 ``(E) Section 1903(v)(4) (relating to optional 
 coverage of permanent resident alien children), but 
 only if the State has elected to apply such section to 
 that category of children under title XIX.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section take 
effect on October 1, 2001, and apply to medical assistance and child 
health assistance furnished on or after such date.

 Subchapter B--Family Opportunity Act

SEC. 1111. SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENTS TO SOCIAL SECURITY ACT.

 (a) Short Title.--This subchapter may be cited as the ``Family 
Opportunity Act of 2001'' or the ``Dylan Lee James Act''.
 (b) Amendments to Social Security Act.--Except as otherwise 
specifically provided, whenever in this Act an amendment is expressed 
in terms of an amendment to or repeal of a section or other provision, 
the reference shall be considered to be made to that section or other 
provision of the Social Security Act.

SEC. 1112. OPPORTUNITY FOR FAMILIES OF DISABLED CHILDREN TO PURCHASE 
 MEDICAID COVERAGE FOR SUCH CHILDREN.

 (a) State Option To Allow Families of Disabled Children To Purchase 
Medicaid Coverage for Such Children.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1902 (42 U.S.C. 1396a), as amended 
 by section 2(a) of the Breast and Cervical Cancer Prevention 
 and Treatment Act of 2000 (Public Law 106-354; 114 Stat. 1381) 
 and section 702(b) of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP 
 Benefits Improvement and Protection Act of 2000 (as enacted 
 into law by section 1(a)(6) of Public Law 106-554), is 
 amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)(10)(A)(ii)--
 (i) by striking ``or'' at the end of 
 subclause (XVII);
 (ii) by adding ``or'' at the end of 
 subclause (XVIII); and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following 
 new subclause:
 ``(XIX) who are disabled children 
 described in subsection (cc)(1);''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(cc)(1) Individuals described in this paragraph are individuals--
 ``(A) who have not attained 18 years of age;
 ``(B) who would be considered disabled under section 
 1614(a)(3)(C) (determined without regard to the reference to 
 age in that section) but for having earnings or deemed income 
 or resources (as determined under title XVI for children) that 
 exceed the requirements for receipt of supplemental security 
 income benefits; and
 ``(C) whose family income does not exceed such income level 
 as the State establishes and does not exceed--
 ``(i) 300 percent of the income official poverty 
 line (as defined by the Office of Management and 
 Budget, and revised annually in accordance with section 
 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 
 1981) applicable to a family of the size involved; or
 ``(ii) such higher percent of such poverty line as 
 a State may establish, except that no Federal financial 
 participation shall be provided under section 1903(a) 
 for any medical assistance provided to an individual 
 who would not be described in this subsection but for 
 this clause.''.
 (2) Interaction with employer-sponsored family coverage.--
 Section 1902(cc) (42 U.S.C. 1396a(cc)), as added by paragraph 
 (1), is amended by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(2)(A) If an employer of a parent of an individual described in 
paragraph (1) offers family coverage under a group health plan (as 
defined in section 2791(a) of the Public Health Service Act), the State 
may--
 ``(i) require such parent to apply for, enroll in, and pay 
 premiums for, such coverage as a condition of such parent's 
 child being or remaining eligible for medical assistance under 
 subsection (a)(10)(A)(ii)(XIX) if the parent is determined 
 eligible for such coverage and the employer contributes at 
 least 50 percent of the total cost of annual premiums for such 
 coverage; and
 ``(ii) if such coverage is obtained--
 ``(I) subject to paragraph (2) of section 1916(h), 
 reduce the premium imposed by the State under that 
 section (if any) in an amount that reasonably reflects 
 the premium contribution made by the parent for private 
 coverage on behalf of a child with a disability; and
 ``(II) treat such coverage as a third party 
 liability under subsection (a)(25).
 ``(B) In the case of a parent to which subparagraph (A) applies, if 
the family income of such parent does not exceed 300 percent of the 
income official poverty line (referred to in paragraph (1)(C)(i)), a 
State may provide for payment of any portion of the annual premium for 
such family coverage that the parent is required to pay. Any payments 
made by the State under this subparagraph shall be considered, for 
purposes of section 1903(a), to be payments for medical assistance.''.
 (b) State Option To Impose Income-Related Premiums.--Section 1916 
(42 U.S.C. 1396o) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``subsection (g)'' and 
 inserting ``subsections (g) and (h)''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(h)(1) With respect to disabled children provided medical 
assistance under section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XIX), subject to paragraph 
(2), a State may (in a uniform manner for such children) require the 
families of such children to pay monthly premiums set on a sliding 
scale based on family income.
 ``(2) A premium requirement imposed under paragraph (1) may only 
apply to the extent that--
 ``(A) the aggregate amount of such premium and any premium 
 that the parent is required to pay for family coverage under 
 section 1902(cc)(2)(A)(i) does not exceed 5 percent of the 
 family's income; and
 ``(B) the requirement is imposed consistent with section 
 1902(cc)(2)(A)(ii)(I).
 ``(3) A State shall not require prepayment of a premium imposed 
pursuant to paragraph (1) and shall not terminate eligibility of a 
child under section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XIX) for medical assistance 
under this title on the basis of failure to pay any such premium until 
such failure continues for a period of not less than 60 days from the 
date on which the premium became past due. The State may waive payment 
of any such premium in any case where the State determines that 
requiring such payment would create an undue hardship.''.
 (c) Conforming Amendment.--Section 1903(f)(4) (42 U.S.C. 
1396b(f)(4)), as amended by section 710(a) of the Medicare, Medicaid, 
and SCHIP Benefits Improvement and Protection Act of 2000 (as enacted 
into law by section 1(a)(6) of Public Law 106-554), is amended in the 
matter preceding subparagraph (A) by inserting 
``1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XIX),'' after ``1902(a)(10)(A) (ii)(XVIII),''.
 (d) Technical Amendments.--
 (1) Section 1902 (42 U.S.C. 1396a), as amended by section 
 702(b) of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Benefits 
 Improvement and Protection Act of 2000 (as enacted into law by 
 section 1(a)(6) of Public Law 106-554), is amended by 
 redesignating the subsection (aa) added by such section as 
 subsection (bb).
 (2) Section 1902(a)(15) (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(15)), as added 
 by section 702(a)(2) of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP 
 Benefits Improvement and Protection Act of 2000 (as so enacted 
 into law), is amended by striking ``subsection (aa)'' and 
 inserting ``subsection (bb)''.
 (3) Section 1915(b) (42 U.S.C. 1396n(b)), as amended by 
 section 702(c)(2) of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Benefits 
 Improvement and Protection Act of 2000 (as so enacted into 
 law), is amended by striking ``1902(aa)'' and inserting 
 ``1902(bb)''.
 (e) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--The amendments made by subsections (a), 
 (b), and (c) shall apply to medical assistance for items and 
 services furnished on or after January 1, 2002.
 (2) Technical amendments.--The amendments made by 
 subsection (d) shall take effect as if included in the 
 enactment of section 702 of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP 
 Benefits Improvement and Protection Act of 2000 (as enacted 
 into law by section 1(a)(6) of Public Law 106-554).

SEC. 1113. TREATMENT OF INPATIENT PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITAL SERVICES FOR 
 INDIVIDUALS UNDER AGE 21 IN HOME OR COMMUNITY-BASED 
 SERVICES WAIVERS.

 (a) In General.--Section 1915(c) (42 U.S.C. 1396n(c)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) in the first sentence, by inserting ``, or 
 inpatient psychiatric hospital services for individuals 
 under age 21,'' after ``intermediate care facility for 
 the mentally retarded''; and
 (B) in the second sentence, by inserting ``, or 
 inpatient psychiatric hospital services for individuals 
 under age 21'' before the period;
 (2) in paragraph (2)(B), by striking ``or services in an 
 intermediate care facility for the mentally retarded'' each 
 place it appears and inserting ``, services in an intermediate 
 care facility for the mentally retarded, or inpatient 
 psychiatric hospital services for individuals under age 21'';
 (3) by striking paragraph (2)(C) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(C) such individuals who are determined to be likely to 
 require the level of care provided in a hospital, nursing 
 facility, or intermediate care facility for the mentally 
 retarded, or inpatient psychiatric hospital services for 
 individuals under age 21, are informed of the feasible 
 alternatives, if available under the waiver, at the choice of 
 such individuals, to the provision of inpatient hospital 
 services, nursing facility services, services in an 
 intermediate care facility for the mentally retarded, or 
 inpatient psychiatric hospital services for individuals under 
 age 21;''; and
 (4) in paragraph (7)(A)--
 (A) by inserting ``, or inpatient psychiatric 
 hospital services for individuals under age 21,'' after 
 ``intermediate care facility for the mentally 
 retarded''; and
 (B) by inserting ``, or who would require inpatient 
 psychiatric hospital services for individuals under age 
 21'' before the period.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) apply 
with respect to medical assistance provided on or after January 1, 
2001.

SEC. 1114. DEMONSTRATION OF COVERAGE UNDER THE MEDICAID PROGRAM OF 
 CHILDREN WITH POTENTIALLY SEVERE DISABILITIES.

 (a) State Application.--A State may apply to the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services (in this section referred to as the 
``Secretary'') for approval of a demonstration project (in this section 
referred to as a ``demonstration project'') under which up to a 
specified maximum number of children with a potentially severe 
disability (as defined in subsection (b)) are provided medical 
assistance under the State medicaid plan under title XIX of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.).
 (b) Child With a Potentially Severe Disability Defined.--
 (1) In general.--In this section, the term ``child with a 
 potentially severe disability'' means, with respect to a 
 demonstration project, an individual who--
 (A) has not attained 21 years of age;
 (B) has a physical or mental condition, disease, 
 disorder (including a congenital birth defect or a 
 metabolic condition), injury, or developmental 
 disability that was incurred before the individual 
 attained such age; and
 (C) is reasonably expected, but for the receipt of 
 medical assistance under the State medicaid plan, to 
 reach the level of disability defined under section 
 1614(a)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1382c(a)(3)), (determined without regard to the reference to age 
in subparagraph (C) of that section).
 (2) Exception.--Such term does not include an individual 
 who would be considered disabled under section 1614(a)(3)(C) of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1382c(a)(3)(C)) (determined 
 without regard to the reference to age in that section).
 (c) Approval of Demonstration Projects.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (3), the Secretary 
 shall approve applications under subsection (a) that meet the 
 requirements of paragraph (2) and such additional terms and 
 conditions as the Secretary may require. The Secretary may 
 waive the requirement of section 1902(a)(1) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(1)) to allow for sub-State 
 demonstrations.
 (2) Terms and conditions of demonstration projects.--The 
 Secretary may not approve a demonstration project under this 
 section unless the State provides assurances satisfactory to 
 the Secretary that the following conditions are or will be met:
 (A) Independent evaluation.--The State provides for 
 an independent evaluation of the project to be 
 conducted during fiscal year 2006.
 (B) Consultation for development of criteria.--The 
 State consults with appropriate pediatric health 
 professionals in establishing the criteria for 
 determining whether a child has a potentially severe 
 disability.
 (C) Annual report.--The State submits an annual 
 report to the Secretary (in a uniform form and manner 
 established by the Secretary) on the use of funds 
 provided under the grant that includes the following:
 (i) Enrollment and financial statistics 
 on--
 (I) the total number of children 
 with a potentially severe disability 
 enrolled in the demonstration project, 
 disaggregated by disability;
 (II) the services provided by 
 category or code and the cost of each 
 service so categorized or coded; and
 (III) the number of children 
 enrolled in the demonstration project 
 who also receive services through 
 private insurance.
 (ii) With respect to the report submitted 
 for fiscal year 2006, the results of the 
 independent evaluation conducted under 
 subparagraph (A).
 (iii) Such additional information as the 
 Secretary may require.
 (3) Limitations on federal funding.--
 (A) Appropriation.--
 (i) In general.--Out of any funds in the 
 Treasury not otherwise appropriated, there is 
 appropriated to carry out this section--
 (I) $16,666,000 for each of fiscal 
 years 2002 and 2003; and
 (II) $16,667,000 for each of fiscal 
 years 2004 through 2007.
 (ii) Budget authority.--Clause (i) 
 constitutes budget authority in advance of 
 appropriations Acts and represents the 
 obligation of the Federal Government to provide 
 for the payment of the amounts appropriated 
 under clause (i).
 (B) Limitation on payments.--In no case may--
 (i) the aggregate amount of payments made 
 by the Secretary to States under this section 
 exceed $100,000,000;
 (ii) the aggregate amount of payments made 
 by the Secretary to States for administrative 
 expenses relating to the evaluations and annual 
 reports required under subparagraphs (A) and 
 (C) of paragraph (2) exceed $2,000,000 of such 
 $100,000,000; or
 (iii) payments be provided by the Secretary 
 for a fiscal year after fiscal year 2010.
 (C) Funds allocated to states.--
 (i) In general.--The Secretary shall 
 allocate funds to States based on their 
 applications and the availability of funds. In 
 making such allocations, the Secretary shall 
 ensure an equitable distribution of funds among 
 States with large populations and States with 
 small populations.
 (ii) Availability.--Funds allocated to a 
 State under a grant made under this section for 
 a fiscal year shall remain available until 
 expended.
 (D) Funds not allocated to states.--Funds not 
 allocated to States in the fiscal year for which they 
 are appropriated shall remain available in succeeding 
 fiscal years for allocation by the Secretary using the 
 allocation formula established under this section.
 (E) Payments to states.--The Secretary shall pay to 
 each State with a demonstration project approved under 
 this section, from its allocation under subparagraph 
 (C), an amount for each quarter equal to the Federal 
 medical assistance percentage (as defined in section 
 1905(b) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1395d(b))) of expenditures in the quarter for medical 
 assistance provided to children with a potentially 
 severe disability.
 (d) Recommendation.--Not later than October 1, 2005, the Secretary 
shall submit a recommendation to the Committee on Commerce of the House 
of Representatives and the Committee on Finance of the Senate regarding 
whether the demonstration project established under this section should 
be continued after fiscal year 2007.
 (e) State Defined.--In this section, the term ``State'' has the 
meaning given such term for purposes of title XIX of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.).

SEC. 1115. DEVELOPMENT AND SUPPORT OF FAMILY-TO-FAMILY HEALTH 
 INFORMATION CENTERS.

 Section 501 (42 U.S.C. 701) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subsection:
 ``(c)(1) In addition to amounts appropriated under subsection (a) 
and retained under section 502(a)(1) for the purpose of carrying out 
activities described in subsection (a)(2), there is appropriated to the 
Secretary, out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, 
for the purpose of enabling the Secretary (through grants, contracts, 
or otherwise) to provide for special projects of regional and national 
significance for the development and support of family-to-family health 
information centers described in paragraph (2), $10,000,000 for each of 
fiscal years 2002 through 2007. Funds appropriated under this paragraph 
shall remain available until expended.
 ``(2) The family-to-family health information centers described in 
this paragraph are centers that--
 ``(A) assist families of children with disabilities or 
 special health care needs to make informed choices about health 
 care in order to promote good treatment decisions, cost-
 effectiveness, and improved health outcomes for such children;
 ``(B) provide information regarding the health care needs 
 of, and resources available for, children with disabilities or 
 special health care needs;
 ``(C) identify successful health delivery models for such 
 children;
 ``(D) develop with representatives of health care 
 providers, managed care organizations, health care purchasers, 
 and appropriate State agencies a model for collaboration 
 between families of such children and health professionals;
 ``(E) provide training and guidance regarding caring for 
 such children;
 ``(F) conduct outreach activities to the families of such 
 children, health professionals, schools, and other appropriate 
 entities and individuals; and
 ``(G) are staffed by families of children with disabilities 
 or special health care needs who have expertise in Federal and 
 State public and private health care systems and health 
 professionals.
 ``(3) The provisions of this title that are applicable to the funds 
made available to the Secretary under section 502(a)(1) apply in the 
same manner to funds made available to the Secretary under paragraph 
(1).''.

SEC. 1116. RESTORATION OF MEDICAID ELIGIBILITY FOR CERTAIN SSI 
 BENEFICIARIES.

 (a) In General.--Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(II) (42 U.S.C. 
1396a(a)(10)(A)(i)(II)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(aa)'' after ``(II)'';
 (2) by striking ``or who are'' and inserting 
 ``, (bb) who are''; and
 (3) by inserting before the comma at the end the following: 
 ``, or (cc) who are under 21 years of age and with respect to 
 whom supplemental security income benefits would be paid under 
 title XVI if subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section 1611(c)(7) 
 were applied without regard to the phrase `the first day of the 
 month following' ''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
apply to medical assistance for items and services furnished on or 
after the first day of the first calendar quarter that begins after the 
date of enactment of this Act.

 CHAPTER 2--ENROLLMENT IMPROVEMENTS

SEC. 1121. APPLICATION OF SIMPLIFIED TITLE XXI PROCEDURES UNDER THE 
 MEDICAID PROGRAM.

 (a) Application Under Medicaid.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1902(l) of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1396a(l)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``subject to 
 paragraph (5)'', after ``Notwithstanding subsection 
 (a)(17),''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(5) With respect to determining the eligibility of individuals 
under 19 years of age (or such higher age as the State has elected 
under paragraph (1)(D)) for medical assistance under subsection 
(a)(10)(A) notwithstanding any other provision of this title, if the 
State has established a State child health plan under title XXI--
 ``(A) the State may not apply a resource standard;
 ``(B) the State shall use the same simplified eligibility 
 form (that in no case shall be more than 4 pages and that 
 permits application other than in person) as the State uses 
 under such State child health plan with respect to such 
 individuals;
 ``(C) the State shall provide for initial eligibility 
 determinations and redeterminations of eligibility using the 
 same verification policies, forms, and frequency as the State 
 uses for such purposes under such State child health plan with 
 respect to such individuals;
 ``(D) the State shall not require a face-to-face interview 
 for purposes of initial eligibility determinations and 
 redeterminations and shall allow for self-declaration of 
 initial eligibility and recertification information; and
 ``(E) the State shall coordinate the enrollment of children 
 under this title and title XXI with the enrollment of such 
 children and their families in other Federal means-tested 
 public assistance programs, including child care programs, free 
 or reduced price lunches or breakfasts under the Richard B. 
 Russell National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1751 et seq.), 
 assistance under the special supplemental nutrition program for 
 women, infants, and children (WIC) under section 17 of the 
 Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786), and benefits 
 under the Food Stamp Act of 1977.''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraph (1) 
 apply to determinations of eligibility made on or after the 
 date that is 1 year after the date of the enactment of this 
 Act, whether or not regulations implementing such amendments 
 have been issued.
 (3) Development of uniform application.--Not later than 1 
 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services, in consultation with States and 
 organizations with expertise in outreach to, and enrollment of, 
 children without health insurance, shall develop a uniform 
 application that meets the requirements of section 1902(l)(5) 
 of the Social Security Act, as added by paragraph (1), and may 
 be used in any State.
 (b) Presumptive Eligibility.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1920A(b)(3)(A)(i) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-1a(b)(3)(A)(i)), as amended by 
 section 708(a) of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Benefits 
 Improvement and Protection Act of 2000 (as enacted into law by 
 section 1(a)(6) of Public Law 106-554), is amended by inserting 
 ``a child care resource and referral agency,'' after ``a State 
 or tribal child support enforcement agency,''.
 (2) Application to presumptive eligibility for pregnant 
 women under medicaid.--Section 1920(b) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-1(b)) is amended by adding at the end 
 after and below paragraph (2) the following flush sentence:
``The term `qualified provider' includes a qualified entity as defined 
in section 1920A(b)(3).''.
 (3) Application under title xxi.--
 (A) In general.--Section 2107(e)(1)(D) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397gg(e)(1)), as added 
 by section 803 of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP 
 Benefits Improvement and Protection Act of 2000 (as 
 enacted into law by section 1(a)(6) of Public Law 106-
 554), is amended to read as follows:
 ``(D) Sections 1920 and 1920A (relating to 
 presumptive eligibility).''.
 (B) Exception from limitation on administrative 
 expenses.--Section 2105(c)(2) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1397ee(c)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(C) Exception for presumptive eligibility 
 expenditures.--The limitation under subparagraph (A) on 
 expenditures shall not apply to expenditures 
 attributable to the application of section 1920 or 
 1920A (pursuant to section 2107(e)(1)(D)), regardless 
 of whether the child is determined to be ineligible for 
 the program under this title or title XIX.''.
 (C) Conforming elimination of resource test.--
 Section 2102(b)(1)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1397bb(b)(1)(A)) is amended--
 (i) by striking ``and resources (including 
 any standards relating to spenddowns and 
 disposition of resources)''; and
 (ii) by adding at the end the following: 
 ``Effective 1 year after the date of the 
 enactment of the Leave No Child Behind Act of 
 2001, such standards may not include the 
 application of a resource standard or test.''.
 (c) Automatic Reassessment of Eligibility for Title XXI and 
Medicaid Benefits for Children Losing Medicaid or Title XXI 
Eligibility.--
 (1) Loss of medicaid eligibility.--Section 1902(a) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)) is amended--
 (A) by striking the period at the end of paragraph 
 (65) and inserting ``; and''; and
 (B) by inserting after paragraph (65) the 
 following:
 ``(66) provide, in the case of a State with a State child 
 health plan under title XXI, that before medical assistance to 
 a child (or a parent of a child) is discontinued under this 
 title, a determination of whether the child (or parent) is 
 eligible for benefits under title XXI shall be made and, if 
 determined to be so eligible, the child (or parent) shall be 
 automatically enrolled in the program under such title without 
 the need for a new application.''.
 (2) Loss of title xxi eligibility.--Section 2102(b)(3) (42 
 U.S.C. 1397bb(b)(3)) is amended by redesignating subparagraphs 
 (D) and (E) as subparagraphs (E) and (F), respectively, and by 
inserting after subparagraph (C) the following:
 ``(D) that before health assistance to a child (or 
 a parent of a child) is discontinued under this title, 
 a determination of whether the child (or parent) is 
 eligible for benefits under title XIX is made and, if 
 determined to be so eligible, the child (or parent) is 
 automatically enrolled in the program under such title 
 without the need for a new application;''.
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraphs (1) 
 and (2) apply to individuals who lose eligibility under the 
 medicaid program under title XIX, or under a State child health 
 insurance plan under title XXI, respectively, of the Social 
 Security Act on or after the date that is 60 days after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act.
 (d) Provision of Medicaid and SCHIP Applications and Information 
Under the School Lunch Program.--Section 9(b)(2)(B) of the Richard B. 
Russell National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1758(b)(2)(B)) is 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``(B) Applications'' and inserting ``(B)(i) 
 Applications''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(ii)(I) Applications for free and reduced price lunches that are 
distributed pursuant to clause (i) to parents or guardians of children 
in attendance at schools participating in the school lunch program 
under this Act shall also contain information on the availability of 
medical assistance under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) (commonly referred to as the `medicaid program') 
and of child health assistance under title XXI of such Act (commonly 
referred to as `SCHIP'), including information on how to obtain an 
application for assistance under such program.
 ``(II) Information on the medicaid program and SCHIP under 
subclause (I) shall be provided on a form separate from the application 
form for free and reduced price lunches under clause (i).''.
 (e) 12-Months Continuous Eligibility.--
 (1) Medicaid.--Section 1902(e)(12) of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(e)(12)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``At the option of the State, the 
 plan may'' and inserting ``The plan shall'';
 (B) by striking ``an age specified by the State 
 (not to exceed 19 years of age)'' and inserting ``19 
 years of age (or such higher age as the State has 
 elected under subsection (l)(1)(D)) or who is eligible 
 for medical assistance as the parent of such a child'';
 (C) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``a period 
 (not to exceed 12 months) '' and inserting ``the 12-
 month period beginning on the date''; and
 (D) in subparagraph (B), by inserting ``or, in the 
 case of a parent of a child, the child)'' after ``the 
 individual''.
 (2) Title xxi.--Section 2101(b)(2) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1397aa(b)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the following: 
 ``Such methods shall provide 12-months continuous eligibility 
 for children and parents under this title in the same manner as 
 section 1902(e)(12) provides 12-months continuous eligibility 
 for individuals described in such section under title XIX.''.

SEC. 1122. AUTOMATIC ENROLLMENT OF CHILDREN BORN TO TITLE XXI PARENTS.

 Section 2102(b)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1397bb(b)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subparagraph:
 ``(C) Automatic eligibility of children born to a 
 parent being provided familycare.--Such eligibility 
 standards shall provide for automatic coverage of a 
 child born to an individual who is provided assistance 
 under this title in the same manner as medical 
 assistance would be provided under section 1902(e)(4) 
 to a child described in such section.''.

 CHAPTER 3--EFFECTIVE DATE

SEC. 1131. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 (a) In General.--Subject to subsection (b), the amendments made by 
this subtitle take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.
 (b) Extension of Effective Date for State Law Amendment.--In the 
case of a State plan under title XIX or XXI of the Social Security Act 
which the Secretary of Health and Human Services determines requires 
State legislation in order for the plan to meet the additional 
requirements imposed by the amendments made by this subtitle, such 
State plan shall not be regarded as failing to comply with such 
requirements solely on the basis of its failure to meet the additional 
requirements before the first day of the first calendar quarter 
beginning after the close of the first regular session of the State 
legislature that begins after the date of enactment of this Act. For 
purposes of the previous sentence, in the case of a State that has a 2-
year legislative session, each year of the session is considered to be 
a separate regular session of the State legislature.

 Subtitle C--Improving Access to Care

 CHAPTER 1--COMMISSION

SEC. 1201. COMMISSION ON CHILDREN'S ACCESS TO CARE.

 (a) Establishment.--There is established a Commission on Children's 
Access to Care (in this section referred to as the ``Commission'').
 (b) Membership.--
 (1) Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 11 
 members of whom--
 (A) 3 members shall be appointed by the President;
 (B) 2 members shall be appointed by the Majority 
 Leader of the Senate;
 (C) 2 members shall be appointed by the Speaker of 
 the House of Representatives;
 (D) 2 members shall be appointed by the Minority 
 Leader of the Senate; and
 (E) 2 members shall be appointed by the Minority 
 Leader of the House of Representatives.
 (2) Qualifications.--Members of the Commission shall be 
 appointed from among representatives of children's advocacy 
 groups and children's health care providers.
 (3) Timing of appointments.--Members of the Commission 
 shall be appointed not later than 6 months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act.
 (4) Chair.--
 (A) In general.--The Commission shall select a 
 Chair from among its members.
 (B) Duties.--The Chair of the Commission shall be 
 responsible for--
 (i) the assignment of duties and 
 responsibilities among staff personnel and 
 their continuing supervision; and
 (ii) the use and expenditure of funds 
 available to the Commission.
 (5) Vacancies.--Any vacancy on the Commission shall be 
 filled in the same manner as the original incumbent was 
 appointed.
 (6) Travel expenses.--The members of the Commission shall 
 be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of 
 subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies 
 under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States 
 Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business 
 in the performance of services for the Commission.
 (c) Meetings.--
 (1) Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date 
 on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the 
 Commission shall hold its first meeting.
 (2) Time.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the 
 Chair.
 (3) Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission 
 shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may 
 hold hearings.
 (d) Duties.--
 (1) In general.--The Commission shall conduct annual 
 studies of children's access to health care.
 (2) Matters studied.--Each year the Commission shall 
 study--
 (A) the impact of payment rates under the medicaid 
 and the State children's health insurance programs on 
 access to health care and provider participation in the 
 delivery of health care to children;
 (B) the access to health care of children with 
 special health care needs, particularly those in 
 managed care delivery systems;
 (C) the access to, and delivery of, preventive 
 health care to children;
 (D) Federal and State government efforts to collect 
 data, report, evaluate, and monitor children's access 
 to health care, including Federal and State government 
 deficiencies in assessing children's access to health 
 care;
 (E) the needs for supplemental and enabling 
 services to improve children's access to health care, 
 including translation and transportation services; and
 (F) other factors that impact the ability of 
 families with children to gain access to health care 
 services.
 (3) Reports.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 date of the initial meeting of the Commission, and 
 annually thereafter, the Commission shall submit to 
 Congress and the President a report.
 (B) Contents.--Each report shall contain the 
 results of the study conducted for that year and the 
 Commission's recommendations to improve children's--
 (i) health status; and
 (ii) access to health care.
 (e) Powers of the Commission.--
 (1) Hearings.--The Commission may hold hearings, sit and 
 act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence 
 as the Commission considers advisable to carry out this 
 section.
 (2) Information from federal agencies.--The Commission may 
 secure directly from any Federal department or agency such 
 information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out 
 this section. Upon request of the Chair of the Commission, the 
 head of such department or agency shall furnish such 
 information to the Commission.
 (3) Postal services.--The Commission may use the United 
 States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions 
 as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
 (4) Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of 
 gifts or donations of services or property.
 (f) Staff and Administrative Support.--
 (1) In general.--The Chair of the Commission may, without 
 regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and 
 terminate an executive director and such other additional 
 personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to 
 perform its duties. The employment of an executive director 
 shall be subject to confirmation by the Commission.
 (2) Compensation.--The Chair of the Commission may fix the 
 compensation of the executive director and other personnel 
 without regard to chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 
 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of 
 positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate 
 of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not 
 exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule 
 under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
 (3) Detail of government employees.--Any Federal Government 
 employee may be detailed to the Commission without 
 reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or 
 loss of civil service status or privilege.
 (4) Procurement of temporary and intermittent services.--
 The Chair of the Commission may procure temporary and 
 intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United 
 States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the 
 daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for 
 level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 
 5, United States Code.

 CHAPTER 2--CHILDREN'S HEALTH INSURANCE ACCOUNTABILITY

SEC. 1211. SHORT TITLE.

 This chapter may be cited as the ``Children's Health Insurance 
Accountability Act of 2001''.

SEC. 1212. FINDINGS.

 Congress makes the following findings:
 (1) Children have health and development needs that are 
 markedly different than those for the adult population.
 (2) Children experience complex and continuing changes 
 during the continuum from birth to adulthood in which 
 appropriate health care is essential for optimal development.
 (3) The vast majority of work done on development methods 
 to assess the effectiveness of health care services and the 
 impact of medical care on patient outcomes and patient 
 satisfaction has been focused on adults.
 (4) Health outcome measures need to be age, gender, and 
 developmentally appropriate to be useful to families and 
 children.
 (5) Costly disorders of adulthood often have their origins 
 in childhood, making early access to effective health services 
 in childhood essential.
 (6) More than 200 chronic conditions, disabilities and 
 diseases affect children, including asthma, diabetes, sickle 
 cell anemia, spina bifida, epilepsy, autism, cerebral palsy, 
 congenital heart disease, mental retardation, and cystic 
 fibrosis. These children need the services of specialists who 
 have in depth knowledge about their particular condition.
 (7) Children's patterns of illness, disability and injury 
 differ dramatically from adults.

SEC. 1213. AMENDMENTS TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT.

 (a) Patient Protection Standards.--Title XXVII of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg et seq.) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating part C as part D; and
 (2) by inserting after part B the following new part:

 ``Part C--Children's Health Protection Standards

``SEC. 2770. ACCESS TO CARE.

 ``(a) Access to Appropriate Primary Care Providers.--
 ``(1) In general.--If a group health plan, or a health 
 insurance issuer in connection with the provision of health 
 insurance coverage, requires or provides for an enrollee to 
 designate a participating primary care provider for a child of 
 such enrollee--
 ``(A) the plan or issuer shall permit the enrollee 
 to designate a physician who specializes in pediatrics 
 as the child's primary care provider; and
 ``(B) if such an enrollee has not designated such a 
 provider for the child, the plan or issuer shall 
 consider appropriate pediatric expertise in mandatorily 
 assigning such an enrollee to a primary care provider.
 ``(2) Construction.--Nothing in paragraph (1) shall waive 
 any requirements of coverage relating to medical necessity or 
 appropriateness with respect to coverage of services.
 ``(b) Access to Pediatric Specialty Services.--
 ``(1) Referral to specialty care for children requiring 
 treatment by specialists.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of a child who is 
 covered under a group health plan, or health insurance 
 coverage offered by a health insurance issuer and who 
 has a mental or physical condition, disability, or 
 disease of sufficient seriousness and complexity to 
 require diagnosis, evaluation or treatment by a 
specialist, the plan or issuer shall make or provide for a referral to 
a specialist who has extensive experience or training, and is available 
and accessible to provide the treatment for such condition or disease, 
including the choice of a nonprimary care physician specialist 
participating in the plan or a referral to a nonparticipating provider 
as provided for under subparagraph (D) if such a provider is not 
available within the plan.
 ``(B) Specialist defined.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term `specialist' means, with respect 
 to a condition, disability, or disease, a health care 
 practitioner, facility, or center (such as a center of 
 excellence) that has extensive pediatric expertise 
 through appropriate training or experience to provide 
 high quality care in treating the condition, disability 
 or disease.
 ``(C) Referrals to participating providers.--A plan 
 or issuer is not required under subparagraph (A) to 
 provide for a referral to a specialist that is not a 
 participating provider, unless the plan or issuer does 
 not have an appropriate specialist that is available 
 and accessible to treat the enrollee's condition and 
 that is a participating provider with respect to such 
 treatment.
 ``(D) Treatment of nonparticipating providers.--If 
 a plan or issuer refers a child enrollee to a 
 nonparticipating specialist, services provided pursuant 
 to the referral shall be provided at no additional cost 
 to the enrollee beyond what the enrollee would 
 otherwise pay for services received by such a 
 specialist that is a participating provider.
 ``(E) Specialists as primary care providers.--A 
 plan or issuer shall have in place a procedure under 
 which a child who is covered under health insurance 
 coverage provided by the plan or issuer who has a 
 condition or disease that requires specialized medical 
 care over a prolonged period of time shall receive a 
 referral to a pediatric specialist affiliated with the 
 plan, or if not available within the plan, to a 
 nonparticipating provider for such condition and such 
 specialist may be responsible for and capable of 
 providing and coordinating the child's primary and 
 specialty care.
 ``(2) Standing referrals.--
 ``(A) In general.--A group health plan, or health 
 insurance issuer in connection with the provision of 
 health insurance coverage of a child, shall have a 
 procedure by which a child who has a condition, 
 disability, or disease that requires ongoing care from 
 a specialist may request and obtain a standing referral 
 to such specialist for treatment of such condition. If 
 the primary care provider in consultation with the 
 medical director of the plan or issuer and the 
 specialist (if any), determines that such a standing 
 referral is appropriate, the plan or issuer shall 
 authorize such a referral to such a specialist. Such 
 standing referral shall be consistent with a treatment 
 plan.
 ``(B) Treatment plans.--A group health plan, or 
 health insurance issuer, with the participation of the 
 family and the health care providers of the child, 
 shall develop a treatment plan for a child who requires 
 ongoing care that covers a specified period of time 
 (but in no event less than a 6-month period). Services 
 provided for under the treatment plan shall not require 
 additional approvals or referrals through a gatekeeper.
 ``(C) Terms of referral.--The provisions of 
 subparagraph (C) and (D) of paragraph (1) shall apply 
 with respect to referrals under subparagraph (A) in the 
 same manner as they apply to referrals under paragraph 
 (1)(A).
 ``(c) Adequacy of Access.--For purposes of subsections (a) and (b), 
a group health plan or health insurance issuer in connection with 
health insurance coverage shall ensure that a sufficient number, 
distribution, and variety of qualified participating health care 
providers are available so as to ensure that all covered health care 
services, including specialty services, are available and accessible to 
all enrollees in a timely manner.
 ``(d) Coverage of Emergency Services.--
 ``(1) In general.--If a group health plan, or health 
 insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer, 
 provides any benefits for children with respect to emergency 
 services (as defined in paragraph (2)(A)), the plan or issuer 
 shall cover emergency services furnished under the plan or 
 coverage--
 ``(A) without the need for any prior authorization 
 determination;
 ``(B) whether or not the physician or provider 
 furnishing such services is a participating physician 
 or provider with respect to such services; and
 ``(C) without regard to any other term or condition 
 of such coverage (other than exclusion of benefits, or 
 an affiliation or waiting period, permitted under 
 section 2701).
 ``(2) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Emergency medical condition based on prudent 
 layperson standard.--The term `emergency medical 
 condition' means a medical condition manifesting itself 
 by acute symptoms of sufficient severity (including 
 severe pain) such that a prudent layperson, who 
 possesses an average knowledge of health and medicine, 
 could reasonably expect the absence of immediate 
 medical attention to result in a condition described in 
 clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of section 1867(e)(1)(A) of 
 the Social Security Act.
 ``(B) Emergency services.--The term `emergency 
 services' means--
 ``(i) a medical screening examination (as 
 required under section 1867 of the Social 
 Security Act) that is within the capability of 
 the emergency department of a hospital, 
 including ancillary services routinely 
 available to the emergency department to 
 evaluate an emergency medical condition (as 
 defined in subparagraph (A)); and
 ``(ii) within the capabilities of the staff 
 and facilities available at the hospital, such 
 further medical examination and treatment as 
 are required under section 1867 of such Act to 
 stabilize the patient.
 ``(3) Reimbursement for maintenance care and post-
 stabilization care.--A group health plan, and health insurance 
 issuer offering health insurance coverage, shall provide, in 
 covering services other than emergency services, for 
 reimbursement with respect to services which are otherwise 
 covered and which are provided to an enrollee other than 
 through the plan or issuer if the services are maintenance care 
 or post-stabilization care covered under the guidelines 
 established under section 1852(d) of the Social Security Act 
 (relating to promoting efficient and timely coordination of 
 appropriate maintenance and post-stabilization care of an 
 enrollee after an enrollee has been determined to be stable).
 ``(e) Prohibition on Financial Barriers.--A health insurance issuer 
in connection with the provision of health insurance coverage may not 
impose any cost sharing for pediatric specialty services provided under 
such coverage to enrollee children in amounts that exceed the cost-
sharing required for other specialty care under such coverage.
 ``(f) Children With Special Health Care Needs.--A health insurance 
issuer in connection with the provision of health insurance coverage 
shall ensure that such coverage provides special consideration for the 
provision of services to enrollee children with special health care 
needs. Appropriate procedures shall be implemented to provide care for 
children with special health care needs. The development of such 
procedures shall include participation by the families of such 
children.
 ``(g) Definitions.--In this part:
 ``(1) Child.--The term `child' means an individual who is 
 under 19 years of age.
 ``(2) Children with special health care needs.--The term 
 `children with special health care needs' means those children 
 who have or are at elevated risk for chronic physical, 
 developmental, behavioral or emotional conditions and who also 
 require health and related services of a type and amount not 
 usually required by children.

``SEC. 2771. CONTINUITY OF CARE.

 ``(a) In General.--If a contract between a health insurance issuer, 
in connection with the provision of health insurance coverage, and a 
health care provider is terminated (other than by the issuer for 
failure to meet applicable quality standards or for fraud) and an 
enrollee is undergoing a course of treatment from the provider at the 
time of such termination, the issuer shall--
 ``(1) notify the enrollee of such termination, and
 ``(2) subject to subsection (c), permit the enrollee to 
 continue the course of treatment with the provider during a 
 transitional period (provided under subsection (b)).
 ``(b) Transitional Period.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraphs (2) 
 through (4), the transitional period under this subsection 
 shall extend for at least--
 ``(A) 60 days from the date of the notice to the 
 enrollee of the provider's termination in the case of a 
 primary care provider, or
 ``(B) 120 days from such date in the case of 
 another provider.
 ``(2) Institutional care.--The transitional period under 
 this subsection for institutional or inpatient care from a 
 provider shall extend until the discharge or termination of the 
 period of institutionalization and shall include reasonable 
 follow-up care related to the institutionalization and shall 
 also include institutional care scheduled prior to the date of 
 termination of the provider status.
 ``(3) Pregnancy.--If--
 ``(A) an enrollee has entered the second trimester 
 of pregnancy at the time of a provider's termination of 
 participation, and
 ``(B) the provider was treating the pregnancy 
 before date of the termination,
 the transitional period under this subsection with respect to 
 provider's treatment of the pregnancy shall extend through the 
 provision of post-partum care directly related to the delivery.
 ``(4) Terminal illness.--
 ``(A) In general.--If--
 ``(i) an enrollee was determined to be 
 terminally ill (as defined in subparagraph (B)) 
 at the time of a provider's termination of 
 participation, and
 ``(ii) the provider was treating the 
 terminal illness before the date of 
 termination,
 the transitional period under this subsection shall 
 extend for the remainder of the enrollee's life for 
 care directly related to the treatment of the terminal 
 illness.
 ``(B) Definition.--In subparagraph (A), an enrollee 
 is considered to be `terminally ill' if the enrollee 
 has a medical prognosis that the enrollee's life 
 expectancy is 6 months or less.
 ``(c) Permissible Terms and Conditions.--An issuer may condition 
coverage of continued treatment by a provider under subsection (a)(2) 
upon the provider agreeing to the following terms and conditions:
 ``(1) The provider agrees to continue to accept 
 reimbursement from the issuer at the rates applicable prior to 
 the start of the transitional period as payment in full.
 ``(2) The provider agrees to adhere to the issuer's quality 
 assurance standards and to provide to the issuer necessary 
 medical information related to the care provided.
 ``(3) The provider agrees otherwise to adhere to the 
 issuer's policies and procedures, including procedures 
 regarding referrals and obtaining prior authorization and 
 providing services pursuant to a treatment plan approved by the 
 issuer.

``SEC. 2772. CONTINUOUS QUALITY IMPROVEMENT.

 ``(a) In General.--A health insurance issuer that offers health 
insurance coverage for children shall establish and maintain an 
ongoing, internal quality assurance program that at a minimum meets the 
requirements of subsection (b).
 ``(b) Requirements.--The internal quality assurance program of an 
issuer under subsection (a) shall--
 ``(1) establish and measure a set of health care, 
 functional assessments, structure, processes and outcomes, and 
 quality indicators that are unique to children and based on 
 nationally accepted standards or guidelines of care;
 ``(2) maintain written protocols consistent with recognized 
 clinical guidelines or current consensus on the pediatric 
 field, to be used for purposes of internal utilization review, 
 with periodic updating and evaluation by pediatric specialists 
 to determine effectiveness in controlling utilization;
 ``(3) provide for peer review by health care professionals 
 of the structure, processes, and outcomes related to the 
 provision of health services, including pediatric review of 
 pediatric cases;
 ``(4) include in member satisfaction surveys, questions on 
 child and family satisfaction and experience of care, including 
 care to children with special needs;
 ``(5) monitor and evaluate the continuity of care with 
 respect to children;
 ``(6) include pediatric measures that are directed at 
 meeting the needs of at-risk children and children with chronic 
 conditions, disabilities and severe illnesses;
 ``(7) maintain written guidelines to ensure the 
 availability of medications appropriate to children;
 ``(8) use focused studies of care received by children with 
 certain types of chronic conditions and disabilities and 
 focused studies of specialized services used by children with 
 chronic conditions and disabilities;
 ``(9) monitor access to pediatric specialty services; and
 ``(10) monitor child health care professional satisfaction.
 ``(c) Utilization Review Activities.--
 ``(1) Compliance with requirements.--
 ``(A) In general.--A health insurance issuer that 
 offers health insurance coverage for children shall 
 conduct utilization review activities in connection 
 with the provision of such coverage only in accordance 
 with a utilization review program that meets at a 
 minimum the requirements of this subsection.
 ``(B) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(i) Clinical peers.--The term `clinical 
 peer' means, with respect to a review, a 
 physician or other health care professional who 
 holds a non-restricted license in a State and 
 in the same or similar specialty as typically 
 manages the pediatric medical condition, 
 procedure, or treatment under review.
 ``(ii) Health care professional.--The term 
 `health care professional' means a physician or 
 other health care practitioner licensed or 
 certified under State law to provide health 
 care services and who is operating within the 
 scope of such licensure or certification.
 ``(iii) Utilization review.--The terms 
 `utilization review' and `utilization review 
 activities' mean procedures used to monitor or 
 evaluate the clinical necessity, 
 appropriateness, efficacy, or efficiency of 
 health care services, procedures or settings 
 for children, and includes prospective review, 
 concurrent review, second opinions, case 
 management, discharge planning, or 
 retrospective review specific to children.
 ``(2) Written policies and criteria.--
 ``(A) Written policies.--A utilization review 
 program shall be conducted consistent with 
written policies and procedures that govern all aspects of the program.
 ``(B) Use of written criteria.--A utilization 
 review program shall utilize written clinical review 
 criteria specific to children and developed pursuant to 
 the program with the input of appropriate physicians, 
 including pediatricians, nonprimary care pediatric 
 specialists, and other child health professionals.
 ``(C) Administration by health care 
 professionals.--A utilization review program shall be 
 administered by qualified health care professionals, 
 including health care professionals with pediatric 
 expertise who shall oversee review decisions.
 ``(3) Use of qualified, independent personnel.--
 ``(A) In general.--A utilization review program 
 shall provide for the conduct of utilization review 
 activities only through personnel who are qualified 
 and, to the extent required, who have received 
 appropriate pediatric or child health training in the 
 conduct of such activities under the program.
 ``(B) Peer review of adverse clinical 
 determinations.--A utilization review program shall 
 provide that clinical peers shall evaluate the clinical 
 appropriateness of adverse clinical determinations and 
 divergent clinical options.

``SEC. 2773. APPEALS AND GRIEVANCE MECHANISMS FOR CHILDREN.

 ``(a) Internal Appeals Process.--A health insurance issuer in 
connection with the provision of health insurance coverage for children 
shall establish and maintain a system to provide for the resolution of 
complaints and appeals regarding all aspects of such coverage. Such a 
system shall include an expedited procedure for appeals on behalf of a 
child enrollee in situations in which the time frame of a standard 
appeal would jeopardize the life, health, or development of the child.
 ``(b) External Appeals Process.--A health insurance issuer in 
connection with the provision of health insurance coverage for children 
shall provide for an independent external review process that meets the 
following requirements:
 ``(1) External appeal activities shall be conducted through 
 clinical peers, a physician or other health care professional 
 who is appropriately credentialed in pediatrics with the same 
 or similar specialty and typically manages the condition, 
 procedure, or treatment under review or appeal.
 ``(2) External appeal activities shall be conducted through 
 an entity that has sufficient pediatric expertise, including 
 subspecialty expertise, and staffing to conduct external appeal 
 activities on a timely basis.
 ``(3) Such a review process shall include an expedited 
 procedure for appeals on behalf of a child enrollee in which 
 the time frame of a standard appeal would jeopardize the life, 
 health, or development of the child.

``SEC. 2774. ACCOUNTABILITY THROUGH DISTRIBUTION OF INFORMATION.

 ``(a) In General.--A health insurance issuer in connection with the 
provision of health insurance coverage for children shall submit to 
enrollees (and prospective enrollees), and make available to the 
public, in writing the health-related information described in 
subsection (b).
 ``(b) Information.--The information to be provided under subsection 
(a) shall include a report of measures of structures, processes, and 
outcomes regarding each health insurance product offered to 
participants and dependents in a manner that is separate for both the 
adult and child enrollees, using measures that are specific to each 
group.''.
 (b) Application to Group Health Insurance Coverage.--
 (1) In general.--Subpart 2 of part A of title XXVII of the 
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-4 et seq.) is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 2707. CHILDREN'S HEALTH ACCOUNTABILITY STANDARDS.

 ``(a) In General.--Each health insurance issuer shall comply with 
children's health accountability requirement under part C with respect 
to group health insurance coverage it offers.
 ``(b) Assuring Coordination.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services and the Secretary of Labor shall ensure, through the execution 
of an interagency memorandum of understanding between such Secretaries, 
that--
 ``(1) regulations, rulings, and interpretations issued by 
 such Secretaries relating to the same matter over which such 
 Secretaries have responsibility under part C (and this section) 
 and section 714 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act 
 of 1974 are administered so as to have the same effect at all 
 times; and
 ``(2) coordination of policies relating to enforcing the 
 same requirements through such Secretaries in order to have a 
 coordinated enforcement strategy that avoids duplication of 
 enforcement efforts and assigns priorities in enforcement.''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Section 2792 of the Public 
 Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-92) is amended by inserting 
 ``and section 2707(b)'' after ``of 1996''.
 (c) Application to Individual Health Insurance Coverage.--Part B of 
title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-41 et 
seq.) is amended by inserting after section 2752 the following new 
section:

``SEC. 2753. CHILDREN'S HEALTH ACCOUNTABILITY STANDARDS.

 ``Each health insurance issuer shall comply with children's health 
accountability requirements under part C with respect to individual 
health insurance coverage it offers.''.
 (d) Modification of Preemption Standards.--
 (1) Group health insurance coverage.--Section 2723 of the 
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-23) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ``subsection 
 (b)'' and inserting ``subsections (b) and (c)'';
 (B) by redesignating subsections (c) and (d) as 
 subsections (d) and (e), respectively; and
 (C) by inserting after subsection (b) the following 
 new subsection:
 ``(c) Special Rules in Case of Children's Health Accountability 
Requirements.--Subject to subsection (a)(2), the provisions of section 
2707 and part C, and part D insofar as it applies to section 2707 or 
part C, shall not prevent a State from establishing requirements 
relating to the subject matter of such provisions so long as such 
requirements are at least as stringent on health insurance issuers as 
the requirements imposed under such provisions.''.
 (2) Individual health insurance coverage.--Section 2762 of 
 the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-62), as added by 
 section 605(b)(3)(B) of Public Law 104-204, is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a), by striking ``subsection 
 (b), nothing in this part'' and inserting ``subsections 
 (b) and (c)'', and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(c) Special Rules in Case of Children's Health Accountability 
Requirements.--Subject to subsection (b), the provisions of section 
2753 and part C, and part D insofar as it applies to section 2753 or 
part C, shall not prevent a State from establishing requirements 
relating to the subject matter of such provisions so long as such 
requirements are at least as stringent on health insurance issuers as 
the requirements imposed under such section.''.

SEC. 1214. AMENDMENTS TO THE EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT INCOME SECURITY ACT OF 
 1974.

 (a) In General.--Subpart B of part 7 of subtitle B of title I of 
the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1185 et 
seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 714. CHILDREN'S HEALTH ACCOUNTABILITY STANDARDS.

 ``(a) In General.--Subject to subsection (b), the provisions of 
part C of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act shall apply 
under this subpart and part to a group health plan (and group health 
insurance coverage offered in connection with a group health plan) as 
if such part were incorporated in this section.
 ``(b) Application.--In applying subsection (a) under this subpart 
and part, any reference in such part C--
 ``(1) to health insurance coverage is deemed to be a 
 reference only to group health insurance coverage offered in 
 connection with a group health plan and to also be a reference 
 to coverage under a group health plan;
 ``(2) to a health insurance issuer is deemed to be a 
 reference only to such an issuer in relation to group health 
 insurance coverage or, with respect to a group health plan, to 
 the plan;
 ``(3) to the Secretary is deemed to be a reference to the 
 Secretary of Labor;
 ``(4) to an applicable State authority is deemed to be a 
 reference to the Secretary of Labor; and
 ``(5) to an enrollee with respect to health insurance 
 coverage is deemed to include a reference to a participant or 
 beneficiary with respect to a group health plan.''.
 (b) Modification of Preemption Standards.--Section 731 of the 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 1191) is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ``subsection (b)'' 
 and inserting ``subsections (b) and (c)'';
 (2) by redesignating subsections (c) and (d) as subsections 
 (d) and (e), respectively; and
 (3) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(c) Special Rules in Case of Patient Accountability 
Requirements.--Subject to subsection (a)(2), the provisions of section 
714, shall not prevent a State from establishing requirements relating 
to the subject matter of such provisions so long as such requirements 
are at least as stringent on group health plans and health insurance 
issuers in connection with group health insurance coverage as the 
requirements imposed under such provisions.''.
 (c) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 732(a) of the Employee Retirement Income 
 Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1185(a)) is amended by striking 
 ``section 711'' and inserting ``sections 711 and 714''.
 (2) The table of contents in section 1 of the Employee 
 Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by inserting 
 after the item relating to section 713 the following new item:

``Sec. 714. Children's health accountability standards.''.

SEC. 1215. STUDIES.

 (a) By Secretary.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall 
conduct a study, and prepare and submit to Congress a report, 
concerning--
 (1) the unique characteristics of patterns of illness, 
 disability, and injury in children;
 (2) the development of measures of quality of care and 
 outcomes related to the health care of children; and
 (3) the access of children to primary mental health 
 services and the coordination of managed behavioral health 
 services.
 (b) By GAO.--
 (1) Managed care.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the General Accounting Office shall 
 conduct a study, and prepare and submit to the Committee on 
 Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the 
 Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
 Representatives a report, concerning--
 (A) an assessment of the structure and performance 
 of non-governmental health plans, medicaid managed care 
 organizations, plans under title XIX of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.), and the program 
 under title XXI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1397aa et seq.) serving the needs of children with 
 special health care needs;
 (B) an assessment of the structure and performance 
 of non-governmental plans in serving the needs of 
 children as compared to medicaid managed care 
 organizations under title XIX of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.); and
 (C) the emphasis that private managed care health 
 plans place on primary care and the control of services 
 as it relates to care and services provided to children 
 with special health care needs.
 (2) Plan survey.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the General Accounting Office shall 
 prepare and submit to the Committee on Health, Education, 
 Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the Committee on Energy 
 and Commerce of the House of Representatives a report that 
 contains a survey of health plan activities that address the 
 unique health needs of adolescents, including quality measures 
 for adolescents and innovative practice arrangement.

 CHAPTER 3--EPSDT

SEC. 1221. COLLECTION OF DATA REGARDING THE DELIVERY OF EPSDT SERVICES.

 Section 1902(a)(43) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396a(a)(43)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in subparagraph (D)(iv), by striking the semicolon and 
 inserting ``, and''; and
 (3) by inserting after subparagraph (D)(iv), the following 
 new subparagraph:
 ``(E) beginning with fiscal year 2003, reporting to 
 the Secretary (in a uniform form and manner established 
 by the Secretary that does not identify individual 
 patients and that allows for the comparison of data 
 within and among States) the following information 
 relating to early and periodic screening, diagnostic, 
 and treatment services provided to each child enrolled 
 under the plan during each fiscal year:
 ``(i) as of the date of enrollment of the 
 child, the child's--
 ``(I) age, State of residence, 
 gender, and race/ethnicity,
 ``(II) the basis for eligibility 
 for medical assistance,
 ``(III) immunization history,
 ``(IV) blood-lead level,
 ``(V) weight and height percentile 
 compared to the widely accepted 
 standard percentiles for the child's 
 age,
 ``(VI) general health and any 
 chronic conditions or disabilities, and
 ``(VII) the primary service 
 delivery arrangement (such as fee-for-
 service, managed care, preferred 
 provider organization, or other 
 provider practice arrangement); and
 ``(ii) throughout the fiscal year (at such 
 intervals as the Secretary shall specify)--
 ``(I) the number of medical 
 screenings the child received and a 
 specific description of the services 
 performed as part of such screenings 
 (such as the weighing and measuring of 
 the child and the administering of a 
 blood-lead level test),
 ``(II) the number of screenings the 
 child received for vision and hearing 
 problems,
 ``(III) the number of dental 
 screenings the child received,
 ``(IV) information regarding 
 whether a condition was discovered from 
 any of such screenings, whether the 
 child was referred for, and received, 
 further treatment, and if so, 
the number of visits, and the treatments received, and
 ``(V) the actual or estimated costs 
 of each of such screenings and 
 treatments,
 ``(VI) information regarding 
 whether such screenings and treatments 
 are more comprehensive that similar 
 screenings and treatments provided to 
 adult individuals enrolled in the plan, 
 and
 ``(VII) the service delivery 
 arrangement for such screening and 
 treatment provided;''.

 Subtitle D--Reducing Public Health Risks

 CHAPTER 1--ASTHMA TREATMENTS

SEC. 1301. FINDINGS.

 Congress finds that--
 (1)(A) asthma is 1 of the most common and deadly diseases 
 in the United States, affecting an estimated 14,000,000 to 
 15,000,000 individuals in the United States, including almost 
 5,000,000 children;
 (B) asthma is the most common chronic illness in children, 
 affecting an estimated 7 percent of children in the United 
 States;
 (C) although asthma can occur at any age, about 80 percent 
 of the children who develop asthma do so before starting 
 school;
 (D) asthma is the single greatest cause of school 
 absenteeism, with 10,100,000 days missed from school per year 
 in the United States; and
 (E) according to a 1995 National Institutes of Health 
 workshop report, the cost of lost productivity from missed 
 school days for parents of children with asthma is estimated at 
 $1,000,000,000 per year; and
 (2)(A) vision and hearing screening is an essential part of 
 child health care;
 (B) a vision or hearing deficit may undermine a child's 
 ability to learn;
 (C) the Chicago public school system has determined through 
 vision screening that a far higher number of children 
 identified as failing academically suffer from vision 
 impairment;
 (D) students who have failed a grade 1 or more times are 
 even more likely to have a vision problem;
 (E) more than 30 percent of students in Chicago public 
 schools who were retained during the 1998-1999 school year 
 failed their school-based vision screening, a rate that is 50 
 percent higher than children who were not failing;
 (F) schools play a critical role in promoting a clear link 
 between visual and hearing acuity and academic performance;
 (G) providing vision and hearing screening in schools helps 
 children receive those essential health care services in a 
 timely fashion;
 (H) many parents find it difficult to take time off work in 
 order to ensure that their children receive preventive or other 
 nonemergency health care services; and
 (I) allowing children to receive nonemergency health care 
 services at school would ensure that the children receive 
 services that promote healthy lives and better academic 
 achievement.

SEC. 1302. ASTHMA, VISION, AND HEARING SCREENING FOR EARLY HEAD START 
 AND HEAD START PROGRAMS.

 (a) Early Head Start Programs.--Section 645A of the Head Start Act 
(42 U.S.C. 9840a) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(h) Asthma, Vision, and Hearing Screening.--
 ``(1) In general.--An entity that receives assistance under 
 this section may carry out a program under which the entity--
 ``(A) determines whether a child eligible to 
 participate in the program described in subsection 
 (a)(1) has received each of an asthma, vision, and 
 hearing screening test using a test that is appropriate 
 for age and risk factors on the enrollment of the child 
 in the program; and
 ``(B) in the case of a child who has not received 
 each of an asthma, and vision, and hearing screening 
 test, ensures that the enrolled child receives such a 
 test either by referral or by performing the test 
 (under contract or otherwise).
 ``(2) Reimbursement.--
 ``(A) In general.--On the request of an entity that 
 performs or arranges for the performance of an asthma, 
 vision, or hearing screening test under paragraph (1) 
 on a child who is eligible for or receiving medical 
 assistance under a State plan under title XIX of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.), the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, notwithstanding 
 any other provision of, or limitation under, title XIX 
 of the Social Security Act, shall reimburse the entity, 
 from funds that are made available under that title, 
 for 100 percent of the cost of the test and data 
 reporting.
 ``(B) Costs.--The costs of a test conducted under 
 this subsection--
 ``(i) shall include reimbursement for 
 testing devices and associated supplies 
 approved for sale by the Food and Drug 
 Administration and used in compliance with 
 section 353 of the Public Health Service Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 263a); and
 ``(ii) shall include reimbursement for 
 administering the tests and related services, 
 as determined appropriate by the State agency.
 ``(3) Head start.--This subsection shall apply to Head 
 Start programs that include coverage, directly or indirectly, 
 for infants and toddlers under the age of 3 years.''.
 (b) Head Start Programs.--Section 642(b) of the Head Start Act (42 
U.S.C. 9837(b)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (10), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in paragraph (11), by striking the period at the end 
 and inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(12) with respect to an agency that elects to carry out a 
 program under section 645(h), comply with the requirements of 
 such section 645A(h) in the case of each child eligible to 
 participate in the Head Start program to be carried out by the 
 agency.''.
 (c) Payments for Screening and Treatment Provided to Children 
Eligible Under Medicaid or SCHIP.--
 (1) Medicaid.--Section 1903(c) of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1396b(c)) is amended--
 (A) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(c)''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) Nothing in this title or any other provision of law, 
including the payment limitation commonly known as the `free care 
rule', shall be construed as prohibiting or restricting, or authorizing 
the Secretary to prohibit or restrict, payment under subsection (a) for 
medical assistance for covered services furnished to a child who is 
eligible for or receiving medical assistance under the State plan and 
who receives an asthma, vision, hearing, or other health screening 
test, or is provided treatment, education in disease management, 
corrective eyewear, or hearing aids, through a public elementary or 
secondary school, whether directly or indirectly, and regardless of 
whether the school participates in a program established under 
subsection (a) or (b) of section 320B of the Public Health Service 
Act.''.
 (2) SCHIP.--Section 2105 of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C.1397ee) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(g) Required Payment for Certain School-Based Services.--Nothing 
in this title or any other provision of law (including the payment 
limitation under title XIX commonly known as the `free care rule' to 
the extent, if any, such limitation applies to the program established 
under this title), shall be construed as prohibiting or restricting, or 
authorizing the Secretary to prohibit or restrict, payment under 
subsection (a) for child health assistance for covered services 
furnished to a child who is eligible for or receiving such assistance 
under the State plan and who receives an asthma, vision, or hearing 
screening test, or other health screening test that is available to 
children receiving assistance under the State plan, or is provided 
treatment, education in disease management, corrective eyewear, or 
hearing aids through a public elementary or secondary school, whether 
directly or indirectly, and regardless of whether the school 
participates in a program established under subsection (a) or (b) of 
section 320B of the Public Health Service Act.''.

SEC. 1303. ASTHMA, VISION, AND HEARING SCREENING AND TREATMENT FOR 
 CHILDREN ENROLLED IN PUBLIC SCHOOLS.

 Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 243 
et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 320B. ASTHMA, VISION, AND HEARING SCREENING AND TREATMENT FOR 
 CHILDREN ENROLLED IN PUBLIC SCHOOLS.

 ``(a) Asthma Screening and Case Management Program.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, in collaboration with the 
 Secretary of Education, shall carry out an asthma screening and 
 case management program under which local educational agencies 
 shall be reimbursed for the provision of asthma screening and 
 case management to children enrolled in public elementary 
 schools and secondary schools located in areas with respect to 
 which there is a high incidence of childhood asthma.
 ``(2) Program elements.--Under the program, a local 
 educational agency shall--
 ``(A) determine whether a child enrolled in a 
 school described in paragraph (1) has received an 
 asthma screening test using a test that is appropriate 
 for age and risk factors on the enrollment of the child 
 in the school;
 ``(B) in the case of a child who has not received 
 an asthma screening test, ensure that the child 
 receives such a test either by referral or by 
 performing the test (under contract or otherwise); and
 ``(C) in the case of a child determined to have 
 asthma, provide treatment or refer the child for 
 treatment (including case management) and education in 
 the management of asthma.
 ``(3) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection with respect to 
 a child, and any data reporting with respect to the child, who 
 is not eligible for coverage under title XIX or XXI of the 
 Social Security Act, or is not otherwise covered under a health 
 insurance plan, $10,000,000 for each fiscal year.
 ``(b) Vision and Hearing Screening Program.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall carry out a vision 
 and hearing screening program under which local educational 
 agencies shall be reimbursed for the provision of vision and 
 hearing screening and corrective eyewear and hearing aids to 
 children enrolled in public elementary schools and secondary 
 schools.
 ``(2) Program elements.--Under the program, a local 
 educational agency shall--
 ``(A) elect to provide vision and hearing screening 
 tests--
 ``(i) to all children enrolled in a school 
 who are most likely to suffer from vision or 
 hearing loss; or
 ``(ii) to all children enrolled in a 
 school;
 ``(B) ensure that the category of children elected 
 under subparagraph (A) receive such tests, either by 
 referral or by performing the test (under contract or 
 otherwise), that are appropriate for the age and risk 
 factors of the children, based on the enrollment of the 
 children in the school; and
 ``(C) in the case of any child determined to have a 
 vision or hearing impairment, provide the child with 
 such eyewear and hearing aids as are appropriate to 
 correct the child's vision or hearing, to the extent 
 that such correction is feasible.
 ``(3) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection with respect to 
 a child, and any data reporting with respect to the child, who 
 is not eligible for coverage under title XIX or XXI of the 
 Social Security Act, or is not otherwise covered under a health 
 insurance plan, $10,000,000 for each fiscal year.
 ``(c) Reimbursement.--
 ``(1) Children enrolled in or eligible for medicaid.--
 ``(A) In general.--With respect to a child who is 
 eligible for or receiving medical assistance under a 
 State plan under title XIX of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) and who receives, or is 
 provided, a test, treatment, education, corrective 
 eyewear, or hearing aid under a program established 
 under subsection (a) or (b), the Secretary, 
 notwithstanding any other provision of, or limitation 
 under, such title XIX, including the payment limitation 
 commonly known as the `free care rule', shall reimburse 
 the local educational agency administering such program 
 from funds that are made available under such title XIX 
 for 100 percent of the cost of the performance, 
 arrangement, or provision and data reporting.
 ``(B) Costs.--The costs of a test conducted under 
 this section shall include reimbursement for--
 ``(i) testing devices and associated 
 supplies approved for sale by the Food and Drug 
 Administration and used in compliance with 
 section 353; and
 ``(ii) administering the tests and related 
 services, as determined appropriate by the 
 State agency responsible for the administration 
 of title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.).
 ``(2) Children enrolled in or eligible for schip.--
 ``(A) In general.--With respect to a child who is 
 eligible for or receiving child health assistance under 
 a State plan under title XXI of the Social Security Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1397aa et seq.) and who receives, or is 
 provided, a test, treatment, education, corrective 
 eyewear, or hearing aid under a program established 
 under subsection (a) or (b), the Secretary, 
 notwithstanding any other provision of, or limitation 
 under, such title XXI, or any other provision of law 
 (including the payment limitation under title XIX 
 commonly known as the `free care rule' to the extent, 
 if any, such limitation applies to the State children's 
 health insurance program established under title XXI of 
 that Act), shall reimburse the local educational agency 
 administering such program from funds that are made 
 available under such title XXI for 100 percent of the 
 cost of the performance, arrangement, or provision and 
 data reporting.
 ``(B) Costs.--The costs shall include the costs 
 described in paragraph (1)(B).
 ``(d) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to require that a local educational agency participate in a 
program carried out by the Secretary under this section.
 ``(e) Definitions.--In this section, the terms `local educational 
agency' and `elementary and secondary school' shall have the meanings 
given such terms in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 8801).''.

SEC. 1304. GENERAL EFFECTIVE DATE.

 (a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), the 
amendments made by this chapter take effect on the date that is 18 
months after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (b) Head Start Waivers.--
 (1) In general.--An entity carrying out activities under 
 section 642 or 645A of the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9837, 
 9840a), may be awarded a waiver from the amendments made by 
 section 1302 if the State where the entity is located 
 establishes to the satisfaction of the Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services, in accordance with requirements and procedures 
 recommended in accordance with paragraph (2) to the Secretary 
 by the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and 
 Prevention a plan for increasing the number of asthma, vision, 
 and hearing screening tests of children enrolled in the Early 
 Head Start and Head Start programs in the State.
 (2) Development of waiver procedures and requirements.--Not 
 later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
 Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
 shall develop and recommend to the Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services criteria and procedures (including a timetable 
 for the submission of the State plan described in paragraph 
 (1)) for the awarding of waivers under that paragraph.

 CHAPTER 2--INCREASE IN FUNDING FOR HUD PROGRAMS

SEC. 1311. LEAD-BASED PAINT HAZARD CONTROL GRANTS.

 Section 1011(p) of the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard 
Reduction Act of 1992 (42 U.S.C. 4852) is amended by striking 
``appropriated'' and all that follows through the period and inserting 
``appropriated--
 ``(1) $125,000,000 for fiscal year 1993 and $250,000,000 
 for fiscal year 1994;
 ``(2) $200,000,000 for fiscal year 2002;
 ``(3) $250,000,000 for fiscal year 2003; and
 ``(4) $300,000,000 beginning with fiscal year 2004 and 
 fiscal years thereafter.''.

SEC. 1312. HEALTHY HOMES INITIATIVE PROGRAM.

 There are authorized to be appropriated for the Healthy Homes 
Initiative program pursuant to sections 501 and 502 of the Housing and 
Urban Development Act of 1970, for which funds were provided under 
title II of the Departments of Veterans Affairs and Housing and Urban 
Development, Independent Agencies Appropriations Act, 2000--
 (1) $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2002; and
 (2) $150,000,000 beginning with fiscal year 2003 and fiscal 
 years thereafter.

 CHAPTER 3--YOUTH SMOKING CESSATION AND EDUCATION

SEC. 1321. SHORT TITLE.

 This chapter may be cited as the ``Kids Deserve Freedom from 
Tobacco Act of 2001'' or the ``KIDS Act''.

 Subchapter A--Protection of Children from Tobacco

PART I--FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION JURISDICTION AND GENERAL AUTHORITY

SEC. 1331. REFERENCE.

 Whenever in this subchapter an amendment or repeal is expressed in 
terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, 
the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other 
provision of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et 
seq.).

SEC. 1332. STATEMENT OF GENERAL AUTHORITY.

 The regulations promulgated by the Secretary in the rule dated 
August 28, 1996 (Vol. 61, No. 168 C.F.R.), adding part 897 to title 21, 
Code of Federal Regulations, shall be deemed to have been lawfully 
promulgated under the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act as amended by this 
subchapter. Such regulations shall apply to all tobacco products.

SEC. 1333. NONAPPLICABILITY TO OTHER DRUGS OR DEVICES.

 Nothing in this subchapter, or an amendment made by this 
subchapter, shall be construed to affect the regulation of drugs and 
devices that are not tobacco products by the Secretary under the 
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.

SEC. 1334. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO CONFIRM JURISDICTION.

 (a) Definitions.--
 (1) Drug.--Section 201(g)(1) (21 U.S.C. 321(g)(1)) is 
 amended by striking ``; and (D)'' and inserting ``; (D) 
 nicotine in tobacco products; and (E)''.
 (2) Devices.--Section 201(h) (21 U.S.C. 321(h)) is amended 
 by adding at the end the following: ``Such term includes a 
 tobacco product.''.
 (3) Other definitions.--Section 201 (21 U.S.C. 321) is 
 amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(kk) The term `tobacco product' means any product made or 
 derived from tobacco that is intended for human consumption.''.
 (b) Prohibited Acts.--Section 301 (21 U.S.C. 331) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(aa) The manufacture, labeling, distribution, advertising and 
sale of any adulterated or misbranded tobacco product in violation of--
 ``(1) regulations issued under this Act; or
 ``(2) the KIDS Act, or regulations issued under such 
 Act.''.
 (c) Adulterated Drugs and Devices.--
 (1) In general.--Section 501 of the Federal Food, Drug, and 
 Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 351) is amended by adding at the end 
 the following:
 ``(j) If it is a tobacco product and it does not comply with the 
provisions of subchapter D of this chapter or the KIDS Act.''.
 (2) Misbranding.--Section 502(q) (21 U.S.C. 352(q)) is 
 amended--
 (A) by striking ``or (2)'' and inserting in lieu 
 thereof ``(2)''; and
 (B) by inserting before the period the following: 
 ``, or (3) in the case of a tobacco product, it is 
 sold, distributed, advertised, labeled, or used in 
 violation of this Act or the KIDS Act, or regulations 
 prescribed under such Acts''.
 (d) Restricted Device.--Section 520(e) (21 U.S.C. 360j(e)) is 
amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``or use--'' and 
 inserting ``or use, including restrictions on the access to, 
 and the advertising and promotion of, tobacco products--''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Tobacco products are a restricted device under this 
paragraph.''.
 (e) Regulatory Authority.--Section 503(g) (21 U.S.C. 353(g)) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(5) The Secretary may regulate any tobacco product as a drug, 
device, or both, and may designate the office of the Administration 
that shall be responsible for regulating such products.''.

SEC. 1335. GENERAL RULE.

 Section 513(a)(1)(B) (21 U.S.C. 360c(a)(1)(B)) is amended by adding 
at the end the following: ``The sale of tobacco products to adults that 
comply with performance standards established for these products under 
section 514 and other provisions of this Act and any regulations 
prescribed under this Act shall not be prohibited by the Secretary, 
notwithstanding sections 502(j), 516, and 518.''.

SEC. 1336. SAFETY AND EFFICACY STANDARD AND RECALL AUTHORITY.

 (a) Safety and Efficacy Standard.--Section 513(a) (21 U.S.C. 
360c(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(B), by inserting after the first 
 sentence the following: ``For a device which is a tobacco 
 product, the assurance in the previous sentence need not 
be found if the Secretary finds that special controls achieve the best 
public health result.''; and
 (2) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by redesignating subparagraphs (A), (B) and (C) 
 as clauses (i), (ii) and (iii), respectively;
 (B) by striking ``(2) For'' and inserting ``(2)(A) 
 For''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(B) For purposes of paragraph (1)(B), subsections (c)(2)(C), 
(d)(2)(B), (e)(2)(A), (f)(3)(B)(i), and (f)(3)(C)(i), and sections 514, 
519(a), 520(e), and 520(f), the safety and effectiveness of a device 
that is a tobacco product need not be found if the Secretary finds that 
the action to be taken under any such provision would achieve the best 
public health result. The finding as to whether the best public health 
result has been achieved shall be determined with respect to the risks 
and benefits to the population as a whole, including users and non-
users of the tobacco product, and taking into account--
 ``(i) the increased or decreased likelihood that existing 
 consumers of tobacco products will stop using such products; 
 and
 ``(ii) the increased or decreased likelihood that those who 
 do not use tobacco products will start using such products.''.
 (b) Recall Authority.--Section 518(e)(1) (21 U.S.C. 360h(e)(1)) is 
amended by inserting after ``adverse health consequences or death,'' 
the following: ``and for tobacco products that the best public health 
result would be achieved,''.

 PART II--REGULATION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS

SEC. 1341. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.

 Section 514(a) (21 U.S.C. 60d(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2), by striking ``device'' and inserting 
 ``nontobacco product device'';
 (2) by redesignating paragraphs (3) and (4) as paragraphs 
 (6) and (7), respectively; and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following:
 ``(3) The Secretary may adopt a performance standard under section 
514(a)(2) for a tobacco product regardless of whether the product has 
been classified under section 513. Such standard may--
 ``(A) include provisions to achieve the best public health 
 result;
 ``(B) where necessary to achieve the best public health 
 result, include--
 ``(i) provisions respecting the construction, 
 components, constituents, ingredients, and properties 
 of the tobacco product device, including the reduction 
 or elimination (or both) of nicotine and the other 
 components, ingredients, and constituents of the 
 tobacco product, its components and its by-products, 
 based upon the best available technology;
 ``(ii) provisions for the testing (on a sample 
 basis or, if necessary, on an individual basis) of the 
 tobacco product device or, if it is determined that no 
 other more practicable means are available to the 
 Secretary to assure the conformity of the tobacco 
 product device to such standard, provisions for the 
 testing (on a sample basis or, if necessary, on an 
 individual basis) by the Secretary or by another person 
 at the direction of the Secretary;
 ``(iii) provisions for the measurement of the 
 performance characteristics of the tobacco product 
 device;
 ``(iv) provisions requiring that the results of 
 each test or of certain tests of the tobacco product 
 device required to be made under clause (ii) 
 demonstrate that the tobacco product device is in 
 conformity with the portions of the standard for which 
 the test or tests were required; and
 ``(v) a provision that the sale and distribution of 
 the tobacco product device be restricted but only to 
 the extent that the sale and distribution of a tobacco 
 product device may otherwise be restricted under this 
 Act; and
 ``(C) where appropriate, require the use and prescribe the 
 form and content of labeling for the use of the tobacco product 
 device.
 ``(4) Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of the KIDS 
Act, the Secretary (acting through the Commissioner of Food and Drugs) 
shall establish a Scientific Advisory Committee to evaluate whether a 
level or range of levels exists at which nicotine yields do not produce 
drug-dependence. The Advisory Committee shall also review any other 
safety, dependence or health issue assigned to it by the Secretary. The 
Secretary need not promulgate regulations to establish the 
Committee.''.

SEC. 1342. APPLICATION OF FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT TO 
 TOBACCO PRODUCTS.

 (a) Tobacco Products Regulation.--Chapter V (21 U.S.C. 351 et seq.) 
is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SUBCHAPTER F--TOBACCO PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT, MANUFACTURING, AND ACCESS 
 RESTRICTIONS

``SEC. 570. PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS.

 ``Any regulations necessary to implement this subchapter shall be 
promulgated not later than 12 months after the date of enactment of 
this subchapter using notice and comment rulemaking (in accordance with 
chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code). Such regulations may be 
revised thereafter as determined necessary by the Secretary.

``SEC. 571. MAIL-ORDER SALES.

 ``(a) In General.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
enactment of this subchapter, the Secretary shall review and determine 
whether persons under the age of 18 years are obtaining tobacco 
products by means of the mail.
 ``(b) Restrictions.--Based solely upon the review conducted under 
subsection (a), the Secretary may take regulatory and administrative 
action to restrict or eliminate mail order sales of tobacco products.

``SEC. 572. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROPOSED RESOLUTION.

 ``(a) Additional Restrictions on Marketing, Advertising, and 
Access.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of 
this subchapter, the Secretary shall revise the regulations related to 
tobacco products promulgated by the Secretary on August 28, 1996 (61 
Fed. Reg. 44396) to include the additional restrictions on marketing, 
advertising, and access described in Title IA and Title IC of the 
Proposed Resolution entered into by the tobacco manufacturers and the 
State attorneys general on June 20, 1997, except that the Secretary 
shall not include an additional restriction on marketing or advertising 
in such regulations if its inclusion would violate the First Amendment 
to the Constitution.
 ``(b) Warnings.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the 
enactment of this subchapter, the Secretary shall promulgate 
regulations to require warnings on cigarette and smokeless tobacco 
labeling and advertisements. The content, format, and rotation of 
warnings shall conform to the specifications described in Title IB of 
the Proposed Resolution entered into by the tobacco manufacturers and 
the State attorneys general on June 20, 1997.
 ``(c) Rules of Construction.--
 ``(1) In general.--Nothing in this section shall be 
 construed to limit the ability of the Secretary to change the 
 text or layout of any of the warning statements, or any of the 
 labeling provisions, under the regulations promulgated under 
 subsection (b) and other provisions of this Act, if determined 
 necessary by the Secretary in order to make such statements or 
 labels larger, more prominent, more conspicuous, or more 
 effective.
 ``(2) Unfair acts.--Nothing in this section (other than the 
 requirements of subsections (a) and (b)) shall be construed to 
 limit or restrict the authority of the Federal Trade Commission 
 with respect to unfair or deceptive acts or practices in the 
 advertising of tobacco products.
 ``(d) Limited Preemption.--
 ``(1) State and local action.--No warning label with 
 respect to tobacco products, or any other tobacco product for 
 which warning labels have been required under this section, 
 other than the warning labels required under this Act, shall be 
 required by any State or local statute or regulation to be 
 included on any package of a tobacco product.
 ``(2) Effect on liability law.--Nothing in this section 
 shall relieve any person from liability at common law or under 
 State statutory law to any other person.
 ``(e) Violation of Section.--Any tobacco product that is in 
violation of this section shall be deemed to be misbranded.

``SEC. 573. GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF MANUFACTURERS, DISTRIBUTORS AND 
 RETAILERS.

 ``Each manufacturer, distributor, and retailer shall ensure that 
the tobacco products it manufactures, labels, advertises, packages, 
distributes, sells, or otherwise holds for sale comply with all 
applicable requirements of this Act.

``SEC. 574. DISCLOSURE AND REPORTING OF TOBACCO AND NONTOBACCO 
 INGREDIENTS AND CONSTITUENTS.

 ``(a) Disclosure of All Ingredients.--
 ``(1) Immediate and annual disclosure.--Not later than 30 
 days after the date of enactment of this subchapter, and 
 annually thereafter, each manufacturer of a tobacco product 
 shall submit to the Secretary an ingredient list for each brand 
 of tobacco product it manufactures that contains the 
 information described in paragraph (2).
 ``(2) Requirements.--The list described in paragraph (1) 
 shall, with respect to each brand or variety of tobacco product 
 of a manufacturer, include--
 ``(A) a list of all ingredients, constituents, 
 substances, and compounds that are found in or added to 
 the tobacco or tobacco product (including the paper, 
 filter, or packaging of the product if applicable) in 
 the manufacture of the tobacco product, for each brand 
 or variety of tobacco product so manufactured, 
 including, if determined necessary by the Secretary, 
 any material added to the tobacco used in the product 
 prior to harvesting;
 ``(B) the quantity of the ingredients, 
 constituents, substances, and compounds that are listed 
 under subparagraph (A) in each brand or variety of 
 tobacco product;
 ``(C) the nicotine content of the product, measured 
 in milligrams of nicotine;
 ``(D) for each brand or variety of cigarettes--
 ``(i) the filter ventilation percentage 
 (the level of air dilution in the cigarette as 
 provided by the ventilation holes in the 
 filter, described as a percentage);
 ``(ii) the pH level of the smoke of the 
 cigarette; and
 ``(iii) the tar, unionized (free) nicotine, 
 and carbon monoxide delivery level and any 
 other smoking conditions established by the 
 Secretary, reported in milligrams of tar, 
 nicotine, and carbon monoxide per cigarette;
 ``(E) for each brand or variety of smokeless 
 tobacco products--
 ``(i) the pH level of the tobacco;
 ``(ii) the moisture content of the tobacco 
 expressed as a percentage of the weight of the 
 tobacco; and
 ``(iii) the nicotine content--
 ``(I) for each gram of the product, 
 measured in milligrams of nicotine;
 ``(II) expressed as a percentage of 
 the dry weight of the tobacco; and
 ``(III) with respect to unionized 
 (free) nicotine, expressed as a 
 percentage per gram of the tobacco and 
 expressed in milligrams per gram of the 
 tobacco; and
 ``(F) any other information determined appropriate 
 by the Secretary.
 ``(3) Methods.--The Secretary shall have the authority to 
 promulgate regulations to establish the methods to be used by 
 manufacturers in making the determinations required under 
 paragraph (2).
 ``(4) Other tobacco products.--The Secretary shall 
 prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to establish 
 information disclosure procedures for other tobacco products.
 ``(b) Safety Assessments.--
 ``(1) Application to new ingredients.--
 ``(A) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 date of enactment of this subchapter, and annually 
 thereafter, each manufacturer shall submit to the 
 Secretary a safety assessment for each new ingredient, 
 constituent, substance, or compound that such 
 manufacturer desires to make a part of a tobacco 
 product. Such new ingredient, constituent, substance, 
 or compound shall not be included in a tobacco product 
 prior to approval by the Secretary of such a safety 
 assessment.
 ``(B) Method of filing.--A safety assessment 
 submitted under subparagraph (A) shall be signed by an 
 officer of the manufacturer who is acting on behalf of 
 the manufacturer and who has the authority to bind the 
 manufacturer, and contain a statement that ensures that 
 the information contained in the assessment is true, 
 complete and accurate.
 ``(C) Definition of new ingredient.--For purposes 
 of subparagraph (A), the term `new ingredient, 
 constituent, substance, or compound' means an 
 ingredient, constituent, substance, or compound listed 
 under subsection (a)(1) that was not used in the brand 
 or variety of tobacco product involved prior to January 
 1, 1998.
 ``(2) Application to other ingredients.--With respect to 
 the application of this section to ingredients, constituents 
 substances, or compounds listed under subsection (a) to which 
 paragraph (1) does not apply, all such ingredients, 
 constituents, substances, or compounds shall be reviewed 
 through the safety assessment process within the 5-year period 
 beginning on the date of enactment of this subchapter. The 
 Secretary shall develop a procedure for the submission of 
 safety assessments of such ingredients, constituents, 
 substances, or compounds that staggers such safety assessments 
 within the 5-year period.
 ``(3) Basis of assessment.--The safety assessment of an 
 ingredient, constituent, substance, or compound described in 
 paragraphs (1) and (2) shall--
 ``(A) be based on the best scientific evidence 
 available at the time of the submission of the 
 assessment; and
 ``(B) demonstrate that there is a reasonable 
 certainty among experts qualified by scientific 
 training and experience who are consulted, that the 
 ingredient, constituent, substance, or compound will 
 not present any risk to consumers or the public in the 
 quantities used under the intended conditions of use.
 ``(c) Prohibition.--
 ``(1) Regulations.--Not later than 12 months after the date 
 of enactment of this subchapter, the Secretary shall promulgate 
 regulations to prohibit the use of any ingredient, constituent, 
 substance, or compound in the tobacco product of a 
 manufacturer--
 ``(A) if no safety assessment has been submitted by 
 the manufacturer for the ingredient, constituent, 
 substance, or compound as otherwise required under this 
 section; or
 ``(B) if the Secretary finds that the manufacturer 
 has failed to demonstrate the safety of the ingredient, 
 constituent, substance, or compound that was the 
 subject of the assessment under paragraph (2).
 ``(2) Review of assessments.--
 ``(A) General review.--Not later than 180 days 
 after the receipt of a safety assessment under 
 subsection (b), the Secretary shall review the findings 
 contained in such assessment and approve or disapprove 
 of the safety of the ingredient, constituent, 
 substance, or compound that was the subject of the 
 assessment. The Secretary may, for good cause, extend 
 the period for such review. The Secretary shall provide 
 notice to the manufacturer of an action under this 
 subparagraph.
 ``(B) Inaction by secretary.--If the Secretary 
 fails to act with respect to an assessment of an 
 existing ingredient, constituent, substance, or 
 additive during the period referred to in subparagraph 
 (A), the manufacturer of the tobacco product involved 
 may continue to use the ingredient, constituent, 
 substance, or compound involved until such time as the 
 Secretary makes a determination with respect to the 
 assessment.
 ``(d) Right To Know; Full Disclosure of Ingredients to the 
Public.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (3), a 
 package of a tobacco product shall disclose all ingredients, 
 constituents, substances, or compounds contained in the product 
 in accordance with regulations promulgated under section 701(a) 
 by the Secretary.
 ``(2) Disclosure of percentage of domestic and foreign 
 tobacco.--The regulations referred to in paragraph (1) shall 
 require that the package of a tobacco product disclose, with 
 respect to the tobacco contained in the product--
 ``(A) the percentage that is domestic tobacco; and
 ``(B) the percentage that is foreign tobacco.
 ``(3) Health disclosure.--Notwithstanding section 301(j), 
 the Secretary may require the public disclosure of any 
 ingredient, constituent, substance, or compound contained in a 
 tobacco product that relates to a trade secret or other matter 
 referred to in section 1905 of title 18, United States Code, if 
 the Secretary determines that such disclosure will promote the 
 public health.

``SEC. 575. REDUCED RISK PRODUCTS.

 ``(a) Prohibition.--
 ``(1) In general.--No manufacturer, distributor or retailer 
 of tobacco products may make any direct or implied statement in 
 advertising or on a product package that could reasonably be 
 interpreted to state or imply a reduced health risk associated 
 with a tobacco product unless the manufacturer demonstrates to 
 the Secretary, in such form as the Secretary may require, that 
 based on the best available scientific evidence the product 
 significantly reduces the overall health risk to the public 
 when compared to other tobacco products.
 ``(2) Submission to secretary.--Prior to making any 
 statement described in paragraph (1), a manufacturer, 
 distributor or retailer shall submit such statement to the 
 Secretary, who shall review such statement to ensure its 
 accuracy and, in the case of advertising, to prevent such 
 statement from increasing, or preventing the contraction of, 
 the size of the overall market for tobacco products.
 ``(b) Determination by Secretary.--If the Secretary determines that 
a statement described in subsection (a)(2) is permissible because the 
tobacco product does present a significantly reduced overall health 
risk to the public, the Secretary may permit such statement to be made.
 ``(c) Development or Acquisition of Reduced Risk Technology.--
 ``(1) In general.--Any manufacturer that develops or 
 acquires any technology that the manufacturer reasonably 
 believes will reduce the risk from tobacco products shall 
 notify the Secretary of the development or acquisition of the 
 technology. Such notice shall be in such form and within such 
 time as the Secretary shall require.
 ``(2) Confidentiality.--With respect to any technology 
 described in paragraph (1) that is in the early stages of 
 development (as determined by the Secretary), the Secretary 
 shall establish protections to ensure the confidentiality of 
 any proprietary information submitted to the Secretary under 
 this subsection during such development.

``SEC. 576. ACCESS TO COMPANY INFORMATION.

 ``(a) Compliance Procedures.--Each manufacturer of tobacco products 
shall establish procedures to ensure compliance with this Act.
 ``(b) Requirement.--In addition to any other disclosure obligations 
under this Act, the KIDS Act, or any other law, each manufacturer of 
tobacco products shall, not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of the KIDS Act and thereafter as required by the Secretary, 
disclose to the Secretary all nonpublic information and research in its 
possession or control relating to the addiction or dependency, or the 
health or safety of tobacco products, including (without limitation) 
all research relating to processes to make tobacco products less 
hazardous to consumers and the research and documents described in 
subsection (c).
 ``(c) Research and Documents.--The documents described in this 
section include any documents concerning tobacco product research 
relating to--
 ``(1) nicotine, including--
 ``(A) the interaction between nicotine and other 
 components in tobacco products including ingredients in 
 the tobacco and smoke components;
 ``(B) the role of nicotine in product design and 
 manufacture, including product charters, and parameters 
 in product development, the tobacco blend, filter 
 technology, and paper;
 ``(C) the role of nicotine in tobacco leaf 
 purchasing;
 ``(D) reverse engineering activities involving 
 nicotine (such as analyzing the products of other 
 companies);
 ``(E) an analysis of nicotine delivery; and
 ``(F) the biology, psychopharmacology and any other 
 health effects of nicotine;
 ``(2) other ingredients, including--
 ``(A) the identification of ingredients in tobacco 
 products and constituents in smoke, including additives 
 used in product components such as paper, filter, and 
 wrapper;
 ``(B) any research on the health effects of 
 ingredients; and
 ``(C) any research or other information explaining 
 what happens to ingredients when they are heated and 
 burned;
 ``(3) less hazardous or safer products, including any 
 research or product development information on activities 
 involving reduced risk, less hazardous, low-tar or reduced-tar, 
 low-nicotine or reduced-nicotine or nicotine-free products; and
 ``(4) tobacco product advertising, marketing and promotion, 
 including--
 ``(A) documents related to the design of 
 advertising campaigns, including the desired 
 demographics for individual products on the market or 
 being tested;
 ``(B) documents concerning the age of initiation of 
 tobacco use, general tobacco use behavior, beginning 
 smokers, pre-smokers, and new smokers;
 ``(C) documents concerning the effects of 
 advertising; and
 ``(D) documents concerning future marketing options 
 or plans in light of the requirements and regulations 
 to be imposed under this subchapter or the KIDS Act.
 ``(d) Authority of Secretary.--With respect to tobacco product 
manufacturers, the Secretary shall have the same access to records and 
information and inspection authority as is available with respect to 
manufacturers of other medical devices.

``SEC. 577. OVERSIGHT OF TOBACCO PRODUCT MANUFACTURING.

 ``The Secretary shall by regulation prescribe good manufacturing 
practice standards for tobacco products. Such regulations shall be 
modeled after good manufacturing practice regulations for medical 
devices, food, and other items under section 520(f). Such standards 
shall be directed specifically toward tobacco products, and shall 
include--
 ``(1) a quality control system, to ensure that tobacco 
 products comply with such standards;
 ``(2) a system for inspecting tobacco product materials to 
 ensure their compliance with such standards;
 ``(3) requirements for the proper handling of finished 
 tobacco products;
 ``(4) strict tolerances for pesticide chemical residues in 
 or on tobacco or tobacco product commodities in the possession 
 of the manufacturer, except that nothing in this paragraph 
 shall be construed to affect any authority of the Environmental 
 Protection Agency;
 ``(5) authority for officers or employees of the Secretary 
 to inspect any factory, warehouse, or other establishment of 
 any tobacco product manufacturer, and to have access to 
 records, files, papers, processes, controls and facilities 
 related to tobacco product manufacturing, in accordance with 
 appropriate authority and rules promulgated under this Act; and
 ``(6) a requirement that the tobacco product manufacturer 
 maintain such files and records as the Secretary may specify, 
 as well as that the manufacturer report to the Secretary such 
 information as the Secretary shall require, in accordance with 
 section 519.

``SEC. 578. PRESERVATION OF STATE AND LOCAL AUTHORITY.

 ``Notwithstanding section 521 and except as otherwise provided for 
in section 572(e), nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as 
prohibiting a State or locality from imposing requirements, 
prohibitions, penalties or other measures to further the purposes of 
this subchapter that are in addition to the requirements, prohibitions, 
or penalties required under this subchapter. State and local 
governments may impose additional tobacco product control measures to 
further restrict or limit the use of such products.''.

SEC. 1343. FUNDING.

 (a) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this part (and 
the amendments made by this part).
 (b) Trigger.--No expenditures shall be made under this part (or the 
amendments made by this part) during any fiscal year in which the 
annual amount appropriated for the Food and Drug Administration is less 
than the amount so appropriated for the prior fiscal year.

SEC. 1344. REPEALS.

 The following provisions of law are repealed:
 (1) The Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act (15 
 U.S.C. 1331 et seq.), except for sections 5(d)(1) and (2) and 
 6.
 (2) The Comprehensive Smokeless Tobacco Health Education 
 Act of 1986 (15 U.S.C. 4401 et seq.), except for sections 3(f) 
 and 8(a) and (b).
 (3) The Comprehensive Smoking Education Act of 1964 (Public 
 law 98-474).

 Subchapter B--Miscellaneous Provisions

SEC. 1351. NONAPPLICATION TO TOBACCO PRODUCERS.

 (a) In General.--This chapter and the amendments made by this 
chapter shall not apply to the producers of tobacco leaf, including 
tobacco growers, tobacco warehouses, and tobacco grower cooperatives.
 (b) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this chapter, or an amendment 
made by this chapter, shall be construed to provide the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services with the authority to--
 (1) enter onto a farm owned by a producer of tobacco leaf 
 without the written consent of such producer; or
 (2) promulgate regulations on any matter that involves the 
 production of tobacco leaf or a producer thereof, other than 
 activities by a manufacturer that affect production.
 (c) Manufacturer Acting as Producer.--Notwithstanding any other 
provision of this section, if a producer of tobacco leaf is also a 
tobacco product manufacturer or is owned or controlled by a tobacco 
product manufacturer, the producer shall be subject to the provisions 
of this chapter, and the amendments made by this chapter, in the 
producer's capacity as a manufacturer.
 (d) Definition.--In this section, the term ``controlled by'' means 
a producer that is a member of the same controlled group of 
corporations, as that term is used for purposes of section 52(a) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, or under common control within the 
meaning of the regulations promulgated under section 52(b) of such 
Code.

SEC. 1352. EQUAL TREATMENT OF RETAIL OUTLETS.

 The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall promulgate 
regulations to require that retail establishments that are accessible 
to individuals under the age of 18, for which the predominant business 
is the sale of tobacco products, comply with any advertising 
restrictions applicable to such establishments.

 CHAPTER 4--COVERAGE OF CHILDHOOD IMMUNIZATIONS

SEC. 1361. SHORT TITLE.

 This chapter be cited as the ``Comprehensive Insurance Coverage of 
Childhood Immunization Act of 2001''.

SEC. 1362. AMENDMENTS TO THE EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT INCOME SECURITY ACT OF 
 1974.

 (a) In General.--Subpart B of part 7 of subtitle B of title I of 
the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1185 et 
seq.), as amended by section 1214, is further amended by adding at the 
end the following:

``SEC. 715. STANDARD RELATING TO COVERAGE OF CHILDHOOD IMMUNIZATION.

 ``(a) In General.--A group health plan, and a health insurance 
issuer offering health insurance coverage in connection with a group 
health plan, shall provide for each plan year comprehensive coverage 
for routine immunizations for each individual who is a dependent of a 
participant or beneficiary under the plan and is under 19 years of age.
 ``(b) Comprehensive Coverage.--For purposes of this section, 
comprehensive coverage for routine immunizations for a plan year 
consists of coverage, without deductibles, coinsurance, or other cost-
sharing, for immunizations (including the vaccine itself) in accordance 
with the most recent version of the Recommended Childhood Immunization 
Schedule issued prior to such plan year by the Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1 of 
the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended by 
section 1214, is further amended by inserting after the item relating 
to section 714 the following new item:

``Sec. 715. Standard relating to coverage of childhood immunization.''.

SEC. 1363. AMENDMENTS TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT.

 (a) Group Market.--Subpart 2 of part A of title XXVII of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-4 et seq.) is amended by adding at 
the end the following:

``SEC. 2707. STANDARD RELATING TO COVERAGE OF CHILDHOOD IMMUNIZATION.

 ``(a) In General.--A group health plan, and a health insurance 
issuer offering health insurance coverage in connection with a group 
health plan, shall provide for each plan year comprehensive coverage 
for routine immunizations for each individual who is a dependent of a 
participant or beneficiary under the plan and is under 19 years of age.
 ``(b) Comprehensive Coverage.--For purposes of this section, 
comprehensive coverage for routine immunizations for a plan year 
consists of coverage, without deductibles, coinsurance, or other cost-
sharing, for immunizations (including the vaccine itself) in accordance 
with the most recent version of the Recommended Childhood Immunization 
Schedule issued prior to such plan year by the Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention.''.
 (b) Individual Market.--The first subpart 3 of part B of title 
XXVII of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-51 et seq.) 
(relating to other requirements) (42 U.S.C. 300gg-51 et seq.) is 
amended--
 (1) by redesignating such subpart as subpart 2; and
 (2) by inserting after section 2753, as added by section 
 1213(c), the following:

``SEC. 2754. STANDARD RELATING TO COVERAGE OF CHILDHOOD IMMUNIZATION.

 ``The provisions of section 2707 shall apply to health insurance 
coverage offered by a health insurance issuer in the individual market 
in the same manner as they apply to health insurance coverage offered 
by a health insurance issuer in connection with a group health plan in 
the small or large group market.''.

SEC. 1364. AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1986.

 Subchapter B of chapter 100 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is 
amended--
 (1) in the table of sections, by inserting after the item 
 relating to section 9812 the following new item:

 ``Sec. 9813. Standard relating to 
 coverage of childhood 
 immunization.'';
 and
 (2) by inserting after section 9812 the following:

``SEC. 9813. STANDARD RELATING TO COVERAGE OF CHILDHOOD IMMUNIZATION.

 ``(a) In General.--A group health plan shall provide for each plan 
year comprehensive coverage for routine immunizations for each 
individual who is a dependent of a participant or beneficiary under the 
plan and is under 19 years of age.
 ``(b) Comprehensive Coverage.--For purposes of this section, 
comprehensive coverage for routine immunizations for a plan year 
consists of coverage, without deductibles, coinsurance, or other cost-
sharing, for immunizations (including the vaccine itself) in accordance 
with the most recent version of the Recommended Childhood Immunization 
Schedule issued prior to such plan year by the Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention.''.

SEC. 1365. EFFECTIVE DATES.

 (a) Group Health Insurance Coverage.--Subject to subsection (c), 
the amendments made by sections 1362, 1363(a), and 1364 apply with 
respect to group health plans for plan years beginning on or after 
January 1, 2002.
 (b) Individual Health Insurance Coverage.--The amendment made by 
section 1363(b) applies with respect to health insurance coverage 
offered, sold, issued, renewed, in effect, or operated in the 
individual market on or after such date.
 (c) Collective Bargaining Exception.--In the case of a group health 
plan maintained pursuant to 1 or more collective bargaining agreements 
between employee representatives and 1 or more employers ratified 
before the date of enactment of this Act, the amendments made sections 
1362, 1363(a), and 1364 shall not apply to plan years beginning before 
the later of--
 (1) the earliest date as of which all such collective 
 bargaining agreements relating to the plan have terminated 
 (determined without regard to any extension thereof agreed to 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act), or
 (2) January 1, 2002.
For purposes of paragraph (1), any plan amendment made pursuant to a 
collective bargaining agreement relating to the plan which amends the 
plan solely to conform to any requirement added by sections 1362, 
1363(a), and 1364 shall not be treated as a termination of such 
collective bargaining agreement.

 Subtitle E--Reducing Environmental Health Risks

 CHAPTER 1--ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION OF CHILDREN

SEC. 1401. SHORT TITLE.

 This chapter may be cited as the ``Children's Environmental 
Protection Act''.

SEC. 1402. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION FOR CHILDREN AND OTHER VULNERABLE 
 SUBPOPULATIONS.

 The Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2601 et seq.) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:

 ``TITLE V--ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION FOR CHILDREN AND OTHER VULNERABLE 
 SUBPOPULATIONS

``SEC. 501. FINDINGS AND POLICY.

 ``(a) Findings.--Congress finds that--
 ``(1) the protection of public health and safety depends on 
 individuals and government officials being aware of the 
 pollution dangers that exist in their homes, schools, and 
 communities, and whether those dangers present special threats 
 to the health of children and other vulnerable subpopulations;
 ``(2) children spend much of their young lives in schools 
 and day care centers, and may face significant exposure to 
 pesticides and other environmental pollutants in those 
 locations;
 ``(3) the metabolism, physiology, and diet of children, and 
 exposure patterns of children to environmental pollutants, 
 differ from those of adults, and those differences and the 
 inherent nature of immature and developing systems of children 
 can make children more susceptible than adults to the harmful 
 effects of environmental pollutants;
 ``(4) a study conducted by the National Academy of Sciences 
 that particularly considered the effects of pesticides on 
 children concluded that current approaches to assessing 
 pesticide risks typically do not consider risks to children 
 and, as a result, current standards and tolerances often fail 
 to adequately protect children;
 ``(5) there are often insufficient data to enable the 
 Administrator, when establishing an environmental and public 
 health standard for an environmental pollutant, to evaluate the 
 special susceptibility or exposure of children to environmental 
 pollutants;
 ``(6) when data are lacking to evaluate the special 
 susceptibility or exposure of children to an environmental 
 pollutant, the Administrator generally--
 ``(A) does not presume that the environmental 
 pollutant presents a special risk to children; and
 ``(B) does not apply a special or additional margin 
 of safety to protect the health of children in 
 establishing an environmental or public health standard 
 for that pollutant; and
 ``(7) safeguarding children from environmental pollutants 
 requires the systematic collection of data concerning the 
 special susceptibility and exposure of children to those 
 pollutants, and the adoption of an additional safety factor of 
 at least 10-fold in the establishment of environmental and 
 public health standards where reliable data are not available.
 ``(b) Policy.--It is the policy of the United States that--
 ``(1) the public has the right to be informed about the 
 pollution dangers to which children are being exposed in their 
 homes, schools and communities, and how those dangers may 
 present special health threats to children and other vulnerable 
 subpopulations;
 ``(2) each environmental and public health standard for an 
 environmental pollutant established by the Administrator must, 
 with an adequate margin of safety, protect children and other 
 vulnerable subpopulations;
 ``(3) where data sufficient to evaluate the special 
 susceptibility and exposure of children (including exposure 
in utero) to an environmental pollutant are lacking, the Administrator 
should presume that the environmental pollutant poses a special risk to 
children and should apply an appropriate additional margin of safety of 
at least 10-fold in establishing an environmental or public health 
standard for that environmental pollutant;
 ``(4) since it is difficult to identify all conceivable 
 risks and address all uncertainties associated with pesticide 
 use, the use of dangerous pesticides in schools and day care 
 centers should be eliminated; and
 ``(5) the Environmental Protection Agency, the Department 
 of Health and Human Services (including the National Institute 
 of Environmental Health Sciences and the Agency for Toxic 
 Substances and Disease Registry), the National Institutes of 
 Health, and other Federal agencies should support research on 
 the short-term and long-term health effects of cumulative and 
 synergistic exposures of children and other vulnerable 
 subpopulations to environmental pollutants.

``SEC. 502. DEFINITIONS.

 ``In this title:
 ``(1) Child.--The term `child' means an individual 18 years 
 of age or younger.
 ``(2) Committee.--The term `Committee' means the Children's 
 Environmental Health Protection Advisory Committee established 
 under section 506.
 ``(3) Day care center.--The term `day care center' means a 
 center-based child care provider that is licensed, regulated, 
 or registered under applicable State or local law.
 ``(4) Environmental pollutant.--The term `environmental 
 pollutant' includes--
 ``(A) a hazardous substance (as defined in section 
 101 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
 Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 
 9601));
 ``(B) a contaminant (as defined in section 1401 of 
 the Safe Drinking Water Act (42 U.S.C. 300f));
 ``(C) an air pollutant subject to regulation under 
 the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401 et seq.);
 ``(D) a water pollutant subject to regulation under 
 the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 
 et seq.); and
 ``(E) a pesticide subject to regulation under the 
 Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (7 
 U.S.C. 136 et seq.).
 ``(5) Pesticide.--The term `pesticide' has the meaning 
 given the term in section 2 of the Federal Insecticide, 
 Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. 136).
 ``(6) School.--The term `school' means an elementary school 
 (as defined in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 8801)), a secondary school (as 
 defined in section 14101 of that Act), a kindergarten, or a 
 nursery school that is public or receives Federal funding.
 ``(7) Vulnerable subpopulation.--The term `vulnerable 
 subpopulation' means--
 ``(A) children;
 ``(B) pregnant women;
 ``(C) the elderly;
 ``(D) individuals with a history of serious 
 illness; and
 ``(E) any other subpopulation identified by the 
 Administrator as being likely to experience special 
 health risks from environmental pollutants.

``SEC. 503. SAFEGUARDING CHILDREN AND OTHER VULNERABLE SUBPOPULATIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Administrator shall--
 ``(1) ensure that each environmental and public health 
 standard for an environmental pollutant protects children and 
 other vulnerable subpopulations with an adequate margin of 
 safety;
 ``(2) explicitly evaluate data concerning the special 
 susceptibility and exposure of children to any environmental 
 pollutant for which an environmental or public health standard 
 is established; and
 ``(3) adopt an additional margin of safety of at least 10-
 fold in the establishment of an environmental or public health 
 standard for an environmental pollutant in the absence of 
 reliable data on toxicity and exposure of the child to an 
 environmental pollutant or if there is a lack of reliable data 
 on the susceptibility of the child to an environmental 
 pollutant for which the environmental and public health 
 standard is being established.
 ``(b) Establishing, Modifying, or Reevaluating Environmental and 
Public Health Standards.--
 ``(1) In general.--In establishing, modifying, or 
 reevaluating any environmental or public health standard for an 
 environmental pollutant under any law administered by the 
 Administrator, the Administrator shall take into consideration 
 available information concerning--
 ``(A) all routes of exposure of children to that 
 environmental pollutant; and
 ``(B) the special susceptibility of children to the 
 environmental pollutant, including--
 ``(i) neurological differences between 
 children and adults;
 ``(ii) the effect of exposure to that 
 environmental pollutant in utero; and
 ``(iii) the cumulative effect on a child of 
 exposure to that environmental pollutant and 
 any other substance having a common 
 toxicological mechanism.
 ``(2) Additional safety margin.--If any of the data 
 described in paragraph (1) are not available, the Administrator 
 shall, in completing a risk assessment, risk characterization, 
 or other assessment of risk underlying an environmental or 
 public health standard, adopt an additional margin of safety of 
 at least 10-fold to take into account--
 ``(A) potential pre-natal and post-natal toxicity 
 of an environmental pollutant; and
 ``(B) the completeness of data concerning the 
 exposure and toxicity of the environmental pollutant to 
 children.
 ``(c) Identification and Revision of Current Environmental and 
Public Health Standards That Present Special Risks to Children.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this title and annually thereafter, based on the 
 recommendations of the Committee, the Administrator shall--
 ``(A) repromulgate, in accordance with this 
 section, at least 3 of the environmental and public 
 health standards identified by the Committee as posing 
 a special risk to children; or
 ``(B) publish a finding in the Federal Register 
 that provides the reasons of the Administrator for 
 declining to repromulgate at least 3 of the 
 environmental and public health standards identified by 
 the Committee as posing a special risk to children.
 ``(2) Determination by administrator.--If the Administrator 
 makes the finding described in paragraph (1)(B), the 
 Administrator shall repromulgate in accordance with this 
 section at least 3 environmental and public health standards 
 determined to pose a greater risk to children's health than the 
 environmental and public health standards identified by the 
 Children's Environmental Health Protection Advisory Committee.
 ``(3) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this title and annually thereafter, the 
 Administrator shall submit a report to Congress describing the 
 progress made by the Administrator in carrying out this 
 subsection.

``SEC. 504. SAFER ENVIRONMENT FOR CHILDREN.

 ``Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this title, 
the Administrator shall--
 ``(1) identify environmental pollutants commonly used or 
 found in areas that are reasonably accessible to children;
 ``(2) create a scientifically peer-reviewed list of 
 substances identified under paragraph (1) with known, likely, 
 or suspected health risks to children;
 ``(3) develop a scientifically peer reviewed list of safer-
 for-children substances and products recommended by the 
 Administrator for use in areas that are reasonably accessible 
 to children that, when applied as recommended by the 
 manufacturer, will minimize potential risks to children from 
 exposure to environmental pollutants;
 ``(4) establish guidelines to help reduce and eliminate 
 exposure of children to environmental pollutants in areas 
 reasonably accessible to children, including advice on how to 
 establish an integrated pest management program;
 ``(5) develop a family right-to-know information kit that 
 includes a summary of helpful information and guidance to 
 families, such as--
 ``(A) the information developed under paragraph 
 (3);
 ``(B) the guidelines established under paragraph 
 (4);
 ``(C) information on the potential health effects 
 of environmental pollutants;
 ``(D) practical suggestions on how parents may 
 reduce the exposure of their children to environmental 
 pollutants; and
 ``(E) other information determined to be relevant 
 by the Administrator, in cooperation with the Director 
 of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention;
 ``(6) make all information developed under this subsection 
 available to Federal and State agencies, to the public, and on 
 the Internet; and
 ``(7) review and update the lists developed under 
 paragraphs (2) and (3) at least annually.

``SEC. 505. RESEARCH TO IMPROVE INFORMATION ON THE EFFECTS OF 
 ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTANTS ON CHILDREN.

 ``(a) Exposure and Toxicity Data.--The Administrator, the Secretary 
of Agriculture, and the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall 
coordinate and support the development and implementation of basic and 
applied research initiatives to examine--
 ``(1) the health effects and toxicity of pesticides 
 (including active and inert ingredients) and other 
 environmental pollutants on children and other vulnerable 
 subpopulations; and
 ``(2) the exposure of children and other vulnerable 
 subpopulations to environmental pollutants.
 ``(b) Biennial Reports.--The Administrator, the Secretary of 
Agriculture, and the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall 
submit biennial reports to Congress describing actions taken to carry 
out this section.

``SEC. 506. CHILDREN'S ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH PROTECTION ADVISORY 
 COMMITTEE.

 ``(a) Establishment.--The Administrator shall establish a 
Children's Environmental Health Protection Advisory Committee to assist 
the Administrator in carrying out this title.
 ``(b) Composition.--The Committee shall be comprised of--
 ``(1) medical professionals specializing in pediatric 
 health;
 ``(2) educators;
 ``(3) representatives of community groups;
 ``(4) representatives of environmental and public health 
 nonprofit organizations;
 ``(5) industry representatives; and
 ``(6) representatives of State environmental and public 
 health departments.
 ``(c) Duties.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment 
of this title and annually thereafter, the Committee shall develop a 
list of standards that merit reevaluation by the Administrator in order 
to better protect the health of children.
 ``(d) Termination.--The Committee shall terminate not later than 15 
years after the date on which the Committee is established.

``SEC. 507. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary 
to carry out this title.''.

SEC. 1403. CONFORMING AMENDMENT.

 The table of contents in section 1 of the Toxic Substances Control 
Act (15 U.S.C. prec. 2601) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:

 ``TITLE V--ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION FOR CHILDREN AND OTHER VULNERABLE 
 SUBPOPULATIONS

``Sec. 501. Findings and policy.
``Sec. 502. Definitions.
``Sec. 503. Safeguarding children and other vulnerable subpopulations.
``Sec. 504. Safer environment for children.
``Sec. 505. Research to improve information on the effects of 
 environmental pollutants on children.
``Sec. 506. Children's environmental health protection advisory 
 committee.
``Sec. 507. Authorization of appropriations.''.

 CHAPTER 2--SCHOOL ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

SEC. 1411. SHORT TITLE.

 This chapter may be cited as the ``School Environment Protection 
Act''.

SEC. 1412. INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS FOR SCHOOLS.

 The Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act is 
amended--
 (1) by redesignating sections 33 and 34 (7 U.S.C. 136x, 
 136y) as sections 34 and 35, respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after section 32 (7 U.S.C. 136w-7) the 
 following:

``SEC. 33. INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS FOR SCHOOLS.

 ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Board.--The term `Board' means the National School 
 Integrated Pest Management Advisory Board established under 
 subsection (c).
 ``(2) Contact person.--The term `contact person' means an 
 individual who is--
 ``(A) knowledgeable about integrated pest 
 management systems; and
 ``(B) designated by a local educational agency as 
 the contact person under subsection (f).
 ``(3) Crack and crevice treatment.--The term `crack and 
 crevice treatment' means the application of small quantities of 
 a pesticide in a building into openings such as those commonly 
 found at expansion joints, between levels of construction, and 
 between equipment and floors.
 ``(4) Emergency.--The term `emergency' means an urgent need 
 to mitigate or eliminate a pest that threatens the health or 
 safety of a student or staff member.
 ``(5) Fund.--The term `Fund' means the Integrated Pest 
 Management Trust Fund established under subsection (m).
 ``(6) Integrated pest management system.--The term 
 `integrated pest management system' means a managed pest 
 control system that--
 ``(A) eliminates or mitigates economic, health, and 
 aesthetic damage caused by pests;
 ``(B) uses--
 ``(i) integrated methods;
 ``(ii) site or pest inspections;
 ``(iii) pest population monitoring;
 ``(iv) an evaluation of the need for pest 
 control; and
 ``(v) 1 or more pest control methods, 
 including sanitation, structural repair, 
 mechanical and biological controls, other 
 nonchemical methods, and (if nontoxic options 
 are unreasonable and have been exhausted) least 
 toxic pesticides; and
 ``(C) minimizes--
 ``(i) the use of pesticides; and
 ``(ii) the risk to human health and the 
 environment associated with pesticide 
 applications.
 ``(7) Least toxic pesticides.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `least toxic 
 pesticides' means--
 ``(i) boric acid and disodium octoborate 
 tetrahydrate;
 ``(ii) silica gels;
 ``(iii) diatomaceous earth;
 ``(iv) nonvolatile insect and rodent baits 
 in tamper resistant containers or for crack and 
 crevice treatment only;
 ``(v) microbe-based insecticides;
 ``(vi) botanical insecticides (not 
 including synthetic pyrethroids) without toxic 
 synergists;
 ``(vii) biological, living control agents; 
 and
 ``(viii) materials for which the 
 inert ingredients are nontoxic and 
 disclosed.
 ``(B) Exclusions.--The term `least toxic 
 pesticides' does not include a pesticide that is 
 determined by the Administrator to be an acutely or 
 moderately toxic pesticide, carcinogen, mutagen, 
 teratogen, reproductive toxin, developmental 
 neurotoxin, endocrine disrupter, or immune system 
 toxin, and any application of the pesticide using a 
 broadcast spray, dust, tenting, fogging, or baseboard 
 spray application.
 ``(8) List.--The term `list' means the list of least toxic 
 pesticides established under subsection (d).
 ``(9) Local educational agency.--The term `local 
 educational agency' has the meaning given the term in section 
 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 8801).
 ``(10) Official.--The term `official' means the official 
 appointed by the Administrator under subsection (e).
 ``(11) Person.--The term `person' means--
 ``(A) an individual that attends, has children 
 enrolled in, works at, or uses a school;
 ``(B) a resident of a school district; and
 ``(C) any other individual that may be affected by 
 pest management activities of a school.
 ``(12) Pesticide.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `pesticide' means any 
 substance or mixture of substances, including 
 herbicides and bait stations, intended for--
 ``(i) preventing, destroying, repelling, or 
 mitigating any pest;
 ``(ii) use as a plant regulator, defoliant, 
 or desiccant; or
 ``(iii) use as a spray adjuvant such as a 
 wetting agent or adhesive.
 ``(B) Exclusion.--The term `pesticide' does not 
 include antimicrobial agents such as disinfectants or 
 deodorizers used for cleaning products.
 ``(13) School.--The term `school' means a public--
 ``(A) elementary school (as defined in section 
 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 8801));
 ``(B) secondary school (as defined in section 14101 
 of that Act); or
 ``(C) kindergarten or nursery school.
 ``(14) School grounds.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `school grounds' means 
 the area outside of the school buildings controlled, 
 managed, or owned by the school or school district.
 ``(B) Inclusions.--The term `school grounds' 
 includes a lawn, playground, sports field, and any 
 other property or facility controlled, managed, owned, 
 or leased for use for a school-sponsored event, by a 
 school.
 ``(15) Space spraying.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `space spraying' means 
 application of a pesticide by discharge into the air 
 throughout an inside area.
 ``(B) Inclusion.--The term `space spraying' 
 includes the application of a pesticide using a 
 broadcast spray, dust, tenting, or fogging.
 ``(C) Exclusion.--The term `space spraying' does 
 not include crack and crevice treatment.
 ``(16) Staff member.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `staff member' means an 
 employee of a school or local educational agency.
 ``(B) Inclusions.--The term `staff member' includes 
 an administrator, teacher, and other person that is 
 regularly employed by a school or local educational 
 agency.
 ``(C) Exclusions.--The term `staff member' does not 
 include--
 ``(i) an employee hired by a school, local 
 educational agency, or State to apply a 
 pesticide; or
 ``(ii) a person assisting in the 
 application of a pesticide.
 ``(17) State educational agency.--The term `State 
 educational agency' has the meaning given the term in section 
 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 8801).
 ``(18) Universal notification.--The term `universal 
 notification' means notice provided by a local educational 
 agency or school to--
 ``(A) all parents or guardians of children 
 attending the school; and
 ``(B) staff members of the school or local 
 educational agency.
 ``(b) Integrated Pest Management Systems.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Administrator, in consultation with 
 the Secretary of Education, shall establish a National School 
 Integrated Pest Management Advisory System to develop and 
 update uniform standards and criteria for implementing 
 integrated pest management systems in schools.
 ``(2) Implementation.--Not later than 18 months after the 
 date of enactment of this subsection, each local educational 
 agency of a school district shall develop and implement in each 
 of the schools in the school district an integrated pest 
 management system that complies with this section.
 ``(3) State programs.--If, on the date of enactment of this 
 section, a State maintains an integrated pest management system 
 that meets the standards and criteria established under 
 paragraph (1) (as determined by the Board), a local educational 
 agency in the State may continue to implement the system in a 
 school or in the school district in accordance with paragraph 
 (2).
 ``(4) Application to schools and school grounds.--The 
 requirements of this section that apply to a school, including 
 the requirement to implement an integrated management system, 
 apply to pesticide application in a school building and on the 
 school grounds.
 ``(5) Application of pesticides when schools in use.--A 
 school shall prohibit--
 ``(A) the application of a pesticide when a school 
 or school grounds are occupied or in use; or
 ``(B) the use of an area or room treated by a 
 pesticide, other than a least toxic pesticide, during 
 the 24-hour period beginning at the end of the 
 treatment.
 ``(c) National School Integrated Pest Management Advisory Board.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Administrator, in consultation with 
 the Secretary of Education, shall establish a National School 
 Integrated Pest Management Advisory Board to--
 ``(A) establish uniform standards and criteria for 
 developing integrated pest management systems and 
 policies in schools;
 ``(B) develop standards for the use of least toxic 
 pesticides in schools; and
 ``(C) advise the Administrator on any other aspects 
 of the implementation of this section.
 ``(2) Composition of board.--The Board shall be composed of 
 12 members and include 1 representative from each of the 
 following groups:
 ``(A) Parents.
 ``(B) Public health care professionals.
 ``(C) Medical professionals.
 ``(D) State integrated pest management system 
 coordinators.
 ``(E) Independent integrated pest management 
 specialists that have carried out school integrated 
 pest management programs.
 ``(F) Environmental advocacy groups.
 ``(G) Children's health advocacy groups.
 ``(H) Trade organization for pest control 
 operators.
 ``(I) Teachers and staff members.
 ``(J) School maintenance staff.
 ``(K) School administrators.
 ``(L) School board members.
 ``(3) Appointment.--Not later than 180 days after the date 
 of enactment of this section, the Administrator shall appoint 
 members of the Board from nominations received from Parent 
 Teacher Associations, school districts, States, and other 
 interested persons and organizations.
 ``(4) Term.--
 ``(A) In general.--A member of the Board shall 
 serve for a term of 5 years, except that the 
 Administrator may shorten the terms of the original 
 members of the Board in order to provide for a 
 staggered term of appointment for all members of the 
 Board.
 ``(B) Consecutive terms.--Subject to subparagraph 
 (C), a member of the Board shall not serve consecutive 
 terms unless the term of the member has been reduced by 
 the Administrator.
 ``(C) Maximum term.--In no event may a member of 
 the Board serve for more than 6 consecutive years.
 ``(5) Meetings.--The Administrator shall convene--
 ``(A) an initial meeting of the Board not later 
 than 60 days after the appointment of the members; and
 ``(B) subsequent meetings on a periodic basis, but 
 not less often than 2 times each year.
 ``(6) Compensation.--A member of the Board shall serve 
 without compensation, but may be reimbursed by the 
 Administrator for expenses (in accordance with section 5703 of 
 title 5, United States Code) incurred in performing duties as a 
 member of the Board.
 ``(7) Chairperson.--The Board shall select a Chairperson 
 for the Board.
 ``(8) Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Board shall 
 constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting business.
 ``(9) Decisive votes.--Two-thirds of the votes cast at a 
 meeting of the Board at which a quorum is present shall be 
 decisive for any motion.
 ``(10) Administration.--The Administrator--
 ``(A) shall--
 ``(i) authorize the Board to hire a staff 
 director; and
 ``(ii) detail staff of the Environmental 
 Protection Agency, or allow for the hiring of 
 staff for the Board; and
 ``(B) subject to the availability of 
 appropriations, may pay necessary expenses incurred by 
 the Board in carrying out this subtitle, as determined 
 appropriate by the Administrator.
 ``(11) Responsibilities of the board.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Board shall provide 
 recommendations to the Administrator regarding the 
 implementation of this section.
 ``(B) List of least toxic pesticides.--Not later 
 than 1 year after the initial meeting of the Board, the 
 Board shall--
 ``(i) review implementation of this section 
 (including use of least toxic pesticides); and
 ``(ii) review and make recommendations to 
 the Administrator with respect to new proposed 
 active and inert ingredients or proposed 
 amendments to the list in accordance with 
 subsection (d).
 ``(C) Technical advisory panels.--
 ``(i) In general.--The Board shall convene 
 technical advisory panels to provide scientific 
 evaluations of the materials considered for 
 inclusion on the list.
 ``(ii) Composition.--A panel described in 
 clause (i) shall include experts on integrated 
 pest management, children's health, entomology, 
 health sciences, and other relevant 
 disciplines.
 ``(D) Special review.--
 ``(i) In general.--Not later than 2 years 
 after the initial meeting of the Board, the 
 Board shall review, with the assistance of a 
 technical advisory panel, pesticides used in 
 school buildings and on school grounds for 
 their acute toxicity and chronic effects, 
 including cancer, mutations, birth defects, 
 reproductive dysfunction, neurological and 
 immune system effects, and endocrine system 
 disruption.
 ``(ii) Determination.--The Board--
 ``(I) shall determine whether the 
 use of pesticides described in clause 
 (i) may endanger the health of 
 children; and
 ``(II) may recommend to the 
 Administrator restrictions on pesticide 
 use in school buildings and on school 
 grounds.
 ``(12) Requirements.--In establishing the proposed list, 
 the Board shall--
 ``(A) review available information from the 
 Environmental Protection Agency, the National Institute 
 of Environmental Health Studies, medical and scientific 
 literature, and such other sources as appropriate, 
 concerning the potential for adverse human and 
 environmental effects of substances considered for 
 inclusion in the proposed list; and
 ``(B) cooperate with manufacturers of substances 
 considered for inclusion in the proposed list to obtain 
 a complete list of ingredients and determine that such 
 substances contain inert ingredients that are generally 
 recognized as safe.
 ``(13) Petitions.--The Board shall establish procedures 
 under which individuals may petition the Board for the purpose 
 of evaluating substances for inclusion on the list.
 ``(14) Periodic review.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Board shall review each 
 substance included on the list at least once during 
 each 5-year period beginning on--
 ``(i) the date that the substance was 
 initially included on the list; or
 ``(ii) the date of the last review of the 
 substance under this subsection.
 ``(B) Submission to administrator.--The Board shall 
 submit the results of a review under subparagraph (A) 
 to the Administrator with a recommendation as to 
 whether the substance should continue to be included on 
 the list.
 ``(15) Confidentiality.--Any business sensitive material 
 obtained by the Board in carrying out this section shall be 
treated as confidential business information by the Board and shall not 
be released to the public.
 ``(d) List of Least Toxic Pesticides; Pesticide Review.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Board shall recommend to the 
 Administrator a list of least toxic pesticides (including the 
 pesticides described in subsection (a)(7)) that may be used as 
 least toxic pesticides, any restrictions on the use of the 
 listed pesticides, and any recommendations regarding 
 restrictions on all other pesticides, in accordance with this 
 section.
 ``(2) Procedure for evaluating pesticide use.--
 ``(A) List of least toxic pesticides.--
 ``(i) In general.--The Administrator shall 
 establish a list of least toxic pesticides that 
 may be used in school buildings and on school 
 grounds, including any restrictions on the use 
 of the pesticides, that is based on the list 
 prepared by the Board.
 ``(ii) Regulatory review.--The 
 Administrator shall initiate regulatory review 
 of all other pesticides recommended for 
 restriction by the Board.
 ``(B) Recommendations.--Not later than 1 year after 
 receiving the proposed list and restrictions, and 
 recommended restrictions on all other pesticides from 
 the Board, the Administrator shall--
 ``(i) publish the proposed list and 
 restrictions and all other proposed pesticide 
 restrictions in the Federal Register and seek 
 public comment on the proposed proposals; and
 ``(ii) after evaluating all comments 
 received concerning the proposed list and 
 restrictions, but not later than 1 year after 
 the close of the period during which public 
 comments are accepted, publish the final list 
 and restrictions in the Federal Register, 
 together with a discussion of comments 
 received.
 ``(C) Findings.--Not later than 2 years after 
 publication of the final list and restrictions, the 
 Administrator shall make a determination and issue 
 findings on whether use of registered pesticides in 
 school buildings and on school grounds may endanger the 
 health of children.
 ``(D) Notice and comment.--
 ``(i) In general.--Prior to establishing or 
 making amendments to the list, the 
 Administrator shall publish the proposed list 
 or any proposed amendments to the list in the 
 Federal Register and seek public comment on the 
 proposals.
 ``(ii) Recommendations.--The Administrator 
 shall include in any publication described in 
 clause (i) any changes or amendments to the 
 proposed list that are recommended to and by 
 the Administrator.
 ``(E) Publication of list.--After evaluating all 
 comments received concerning the proposed list or 
 proposed amendments to the list, the Administrator 
 shall publish the final list in the Federal Register, 
 together with a description of comments received.
 ``(e) Office of Pesticide Programs.--
 ``(1) Establishment.--The Administrator shall appoint an 
 official for school pest management within the Office of 
 Pesticide Programs of the Environmental Protection Agency to 
 coordinate the development and implementation of integrated 
 pest management systems in schools.
 ``(2) Duties.--The official shall--
 ``(A) coordinate the development of school 
 integrated pest management systems and policies;
 ``(B) consult with schools concerning--
 ``(i) issues related to the integrated pest 
 management systems of schools;
 ``(ii) the use of least toxic pesticides; 
 and
 ``(iii) the registration of pesticides, and 
 amendments to the registrations, as the 
 registrations and amendments relate to the use 
 of integrated pest management systems in 
 schools; and
 ``(C) support and provide technical assistance to 
 the Board.
 ``(f) Contact Person.--
 ``(1) In general.--Each local educational agency of a 
 school district shall designate a contact person for carrying 
 out an integrated pest management system in schools in the 
 school district.
 ``(2) Duties.--The contact person of a school district 
 shall--
 ``(A) maintain information about pesticide 
 applications inside and outside schools within the 
 school district, in school buildings, and on school 
 grounds;
 ``(B) act as a contact for inquiries about the 
 integrated pest management system;
 ``(C) maintain material safety data sheets and 
 labels for all pesticides that may be used in the 
 school district;
 ``(D) be informed of Federal and State chemical 
 health and safety information and contact information;
 ``(E) maintain scheduling of all pesticide usage 
 for schools in the school district;
 ``(F) maintain contact with Federal and State 
 integrated pest management system experts; and
 ``(G) obtain periodic updates and training from 
 State integrated pest management system experts.
 ``(3) Pesticide use data.--A local educational agency of a 
 school district shall--
 ``(A) maintain all pesticide use data for each 
 school in the school district; and
 ``(B) on request, make the data available to the 
 public for review.
 ``(g) Notice of Integrated Pest Management System.--
 ``(1) In general.--At the beginning of each school year, 
 each local educational agency or school of a school district 
 shall include a notice of the integrated pest management system 
 of the school district in school calendars or other forms of 
 universal notification.
 ``(2) Contents.--The notice shall include a description 
 of--
 ``(A) the integrated pest management system of the 
 school district;
 ``(B) any pesticide (including any least toxic 
 pesticide) or bait station that may be used in a school 
 building or on school grounds as part of the integrated 
 pest management system;
 ``(C) the name, address, and telephone number of 
 the contact person of the school district;
 ``(D) a statement that--
 ``(i) the contact person maintains the 
 product label and material safety data sheet of 
 each pesticide (including each least toxic 
 pesticide) and bait station that may be used by 
 a school in buildings or on school grounds;
 ``(ii) the label and data sheet is 
 available for review by a parent, guardian, 
 staff member, or student attending the school; 
 and
 ``(iii) the contact person is available to 
 parents, guardians, and staff members for 
 information and comment; and
 ``(E) the time and place of any meetings that will 
 be held under subsection (g)(1).
 ``(3) Use of pesticides.--A local educational agency or 
 school may use a pesticide during a school year only if the use 
 of the pesticide has been disclosed in the notice required 
 under paragraph (1) at the beginning of the school year.
 ``(4) New employees and students.--After the beginning of 
 each school year, a local educational agency or school of a 
school district shall provide the notice required under this subsection 
to--
 ``(A) each new staff member who is employed during 
 the school year; and
 ``(B) the parent or guardian of each new student 
 enrolled during the school year.
 ``(h) Use of Pesticides.--
 ``(1) In general.--If a local educational agency or school 
 determines that a pest in the school or on school grounds 
 cannot be controlled after having used the integrated pest 
 management system of the school or school district and least 
 toxic pesticides, the school may use a pesticide (other than 
 space spraying of the pesticide) to control the pest in 
 accordance with this subsection.
 ``(2) Prior notification of parents, guardians, and staff 
 members.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to paragraphs (4) and 
 (5), not less than 72 hours before a pesticide (other 
 than a least toxic pesticide) is used by a school, the 
 school shall provide to a parent or guardian of each 
 student enrolled at the school and each staff member of 
 the school, notice that includes--
 ``(i) the common name, trade name, and 
 Environmental Protection Agency registration 
 number of the pesticide;
 ``(ii) a description of the location of the 
 application of the pesticide;
 ``(iii) a description of the date and time 
 of application, except that, in the case of 
 outdoor pesticide applications, 1 notice shall 
 include 3 dates, in chronological order, that 
 the outdoor pesticide applications may take 
 place if the preceding date is canceled;
 ``(iv) a statement that `The Office of 
 Pesticide Programs of the United States 
 Environmental Protection Agency has stated: 
 `Where possible, persons who potentially are 
 sensitive, such as pregnant women and infants 
 (less than 2 years old), should avoid any 
 unnecessary pesticide exposure.';
 ``(v) a description of potential adverse 
 effects of the pesticide based on the material 
 safety data sheet of the pesticide;
 ``(vi) a description of the reasons for the 
 application of the pesticide;
 ``(vii) the name and telephone number of 
 the contact person of the school district; and
 ``(viii) any additional warning information 
 related to the pesticide.
 ``(B) Method of notification.--The school may 
 provide the notice required by subparagraph (A) by--
 ``(i) written notice sent home with the 
 student and provided to the staff member;
 ``(ii) a telephone call;
 ``(iii) direct contact; or
 ``(iv) written notice mailed at least 1 
 week before the application.
 ``(C) Reissuance.--If the date of the application 
 of the pesticide needs to be extended beyond the period 
 required for notice under this paragraph, the school 
 shall reissue the notice under this paragraph for the 
 new date of application.
 ``(3) Posting of signs.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to paragraphs (4) and 
 (5), at least 72 hours before a pesticide (other than a 
 least toxic pesticide) is used by a school, the school 
 shall post a sign that provides notice of the 
 application of the pesticide--
 ``(i) in a prominent place that is in or 
 adjacent to the location to be treated; and
 ``(ii) at each entrance to the building or 
 school grounds to be treated.
 ``(B) Administration.--A sign required under 
 subparagraph (A) for the application of a pesticide 
 shall--
 ``(i) remain posted for at least 72 hours 
 after the end of the treatment;
 ``(ii) be at least 8\1/2\ inches by 11 
 inches; and
 ``(iii) state the same information as that 
 required for prior notification of the 
 application under paragraph (2).
 ``(C) Outdoor pesticide applications.--
 ``(i) In general.--In the case of outdoor 
 pesticide applications, each sign shall include 
 3 dates, in chronological order, that the 
 outdoor pesticide application may take place if 
 the preceding date is canceled due to weather.
 ``(ii) Duration of posting.--A sign 
 described in clause (i) shall be posted after 
 an outdoor pesticide application in accordance 
 with subparagraph (B).
 ``(4) Administration.--
 ``(A) Applicators.--Paragraphs (2) and (3) shall 
 apply to any person that applies a pesticide in a 
 school or on school grounds, including a custodian, 
 staff member, or commercial applicator.
 ``(B) Time of year.--Paragraphs (2) and (3) shall 
 apply to a school--
 ``(i) during the school year; and
 ``(ii) during holidays and the summer 
 months, if the school is in use, with notice 
 provided to all staff members and the parents 
 or guardians of the students that are using the 
 school in an authorized manner.
 ``(5) Emergencies.--
 ``(A) In general.--A school may apply a pesticide 
 (other than a least toxic pesticide) in the school or 
 on school grounds without complying with paragraphs (2) 
 and (3) in an emergency, subject to subparagraph (B).
 ``(B) Subsequent notification of parents, 
 guardians, and staff members.--Not later than the 
 earlier of the time that is 24 hours after a school 
 applies a pesticide under this paragraph or on the 
 morning of the next school day, the school shall 
 provide to each parent or guardian of a student 
 enrolled at the school, and staff member of the school, 
 notice of the application of the pesticide for 
 emergency pest control that includes--
 ``(i) the information required for a notice 
 under paragraph (2)(A);
 ``(ii) a description of the problem and the 
 factors that qualified the problem as an 
 emergency that threatened the health or safety 
 of a student or staff member; and
 ``(iii) a description of the steps the 
 school will take in the future to avoid 
 emergency application of a pesticide under this 
 paragraph.
 ``(C) Method of notification.--The school may 
 provide the notice required by subparagraph (B) by--
 ``(i) written notice sent home with the 
 student and provided to the staff member;
 ``(ii) a telephone call; or
 ``(iii) direct contact.
 ``(D) Posting of signs.--A school applying a 
 pesticide under this paragraph shall post a sign 
 warning of the pesticide application in accordance with 
 paragraph (3).
 ``(E) Modification of integrated pest management 
 plans.--If a school in a school district applies a 
 pesticide under this paragraph, the local educational 
 agency of the school district shall modify the 
 integrated pest management plan of the school 
district to minimize the future applications of pesticides under this 
paragraph.
 ``(6) Drift of pesticides onto school grounds.--Each local 
 educational agency, State pesticide lead agency, and the 
 Administrator are encouraged to--
 ``(A) identify sources of pesticides that drift 
 from treated land to school grounds of the educational 
 agency; and
 ``(B) take steps necessary to create an indoor and 
 outdoor school environment that are protected from 
 pesticides described in subparagraph (A).
 ``(i) Meetings.--
 ``(1) In general.--Before the beginning of a school year, 
 at the beginning of each new calendar year, and at a regularly 
 scheduled meeting of a school board, each local educational 
 agency shall provide an opportunity for the contact person 
 designated under subsection (d) to receive and address public 
 comments regarding the integrated pest management system of the 
 school district.
 ``(2) Emergency meetings.--An emergency meeting of a school 
 board to address a pesticide application may be called under 
 locally appropriate procedures for convening emergency 
 meetings.
 ``(j) Investigations and Orders.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 60 days after receiving a 
 complaint of a violation of this section, the Administrator 
 shall--
 ``(A) conduct an investigation of the complaint;
 ``(B) determine whether it is reasonable to believe 
 the complaint has merit; and
 ``(C) notify the complainant and the person alleged 
 to have committed the violation of the findings of the 
 Administrator.
 ``(2) Preliminary order.--If the Administrator determines 
 it is reasonable to believe a violation occurred, the 
 Administrator shall issue a preliminary order (that includes 
 findings) to impose the penalty described in subsection (j).
 ``(3) Objections to preliminary order.--
 ``(A) In general.--Not later than 30 days after the 
 preliminary order is issued under paragraph (2), the 
 complainant and the person alleged to have committed 
 the violation may--
 ``(i) file objections to the preliminary 
 order (including findings); and
 ``(ii) request a hearing on the record.
 ``(B) Final order.--If a hearing is not requested 
 within 30 days after the preliminary order is issued, 
 the preliminary order shall be final and not subject to 
 judicial review.
 ``(4) Hearing.--A hearing under this subsection shall be 
 conducted expeditiously.
 ``(5) Final order.--Not later than 120 days after the end 
 of the hearing, the Administrator shall issue a final order.
 ``(6) Settlement agreement.--Before the final order is 
 issued, the proceeding may be terminated by a settlement 
 agreement, which shall remain open, entered into by the 
 Administrator, the complainant, and the person alleged to have 
 committed the violation.
 ``(7) Costs.--
 ``(A) In general.--If the Administrator issues a 
 final order against a school or school district for 
 violation of this section and the complainant requests, 
 the Administrator may assess against the person against 
 whom the order is issued the costs (including 
 attorney's fees) reasonably incurred by the complainant 
 in bringing the complaint.
 ``(B) Amount.--The Administrator shall determine 
 the amount of the costs that were reasonably incurred 
 by the complainant.
 ``(8) Judicial review and venue.--
 ``(A) In general.--A person adversely affected by 
 an order issued after a hearing under this subsection 
 may file a petition for review not later than 60 days 
 after the date that the order is issued, in a district 
 court of the United States or other United States court 
 for any district in which a local educational agency or 
 school is found, resides, or transacts business.
 ``(B) Timing.--The review shall be heard and 
 decided expeditiously.
 ``(C) Collateral review.--An order of the 
 Administrator subject to review under this paragraph 
 shall not be subject to judicial review in a criminal 
 or other civil proceeding.
 ``(k) Civil Penalty.--
 ``(1) In general.--Any local educational agency, school, or 
 person that violates this section may be assessed a civil 
 penalty by the Administrator under subsections (h) and (i), 
 respectively, of not more than $10,000 for each offense.
 ``(2) Transfer to trust fund.--Except as provided in 
 subsection (i)(4)(B), civil penalties collected under paragraph 
 (1) shall be deposited in the Fund.
 ``(l) Integrated Pest Management Trust Fund.--
 ``(1) Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury 
 of the United States a trust fund to be known as the 
 `Integrated Pest Management Trust Fund', consisting of--
 ``(A) amounts deposited in the Fund under 
 subsection (j)(2);
 ``(B) amounts transferred to the Secretary of the 
 Treasury for deposit into the Fund under paragraph (5); 
 and
 ``(C) any interest earned on investment of amounts 
 in the Fund under paragraph (3).
 ``(2) Expenditures from fund.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), on 
 request by the Administrator, the Secretary of the 
 Treasury shall transfer from the Fund to the 
 Administrator, without further appropriation, such 
 amounts as the Secretary determines are necessary to 
 provide funds to each State educational agency of a 
 State, in proportion to the amount of civil penalties 
 collected in the State under subsection (j)(1), to 
 carry out education, training, propagation, and 
 development activities under integrated pest management 
 systems of schools in the State to remedy the harmful 
 effects of actions taken by the persons that paid the 
 civil penalties.
 ``(B) Administrative expenses.--An amount not to 
 exceed 6 percent of the amounts in the Fund shall be 
 available for each fiscal year to pay the 
 administrative expenses necessary to carry out this 
 subsection.
 ``(3) Investment of amounts.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury 
 shall invest such portion of the Fund as is not, in the 
 judgment of the Secretary of the Treasury, required to 
 meet current withdrawals. Investments may be made only 
 in interest-bearing obligations of the United States.
 ``(B) Acquisition of obligations.--For the purpose 
 of investments under subparagraph (A), obligations may 
 be acquired--
 ``(i) on original issue at the issue price; 
 or
 ``(ii) by purchase of outstanding 
 obligations at the market price.
 ``(C) Sale of obligations.--Any obligation acquired 
 by the Fund may be sold by the Secretary of the 
 Treasury at the market price.
 ``(D) Credits to fund.--The interest on, and the 
 proceeds from the sale or redemption of, any 
 obligations held in the Fund shall be credited to and 
 form a part of the Fund.
 ``(4) Transfers of amounts.--
 ``(A) In general.--The amounts required to be 
 transferred to the Fund under this subsection shall be 
 transferred at least monthly from the general fund 
of the Treasury to the Fund on the basis of estimates made by the 
Secretary of the Treasury.
 ``(B) Adjustments.--Proper adjustment shall be made 
 in amounts subsequently transferred to the extent prior 
 estimates were in excess of or less than the amounts 
 required to be transferred.
 ``(5) Acceptance and use of donations.--The Secretary may 
 accept and use donations to carry out paragraph (2)(A). Amounts 
 received by the Secretary in the form of donations shall be 
 transferred to the Secretary of the Treasury for deposit into 
 the Fund.
 ``(m) Employee Protection.--
 ``(1) In general.--No local educational agency, school, or 
 person may harass, prosecute, hold liable, or discriminate 
 against any employee or other person because the employee or 
 other person--
 ``(A) is assisting or demonstrating an intent to 
 assist in achieving compliance with this section 
 (including any regulation);
 ``(B) is refusing to violate or assist in the 
 violation of this section (including any regulation); 
 or
 ``(C) has commenced, caused to be commenced, or is 
 about to commence a proceeding, has testified or is 
 about to testify at a proceeding, or has assisted or 
 participated or is about to participate in any manner 
 in such a proceeding or in any other action to carry 
 out this section.
 ``(2) Complaints.--Not later than 1 year after an alleged 
 violation occurred, an employee or other person alleging a 
 violation of this section, or another person at the request of 
 the employee, may file a complaint with the Administrator.
 ``(3) Remedial action.--If the Administrator decides, on 
 the basis of a complaint, that a local educational agency, 
 school, or person violated paragraph (1), the Administrator 
 shall order the local educational agency, school, or person 
 to--
 ``(A) take affirmative action to abate the 
 violation;
 ``(B) reinstate the complainant to the former 
 position with the same pay and terms and privileges of 
 employment; and
 ``(C) pay compensatory damages, including back pay.
 ``(n) Grants.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Administrator, in consultation with 
 the Secretary of Education, shall provide grants to local 
 educational agencies to develop and implement integrated pest 
 management systems in schools in the school district of the 
 local educational agencies.
 ``(2) Amount.--The amount of a grant provided to a local 
 educational agency of a school district under paragraph (1) 
 shall be based on the ratio that the number of students 
 enrolled in schools in the school district bears to the total 
 number of students enrolled in schools in all school districts 
 in the United States.
 ``(o) Relationship to State and Local Requirements.--This section 
(including regulations promulgated under this section) shall not 
preempt requirements imposed on local educational agencies and schools 
related to the use of integrated pest management by State or local law 
(including regulations) that are more stringent than the requirements 
imposed under this section.
 ``(p) Regulations.--Subject to subsection (m), the Administrator 
shall promulgate such regulations as are necessary to carry out this 
section.
 ``(q) Restriction on Pesticide Use.--Not later than 6 years after 
the date of enactment of this section, no pesticide, other than a 
pesticide that is defined as a least toxic pesticide under this 
subsection, shall be used in a school or on school grounds unless the 
Administrator has met the deadlines and requirements of this section.
 ``(r) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $7,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2002 through 2006.''.

SEC. 1413. CONFORMING AMENDMENT.

 The table of contents in section 1(b) of the Federal Insecticide, 
Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. prec. 121) is amended by 
striking the items relating to sections 30 through 32 and inserting the 
following:

``Sec. 30. Minimum requirements for training of maintenance applicators 
 and service technicians.
``Sec. 31. Environmental Protection Agency minor use program.
``Sec. 32. Department of Agriculture minor use program.
 ``(a) In general.
 ``(b)(1) Minor use pesticide data.
 ``(2) Minor Use Pesticide Data Revolving Fund.
``Sec. 33. Integrated pest management systems for schools.
 ``(a) Definitions.
 ``(1) Board.
 ``(2) Contact person.
 ``(3) Crack and crevice treatment.
 ``(4) Emergency.
 ``(5) Fund.
 ``(6) Integrated pest management system.
 ``(7) Least toxic pesticides.
 ``(8) List.
 ``(9) Local educational agency.
 ``(10) Official.
 ``(11) Person.
 ``(12) Pesticide.
 ``(13) School.
 ``(14) School grounds.
 ``(15) Space spraying.
 ``(16) Staff member.
 ``(17) State educational agency.
 ``(18) Universal notification.
 ``(b) Integrated pest management systems.
 ``(1) In general.
 ``(2) Implementation.
 ``(3) State programs.
 ``(4) Application to schools and school 
 grounds.
 ``(5) Application of pesticides when schools in 
 use.
 ``(c) National School Integrated Pest Management 
 Advisory Board.
 ``(1) In general.
 ``(2) Composition of Board.
 ``(3) Appointment.
 ``(4) Term.
 ``(5) Meetings.
 ``(6) Compensation.
 ``(7) Chairperson.
 ``(8) Quorum.
 ``(9) Decisive votes.
 ``(10) Administration.
 ``(11) Responsibilities of the Board.
 ``(12) Requirements.
 ``(13) Petitions.
 ``(14) Periodic review.
 ``(15) Confidentiality.
 ``(d) List of least toxic pesticides.
 ``(1) In general.
 ``(2) Procedure for evaluating pesticide use.
 ``(e) Office of Pesticide Programs.
 ``(1) Establishment.
 ``(2) Duties.
 ``(f) Contact person.
 ``(1) In general.
 ``(2) Duties.
 ``(3) Pesticide use data.
 ``(g) Notice of integrated pest management system.
 ``(1) In general.
 ``(2) Contents.
 ``(3) Use of pesticides.
 ``(4) New employees and students.
 ``(h) Use of pesticides.
 ``(1) In general.
 ``(2) Prior notification of parents, guardians, 
 and staff members.
 ``(3) Posting of signs.
 ``(4) Administration.
 ``(5) Emergencies.
 ``(6) Drift of pesticides onto school grounds.
 ``(i) Meetings.
 ``(1) In general.
 ``(2) Emergency meetings.
 ``(j) Investigations and orders.
 ``(1) In general.
 ``(2) Preliminary order.
 ``(3) Objections to preliminary order.
 ``(4) Hearing.
 ``(5) Final order.
 ``(6) Settlement agreement.
 ``(7) Costs.
 ``(8) Judicial review and venue.
 ``(k) Civil penalty.
 ``(1) In general.
 ``(2) Transfer to Trust Fund.
 ``(l) Integrated Pest Management Trust Fund.
 ``(1) Establishment.
 ``(2) Expenditures from Fund.
 ``(3) Investment of amounts.
 ``(4) Transfers of amounts.
 ``(5) Acceptance and use of donations.
 ``(m) Employee protection.
 ``(1) In general.
 ``(2) Complaints.
 ``(3) Remedial action.
 ``(n) Grants.
 ``(1) In general.
 ``(2) Amount.
 ``(o) Relationship to State and local requirements.
 ``(p) Regulations.
 ``(q) Restriction on pesticide use.
 ``(r) Authorization of appropriations.
``Sec. 34. Severability.
``Sec. 35. Authorization of appropriations.''.

SEC. 1414. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This chapter and the amendments made by this chapter take effect on 
October 1, 2001.

 TITLE II--HEALTHY START - SUPPORT FOR HEALTHY DEVELOPMENT

 Subtitle A--Promotion of State and Local Support

SEC. 2001. STATE AND LOCAL PARENTING SUPPORT AND EDUCATION GRANT 
 PROGRAM.

 (a) State Allotments.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 (referred to in this section as the ``Secretary'') shall make 
 grants, from allotments made under paragraph (2), to eligible 
 States to support parenting support and education programs.
 (2) Allotments.--From the funds appropriated under 
 subsection (h) for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall allot to 
 each State an amount that bears the same relationship to the 
 funds as the total number of children in the State bears to the 
 total number of children in all States, but no State shall 
 receive less than \1/2\ of 1 percent of the funds.
 (3) Reservation.--
 (A) In general.--For each State in which the 
 population of Indians (including Alaska Natives) is 
 more than 2 percent of the population of the State, the 
 Governor of the State shall reserve for Indian tribes 2 
 percent of the funds received through an allotment made 
 under paragraph (2).
 (B) Distribution.--
 (i) In general.--Except as described in 
 clause (ii), from the funds reserved under 
 subparagraph (A), the Governor shall allocate 
 to each Indian tribe in the State an amount 
 that bears the same relationship to the funds 
 as the total number of children in the tribe 
 bears to the total number of children in all 
 Indian tribes in the State.
 (ii) Alaska.--The Governor of Alaska shall 
 allocate the funds reserved under subparagraph 
 (A) for Indian tribes in Alaska to the 
 nonprofit entities described in section 
 419(4)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 619(4)(B)). The Governor shall allocate to each 
 region of the State, for such entities, an 
 amount that bears the same relationship to the 
 funds as the total number of Alaska Native 
 children in the region bears to the total 
 number of Alaska Native children in all regions 
 of the State.
 (C) Definitions.--In this paragraph:
 (i) Alaska native.--The term ``Alaska 
 Native'' has the meaning given the term 
 ``Native'' in section 3 of the Alaska Native 
 Claims Settlement Act (43 U.S.C. 1602).
 (ii) Indian; indian tribe.--The terms 
 `Indian' and `Indian tribe' have the meanings 
 given the terms in section 4 of the Indian 
 Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act 
 (25 U.S.C. 450b).
 (b) State Parenting Support and Education Councils.--
 (1) In general.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 subsection (a), the Governor of each State shall appoint or 
 designate an existing entity (as of the date of the appointment 
 or designation) to serve as a State Parenting Support and 
 Education Council (referred to in this section as the 
 ``Council''), which shall include--
 (A) representatives of parents;
 (B) representatives of the State government;
 (C) bipartisan representation from the State 
 legislature;
 (D) representatives from communities; and
 (E) representatives of children's organizations 
 interested in promoting parenting support and education 
 programs.
 (2) Responsibilities.--
 (A) Assessment.--The Council shall conduct a needs 
 and resources assessment of parenting support and 
 education programs in the State to--
 (i) determine areas in which such programs 
 are lacking or inadequate; and
 (ii) identify the additional programs that 
 are needed and the programs that require 
 additional resources.
 (B) Grants.--On completion of the assessment, the 
 Council for a State may use the grant received by the 
 State under subsection (a) to make grants under 
 subsection (c) in a manner that takes into account the 
 results of the assessment.
 (c) Grants to State and Local Agencies and Entities.--
 (1) In general.--The Council may carry out a program under 
 which the Council makes grants to State agencies to provide 
 parenting support and education programs on a statewide basis, 
 or to local agencies (including schools) and nonprofit service 
 providers (including faith-based organizations) to provide 
 parenting support and education programs.
 (2) Applications.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 this subsection, an agency or entity shall submit an 
 application to a Council at such time, in such manner, and 
 containing such information as the Council may require.
 (d) Local Use of Funds.--An agency or entity that receives a grant 
under subsection (c) may use the funds made available through the grant 
to carry out parenting support and education programs that--
 (1) provide parenting support to promote early brain 
 development and childhood development and education, 
 including--
 (A) providing assistance to schools to offer 
 classroom instruction on brain stimulation, child 
 development, and early childhood education;
 (B) distributing materials developed by entities 
 that reflect best parenting practices;
 (C) developing and distributing referral 
 information on programs and services available to 
 children and families at the local level, including 
 information on eligibility criteria;
 (D) conducting voluntary hospital visits for 
 postpartum women and in-home visits for families with 
 infants, toddlers, or newly adopted children to provide 
 hands-on training and one-on-one instruction on brain 
 stimulation, child development, and early childhood 
 education; and
 (E) carrying out parenting education programs, 
 including training programs, with respect to best 
 parenting practices;
 (2) provide parenting support for parents of adolescents 
 and youth, including providing funds for services and support 
 for parents and other caregivers of adolescents and youth being 
 served by a range of education, social service, mental health, 
 health, runaway, and homeless youth programs, which parenting 
 support--
 (A) may be provided by the Boys and Girls Club, the 
 YMCA, the YWCA, entities that provide after school 
 programs, entities that provide 4-H programs, or other 
 community based organizations; and
 (B) may include providing parent-caregiver support 
 groups, peer support groups, parent education classes, 
 seminars or discussion groups on problems facing 
 adolescents and youth, or advocates and mentors to help 
 parents understand and work with schools, the courts, 
 and various treatment programs; or
 (3) provide parenting support and education resource 
 centers, including--
 (A) centers that may serve as a single point of 
 contact for the provision to children and their 
 families of comprehensive services, which--
 (i) shall include services available to 
 children from Federal, State, and local 
 government agencies and nonprofit 
 organizations; and
 (ii) may include child care, respite care, 
 pediatric care, child abuse prevention 
 programs, nutrition programs, parent training, 
 infant and child cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
 programs, safety training, caregiver training 
 and education, and other related programs;
 (B) centers that provide a national toll-free 
 parent hotline that provides 24-hour consultation and 
 advice, on an anonymous basis, including referrals to 
 local community-based services; and
 (C) centers that provide respite care for parents 
 with children with special needs, single mothers, and 
 parents with at-risk youth.
 (e) Reporting.--Each agency or entity that receives a grant under 
this section shall prepare and submit to the Council every 2 years a 
report describing the program that the agency or entity carried out 
under this section, the number of parents and children served, and the 
success of the program in supporting and educating parents using 
specific performance measures.
 (f) Administrative Costs.--Not more than 5 percent of the amount 
made available through a grant received by a State under subsection (a) 
may be used for the administrative expenses of the State Council in 
implementing the grant program described in subsection (c).
 (g) Supplement not Supplant.--Funds appropriated pursuant to this 
section shall be used to supplement and not supplant other Federal, 
State, and local public funds expended for parenting support and 
education programs.
 (h) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $100,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2002 and 2003, $200,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 and 
2005, and $300,000,000 for fiscal year 2006.
 (i) Definition.--In this section, the term ``child'' means an 
individual who is younger than age 18.

 Subtitle B--Support for Parents Caring for Children

SEC. 2101. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Family and Medical Leave 
Fairness Act of 2001''.

SEC. 2102. FINDINGS.

 Congress finds that--
 (1) the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 
 2601 et seq.) has provided employees with a significant new 
 tool in balancing the needs of their families with the demands 
 of work;
 (2) the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 has had a 
 minimal impact on business, and over 90 percent of private 
 employers covered by the Act experienced little or no cost and 
 a minimal, or positive, impact on productivity as a result of 
 the Act;
 (3) although both employers at workplaces with large 
 numbers of employees and employers at workplaces with small 
 numbers of employees reported that compliance with the Family 
 and Medical Leave Act of 1993 involved very easy administration 
 and low costs, the smaller employers found it easier and less 
 expensive to comply with the Act than the larger employers;
 (4) over three-quarters of worksites with under 50 
 employees covered by the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 
 report no cost increases or small cost increases associated 
 with compliance with the Act;
 (5) in 1998, 27 percent of Americans needed to take family 
 or medical leave but were unable to do so, and 44 percent of 
 these employees did not take such leave because they would have 
 lost their jobs or their employers did not allow it;
 (6) only 57 percent of the private workforce is currently 
 protected by the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993; and
 (7) 13,000,000 more private employees, or an additional 14 
 percent of the private workforce, would be protected by the 
 Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 if the Act was expanded to 
 cover private employers with 25 or more employees.

SEC. 2103. COVERAGE OF EMPLOYEES.

 Paragraphs (2)(B)(ii) and (4)(A)(i) of section 101 of the Family 
and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2611(2)(B)(ii) and (4)(A)(i)) 
are amended by striking ``50'' each place it appears and inserting 
``25''.

 Subtitle C--Paid Family Leave

SEC. 2201. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Family Income to Respond to 
Significant Transitions Insurance Act''.

SEC. 2202. FINDINGS.

 Congress finds that--
 (1) nearly every industrialized nation other than the 
 United States, and most developing nations, provide parents 
 with paid leave for infant care;
 (2)(A) parents' interactions with their infants have a 
 major influence on the physical, cognitive, and social 
 development of the infants; and
 (B) optimal development of an infant depends on a strong 
 attachment between an infant and the infant's parents;
 (3) nearly \2/3\ of employees, who need to take family or 
 medical leave, but do not take the leave, report that they 
 cannot afford to take the leave;
 (4) although some employees in the United States receive 
 wage replacement during periods of family or medical leave, the 
 benefit of wage replacement is not shared equally in the 
 workforce, as demonstrated by the fact that--
 (A) employees with less education and lower income 
 are less likely to receive wage replacement than 
 employees with more education and higher salaries; and
 (B) female employees, employees from racial 
 minority groups, and younger employees are slightly 
 less likely to receive wage replacement than male 
 employees, white employees, and older employees, 
 respectively;
 (5) in order to cope financially with taking family or 
 medical leave, of persons taking that leave without full wage 
 replacement--
 (A) 40 percent cut their leave short;
 (B) 39 percent put off paying bills;
 (C) 25 percent borrowed money; and
 (D) 9 percent obtained public assistance;
 (6) taking family or medical leave often drives employees 
 earning low wages into poverty, and 21 percent of such low-wage 
 employees who take family or medical leave without full wage 
 replacement resort to public assistance;
 (7) studies document shortages in the supply of infant 
 care, and that the shortages are expected to worsen as welfare 
 reform measures are implemented; and
 (8) compared to 30 years ago, families have experienced an 
 average decrease of 22 hours per week in time that parents 
 spend with their children.

SEC. 2203. PURPOSES.

 The purposes of this subtitle are--
 (1) to establish a demonstration program that supports the 
 efforts of States and political subdivisions to provide partial 
 or full wage replacement, often referred to as FIRST insurance, 
 to new parents so that the new parents are able to spend time 
 with a new infant or newly adopted child, and to other 
 employees; and
 (2) to learn about the most effective mechanisms for 
 providing the wage replacement assistance.

SEC. 2204. DEFINITIONS.

 In this subtitle:
 (1) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Labor, acting after consultation with the Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services.
 (2) Son or daughter; state.--The terms ``son or daughter'' 
 and ``State'' have the meanings given the terms in section 101 
 of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2611).

SEC. 2205. DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS.

 (a) Grants.--The Secretary shall make grants to eligible entities 
to pay for the Federal share of the cost of carrying out projects that 
assist families by providing, through various mechanisms, wage 
replacement for eligible individuals that are responding to caregiving 
needs resulting from the birth or adoption of a son or daughter or 
other family caregiving needs. The Secretary shall make the grants for 
periods of 5 years.
 (b) Eligible Entities.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
this section, an entity shall be a State or political subdivision of a 
State.
 (c) Use of Funds.--
 (1) In general.--An entity that receives a grant under this 
 section may use the funds made available through the grant to 
 provide partial or full wage replacement as described in 
 subsection (a) to eligible individuals--
 (A) directly;
 (B) through an insurance program, such as a State 
 temporary disability insurance program or the State 
 unemployment compensation benefit program;
 (C) through a private disability or other insurance 
 plan, or another mechanism provided by a private 
 employer; or
 (D) through another mechanism.
 (2) Administrative costs.--No entity may use more than 10 
 percent of the total funds made available through the grant 
 during the 5-year period of the grant to pay for the 
 administrative costs relating to a project described in 
 subsection (a).
 (d) Eligible Individuals.--To be eligible to receive wage 
replacement under subsection (a), an individual shall--
 (1) meet such eligibility criteria as the eligible entity 
 providing the wage replacement may specify in an application 
 described in subsection (e); and
 (2) be--
 (A) an individual who is taking leave, under the 
 Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2601 et 
 seq.), other Federal, State, or local law, or a private 
 plan, for a reason described in subparagraph (A) or (B) 
 of section 102(a)(1) of the Family and Medical Leave 
 Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2612(a)(1));
 (B) at the option of the eligible entity, an 
 individual who--
 (i) is taking leave, under that Act, other 
 Federal, State, or local law, or a private 
 plan, for a reason described in subparagraph 
 (C) or (D) of section 102(a)(1) of the Family 
 and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 
 2612(a)(1)); or
 (ii) leaves employment because the 
 individual has elected to care for a son or 
 daughter under age 1; or
 (C) at the option of the eligible entity, an 
 individual with other characteristics specified by the 
 eligible entity in an application described in 
 subsection (e).
 (e) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this 
section, an entity shall submit an application to the Secretary, at 
such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the 
Secretary may require, including, at a minimum--
 (1) a plan for the project to be carried out with the 
 grant;
 (2) information demonstrating that the applicant consulted 
 representatives of employers and employees, including labor 
 organizations, in developing the plan;
 (3) estimates of the costs and benefits of the project;
 (4)(A) information on the number and type of families to be 
 covered by the project, and the extent of such coverage in the 
 area served under the grant; and
 (B) information on any criteria or characteristics that the 
 entity will use to determine whether an individual is eligible 
 for wage replacement under subsection (a), as described in 
 paragraphs (1) and (2)(C) of subsection (d);
 (5) if the project will expand on State and private systems 
 of wage replacement for eligible individuals, information on 
 the manner in which the project will expand on the systems;
 (6) information demonstrating the manner in which the wage 
 replacement assistance provided through the project will assist 
 families in which an individual takes leave as described in 
 subsection (d)(1); and
 (7) an assurance that the applicant will participate in 
 efforts to evaluate the effectiveness of the project.
 (f) Selection Criteria.--In selecting entities to receive grants 
for projects under this section, the Secretary shall--
 (1) take into consideration--
 (A) the scope of the proposed projects;
 (B) the cost-effectiveness, feasibility, and 
 financial soundness of the proposed projects;
 (C) the extent to which the proposed projects would 
 expand access to wage replacement in response to family 
 caregiving needs, particularly for low-wage employees, 
in the area served by the grant; and
 (D) the benefits that would be offered to families 
 and children through the proposed projects; and
 (2) to the extent feasible, select entities proposing 
 projects that utilize diverse mechanisms, including expansion 
 of State unemployment compensation benefit programs, and 
 establishment or expansion of State temporary disability 
 insurance programs, to provide the wage replacement.
 (g) Federal Share.--
 (1) In general.--The Federal share of the cost described in 
 subsection (a) shall be--
 (A) 50 percent for the first year of the grant 
 period;
 (B) 40 percent for the second year of that period;
 (C) 30 percent for the third year of that period; 
 and
 (D) 20 percent for each subsequent year.
 (2) Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the cost 
 may be in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, including plant, 
 equipment, and services and may be provided from State, local, 
 or private sources, or Federal sources other than this 
 subtitle.
 (h) Supplement Not Supplant.--Funds appropriated pursuant to the 
authority of this subtitle shall be used to supplement and not supplant 
other Federal, State, and local public funds and private funds expended 
to provide wage replacement.
 (i) Effect on Existing Rights.--Nothing in this subtitle shall be 
construed to supersede, preempt, or otherwise infringe on the 
provisions of any collective bargaining agreement or any employment 
benefit program or plan that provides greater rights to employees than 
the rights established under this subtitle.

SEC. 2206. EVALUATIONS AND REPORTS.

 (a) Available Funds.--The Secretary shall use not more than 2 
percent of the funds made available under section 2205 to carry out 
this section.
 (b) Evaluations.--The Secretary shall, directly or by contract, 
evaluate the effectiveness of projects carried out with grants made 
under section 2205, including conducting--
 (1) research relating to the projects, including research 
 comparing--
 (A) the scope of the projects, including the type 
 of insurance or other wage replacement mechanism used, 
 the method of financing used, the eligibility 
 requirements, the level of the wage replacement benefit 
 provided (such as the percentage of salary replaced), 
 and the length of the benefit provided, for the 
 projects;
 (B) the utilization of the projects, including the 
 characteristics of individuals who benefit from the 
 projects, particularly low-wage workers, and factors 
 that determine the ability of eligible individuals to 
 obtain wage replacement through the projects; and
 (C) the costs of and savings achieved by the 
 projects, including the cost-effectiveness of the 
 projects and their benefits for children and families;
 (2) analysis of the overall need for wage replacement; and
 (3) analysis of the impact of the projects on the overall 
 availability of wage replacement.
 (c) Reports.--
 (1) Initial report.--Not later than 3 years after the 
 beginning of the grant period for the first grant made under 
 section 2205, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to 
 Congress a report that contains information resulting from the 
 evaluations conducted under subsection (b).
 (2) Subsequent reports.--Not later than 4 years after the 
 beginning of that grant period, and annually thereafter, the 
 Secretary shall prepare and submit to Congress a report that 
 contains--
 (A) information resulting from the evaluations 
 conducted under subsection (b); and
 (B) usage data for the demonstration projects, for 
 the most recent year for which data are available.

SEC. 2207. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subtitle 
$400,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 and such sums as may be necessary for 
each subsequent fiscal year.

 Subtitle D--Health Care for the Uninsured

SEC. 2301. FAMILYCARE COVERAGE OF PARENTS UNDER THE MEDICAID PROGRAM 
 AND TITLE XXI.

 (a) Incentives To Implement FamilyCare Coverage.--
 (1) Under medicaid.--
 (A) Establishment of new optional eligibility 
 category.--Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(A)(ii)) is 
 amended--
 (i) by striking ``or'' at the end of 
 subclause (XVI);
 (ii) by adding ``or'' at the end of 
 subclause (XVII); and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following 
 new subclause:
 ``(XVIII) who are parents described 
 in subsection (k)(1), but only if the 
 State meets the conditions described in 
 subsection (k)(2);''.
 (B) Conditions for coverage.--Section 1902 of such 
 Act is further amended by inserting after subsection 
 (j) the following new subsection:
 ``(k)(1)(A) Parents described in this paragraph are the parents of 
an individual who is under 19 years of age (or such higher age as the 
State may have elected under section 1902(l)(1)(D)) and who is eligible 
and enrolled for medical assistance under subsection (a)(10)(A), if--
 ``(i) such parents are not otherwise eligible for such 
 assistance under such subsection; and
 ``(ii) the income of the family that includes such parents 
 does not exceed an income level specified by the State 
 consistent with paragraph (2)(B).
 ``(B) In this subsection, the term `parent' has the meaning given 
the term `caretaker' for purposes of carrying out section 1931, and 
such additional meaning as defined by the State and approved by the 
Secretary.
 ``(2) The conditions for a State to provide medical assistance 
under subsection (a)(10)(A)(ii)(XVIII) are as follows:
 ``(A) The State has a State child health plan under title 
 XXI which (whether implemented under such title or under this 
 title)--
 ``(i) has an income standard (or will establish an 
 income standard that is effective at the time 
 additional allotments are available to the State under 
 section 2104(d), as amended by the Leave No Child 
 Behind Act of 2001) for children that is at least 200 
 percent of the poverty line; and
 ``(ii) does not limit the acceptance of 
 applications, does not use a waiting list for children 
 who meet eligibility standards to qualify for 
 assistance, and provides benefits to all children in 
 the State who apply for and meet eligibility standards.
 ``(B) The income level specified under paragraph (1)(A)(ii) 
 for parents in a family exceeds the income level applicable 
 under section 1931 but does not exceed the highest income level 
 applicable to a child in the family under this title. A State 
 may not cover such parents with higher family income without 
 covering parents with a lower family income.
 ``(3) In the case of a parent described in paragraph (1) who is 
also the parent of a child who is eligible and enrolled for child 
health assistance under title XXI, the State may elect (on a uniform 
basis) to cover all such parents under section 2111 or under subsection 
(a)(10)(A).''.
 (C) Enhanced matching funds available.--Section 
 1905 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d) is amended--
 (i) in the fourth sentence of subsection 
 (b), by striking ``or subsection (u)(3)'' and 
 inserting ``, (u)(3), or (u)(4)''; and
 (ii) in subsection (u)--
 (I) by redesignating paragraph (4) 
 as paragraph (6), and
 (II) by inserting after paragraph 
 (3) the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) For purposes of subsection (b) and section 2105(a)(1):
 ``(A) FamilyCare parents.--The expenditures described in 
 this subparagraph are the following:
 ``(i) Parents.--Expenditures for medical assistance 
 made available under section 1931, or under section 
 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XVIII) for parents described in 
 section 1902(k)(1), in a family the income of which 
 exceeds the income level applicable under such section 
 1931 to a family of the size involved as of January 1, 
 2000.
 ``(ii) Certain pregnant women.--Expenditures for 
 medical assistance for pregnant women under section 
 1902(l)(1)(A) in a family the income of which exceeds 
 the income level applicable under section 1902(l)(2)(A) 
 to a family of the size involved as of January 1, 
 2000.''.
 (D) Appropriation from title xxi allotment for 
 certain medicaid expansion costs.--Section 
 2105(a)(1)(C) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1397ee(a)(1)(C))) 
 is amended by inserting ``and for medical assistance 
 that is attributable to expenditures described in 
 section 1905(u)(4)(A)'' before the semicolon.
 (E) Only counting enhanced portion for coverage of 
 additional pregnant women.--Section 1905 of such Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1396d) is amended--
 (i) in the fourth sentence of subsection 
 (b), by inserting ``(except in the case of 
 expenditures described in subsection (u)(5))'' 
 after ``do not exceed'';
 (ii) in subsection (u), by inserting after 
 paragraph (4) (as inserted by subparagraph 
 (C)), the following new paragraph:
 ``(5) For purposes of the fourth sentence of subsection (b) and 
section 2105(a), the following payments under this title do not count 
against a State's allotment under section 2104:
 ``(A) Regular fmap for expenditures for pregnant women with 
 income above january 1, 2000 income level and below 185 percent 
 of poverty.--The portion of the payments made for expenditures 
 described in paragraph (4)(A)(ii) that represents the amount 
 that would have been paid if the enhanced FMAP had not been 
 substituted for the Federal medical assistance percentage.''.
 (2) Under title xxi.--
 (A) FamilyCare coverage.--Title XXI of such Act is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 2111. OPTIONAL FAMILYCARE COVERAGE OF PARENTS OF TARGETED LOW-
 INCOME CHILDREN.

 ``(a) Optional Coverage.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
this title, a State child health plan may provide for coverage, through 
an amendment to its State child health plan under section 2102, of 
FamilyCare assistance for targeted low-income parents in accordance 
with this section, but only if--
 ``(1) the State meets the conditions described in section 
 1902(k)(2); and
 ``(2) the State elects to provide medical assistance under 
 section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XVIII) and elects an applicable 
 income limit that is not lower than the limit described in 
 subsection (b)(2)(A).
 ``(b) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
 ``(1) FamilyCare assistance.--The term `FamilyCare 
 assistance' has the meaning given the term child health 
 assistance in section 2110(a) as if any reference to targeted 
 low-income children were a reference to targeted low-income 
 parents.
 ``(2) Targeted low-income parent.--The term `targeted low-
 income parent' has the meaning given the term targeted low-
 income child in section 2110(b) as if the reference to a child 
 were deemed a reference to a parent (as defined in paragraph 
 (3)) of the child; except that in applying such section--
 ``(A) there shall be substituted for the income 
 limit described in paragraph (1)(B)(ii)(I) the 
 applicable income limit in effect for a targeted low-
 income child;
 ``(B) in paragraph (3), January 1, 2000, shall be 
 substituted for July 1, 1997; and
 ``(C) in paragraph (4), January 1, 2000, shall be 
 substituted for March 31, 1997.
 ``(3) Parent.--The term `parent' has the meaning given the 
 term `caretaker' for purposes of carrying out section 1931, and 
 such additional meaning as defined by the State and approved by 
 the Secretary.
 ``(4) Optional treatment of pregnant women as parents.--A 
 State child health plan may treat a pregnant woman who is not 
 otherwise a parent as a targeted low-income parent for purposes 
 of this section but only if the State has established an income 
 level under section 1902(l)(2)(A)(i) for pregnant women that is 
 at least 185 percent of the income official poverty line 
 described in such section.
 ``(c) References to Terms and Special Rules.--In the case of, and 
with respect to, a State providing for coverage of FamilyCare 
assistance to targeted low-income parents under subsection (a), the 
following special rules apply:
 ``(1) Any reference in this title (other than subsection 
 (b)) to a targeted low-income child is deemed to include a 
 reference to a targeted low-income parent.
 ``(2) Any such reference to child health assistance with 
 respect to such parents is deemed a reference to FamilyCare 
 assistance.
 ``(3) In applying section 2103(e)(3)(B) in the case of a 
 family provided coverage under this section, the limitation on 
 total annual aggregate cost-sharing shall be applied to the 
 entire family.
 ``(4) In applying section 2110(b)(4), any reference to 
 `section 1902(l)(2) or 1905(n)(2) (as selected by a State)' is 
 deemed a reference to the income level applicable to parents 
 under section 1931, or, in the case of a pregnant woman 
 described in subsection (b)(4), the income level established 
 under section 1902(l)(2)(A).''.
 (B) Additional allotment for states providing 
 familycare.--
 (i) In general.--Section 2104 of such Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1397dd) is amended by inserting 
 after subsection (c) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(d) Additional Allotments for State Providing FamilyCare.--
 ``(1) Appropriation; total allotment.--For the purpose of 
 providing additional allotments to States electing to provide 
 FamilyCare coverage under section 2111, there is appropriated, 
 out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated--
 ``(A) for fiscal year 2002, $2,000,000,000;
 ``(B) for fiscal year 2003, $2,000,000,000;
 ``(C) for fiscal year 2004, $3,000,000,000;
 ``(D) for fiscal year 2005, $3,000,000,000;
 ``(E) for fiscal year 2006, $6,000,000,000;
 ``(F) for fiscal year 2007, $7,000,000,000;
 ``(G) for fiscal year 2008, $8,000,000,000;
 ``(H) for fiscal year 2009, $9,000,000,000;
 ``(I) for fiscal year 2010, $10,000,000,000; and
 ``(J) for fiscal year 2011 and each fiscal year 
 thereafter, the amount of the allotment provided under 
 this paragraph for the preceding fiscal year increased 
 by the percentage increase (if any) in the medical care 
 expenditure category of the Consumer Price Index for 
 All Urban Consumers (United States city average).
 ``(2) State and territorial allotments.--
 ``(A) In general.--In addition to the allotments 
 provided under subsections (b) and (c), subject to 
 paragraph (3), of the amount available for the 
 additional allotments under paragraph (1) for a fiscal 
 year, the Secretary shall allot to each State with a 
 State child health plan approved under this title and 
 which has elected to provide coverage under section 
 2111 during the fiscal year--
 ``(i) in the case of such a State other 
 than a commonwealth or territory described in 
 clause (ii), the same proportion as the 
 proportion of the State's allotment under 
 section 2104(b) (determined without regard to 
 section 2104(f)) to 98.95 percent of the total 
 amount of the allotments under such section for 
 such States eligible for an allotment under 
 this subparagraph for such fiscal year; and
 ``(ii) in the case of a commonwealth or 
 territory described in section 2104(c)(3), the 
 same proportion as the proportion of the 
 commonwealth's or territory's allotment under 
 section 2104(c) (determined without regard to 
 section 2104(f)) to 1.05 percent of the total 
 amount of the allotments under such section for 
 commonwealths and territories eligible for an 
 allotment under this subparagraph for such 
 fiscal year.
 ``(B) Redistribution of unused allotments.--In 
 applying subsection (f) with respect to additional 
 allotments made available under this subsection, the 
 procedures established under such subsection shall 
 ensure such additional allotments are only made 
 available to States which have elected to provide 
 coverage under section 2111.
 ``(3) Use of additional allotment.--Additional allotments 
 provided under this subsection are not available for amounts 
 expended before October 1, 2001. Such amounts are available for 
 amounts expended on or after such date for child health 
 assistance for targeted low-income children, as well as for 
 FamilyCare assistance.''.
 (ii) Conforming amendments.--Section 2104 
 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1397dd) is further 
 amended--
 (I) in subsection (a), by inserting 
 ``subject to subsection (d),'' after 
 ``under this section,'';
 (II) in subsection (b)(1), by 
 inserting ``and subsection (d)'' after 
 ``Subject to paragraph (4)''; and
 (III) in subsection (c)(1), by 
 inserting ``subject to subsection 
 (d),'' after ``for a fiscal year,''.
 (C) No cost-sharing for pregnancy-related 
 benefits.--Section 2103(e)(2) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1397cc(e)(2)) is amended--
 (i) in the heading, by inserting ``and 
 pregnancy-related services'' after ``preventive 
 services''; and
 (ii) by inserting before the period at the 
 end the following: ``and for pregnancy-related 
 services''.
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 apply to items and services furnished on or after October 1, 
 2001.
 (b) Rules for Implementation Beginning With Fiscal Year 2006.--
 (1) Required coverage of familycare parents.--Section 
 1902(a)(10)(A)(i) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1396a(a)(10)(A)(i)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of subclause 
 (VI);
 (B) by striking the semicolon at the end of 
 subclause (VII) and insert ``, or''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subclause:
 ``(VIII) who would be parents 
 described in subsection (k)(1) if the 
 income level specified in subsection 
 (k)(2)(B) were equal to at least 100 
 percent of the poverty line referred to 
 in such subsection;''.
 (2) Expansion of availability of enhanced match under 
 medicaid for pre-chip expansions.--Paragraph (4) of section 
 1905(u) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(u)), as inserted by 
 subsection (a)(1)(C), is amended--
 (A) by amending clause (ii) of subparagraph (A) to 
 read as follows:
 ``(ii) Certain pregnant women.--Expenditures for 
 medical assistance for pregnant women under section 
 1902(l)(1)(A) in a family the income of which exceeds 
 the 133 percent of the income official poverty line.''; 
 and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraphs:
 ``(B) Parents with income above 100 percent of poverty but 
 below january 1, 2000 income level.--The expenditures described 
 in this subparagraph are expenditures for medical assistance 
 made available for any parents described in section 
 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII), whose income exceeds 100 percent of 
 the income official poverty line applicable to a family of the 
 size involved but does not exceed the applicable income level 
 established under this title (under section 1931 or otherwise) 
 for a parent in a family of the size involved as of January 1, 
 2000.
 ``(C) Children in families with income above medicaid 
 mandatory level not previously described.--The expenditures 
 described in this subparagraph are expenditures (other than 
 expenditures described in paragraph (2) or (3)) for medical 
 assistance made available to any child who is eligible for 
 assistance under section 1902(a)(10)(A) and the income of whose 
 family exceeds the minimum income level required under 
 subsection 1902(l)(2) for a child of the age involved (treating 
 any child who is 19 or 20 years of age as being 18 years of 
 age).''.
 (3) Offset of additional expenditures for enhanced match 
 for pre-chip expansion; elimination of offset for required 
 coverage of familycare parents.--
 (A) In general.--Section 1905(u)(5) of such Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396d(u)(5)), as added by subsection (a)(1)(E), 
 is amended--
 (i) by amending subparagraph (A) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(A) Regular fmap for expenditures for pregnant women with 
 income above 133 percent of poverty.--The portion of the 
 payments made for expenditures described in paragraph 
 (4)(A)(ii) that represents the amount that would have been paid 
 if the enhanced FMAP had not been substituted for the Federal 
 medical assistance percentage.''; and
 (ii) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraphs:
 ``(B) FamilyCare parents under 100 percent of poverty.--
 Payments for expenditures described in paragraph (4)(A)(i) in 
 the case of parents whose income does not exceed 100 percent of 
 the income official poverty line applicable to a family of the 
 size involved.
 ``(C) Regular fmap for expenditures for parents with income 
 above 100 percent of poverty but below january 1, 2000 income 
 level.--The portion of the payments made for expenditures 
 described in paragraph (4)(B) that represents the amount that 
 would have been paid if the enhanced FMAP had not been 
 substituted for the Federal medical assistance percentage.
 ``(D) Regular fmap for expenditures for certain children in 
 families with income above medicaid mandatory level.--The 
 portion of the payments made for expenditures described in 
 paragraph (4)(C) that represents the amount that would have 
 been paid if the enhanced FMAP had not been substituted for the 
 Federal medical assistance percentage.''.
 (B) Conforming amendments.--Section 2105(a)(1)(C) 
 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1397ee(1)(1)(C)), as amended by 
 subsection (a)(1)(D), is amended by striking ``and for 
 medical assistance that is attributable to expenditures 
 described in section 1905(u)(4)(A)'' and inserting 
 ``and for medical assistance that is attributable to 
 expenditures described in section 1905(u)(4), except as 
 provided in section 1905(u)(5)''.
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 apply as of October 1, 2005, to fiscal years beginning on or 
 after such date and to expenditures under the State plan on and 
 after such date.
 (c) Making Title XXI Base Allotments Permanent.--Section 2104(a) of 
such Act (42 U.S.C. 1397dd(a)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (9);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (10) and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(11) for fiscal year 2008 and each fiscal year 
 thereafter, the amount of the allotment provided under this 
 subsection for the preceding fiscal year increased by the 
 percentage increase (if any) in the medical care expenditure 
 category of the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers 
 (United States city average).''.
 (d) Optional Application of Presumptive Eligibility Provisions to 
Parents.--Section 1920A of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-1a) is amended by 
adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(e) In accordance with regulations, a State may elect to apply 
the previous provisions of this section to provide for a period of 
presumptive eligibility for medical assistance for a parent of a child 
with respect to whom such a period is provided under this section.''.
 (e) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Eligibility categories.--Section 1905(a) of such Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)) is amended, in the matter before paragraph 
 (1)--
 (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (xi);
 (B) by inserting ``or'' at the end of clause (xii); 
 and
 (C) by inserting after clause (xii) the following 
 new clause:
 ``(xiii) who are parents described (or treated as if 
 described) in section 1902(k)(1),''.
 (2) Income limitations.--Section 1903(f)(4) of such Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396b(f)(4))--
 (A) effective October 1, 2005, by inserting 
 ``1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII),'' after 
 ``1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(VII),''; and
 (B) by inserting ``1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XVII), 
 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XVIII),'' after 
 ``1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XVI),''.
 (3) Conforming amendment relating to no waiting period for 
 certain women.--Section 2102(b)(1)(B) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1397bb(b)(1)(B)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``, and'' at the end of clause (i) 
 and inserting a semicolon;
 (B) by striking the period at the end of clause 
 (ii) and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(iii) may not apply a waiting period 
 (including a waiting period to carry out 
 paragraph (3)(C)) in the case of targeted low-
 income women who are pregnant.''.

 Subtitle E--Awareness of Environmental Risks to Children

SEC. 2401. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Children's Environmental 
Protection and Right to Know Act''.

SEC. 2402. FINDING.

 Congress finds that requirements to disclose information about 
environmental risks will improve health and safety by--
 (1) prompting persons causing those risks to reduce the 
 risks; and
 (2) enabling individuals to take actions to protect 
 themselves from those risks.

 CHAPTER 1--CHILDREN'S ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

 Subchapter A--Disclosure of Industrial Releases That Present a 
 Significant Risk to Children

SEC. 2411. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 313(f) of the Emergency Planning and 
Community Right-To-Know Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023(f)) is amended by 
striking paragraph (1) and inserting the following:
 ``(1) In general.--
 ``(A) Toxic chemical threshold quantity.--The 
 threshold quantities for purposes of reporting toxic 
 chemicals under this section are as follows:
 ``(i) Toxic chemicals used at facilities.--
 The threshold quantity of a toxic chemical used 
 at a facility shall be 10,000 pounds of the 
 toxic chemical per year.
 ``(ii) Manufactured or processed toxic 
 chemicals.--The threshold quantity of a toxic 
 chemical manufactured or processed at a 
 facility shall be--
 ``(I) 75,000 pounds of a toxic 
 chemical per year, for any toxic 
 chemical for which a toxic chemical 
 release form is required to be 
 submitted under this section on or 
 before July 1, 1988;
 ``(II) 50,000 pounds of a toxic 
 chemical per year, for any toxic 
 chemical for which a toxic chemical 
 release form is required to be 
 submitted during the period beginning 
 July 2, 1988, and ending July 1, 1989; 
 and
 ``(III) 25,000 pounds of a toxic 
 chemical per year, for any toxic 
 chemical for which any toxic release 
 form is required to be submitted on or 
 after July 2, 1989.
 ``(B) Toxic chemicals released from facilities.--
 ``(i) Toxic chemical threshold program.--
 ``(I) Establishment.--Not later 
 than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of the Children's 
 Environmental Protection and Right to 
 Know Act, subject to clause (ii) and in 
 addition to the reporting thresholds 
 for the toxic chemicals specified in 
 subclause (II), the Administrator shall 
 establish a reporting threshold for 
 each toxic chemical that the 
 Administrator determines may present a 
 significant risk to children's health 
 or the environment due to, as 
 determined by the--
 ``(aa) the persistent use 
 or existence of the toxic 
 chemical in the environment;
 ``(bb) the potential of the 
 toxic chemical to bioaccumulate 
 or disrupt endocrine systems; 
 or
 ``(cc) other 
 characteristics of the toxic 
 chemical.
 ``(II) Toxic chemicals included.--
 The Administrator shall establish a 
 reporting threshold under subclause (I) 
 for--
 ``(aa) lead;
 ``(bb) mercury;
 ``(cc) dioxin;
 ``(dd) cadmium;
 ``(ee) chromium; and
 ``(ff) each substance 
 identified as a bioaccumulative 
 chemical of concern in the 
 final rule promulgated by the 
 Administrator entitled `Water 
 Quality Guidance for the Great 
 Lakes System, Part III' (60 
 Fed. Reg. 15336 (March 23, 
 1995)).
 ``(ii) Threshold quantity.--The 
 Administrator shall establish by regulation 
 each threshold quantity for a toxic chemical 
 described in clause (i) at a level that, as 
 determined by the Administrator, will ensure 
 reporting of at least 80 percent of the 
 aggregate of all releases of the toxic chemical 
 from facilities that--
 ``(I) have 10 or more full-time 
 employees; and
 ``(II) are designated with any of 
 Standard Industrial Classification 
 Codes 20 through 39 or any of the 
 Standard Industrial Classification 
 Codes added under subsection 
 (b)(1)(B).''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 313 of the Emergency Planning and Community 
 Right-To-Know Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023) is amended--
 (A) in subsections (a) and (b)(1)(A), by striking 
 ``or otherwise used'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``otherwise used, or released'';
 (B) in subsection (c)--
 (i) by striking ``are those chemicals'' and 
 inserting the following: ``are--
 ``(1) those chemicals'';
 (ii) by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) dioxin and each other substance identified as a 
 bioaccumulative chemical of concern in the final rule 
 promulgated by the Administrator entitled `Water Quality 
 Guidance for the Great Lakes System, Part III' (60 Fed. Reg. 
 15336 (March 23, 1995)).''; and
 (C) in the first sentence of subsection (f)(2), by 
 striking ``paragraph (1)'' and inserting ``subparagraph 
 (A) or (B) of paragraph (1)''.
 (2) Section 326(a)(1)(B) of the Emergency Planning and 
 Community Right-To-Know Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11046(a)(1)(B)) 
 is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(vii) Establish reporting thresholds for chemicals 
 referred to in section 313(f)(1)(C).''.

 Subchapter B--Disclosure of High Health Risk Chemicals in Children's 
 Consumer Products

SEC. 2421. LIST OF TOXIC CHEMICALS.

 (a) Definition of Eligible Product.--Section 2 of the Federal 
Hazardous Substances Act (15 U.S.C. 1261) is amended by adding at the 
end the following:
 ``(u) Eligible Product.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 term `eligible product' means any toy or other article intended 
 for use by children.
 ``(2) Exception.--On and after the date that is 3 years 
 after the date of enactment of this subsection, the term 
 `eligible product' means any consumer product (as defined in 
 section 3 of the Consumer Product Safety Act (15 U.S.C. 
 2052)).''.
 (b) List of Toxic Chemicals.--Section 3 of the Federal Hazardous 
Substances Act (15 U.S.C. 1262) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:
 ``(k) List of Toxic Chemicals.--
 ``(1) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Administrator.--The term `Administrator' 
 means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection 
 Agency.
 ``(B) Chairman.--The term `Chairman' means the 
 Chairman of the Consumer Product Safety Commission.
 ``(2) List.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this subsection, the Administrator, acting jointly 
 with the Chairman, shall publish in the Federal Register a list 
 of substances or mixtures of substances that have been 
 determined by the Administrator and the Chairman to be toxic to 
 children due to their carcinogenic, neurotoxic, or reproductive 
 toxic effects.
 ``(3) Substances and information to be included.--The list 
 under that paragraph shall include--
 ``(A)(i) any chemical that has been identified by a 
 Federal agency as being a carcinogen, neurotoxin, or 
 reproductive toxin;
 ``(ii) each chemical identified as a Group A or 
 Group B carcinogen in the notice published by the 
 Administrator entitled `Regulation of Pesticides in 
 Food: Addressing the Delaney Paradox Policy Statement' 
 (53 Fed. Reg. 41118 (October 19, 1988));
 ``(iii) each chemical that adversely affects the 
 nervous system of children, as identified in criteria 
 documents of the National Institute for Occupational 
 Safety and Health;
 ``(iv) each chemical identified by the Consumer 
 Product Safety Commission as having sufficient evidence 
 to demonstrate--
 ``(I) carcinogenicity in humans or animals;
 ``(II) neurotoxicity in humans or animals;
 ``(III) human developmental toxicity; or
 ``(IV) male or female reproductive toxicity 
 in humans or animals;
 ``(v) each chemical regulated as a neurotoxin, 
 reproductive toxin, or developmental toxin by the 
 Administrator; and
 ``(vi) each chemical on the Biennial List of 
 Carcinogens submitted to Congress by the Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services; and
 ``(B) such reasonably available information on 
 adverse health effects of any substance or mixture of 
 substances as was used to determine whether to include 
 the substance or mixture on the list required under 
 paragraph (2).
 ``(4) Data.--In carrying out paragraph (3), the Secretary 
 and the Chairman shall require manufacturers and importers of 
 substances and mixtures of substances on the list required 
 under paragraph (2) to generate, and shall obtain from any 
 Federal, State, or local government, such data as are 
 sufficient to identify substances or mixtures of substances--
 ``(A) that are toxic within the meaning of 
 paragraph (2); and
 ``(B) to which infants and young children are 
 exposed.
 ``(l) Chemical Testing and Risk Assessment.--As soon as practicable 
after the date of enactment of this subsection, the Administrator of 
the Environmental Protection Agency, in consultation with experts in 
pediatric toxicology and exposure, shall develop and implement new 
short-term and long-term strategies for more comprehensive chemical 
testing and risk assessment to ensure that risks of exposure to 
children (including exposure to children in utero) are, to the maximum 
extent practicable, fully understood.''.

SEC. 2422. REPORTING OF TOXIC CHEMICALS IN CONSUMER PRODUCTS.

 (a) Reporting.--The Federal Hazardous Substances Act (15 U.S.C. 
1261 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 25. REPORTING OF TOXIC CHEMICALS.

 ``(a) In General.--A manufacturer or importer of any eligible 
product that contains, or is composed of, a substance or mixture of 
substances listed under section 3(k) shall submit to the Commission a 
report that describes each of the following:
 ``(1) The identity of the manufacturer or importer of the 
 eligible product.
 ``(2) A description of the eligible product (including any 
 model name and model number of the eligible product).
 ``(3) The identity of the substance or mixture of 
 substances listed under section 3(k) (including the 
 concentration of the substance or mixture in the eligible 
 product).
 ``(4) Any information known to the manufacturer or importer 
 that would support a determination that the eligible product is 
 not a misbranded hazardous substance or a banned hazardous 
 substance.
 ``(5) Such data as are generated by the manufacturer or 
 importer as are sufficient to identify any substances or 
 mixtures of substances manufactured or imported that are toxic 
 to children, as described in section 3(k)(2).
 ``(b) Publication.--The Commission shall annually publish in the 
Federal Register, and make available to the public in an electronic 
format, the information submitted under subsection (a).
 ``(c) Regulations.--The Commission shall promulgate such 
regulations as necessary to carry out this section.
 ``(d) Application of Section.--Subsection (a) shall apply to a 
substance or mixture of substances listed under section 3(k) beginning 
on the date that is 1 year after the date on which the substance or 
mixture of substances is listed under that section.''.
 (b) Prohibited Acts.--
 (1) In general.--Section 4 of the Federal Hazardous 
 Substances Act (15 U.S.C. 1263) is amended by adding at the end 
 the following:
 ``(l) The failure to report as required under section 25.''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Section 5(c)(1) of the Federal 
 Hazardous Substances Act (15 U.S.C. 1264(c)(1)) is amended in 
 the second sentence by striking ``and (k)'' and inserting 
 ``(k), and (l)''.

SEC. 2423. EXEMPTIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 3(c) of the Federal Hazardous Substances 
Act (15 U.S.C. 1262(c)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``(c) If the Commission finds'' and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(c) Exemption From Requirements by Regulation.--
 ``(1) In general.--If the Commission determines''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) Additional regulations.--In addition to regulations 
 promulgated under paragraph (1), the Commission may promulgate 
 regulations exempting from the reporting requirements of 
 section 25 any substance or mixture of substances.
 ``(3) Applicability.--This subsection shall not apply to 
 any substance or mixture of substances unless the Commission 
 determines that the substance or mixture would not, by reason 
 of containing a substance or mixture of substances listed under 
 section 3(k), cause substantial personal injury or substantial 
 illness during, or as a proximate result of, any customary or 
 reasonably foreseeable handling or use (including reasonably 
 foreseeable ingestion by children).''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 3(d) of the Federal Hazardous 
Substances Act (15 U.S.C. 1262(d)) is amended by striking ``adequate 
requirements satisfying the purposes of'' and inserting ``requirements 
at least as stringent as''.

SEC. 2424. PRIVATE CITIZEN ENFORCEMENT.

 The Federal Hazardous Substances Act (15 U.S.C. 1261 et seq.) (as 
amended by section 2422(a)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:

``SEC. 26. PRIVATE CITIZEN ENFORCEMENT.

 ``(a) In General.--Subject to subsection (c), any person other than 
the Commission may bring a civil action in United States district 
court--
 ``(1) against any person, for violation of subsection (a), 
 (b), or (l) of section 4; or
 ``(2) against the Commission, for a failure of the 
 Commission to perform any nondiscretionary act or duty under 
 the amendments made by the Children's Environmental Protection 
 and Right to Know Act.
 ``(b) Jurisdiction.--In the case of a civil action under subsection 
(a)--
 ``(1) the United States district courts shall have 
 jurisdiction over the civil action without regard to the amount 
 in controversy or the citizenship of the parties; and
 ``(2) the court may apply any appropriate civil penalties 
 under section 5 or order the Commission to perform any 
 nondiscretionary act or duty that the Commission failed to 
 perform.
 ``(c) Actions Prohibited.--No action may be commenced under this 
section unless--
 ``(1) not later than 60 days before the date on which the 
 action is filed, the plaintiff gives notice of the intent to 
 bring the action--
 ``(A) to the Commission; and
 ``(B) in the case of an action for a violation of 
 section 4, to the person that is alleged to have 
 violated that section; and
 ``(2) in the case of an action for a violation of section 
 4, the Commission has not commenced and is not diligently 
 pursuing a civil action on behalf of the United States.
 ``(d) Intervention.--In any action on behalf of the United States 
following receipt of a notice under subsection (d)(1), the person 
providing the notice may intervene as of right as a plaintiff in the 
action.
 ``(e) Costs.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), in 
 any action under subsection (a), the costs of litigation 
 (including reasonable attorney fees) may be awarded to--
 ``(A) any substantially prevailing plaintiff; and
 ``(B) in any action under subsection (c), the party 
 intervening under subsection (c), if that party 
 contributed significantly to the success of the 
 plaintiff.
 ``(2) Waiver.--The award of costs under paragraph (1) may 
 be fully or partially waived by a court if the court finds such 
 an award to be inappropriate under the circumstances.
 ``(f) Burden of Proof.--In any action under subsection (a)(1), if 
the person alleged to have violated section 4 asserts that a substance 
or mixture of substances is not a hazardous substance by reason of 
containing a substance or mixture of substances listed under section 
3(k), the burden of proof shall be the alleged violator to establish 
that the substance or mixture of substances is not a hazardous 
substance.
 ``(g) Penalty Fund.--
 ``(1) Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury 
 of the United States a fund to be used in carrying out this 
 section (referred to in this section as the `Fund').
 ``(2) Deposit of assessed penalties.--A penalty assessed as 
 a result of a civil action under subsection (a) shall be 
 deposited in the Fund.
 ``(3) Use of funds.--On request by the Commission, the 
 Secretary of the Treasury shall transfer from the Fund to the 
 Commission such amounts as the Commission determines are 
 necessary to finance compliance and enforcement activities 
 under this Act.
 ``(4) Availability.--Amounts in the Fund shall remain 
 available for use by the Commission until expended, without 
 further appropriation.
 ``(5) Reports.--The Commission shall submit to Congress an 
 annual report that describes--
 ``(A) any funds deposited into the Fund during the 
 year for which the report is submitted (including the 
 sources of those funds); and
 ``(B) the actual and proposed uses of the funds.
 ``(h) Other Projects.--Notwithstanding subsection (g), in lieu of 
being deposited in the Fund, any civil penalty assessed may, at the 
option of the court (after consultation with the Commission), be used 
to fund projects of the Commission that are--
 ``(1) consistent with this Act; and
 ``(2) designed to enhance public awareness of--
 ``(A) the health effects of toxic substances or 
 mixtures of toxic substances in eligible products; and
 ``(B) the potential for exposure of children to 
 toxic substances or mixtures of toxic substances in 
 eligible products.''.

 CHAPTER 2--PUBLIC RIGHT TO KNOW ABOUT TOXIC CHEMICAL USE

SEC. 2431. DISCLOSURE OF TOXIC CHEMICAL USE BY COMPARABLE FACILITIES.

 Section 313(b)(1)(B) of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-
To-Know Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023(b)(1)(B)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``(B) The Administrator'' and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(B) Modifications to covered facilities.--
 ``(i) Modification by the administrator.--
 The Administrator''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(ii) Modifications beginning with 2002 
 reporting year.--Effective beginning with the 
 2002 reporting year, any facility identified by 
 the Standard Industrial Classification Codes 
 specified in the proposed rule entitled 
 `Addition of Facilities in Certain Industry 
 Sectors; Toxic Chemical Release Reporting; 
 Community Right-to-Know, Part II' (61 Fed. Reg. 
 33588 (June 27, 1996)) shall be subject to the 
 requirements of this section.
 ``(iii) Regulations to add additional 
 categories of facilities.--
 ``(I) In general.--Not later than 2 
 years after the date of enactment of 
 this clause, subject to subclause (II), 
 the Administrator shall promulgate 
 final regulations to require compliance 
 with this section by all additional 
 categories of facilities that use or 
 release toxic chemicals in volumes 
 similar to the volumes used or released 
 by facilities that are covered by this 
 section as of the date of enactment of 
 this clause.
 ``(II) Inapplicability to farms.--
 Subclause (I) shall not apply to any 
 farm.''.

SEC. 2432. DISCLOSURE OF TOXIC CHEMICAL USE.

 (a) In General.--Section 313 of the Emergency Planning and 
Community Right-To-Know Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023) is amended--
 (1) in the second sentence of subsection (a), by striking 
 ``releases'' and inserting ``toxic chemical uses and 
 releases'';
 (2) in subsection (g)(1)(C)--
 (A) by inserting ``for the preceding calendar 
 year'' after ``items of information'';
 (B) in clause (ii), by striking ``the preceding 
 calendar year'' and inserting ``the calendar year''; 
 and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(v)(I) The number of employees, including contractors, at 
 the facility.
 ``(II) The number of employees, including contractors, at 
 the facility that were exposed to the toxic chemical.
 ``(III) An estimate of the quantity and level of 
 occupational exposures to the toxic chemical.
 ``(vi)(I) The following materials accounting information:
 ``(aa) A description of the uses of the toxic 
 chemical at the facility.
 ``(bb) The starting inventory of the toxic chemical 
 at the facility.
 ``(cc) The quantity of the toxic chemical produced 
 at the facility.
 ``(dd) The quantity of the toxic chemical 
 transported into the facility and the mode of 
 transportation.
 ``(ee) The quantity of the toxic chemical consumed 
 at the facility.
 ``(ff) The quantity of the toxic chemical 
 transported out of the facility as products or in 
 products, and the quantity intended for--
 ``(AA) industrial use;
 ``(BB) commercial use;
 ``(CC) consumer use; and
 ``(DD) any additional category of use that 
 the Administrator may designate.
 ``(gg) The quantity of the toxic chemical entering 
 any waste stream (or otherwise released into the 
 environment) before recycling, treatment, or disposal.
 ``(hh) The ending inventory of the toxic chemical 
 at the facility.
 ``(ii) The quantity of the toxic chemical recycled 
 at the facility that is subsequently used at the 
 facility.
 ``(jj) The quantity of the toxic chemical used, 
 which shall be calculated with respect to a toxic 
 chemical by adding the quantities reported under items 
 (bb), (cc), (dd), and (ii) with respect to the toxic 
 chemical and subtracting the quantity reported under 
 subclause (hh) with respect to the toxic chemical.
 ``(II) Each quantity reported under this clause shall be 
 complete and verifiable by computations using conventional 
 materials accounting practices.
 ``(III) If the sum of the quantities reported under items 
 (bb), (cc), (dd), and (ii) of subclause (I) does not equal the 
 sum of the quantities reported under subclauses (ee), (ff), 
 (gg), and (hh) of that subclause, the form shall provide an 
 explanation of the difference in the sums.
 ``(vii) The quantity of the reduction, from the year prior 
 to the preceding calendar year, in the quantity of the toxic 
 chemical entering any waste stream (or otherwise released into 
 the environment) before recycling, treatment, or disposal (as 
 reported under section 6607(b)(1) of the Pollution Prevention 
 Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 13106(b)(1)), as a result of--
 ``(I) equipment or technology modifications;
 ``(II) process or procedure modifications;
 ``(III) reformulation or redesign of products;
 ``(IV) substitution of raw materials; and
 ``(V) improvements in housekeeping, maintenance, 
 training, or inventory control.
 ``(viii) The quantity of the reduction, from the year prior 
 to the preceding calendar year, in the quantity of the toxic 
 chemical used as determined under clause (vi)(I)(jj) as a 
 result of all activities specified in clause (vii).''; and
 (3) in the second sentence of subsection (h), by inserting 
 ``uses of toxic chemicals at covered facilities and'' after 
 ``inform persons about''.
 (b) Regulations.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Environmental 
Protection Agency shall promulgate regulations concerning the 
information to be provided under section 313(g)(1)(C)(v) of the 
Emergency Planning and Community Right-To-Know Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 
11023(g)(1)(C)(v)).

SEC. 2433. STREAMLINED DATA COLLECTION AND DISSEMINATION.

 Section 313 of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-To-Know 
Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11023) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:
 ``(m) Streamlined Data Collection and Dissemination.--
 ``(1) In general.--To enhance public access and use of 
 information resources, to facilitate compliance with reporting 
 requirements, and to promote multimedia permitting, reporting, 
 and pollution prevention, the Administrator shall, not later 
 than 3 years after the date of enactment of this subsection--
 ``(A) establish standard data formats for 
 management of information collected under this title 
 and other Federal environmental laws;
 ``(B) integrate information collected under this 
 title and other Federal environmental laws, using--
 ``(i) common company, facility, industry, 
 geographic, and chemical identifiers; and
 ``(ii) other identifiers as the 
 Administrator determines to be appropriate;
 ``(C) establish a system for indexing, locating, 
 and obtaining agency-held information about parent 
 companies, facilities, industries, chemicals, 
 geographic locations, ecological indicators, and the 
 regulatory status of chemicals and entities subject to 
 regulation under this title and other Federal 
 environmental laws;
 ``(D) consolidate all annual reporting 
 requirements, under this title and other Federal 
 environmental laws, for small business concerns (as 
 defined in section 3 of the Small Business Act (15 
 U.S.C. 632)) in a manner that allows reporting to 1 
 point of contact using 1 form or electronic reporting 
 system; and
 ``(E) provide members of the public 1 point of 
 contact for access to all publicly available 
 information collected by the Administrator for any 1 
 regulated entity.
 ``(2) Consolidation.--Not later than 5 years after the date 
 of enactment of this subsection, the Administrator shall 
 consolidate all annual reporting under this title and other 
 Federal environmental laws, for each entity subject to such 
 reporting, in a manner that allows reporting to 1 point of 
 contact using 1 form or electronic reporting system.
 ``(3) Understandable language.--In improving the means by 
 which the Administrator provides information to the public and 
 requires information be reported by regulated entities, as 
 required by paragraphs (1) and (2), the Administrator shall use 
 language and methods of communication that the Administrator 
 finds to be clear and understandable by a member of the public 
 of average intelligence, education, and experience.''.

SEC. 2434. TRADE SECRET PROTECTION.

 Section 322 of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-To-Know 
Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. 11042) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1), by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(C) Withholding of materials accounting 
 information.--
 ``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), 
 any person required to submit materials 
 accounting information under section 
 313(g)(1)(C)(vi) may withhold any item of that 
 information (as determined under regulations 
 promulgated by the Administrator under 
 subsection (c)) if the person complies with 
 paragraph (2) with respect to the information 
 to be withheld.
 ``(ii) Limitation.--Clause (i) does not 
 provide authority to withhold any information 
 covered by the Pollution Prevention Act of 1990 
 (42 U.S.C. 13101 et seq.).'';
 (2) in subsection (b)(4), by inserting ``or other 
 information withheld'' after ``The chemical identity'';
 (3) in subsection (d)--
 (A) in the first sentence of paragraph (1), by 
 inserting ``, or other information withheld under 
 subsection (a)(1),'' after ``toxic chemical''; and
 (B) in paragraphs (2) through (4), by inserting 
 ``or other information withheld'' after ``chemical 
 identity'' each place it appears;
 (4) in subsection (f), by inserting ``or other information 
 withheld under subsection (a)(1)'' after ``chemical identity''; 
 and
 (5) in subsection (h)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``, or other 
 information withheld under subsection (a)(1),'' before 
 ``is claimed as''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``, or other 
 information withheld under subsection (a)(1),'' after 
 ``identity of a toxic chemical''.

 Subtitle F--Promoting Responsible Fatherhood

 CHAPTER 1--BLOCK GRANTS

SEC. 2501. BLOCK GRANTS TO STATES TO ENCOURAGE MEDIA CAMPAIGNS.

 (a) In General.--Part D of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 651 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 469C. BLOCK GRANTS TO STATES FOR MEDIA CAMPAIGNS PROMOTING 
 RESPONSIBLE FATHERHOOD.

 ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Broadcast advertisement.--The term `broadcast 
 advertisement' means a communication intended to be aired by a 
 television or radio broadcast station, including a 
 communication intended to be transmitted through a cable 
 channel.
 ``(2) Child at risk.--The term `child at risk' means each 
 young child whose family income does not exceed the poverty 
 line.
 ``(3) Poverty line.--The term `poverty line' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget 
 Reconciliation Act of 1981 (including any revision required by 
 such section) that is applicable to a family of the size 
 involved.
 ``(4) Printed or other advertisement.--The term `printed or 
 other advertisement' includes any communication intended to be 
 distributed through a newspaper, magazine, outdoor advertising 
 facility, mailing, or any other type of general public 
 advertising, but does not include any broadcast advertisement.
 ``(5) State.--The term `State' means each of the 50 States, 
 the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the 
 United States Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the 
 Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
 ``(6) Young child.--The term `young child' means an 
 individual under age 5.
 ``(b) State Certifications.--Not later than October 1 of each 
fiscal year for which a State desires to receive an allotment under 
this section, the chief executive officer of the State shall submit to 
the Secretary a certification that the State will--
 ``(1) use such funds to promote the formation and 
 maintenance of married 2-parent families, strengthen fragile 
 families, and promote responsible fatherhood through media 
 campaigns conducted in accordance with the requirements of 
 subsection (d);
 ``(2) return any unused funds to the Secretary in 
 accordance with the reconciliation process under subsection 
 (e); and
 ``(3) comply with the reporting requirements under 
 subsection (f).
 ``(c) Payments to States.--For each of fiscal years 2002 through 
2006, the Secretary shall pay to each State that submits a 
certification under subsection (b), from any funds appropriated under 
subsection (h), for the fiscal year an amount equal to the amount of 
the allotment determined for the fiscal year under subsection (g).
 ``(d) Establishment of Media Campaigns.--Each State receiving an 
allotment under this section for a fiscal year shall use the allotment 
to conduct media campaigns as follows:
 ``(1) Conduct of media campaigns.--
 ``(A) Radio and television media campaigns.--
 ``(i) Production of broadcast 
 advertisements.--At the option of the State, to 
 produce broadcast advertisements that promote 
 the formation and maintenance of married 2-
 parent families, strengthen fragile families, 
 and promote responsible fatherhood.
 ``(ii) Air time challenge program.--At the 
 option of the State, to establish an air time 
 challenge program under which the State may 
 spend amounts allotted under this section to 
 purchase time from a broadcast station to air a 
 broadcast advertisement produced under 
 subparagraph (A), but only if the State obtains 
 an amount of time of the same class and during 
 a comparable period to air the advertisement 
 using non-Federal contributions.
 ``(B) Other media campaigns.--At the option of the 
 State, to conduct a media campaign that consists of the 
 production and distribution of printed or other 
 advertisements that promote the formation and 
 maintenance of married 2-parent families, strengthen 
 fragile families, and promote responsible fatherhood.
 ``(2) Administration of media campaigns.--A State may 
 administer media campaigns funded under this section directly 
 or through grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements with 
 public agencies, local governments, or private entities, 
 including charitable and religious organizations.
 ``(3) Consultation with domestic violence assistance 
 centers.--In developing broadcast and printed advertisements to 
 be used in the media campaigns conducted under paragraph (1), 
 the State or other entity administering the campaign shall 
 consult with representatives of State and local domestic 
 violence centers.
 ``(4) Non-federal contributions.--In this subsection, the 
 term `non-Federal contributions' includes contributions by the 
 State and by public and private entities. Such contributions 
 may be in cash or in kind. Such term does not include any 
 amounts provided by the Federal Government, or services 
 assisted or subsidized to any significant extent by the Federal 
 Government, or any amount expended by a State before October 1, 
 2002.
 ``(e) Reconciliation Process.--
 ``(1) 3-year availability of amounts allotted.--Each State 
 that receives an allotment under this section shall return to 
 the Secretary any unused portion of the amount allotted to a 
 State under this section for a fiscal year not later than the 
 last day of the second succeeding fiscal year together with any 
 earnings on such unused portion.
 ``(2) Procedure for redistribution of unused allotments.--
 The Secretary shall establish an appropriate procedure for 
 redistributing to States that have expended the entire amount 
 allotted under this section any amount that is--
 ``(A) returned to the Secretary by States under 
 paragraph (1); or
 ``(B) not allotted to a State under this section 
 because the State did not submit a certification under 
 subsection (b) by October 1 of a fiscal year.
 ``(f) Reporting Requirements.--
 ``(1) Monitoring and evaluation.--Each State receiving an 
 allotment under this section for a fiscal year shall monitor 
 and evaluate the media campaigns conducted using funds made 
 available under this section in such manner as the Secretary, 
 in consultation with the States, determines appropriate.
 ``(2) Annual reports.--Not less frequently than annually, 
 each State receiving an allotment under this section for a 
 fiscal year shall submit to the Secretary reports on the media 
 campaigns conducted under this section at such time, in such 
 manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may 
 require.
 ``(g) Amount of Allotments.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), of 
 the amount appropriated for the purpose of making allotments 
 under this section for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall allot 
 to each State that submits a certification under subsection (b) 
 for the fiscal year an amount equal to the sum of--
 ``(A) the amount that bears the same ratio to 50 
 percent of such funds as the number of young children 
 in the State (as determined by the Secretary based on 
 the most recent March supplement to the Current 
 Population Survey of the Bureau of the Census before 
 the beginning of the calendar year in which such fiscal 
 year begins) as bears to the number of such children in 
 all States; and
 ``(B) the amount that bears the same ratio to 50 
 percent of such funds as the number of children at risk 
 in the State (as determined by the Secretary based on 
 the most recent March supplement to the Current 
 Population Survey of the Bureau of the Census before 
 the beginning of the calendar year in which such fiscal 
 year begins) bears to the number of such children in 
 all States.
 ``(2) Minimum allotments.--No allotment for a fiscal year 
 under this section shall be less than--
 ``(A) in the case of a State other than the 
 Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin 
 Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of 
 the Northern Mariana Islands, 1 percent of the amount 
 appropriated for the fiscal year under subsection (h); 
 and
 ``(B) in the case of the Commonwealth of Puerto 
 Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, Guam, American 
 Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
 Islands, 0.5 percent of such amount.
 ``(3) Pro rata reductions.--The Secretary shall make such 
 pro rata reductions to the allotments determined under 
 paragraph (1) as are necessary to comply with the requirements 
 of paragraph (2).
 ``(h) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated $25,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006 for 
purposes of making allotments to States under this section.''.
 (b) Evaluation.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 shall conduct an evaluation of the impact of the media 
 campaigns funded under section 469C of the Social Security Act, 
 as added by subsection (a).
 (2) Report.--Not later than December 31, 2004, the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services shall report to Congress 
 the results of the evaluation under paragraph (1).
 (3) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated $1,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 for purposes 
 of conducting the evaluation required under this subsection, to 
 remain available until expended.

SEC. 2502. RESPONSIBLE FATHERHOOD BLOCK GRANT.

 (a) In General.--Part D of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 651 et seq.), as amended by section 2501, is amended by adding 
at the end the following:

``SEC. 469D. RESPONSIBLE FATHERHOOD BLOCK GRANT.

 ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Child at risk.--The term `child at risk' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 469C(a)(2).
 ``(2) Poverty line.--The term `poverty line' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 469C(a)(3).
 ``(3) State.--The term `State' has the meaning given such 
 term in section 469C(a)(5).
 ``(4) Young child.--The term `young child' has the meaning 
 given such term in section 469C(a)(6).
 ``(b) State Certifications.--Not later than October 1 of each 
fiscal year for which a State desires to receive an allotment under 
this section, the chief executive officer of the State shall submit to 
the Secretary a certification that the State will--
 ``(1) comply with the matching requirements under 
 subsection (c)(2);
 ``(2) use such funds to promote responsible fatherhood in 
 accordance with the requirements of subsection (d);
 ``(3) use such funds to promote or sustain marriage in 
 accordance with subparagraph (A) or (B) of subsection (d)(2);
 ``(4) return any unused funds to the Secretary in 
 accordance with the reconciliation process under subsection 
 (e); and
 ``(5) comply with the reporting requirements under 
 subsection (f).
 ``(c) Payments to States.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), for each of 
 fiscal years 2002 through 2006, the Secretary shall pay to each 
 State that submits a certification described in subsection (b), 
 from any funds appropriated under subsection (h), for the 
 fiscal year an amount equal to the amount of the allotment 
 determined under subsection (g).
 ``(2) Matching requirement.--The Secretary may not make a 
 payment to a State under paragraph (1) unless the State agrees 
 that, with respect to the costs to be incurred by the State in 
 supporting the programs described in subsection (d), the State 
 will make available non-Federal contributions in an amount 
 equal to 25 percent of the amount of Federal funds paid to the 
 State under such clause.
 ``(3) Non-federal contributions.--In this subsection, the 
 term `non-Federal contributions' includes contributions by the 
 State and by public and private entities. Such contributions 
 may be in cash or in kind. Such term does not include any 
 amounts provided by the Federal Government, or services 
 assisted or subsidized to any significant extent by the Federal 
 Government or any amount expended by a State before October 1, 
 2002.
 ``(d) Responsible Fatherhood Programs.--
 ``(1) Support of programs.--A State shall use the 
 allotments received under this section to support programs 
 described in paragraph (2) directly or through a grant, 
 contract, or cooperative agreement with any public agency, 
 local government, or private entity (including any charitable 
 or religious organization) with experience in administering 
 such a program.
 ``(2) Programs described.--Responsible Fatherhood programs 
 include programs that--
 ``(A) promote marriage through such activities as 
 counseling, mentoring, disseminating information about 
 the benefits of marriage and 2-parent involvement for 
 children, enhancing relationship skills, teaching on 
 how to control aggressive behavior, and disseminating 
 information on the causes of domestic violence and 
 child abuse;
 ``(B) sustain marriages through marriage 
 preparation programs, premarital counseling, marital 
 inventories, skills-based marriage education, financial 
 planning seminars, programs to help parents improve 
 their economic status, and divorce education and 
 reduction programs, including mediation and counseling;
 ``(C) promote responsible parenting through such 
 activities as counseling, mentoring, disseminating 
 information about good parenting practices, skills-
 based parenting education, encouraging child support 
 payments, and other methods; and
 ``(D) help fathers and their families avoid or 
 leave cash welfare and improve their economic status by 
 providing such activities as work first services, job 
 search, job training, subsidized employment, job 
 retention, job enhancement, and encouraging education, 
 including career-advancing education, dissemination of 
 employment materials, coordination with existing 
 employment services such as Welfare to Work and 
 referrals to local employment training initiatives, and 
 other methods.
 ``(3) Targeted low-income participants.--Not less than 50 
 percent of the participants in each program supported under 
 paragraph (1) shall be--
 ``(A) parents of a child who is, or within the past 
 24 months has been, a recipient of assistance or 
 services under a State program funded under this part; 
 or
 ``(B) parents, including an expectant parent or a 
 married parent, whose income (after adjustment for 
 court-ordered child support paid or received) does not 
 exceed 150 percent of the poverty line.
 ``(4) Consultation with domestic violence assistance 
 centers.--Each State or entity administering a program 
 supported under paragraph (1) shall consult with 
 representatives of State and local domestic violence centers.
 ``(5) Supplement not supplant.--Amounts allotted to a State 
 under this section shall be used to supplement and not supplant 
 other Federal, State, or local funds provided to the State 
 under this part or any other provision of law that are used to 
 support programs and activities similar to the a responsible 
 fatherhood program described in paragraph (2).
 ``(6) Restrictions on use.--No amount allotted under this 
 section may be used for court proceedings on matters of child 
 visitation or child custody, or for legislative advocacy.
 ``(e) Reconciliation Process.--
 ``(1) 3-year availability of amounts allotted.--Each State 
 that receives an allotment under this section shall return to 
 the Secretary any unused portion of the amount allotted to a 
 State under this section for a fiscal year not later than the 
 last day of the second succeeding fiscal year, together with 
 any earnings on such unused portion.
 ``(2) Procedure for redistribution of unused allotments.--
 The Secretary shall establish an appropriate procedure for 
 redistributing to States that have expended the entire amount 
 allotted under this section any amount that is--
 ``(A) returned to the Secretary by States under 
 paragraph (1); or
 ``(B) not allotted to a State under this section 
 because the State did not submit a certification under 
 subsection (b) by October 1 of a fiscal year.
 ``(f) Reporting Requirements.--
 ``(1) Monitoring and evaluation.--Each State receiving an 
 allotment under this section shall monitor and evaluate the 
 programs supported using funds made available under this 
 section in such manner as the Secretary, in consultation with 
 the States, determines appropriate.
 ``(2) Annual reports.--Not less frequently than annually, 
 each State receiving an allotment under this section for a 
 fiscal year shall submit to the Secretary reports on the 
 programs supported under this section at such time, in such 
 manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may 
 reasonably require.
 ``(g) Amount of Allotments.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), of 
 the amount appropriated for the purpose of making allotments 
 under this section for a fiscal year the Secretary shall allot 
 to each State that submits a certification under subsection (b) 
 for that fiscal year an amount equal to the sum of--
 ``(A) the amount that bears the same ratio to 50 
 percent of such funds as the number of young children 
 in the State (as determined by the Secretary based on 
 the most recent March supplement to the Current 
 Population Survey of the Bureau of the Census before 
 the beginning of the calendar year in which such fiscal 
 year begins) as bears to the number of such children in 
 all States; and
 ``(B) the amount that bears the same ratio to 50 
 percent of such funds as the number of children at risk 
 in the State (as determined by the Secretary based on 
 the most recent March supplement to the Current 
 Population Survey of the Bureau of the Census before 
 the beginning of the calendar year in which such fiscal 
 year begins) bears to the number of such children in 
 all States.
 ``(2) Minimum allotments.--No allotment for a fiscal year 
 under this section shall be less than--
 ``(A) in the case of a State other than the 
 Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin 
 Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of 
 the Northern Mariana Islands, 1 percent of the amount 
 appropriated for the fiscal year under subsection (h); 
 and
 ``(B) in the case of the Commonwealth of Puerto 
 Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, Guam, American 
 Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
 Islands, 0.5 percent of such amount.
 ``(3) Pro rata reductions.--The Secretary shall make such 
 pro rata reductions to the allotments determined under 
 paragraph (1) as are necessary to comply with the requirements 
 of paragraph (2).
 ``(h) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated $50,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006 for 
purposes of making allotments to States under this section.''.
 (b) Evaluation and Report.--
 (1) Evaluation.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services (in this subsection referred to as the 
 ``Secretary''), in consultation with the Secretary of 
 Labor, shall, directly or through a grant, contract, or 
 interagency agreement, conduct an evaluation of the 
 projects funded under section 469D of the Social 
 Security Act (as added by subsection (a)).
 (B) Outcomes assessment.--The evaluation conducted 
 under subparagraph (A) shall assess, among other 
 outcomes selected by the Secretary, effects of the 
 projects on marriage, parenting, employment, earnings, 
 payment of child support, and incidence of domestic 
 violence and child abuse.
 (C) Project selection.--In selecting projects for 
 the evaluation, the Secretary should include projects 
 that are most likely to further the purposes of this 
 section.
 (D) Random assignment.--In conducting the 
 evaluation, random assignment should be used wherever 
 possible.
 (2) Report.--Not later than December 31, 2004, the 
 Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the results of 
 the evaluation conducted under paragraph (1).
 (3) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated $1,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 
 through 2006 to carry out this subsection.

 CHAPTER 2--NATIONAL CLEARINGHOUSE

SEC. 2511. NATIONAL CLEARINGHOUSE FOR RESPONSIBLE FATHERHOOD PROGRAMS.

 Part D of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 651), as 
amended by section 2502, is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 469E. MEDIA CAMPAIGN NATIONAL CLEARINGHOUSE FOR RESPONSIBLE 
 FATHERHOOD.

 ``(a) Media Campaign and National Clearinghouse.--
 ``(1) In general.--From any funds appropriated under 
 subsection (c), the Secretary shall contract with a nationally 
 recognized, nonprofit fatherhood promotion organization 
 described in subsection (b) to--
 ``(A) develop, promote, and distribute to 
 interested States, local governments, public agencies, 
 and private entities a media campaign that encourages 
 the appropriate involvement of both parents in the life 
 of any child of the parents, with a priority for 
 programs that specifically address the issue of 
 responsible fatherhood; and
 ``(B) develop a national clearinghouse to assist 
 States and communities in efforts to promote and 
 support marriage and responsible fatherhood by 
 collecting, evaluating, and making available (through 
 the Internet and by other means) to other States 
 information regarding the media campaigns established 
 under section 469C.
 ``(2) Coordination with domestic violence programs.--The 
 Secretary shall ensure that the nationally recognized nonprofit 
 fatherhood promotion organization with a contract under 
 paragraph (1) coordinates the media campaign developed under 
 subparagraph (A) of such paragraph and the national 
 clearinghouse developed under subparagraph (B) of such 
 paragraph with a national, State, or local domestic violence 
 program.
 ``(b) Nationally Recognized, Nonprofit Fatherhood Promotion 
Organization Described.--The nationally recognized, nonprofit 
fatherhood promotion organization described in this subsection is such 
an organization that has at least 4 years of experience in--
 ``(1) designing and disseminating a national public 
 education campaign, including the production and successful 
 placement of television, radio, and print public service 
 announcements that promote the importance of responsible 
 fatherhood; and
 ``(2) providing consultation and training to community-
 based organizations interested in implementing fatherhood 
 outreach, support, or skill development programs with an 
 emphasis on promoting married fatherhood as the ideal.
 ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated $2,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006 to 
carry out this section.''.

 TITLE III--HEAD START AND CHILD CARE

 Subtitle A--Infants and Toddlers

SEC. 3001. RESERVATION OF HEAD START ACT FUNDS FOR INFANTS AND 
 TODDLERS.

 Section 640(a)(6) of the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9835(a)(6)) is 
amended--
 (1) by striking subparagraph (A) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), from amounts reserved 
and allotted pursuant to paragraphs (2) and (4), the Secretary shall 
use, for grants for programs described in section 645A(a), a portion of 
the combined total of such amounts equal to--
 ``(i) 10 percent of the funds appropriated pursuant to 
 section 639(a) for fiscal year 2002;
 ``(ii) 11 percent of such funds for fiscal year 2003;
 ``(iii) 12 percent of such funds for fiscal year 2004;
 ``(iv) 13 percent of such funds for fiscal year 2005;
 ``(v) 15 percent of such funds for fiscal year 2006;
 ``(vi) 20 percent of such funds for fiscal year 2007;
 ``(vii) 25 percent of such funds for fiscal year 2008;
 ``(viii) 30 percent of such funds for fiscal 2009;
 ``(ix) 35 percent of such funds for fiscal 2010; and
 ``(x) 40 percent of such funds for fiscal 2011.''; and
 (2) in subparagraph (B)--
 (A) by striking clause (i); and
 (B) by redesignating clauses (ii) and (iii) as 
 clauses (i) and (ii), respectively.

SEC. 3002. RESERVATION OF CHILD CARE AND DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT FUNDS 
 FOR INFANTS AND TODDLERS.

 Section 658G of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 
1990 (42 U.S.C. 9858e) is amended--
 (1) by striking the heading and inserting the following:

``SEC. 658G. ACTIVITIES TO IMPROVE THE QUALITY OF CHILD CARE AND 
 ACTIVITIES FOR INFANTS AND TODDLERS.'';

 (2) by inserting before ``A State'' the following:
 ``(a) Activities To Improve the Quality of Child Care.--''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(b) Activities for Infants and Toddlers.--A State that receives 
funds to carry out this subchapter for a fiscal year shall use, for 
activities that are designed to improve and expand child care for 
children from birth through age 3, not less than--
 ``(1) 5 percent of such funds for fiscal year 2002;
 ``(2) 6 percent of such funds for fiscal year 2003;
 ``(3) 7 percent of such funds for fiscal year 2004;
 ``(4) 8 percent of such funds for fiscal year 2005;
 ``(5) 9 percent of such funds for fiscal year 2006; and
 ``(6) 10 percent of such funds for fiscal year 2007.''.

 Subtitle B--Child Care Access

 CHAPTER 1--IMPROVING ACCESS TO CHILD CARE

SEC. 3101. PAYMENT RATES.

 Section 658E(c)(4) of the Child Care and Development Block Grant 
Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 9858c(c)(4)) is amended by striking subparagraph 
(A) and inserting the following:
 ``(A) In general.--The State plan shall provide an 
 assurance that payment rates for the provision of child 
 care services for which assistance is provided under 
 this subchapter--
 ``(i) are set at not less than the rate at 
 the 100th percentile of the market rate for 
 child care in the State, calculated as a rate--
 ``(I) determined in accordance with 
 market surveys (that reflect variations 
 in the cost of care by locality) 
 conducted by the State not less often 
 than once every 2 years; and
 ``(II) adjusted at intervals 
 between such surveys to reflect 
 increases in the cost of living, in 
 such manner as the Secretary may 
 specify;
 ``(ii) are set at rates higher than the 
 rate at the 100th percentile of the market rate 
 for care of higher than average quality, such 
 as care by accredited providers, care that 
 includes the provision of comprehensive 
 services, care provided at unusual hours, care 
 for children with special needs, care for 
 children from low-income and rural communities, 
 and care of a type that is in short supply; and
 ``(iii) are set at rates that reflect 
 variations in the cost of providing care for 
 children of different ages and different types 
 of care.''.

 CHAPTER 2--IMPROVEMENTS TO THE CHILD CARE AND DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT 
 PROGRAM

SEC. 3111. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 (a) Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990.--Section 
658B of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 
U.S.C. 9858), is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 658B. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this 
subchapter--
 ``(1) $2,936,400,000 for fiscal year 2002;
 ``(2) $4,104,300,000 for fiscal year 2003;
 ``(3) $5,292,400,000 for fiscal year 2004;
 ``(4) $6,524,900,000 for fiscal year 2005;
 ``(5) $7,827,700,000 for fiscal year 2006;
 ``(6) $9,092,800,000 for fiscal year 2007;
 ``(7) $10,524,100,000 for fiscal year 2008;
 ``(8) $11,830,500,000 for fiscal year 2009;
 ``(9) $13,343,900,000 for fiscal year 2010; and
 ``(10) $14,991,200,000 for fiscal year 2011.''.
 (b) Social Security Act.--Section 418(a)(3) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 618(a)(3)) is amended by striking subparagraphs (A) 
through (F) and inserting the following:
 ``(A) $3,989,100,000 for fiscal year 2002;
 ``(B) $5,575,600,000 for fiscal year 2003;
 ``(C) $7,189,800,000 for fiscal year 2004;
 ``(D) $8,864,100,000 for fiscal year 2005;
 ``(E) $10,634,000,000 for fiscal year 2006;
 ``(F) $12,352,500,000 for fiscal year 2007;
 ``(G) $14,297,000,000 for fiscal year 2008;
 ``(H) $16,071,800,000 for fiscal year 2009;
 ``(I) $18,127,600,000 for fiscal year 2010; and
 ``(J) $20,365,600,000 for fiscal year 2011.''.

SEC. 3112. STATE PLAN REQUIREMENTS.

 Section 658E(c)(2) of the Child Care and Development Block Grant 
Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 9858c(c)(2)) is amended--
 (1) by striking subparagraph (D) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(D) Consumer education information.--Certify that 
 the State will collect and disseminate to parents of 
 eligible children and the general public, consumer 
 education information that will promote informed child 
 care choices, and describe how the State will inform 
 parents receiving assistance under a State program 
 funded under part A of title IV of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) and low-income parents 
 about eligibility for assistance under this 
 subchapter.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraphs:
 ``(I) Availability of staff.--Describe how the 
 State will ensure that staff from the lead agency 
 described in section 658D will be available, at the 
 offices of the State program funded under part A of 
 title IV of the Social Security Act, to provide 
 information about eligibility for assistance under this 
 subchapter.
 ``(J) Eligibility redetermination.--Demonstrate 
 that each child that receives assistance under this 
 subchapter in the State will receive such assistance 
 for not less than 1 year before the State redetermines 
 the eligibility of the child under this subchapter.''.

SEC. 3113. DEFINITIONS.

 Section 658P(4)(C) of the Child Care and Development Block Grant 
Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 9858n(4)(C)) is amended--
 (1) in clause (i), by striking ``or'' at the end;
 (2) in clause (ii), by striking the period and inserting 
 ``; or''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(iii) is a foster child.''.

 Subtitle C--Child Care Quality Improvement

 CHAPTER 1--FOCUS ON COMMITTED AND UNDERPAID STAFF FOR CHILDREN'S SAKE

SEC. 3201. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Focus On Committed and Underpaid 
Staff for Children's Sake Act'' or as the ``FOCUS Act''.

SEC. 3202. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.

 (a) Findings.--Congress makes the following findings:
 (1) Research on early brain development and early childhood 
 demonstrates that the experiences children have and the 
 attachments children form early in life have a decisive, long-
 lasting impact on their later development and learning.
 (2) High-quality, developmentally appropriate child care 
 beginning in early childhood and continuing through the years 
 that children are in school improves the scholastic success and 
 educational attainment of children, and the success and 
 attainment persist into adulthood.
 (3) According to a growing body of research, the single 
 most important determinant of child care quality is the 
 presence of consistent, sensitive, well-trained, and well-
 compensated child care providers. However, child care programs 
 nationwide experience high turnover in teaching staff, fueled 
 by poor compensation and few opportunities for advancement.
 (4) The Department of Labor reports that, in 1999, the 
 average wage for a child care provider was $7.42 per hour, or 
 $15,430 annually. For full-time, full-year work, the average 
 annual wage for a child care provider was not much above the 
 1999 poverty line of $13,423 for a family consisting of a 
 parent and 2 children. Family child care providers earned even 
 less. The median weekly wage of a family child care provider in 
1999 was $264, which equals an annual wage of $13,728.
 (5) Despite the important role child care providers may 
 play in early child development and learning, on average, a 
 child care provider earns less in a year than a bus driver 
 ($26,460), barber ($20,970), or janitor ($18,220).
 (6) Employer-sponsored benefits are minimal for most child 
 care staff. Even for child care providers at child care 
 centers, the availability of health care coverage for staff 
 remains woefully inadequate.
 (7) To offer compensation that would be sufficient to 
 attract and retain qualified child care providers, child care 
 programs would have to charge parents fees that many parents 
 could not afford. For programs that serve low-income children 
 whose families qualify for Federal and State child care 
 subsidies, the reimbursement rates set by the State strongly 
 influence the level of compensation that staff receive. Current 
 reimbursement rates for center-based child care services and 
 family child care services are insufficient to recruit and 
 retain qualified child care providers and to ensure high-
 quality services for children.
 (8) Teachers leaving the profession are being replaced by 
 staff with less education and formal training in early child 
 development.
 (9) As a result of low wages and limited benefits, many 
 child care providers do not work for long periods in the child 
 care field. Approximately 30 percent of all teaching staff 
 employed at child care centers leaves employment with a child 
 care center each year.
 (10) Child care providers, as well as the children, 
 families, and businesses that depend upon the providers, suffer 
 the consequences of inadequate compensation. This is true, with 
 few exceptions, for providers in all types of programs, 
 including subsidized and nonsubsidized programs, programs 
 offered by for-profit and nonprofit entities, and programs in 
 large and small child care settings.
 (11) Because of the severe nationwide shortage of qualified 
 staff available for employment by child care programs, several 
 States have recently initiated programs to improve the quality 
 of child care by increasing the training and compensation of 
 child care providers. Such programs encourage the training, 
 education, and increased retention of qualified child care 
 providers by offering financial incentives, including 
 scholarships and increases in compensation, that range from 
 $350 to $6,500 annually.
 (b) Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are--
 (1) to establish the Child Care Provider Development and 
 Retention Grant Program and the Child Care Provider Scholarship 
 Program; and
 (2) to help children receive the high quality child care 
 and early education the children need for positive cognitive 
 and social development, by rewarding and promoting the 
 retention of committed, qualified child care providers and by 
 providing financial assistance to improve the educational 
 qualifications of child care providers.

SEC. 3203. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) Child care provider.--The term ``child care provider'' 
 means an individual who provides a service directly to a child 
 on a person to person basis for compensation for--
 (A) a center-based child care provider that is 
 licensed or regulated under State or local law and that 
 satisfies the State and local requirements applicable 
 to the child care services provided;
 (B) a licensed or regulated family child care 
 provider that satisfies the State and local 
 requirements applicable to the child care services 
 provided; or
 (C) an out-of-school time program that is licensed 
 or regulated under State or local law and that 
 satisfies the State and local requirements applicable 
 to the child care services provided.
 (2) Family child care provider.--The term ``family child 
 care provider'' has the meaning given such term in section 658P 
 of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 
 U.S.C. 9858n).
 (3) Indian tribe.--The term ``Indian tribe'' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 4 of the Indian Self-
 Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450b).
 (4) In-kind contribution.--The term ``in-kind 
 contribution'' means payment of the costs of participation of 
 eligible child care providers in health insurance programs or 
 retirement programs.
 (5) Lead agency.--The term ``lead agency'' means the agency 
 designated under section 658D of the Child Care and Development 
 Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 9858b).
 (6) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (7) State.--The term ``State'' means any of the several 
 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto 
 Rico, Guam, American Samoa, or the Commonwealth of the Northern 
 Mariana Islands.
 (8) Tribal organization.--The term ``tribal organization'' 
 has the meaning given the term in section 4 of the Indian Self-
 Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450b).

SEC. 3204. FUNDS FOR CHILD CARE PROVIDER DEVELOPMENT AND RETENTION 
 GRANTS AND FOR CHILD CARE PROVIDER SCHOLARSHIPS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary may allot and distribute funds 
appropriated to carry out this Act to eligible States and Indian tribes 
and tribal organizations to pay for the Federal share of the cost of 
making grants under sections 3207 and 3208 to eligible child care 
providers.
 (b) Allotments.--The funds shall be allotted and distributed by the 
Secretary in accordance with section 3205, and expended by the States 
(directly, or at the option of the States, through units of general 
purpose local government), and by Indian tribes and tribal 
organizations, in accordance with this Act.

SEC. 3205. ALLOTMENTS TO STATES.

 (a) Amounts Reserved.--
 (1) Territories and possessions.--The Secretary shall 
 reserve not more than \1/2\ of 1 percent of the funds 
 appropriated to carry out this Act for any fiscal year for 
 distribution to Guam, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of 
 the Northern Mariana Islands, to be allotted in accordance with 
 their respective needs, to plan and carry out programs and 
 activities to encourage child care providers to improve their 
 qualifications and to retain qualified child care providers in 
 the child care field.
 (2) Indian tribes and tribal organizations.--The Secretary 
 shall reserve not more than 3 percent of the funds appropriated 
 to carry out this Act for any fiscal year for payments to 
 Indian tribes and tribal organizations with applications 
 approved under subsection (c), to plan and carry out programs 
 and activities to encourage child care providers to improve 
 their qualifications and to retain qualified child care 
 providers in the child care field.
 (b) Allotments to Remaining States.--
 (1) General authority.--From the funds appropriated to 
 carry out this Act for any fiscal year and remaining after the 
 reservations made under subsection (a), the Secretary shall 
 allot to each State (excluding Guam, American Samoa, and the 
 Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands) an amount equal 
 to the sum of--
 (A) an amount that bears the same ratio to 50 
 percent of such remainder as the product of the young 
 child factor of the State and the allotment percentage 
 of the State bears to the sum of the corresponding 
 products for all States; and
 (B) an amount that bears the same ratio to 50 
 percent of such remainder as the product of the school 
 lunch factor of the State and the allotment 
percentage of the State bears to the sum of the corresponding products 
for all States.
 (2) Young child factor.--In this subsection, the term 
 ``young child factor'' means the ratio of the number of 
 children under 5 years of age in the State to the number of 
 such children in all the States, as determined according to the 
 most recent annual estimates of population in the States, as 
 provided by the Bureau of the Census.
 (3) School lunch factor.--In this subsection, the term 
 ``school lunch factor'' means the ratio of the number of 
 children who are receiving free or reduced price lunches under 
 the school lunch program established under the Richard B. 
 Russell National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1751 et seq.) in 
 the State to the number of such children in all the States, as 
 determined annually by the Department of Agriculture.
 (4) Allotment percentage.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B), for purposes of this subsection, the allotment 
 percentage for a State shall be determined by dividing 
 the per capita income of all individuals in the United 
 States, by the per capita income of all individuals in 
 the State.
 (B) Limitations.--For purposes of this subsection, 
 if an allotment percentage determined under 
 subparagraph (A)--
 (i) is more than 1.2 percent, the allotment 
 percentage of that State shall be considered to 
 be 1.2 percent; and
 (ii) is less than 0.8 percent, the 
 allotment percentage of the State shall be 
 considered to be 0.8 percent.
 (C) Per capita income.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), per capita income shall be--
 (i) determined at 2-year intervals;
 (ii) applied for the 2-year period 
 beginning on October 1 of the first fiscal year 
 beginning after the date such determination is 
 made; and
 (iii) equal to the average of the annual 
 per capita incomes for the most recent period 
 of 3 consecutive years for which satisfactory 
 data are available from the Department of 
 Commerce at the time such determination is 
 made.
 (c) Payments to Indian Tribes and Tribal Organizations.--
 (1) Reservation of funds.--From amounts reserved under 
 subsection (a)(2), the Secretary may make grants to or enter 
 into contracts with Indian tribes and tribal organizations that 
 submit applications under this subsection, to plan and carry 
 out programs and activities to encourage child care providers 
 to improve their qualifications and to retain qualified child 
 care providers in the child care field.
 (2) Applications and requirements.--To be eligible to 
 receive a grant or contract under this subsection, an Indian 
 tribe or tribal organization shall submit an application to the 
 Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
 information as the Secretary may require. The application shall 
 provide that the applicant--
 (A) will coordinate the programs and activities 
 involved, to the maximum extent practicable, with the 
 lead agency in each State in which the applicant will 
 carry out such programs and activities; and
 (B) will make such reports on, and conduct such 
 audits of the funds made available through the grant or 
 contract for, programs and activities under this Act as 
 the Secretary may require.
 (d) Data and Information.--The Secretary shall obtain from each 
appropriate Federal agency, the most recent data and information 
necessary to determine the allotments provided for in subsection (b).
 (e) Reallotments.--
 (1) In general.--Any portion of the allotment under 
 subsection (b) to a State for a fiscal year that the Secretary 
 determines will not be distributed to the State for such fiscal 
 year shall be reallotted by the Secretary to other States in 
 proportion to the original allotments made under such 
 subsection to such States for such fiscal year.
 (2) Limitations.--
 (A) Reduction.--The amount of any reallotment to 
 which a State is entitled under this subsection shall 
 be reduced to the extent that such amount exceeds the 
 amount that the Secretary estimates will be distributed 
 to the State to make grants under this Act.
 (B) Reallotments.--The amount of such reduction 
 shall be reallotted to States for which no reduction in 
 an allotment, or in a reallotment, is required by this 
 subsection, in proportion to the original allotments 
 made under subsection (b) to such States for such 
 fiscal year.
 (3) Amounts reallotted.--For purposes of this Act (other 
 than this subsection and subsection (b)), any amount reallotted 
 to a State under this subsection shall be considered to be part 
 of the allotment made under subsection (b) to the State.
 (f) Cost-Sharing.--
 (1) Federal share.--The Federal share of the cost of making 
 grants under sections 3207 and 3208, with funds allotted under 
 this section and distributed by the Secretary to a State, shall 
 be--
 (A) not more than 90 percent of the cost of each 
 grant made under such sections, in the 1st fiscal year 
 for which the State receives such funds;
 (B) not more than 85 percent of the cost of each 
 grant made under such sections, in the 2d fiscal year 
 for which the State receives such funds;
 (C) not more than 80 percent of the cost of each 
 grant made under such sections, in the 3d fiscal year 
 for which the State receives such funds; and
 (D) not more than 75 percent of the cost of each 
 grant made under such sections, in any subsequent 
 fiscal year for which the State receives such funds.
 (2) State share.--The non-Federal share of the cost of 
 making such grants shall be paid by the State in cash or in the 
 form of an in-kind contribution, fairly evaluated by the 
 Secretary.
 (g) Availability of Allotted Funds Distributed to States.--Of the 
funds allotted under this section and distributed by the Secretary to a 
State for a fiscal year--
 (1) not less than 67.5 percent shall be available to the 
 State for grants under section 3207;
 (2) not less than 22.5 percent shall be available to the 
 State for grants under section 3208; and
 (3) not more than 10 percent shall be available to pay 
 administrative costs incurred by the State to carry out this 
 Act.

SEC. 3206. APPLICATION AND PLAN.

 (a) Application.--To be eligible to receive a distribution of funds 
allotted under section 3205, a State shall submit to the Secretary an 
application at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
information as the Secretary may require by rule and shall include in 
such application a State plan that satisfies the requirements of 
subsection (b).
 (b) Requirements of Plan.--
 (1) Lead agency.--The State plan shall identify the lead 
 agency to make grants under this Act for the State.
 (2) Recruitment and retention of child care providers.--The 
 State plan shall describe how the lead agency will encourage 
 both the recruitment of eligible child care providers who are 
 new to the child care field and the retention of eligible child 
 care providers who have a demonstrated commitment to the child 
 care field.
 (3) Notification of grant availability.--The State plan 
 shall describe how the lead agency will identify all eligible 
 child care providers in the State and notify the providers of 
 the availability of grants under this Act.
 (4) Distribution of grants.--The State plan shall describe 
 how the lead agency will make grants under sections 3207 and 
 3208 to child care providers in selected geographical areas in 
 the State in compliance with the following requirements:
 (A) Selection of geographical areas.--For the 
 purpose of making such grants for a fiscal year, the 
 State shall--
 (i) select a variety of geographical areas, 
 determined by the State, that, collectively--
 (I) include urban areas, suburban 
 areas, and rural areas; and
 (II) are areas whose residents have 
 diverse income levels; and
 (ii) give special consideration to 
 geographical areas selected under this 
 subparagraph for the preceding fiscal year.
 (B) Selection of child care providers to receive 
 grants.--In making grants under section 3207, the State 
 may make grants only to eligible child care providers 
 in geographical areas selected under subparagraph (A), 
 but--
 (i) may give special consideration in such 
 areas to eligible child care providers who have 
 attained a higher relevant educational 
 credential, who provide a specific kind of 
 child care services, who provide child care 
 services to populations who meet specific 
 economic characteristics, or who meet such 
 other criteria as the State may establish; and
 (ii) shall give special consideration to 
 eligible child care providers who received a 
 grant under such section in the preceding 
 fiscal year.
 (C) Limitation.--The State shall describe how the 
 State will ensure that grants made under section 3207 
 to child care providers will not be used to offset 
 reductions in the compensation of such providers.
 (D) Reporting requirement.--With respect to each 
 particular geographical area selected under 
 subparagraph (A), the State shall provide an assurance 
 that the State will, for each fiscal year for which 
 such State receives a grant under section 3207--
 (i) include in the report required by 
 section 3209, detailed information regarding--
 (I) the continuity of employment of 
 the grant recipients as child care 
 providers with the same employer;
 (II) with respect to each employer 
 that employed such a grant recipient, 
 whether such employer was accredited by 
 a recognized national or State 
 accrediting body during the period of 
 employment; and
 (III) to the extent practicable and 
 available to the State, the rate and 
 frequency of employment turnover of 
 qualified child care providers 
 throughout such area,
 during the 2-year period ending on the deadline 
 for submission of applications for grants under 
 section 3207 for that fiscal year; and
 (ii) provide a follow-up report, not later 
 than 90 days after the end of the succeeding 
 fiscal year that includes information 
 regarding--
 (I) the continuity of employment of 
 the grant recipients as child care 
 providers with the same employer;
 (II) with respect to each employer 
 that employed such a grant recipient, 
 whether such employer was accredited by 
 a recognized national or State 
 accrediting body during the period of 
 employment; and
 (III) to the extent practicable and 
 available to the State, detailed 
 information regarding the rate and 
 frequency of employment turnover of 
 qualified child care providers 
 throughout such area,
 during the 1-year period beginning on the date 
 on which the grant to the State was made under 
 section 3207.
 (5) Child care provider development and retention grant 
 program.--The State plan shall describe how the lead agency 
 will determine the amounts of grants to be made under section 
 3207 in accordance with the following requirements:
 (A) Sufficient amounts.--The State shall 
 demonstrate that the amounts of individual grants to be 
 made under section 3207 will be sufficient--
 (i) to encourage child care providers to 
 improve their qualifications; and
 (ii) to retain qualified child care 
 providers in the child care field.
 (B) Amounts to credentialed providers.--Such grants 
 made to child care providers who have a child 
 development associate credential and who are employed 
 full-time to provide child care services shall be in an 
 amount that is not less than $1,000 per year.
 (C) Amounts to providers with higher levels of 
 education.--The State shall make such grants in amounts 
 greater than $1,000 per year to child care providers 
 who have higher levels of education than the education 
 required for a credential such as a child development 
 associate credential, according to the following 
 requirements:
 (i) Providers with baccalaureate degrees in 
 relevant fields.--A child care provider who has 
 a baccalaureate degree in the area of child 
 development or early child education shall 
 receive a grant under section 3207 in an amount 
 that is not less than twice the amount of the 
 grant that is made under section 3207 to a 
 child care provider who has an associate of the 
 arts degree in the area of child development or 
early child education.
 (ii) Providers with associate degrees.--A 
 child care provider who has an associate of the 
 arts degree in the area of child development or 
 early child education shall receive a grant 
 under section 3207 in an amount that is not 
 less than 150 percent of the amount of the 
 grant that is made under section 3207 to a 
 child care provider who has a child development 
 associate credential and is employed full-time 
 to provide child care services.
 (iii) Other providers with baccalaureate 
 degrees.--
 (I) In general.--Except as provided 
 in subclause (II), a child care 
 provider who has a baccalaureate degree 
 in a field other than child development 
 or early child education shall receive 
 a grant under section 3207 in an amount 
 equal to the amount of the grant that 
 is made under section 3207 to a child 
 care provider who has an associate of 
 the arts degree in the area of child 
 development or early child education.
 (II) Exception.--If a child care 
 provider who has such a baccalaureate 
 degree obtains additional educational 
 training in the area of child 
 development or early child education, 
 as specified by the State, such 
 provider shall receive a grant under 
 section 3207 in an amount equal to the 
 amount of the grant that is made under 
 section 3207 to a child care provider 
 who has a baccalaureate degree 
 specified in clause (i).
 (D) Amounts to full-time providers.--The State 
 shall make a grant under section 3207 to a child care 
 provider who works full-time in a greater amount than 
 the amount of the grant that is made under section 3207 
 to a child care provider who works part-time, based on 
 the State definitions of full-time and part-time work.
 (E) Amounts to experienced providers.--The State 
 shall make grants under section 3207 in progressively 
 larger amounts to child care providers to reflect the 
 number of years worked as child care providers.
 (6) Distribution of child care provider scholarships.--The 
 State plan shall describe how the lead agency will make grants 
 for scholarships in compliance with section 3208 and shall 
 specify the types of educational and training programs for 
 which the scholarship grants made under such section may be 
 used, including only programs that--
 (A) are administered by institutions of higher 
 education that are eligible to participate in student 
 financial assistance programs under title IV of the 
 Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070 et seq.); 
 and
 (B) lead to a State or nationally recognized 
 credential in the area of child development or early 
 child education, an associate of the arts degree in the 
 area of child development or early child education, or 
 a baccalaureate degree in the area of child development 
 or early child education.
 (7) Employer contribution.--The State plan shall describe 
 how the lead agency will encourage employers of child care 
 providers to contribute to the attainment of education goals by 
 child care providers who receive grants under section 3208.
 (8) Supplementation.--The State plan shall provide 
 assurances that amounts received by the State to carry out 
 sections 3207 and 3208 will be used only to supplement, and not 
 to supplant, Federal, State, and local funds otherwise 
 available to support existing services and activities (as of 
 the date the amounts are used) that encourage child care 
 providers to improve their qualifications and that promote the 
 retention of qualified child care providers in the child care 
 field.

SEC. 3207. CHILD CARE PROVIDER DEVELOPMENT AND RETENTION GRANT PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--A State that receives funds allotted under section 
3205 and made available to carry out this section shall expend such 
funds to make grants to eligible child care providers in accordance 
with this section, to improve the qualifications and promote the 
retention of qualified child care providers.
 (b) Eligibility To Receive Grants.--To be eligible to receive a 
grant under this section, a child care provider shall--
 (1) have a child development associate credential or 
 equivalent, an associate of the arts degree in the area of 
 child development or early child education, a baccalaureate 
 degree in the area of child development or early child 
 education, or a baccalaureate degree in an unrelated field; and
 (2) be employed as a child care provider for not less than 
 1 calendar year, or (if the provider is employed on the date of 
 the eligibility determination in a child care program that 
 operates for less than a full calendar year) the program 
 equivalent of 1 calendar year, ending on the date of the 
 application for such grant, except that not more than 3 months 
 of education related to child development or to early child 
 education obtained during the corresponding calendar year may 
 be treated as employment that satisfies the requirements of 
 this paragraph.
 (c) Preservation of Eligibility.--A State shall not take into 
consideration whether a child care provider is receiving, may receive, 
or may be eligible to receive any funds under section 3208 for purposes 
of selecting eligible child care providers to receive grants under this 
section.

SEC. 3208. CHILD CARE PROVIDER SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--A State that receives funds allotted under section 
3205 and made available to carry out this section shall expend such 
funds to make scholarship grants to eligible child care providers in 
accordance with this section, to improve their educational 
qualifications to provide child care services.
 (b) Eligibility Requirement for Scholarship Grants.--To be eligible 
to receive a scholarship grant under this section, a child care 
provider shall be employed as a child care provider for not less than 1 
calendar year, or (if the provider is employed on the date of the 
eligibility determination in a child care program that operates for 
less than a full calendar year) the program equivalent of 1 calendar 
year, ending on the date of the application for such grant.
 (c) Selection of Grantees.--For purposes of selecting eligible 
child care providers to receive scholarship grants under this section 
and determining the amounts of such grants, a State shall not--
 (1) take into consideration whether a child care provider 
 is receiving, may receive, or may be eligible to receive any 
 funds under any other provision of this Act, or under any other 
 Federal or State law that provides funds for educational 
 purposes; or
 (2) consider as resources of such provider any funds such 
 provider is receiving, may receive, or may be eligible to 
 receive under any other provision of this Act, under any other 
 Federal or State law that provides funds for educational 
 purposes, or from a private entity.
 (d) Cost-Sharing Required.--The amount of a scholarship grant made 
under this section to an eligible child care provider shall be less 
than the cost of the educational or training program for which such 
grant is made.
 (e) Annual Maximum Scholarship Grant Amount.--The maximum aggregate 
dollar amount of a scholarship grant made by a State to an eligible 
child care provider under this section in a fiscal year shall $1,500.

SEC. 3209. ANNUAL REPORT.

 A State that receives funds appropriated to carry out this Act for 
a fiscal year shall submit to the Secretary, not later than 90 days 
after the end of such fiscal year, a report--
 (1) specifying the uses for which the State expended such 
 funds, and the aggregate amount of funds (including State 
 funds) expended for each of such uses;
 (2) containing available data relating to grants made with 
 such funds, including--
 (A) the number of child care providers who received 
 such grants;
 (B) the amounts of such grants;
 (C) any other information that describes or 
 evaluates the effectiveness of this Act;
 (D) the particular geographical areas selected 
 under section 3206 for the purpose of making such 
 grants;
 (E) with respect to grants made under section 
 3207--
 (i) the number of years grant recipients 
 have been employed as child care providers;
 (ii) the level of training and education of 
 grant recipients;
 (iii) to the extent practicable and 
 available to the State, detailed information 
 regarding the salaries and other compensation 
 received by grant recipients to provide child 
 care services before, during, and after 
 receiving such grant;
 (iv) the number of children who received 
 child care services provided by grant 
 recipients;
 (v) information on family demographics of 
 such children;
 (vi) the types of settings described in 
 subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) of section 
 3203(a)(1) in which grant recipients are 
 employed; and
 (vii) the ages of the children who received 
 child care services provided by grant 
 recipients;
 (F) with respect to grants made under section 
 3208--
 (i) the number of years grant recipients 
 have been employed as child care providers;
 (ii) the level of training and education of 
 grant recipients;
 (iii) to the extent practicable and 
 available to the State, detailed information 
 regarding the salaries and other compensation 
 received by grant recipients to provide child 
 care services before, during, and after 
 receiving such grant;
 (iv) the types of settings described in 
 subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) of section 
 3203(a)(1) in which grant recipients are 
 employed;
 (v) the ages of the children who received 
 child care services provided by grant 
 recipients;
 (vi) the number of course credits or 
 credentials obtained by grant recipients; and
 (vii) the amount of time taken for 
 completion of the educational and training 
 programs for which such grants were made; and
 (G) such other information as the Secretary may 
 require by rule.

SEC. 3210. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 There is authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000,000 in the 
aggregate for fiscal years 2002 through 2006 to carry out this Act.

CHAPTER 2--STRENGTHENING QUALITY THROUGH THE CHILD CARE AND DEVELOPMENT 
 BLOCK GRANT

SEC. 3231. STATE PLAN.

 Section 658E(c)(2) of the Child Care and Development Block Grant 
Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 9858c(c)(2)), as amended in section 3112, is 
further amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(K) Establishment of training requirements.--
 Certify that there are requirements in effect within 
 the State, under State or local law, that are designed 
 to support the learning and development of children and 
 that are applicable to all child care providers that 
 provide services for which assistance is made available 
 under this subchapter. Such requirements shall include 
 requirements relating to preservice training in 
 childhood development.
 ``(L) Insuring the safety of children.--Certify 
 that there are requirements in effect within the State, 
 under State or local law, that require that evaluators 
 from an appropriate State or local agency make not less 
 than 2 unannounced visits annually to each child care 
 provider in the State that provides services for which 
 assistance is made available under this subchapter.''.

SEC. 3232. CHILD CARE QUALITY IMPROVEMENTS.

 Section 658G of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 
1990 (42 U.S.C. 9858e), as amended in section 3002, is further amended 
by striking subsection (a) and inserting the following:
 ``(a) Activities To Improve the Quality of Child Care.--
 ``(1) In general.--A State that receives funds to carry out 
 this subchapter shall reserve and use not less than 12 percent 
 of the funds--
 ``(A) for 1 or more activities consisting of--
 ``(i) providing directly, or providing 
 financial assistance to private nonprofit 
 organizations or public entities (including 
 units of general purpose local government) for 
 the development, establishment, expansion, 
 operation, and coordination of, child care 
 resource and referral services;
 ``(ii) making grants or providing loans to 
 eligible child care providers to assist the 
 providers in meeting applicable State and local 
 child care standards and recognized 
 accreditation standards;
 ``(iii) improving the ability of State or 
 local government, as applicable, to monitor 
 compliance with, and to enforce, State and 
 local licensing and regulatory requirements 
 (including registration requirements) 
 applicable to child care providers;
 ``(iv) providing training and technical 
 assistance in areas relating to the provision 
 of child care services, such as training 
 relating to promotion of health and safety, 
 promotion of good nutrition, provision of first 
 aid, recognition of communicable diseases, 
 child abuse detection and prevention, and care 
 of children with special needs; and
 ``(v) improving salaries and other 
 compensation paid to full-time and part-time 
 staff who provide child care services for which 
 assistance is made available under this 
 subchapter; and
 ``(B) to support the system described in paragraph 
 (2).
 ``(2) Child care resource and referral system.--The State 
 shall use a portion of the funds reserved under paragraph (1) 
 to support a system of local child care resource and referral 
 organizations coordinated by a statewide lead child care 
 resource and referral organization. The local child care 
 resource and referral organizations shall--
 ``(A) provide parents in the State with information 
 and support concerning child care options in their 
 communities;
 ``(B) collect data on the supply of and demand for 
 child care in political subdivisions within the State;
 ``(C) develop links with the business community; 
 and
 ``(D) increase the supply and improve the quality 
 of child care in the State and in political 
 subdivisions in the State.''.

SEC. 3233. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) In General.--Section 658I of the Child Care and Development 
Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 9858g) is amended by adding at the 
end the following:
 ``(c) Federal Administration Activities.--The Secretary shall use 
the funds reserved under section 658O(a)(3)--
 ``(1) to support the establishment of a national data 
 system to develop statistics on the supply of, demand for, and 
quality of child care, early education, and non-school-hours programs, 
including use of data collected through child care resource and 
referral organizations at the national, State, and local levels;
 ``(2) to prepare and submit to Congress an annual report on 
 the supply of, demand for, and quality of child care, early 
 education, and non-school-hours programs, using data collected 
 through State and local child care resource and referral 
 organizations and other sources; and
 ``(3) to provide technical assistance to States to enable 
 the States to participate in carrying out the activities 
 described in paragraphs (1) and (2).''.
 (b) Reservation.--Section 658O(a) of the Child Care and Development 
Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 9858m(a)) is amended by adding at 
the end the following:
 ``(3) Administration.--The Secretary shall reserve not more 
 than 2 percent of the amount appropriated under section 658B 
 for each fiscal year to carry out section 658I(c).''.

 CHAPTER 3--CHILD CARE CENTERS IN FEDERAL FACILITIES

SEC. 3241. SHORT TITLE.

 This chapter may be cited as the ``Federal Employees Child Care 
Act''.

SEC. 3242. DEFINITIONS.

 In this chapter (except as otherwise provided in section 3245):
 (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the 
 Administrator of General Services.
 (2) Child care accreditation entity.--The term ``child care 
 accreditation entity'' means a nonprofit private organization 
 or public agency that--
 (A) is recognized by a State agency or by a 
 national organization that serves as a peer review 
 panel on the standards and procedures of public and 
 private child care or school accrediting bodies; and
 (B) accredits a facility to provide child care on 
 the basis of--
 (i) an accreditation or credentialing 
 instrument based on peer-validated research;
 (ii) compliance with applicable State or 
 local licensing requirements, as appropriate, 
 for the facility;
 (iii) outside monitoring of the facility; 
 and
 (iv) criteria that provide assurances of--
 (I) use of developmentally 
 appropriate health and safety standards 
 at the facility;
 (II) use of developmentally 
 appropriate educational activities, as 
 an integral part of the child care 
 program carried out at the facility; 
 and
 (III) use of ongoing staff 
 development or training activities for 
 the staff of the facility, including 
 related skills-based testing.
 (3) Entity sponsoring a child care facility.--The term 
 ``entity sponsoring a child care facility'' means a Federal 
 agency that operates, or an entity that enters into a contract 
 or licensing agreement with a Federal agency to operate, a 
 child care facility primarily for the use of Federal employees.
 (4) Executive agency.--The term ``Executive agency'' has 
 the meaning given the term in section 105 of title 5, United 
 States Code, except that the term--
 (A) does not include the Department of Defense and 
 the Coast Guard; and
 (B) includes the General Services Administration, 
 with respect to the administration of a facility 
 described in paragraph (5)(B).
 (5) Executive facility.--The term ``executive facility''--
 (A) means a facility that is owned or leased by an 
 Executive agency; and
 (B) includes a facility that is owned or leased by 
 the General Services Administration on behalf of a 
 judicial office.
 (6) Federal agency.--The term ``Federal agency'' means an 
 Executive agency, a legislative office, or a judicial office.
 (7) Judicial facility.--The term ``judicial facility'' 
 means a facility that is owned or leased by a judicial office 
 (other than a facility that is also a facility described in 
 paragraph (5)(B)).
 (8) Judicial office.--The term ``judicial office'' means an 
 entity of the judicial branch of the Federal Government.
 (9) Legislative facility.--The term ``legislative 
 facility'' means a facility that is owned or leased by a 
 legislative office.
 (10) Legislative office.--The term ``legislative office'' 
 means an entity of the legislative branch of the Federal 
 Government.
 (11) State.--The term ``State'' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 658P of the Child Care and Development Block 
 Grant Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 9858n).

SEC. 3243. PROVIDING QUALITY CHILD CARE IN FEDERAL FACILITIES.

 (a) Executive Facilities.--
 (1) State and local licensing requirements.--
 (A) In general.--Any entity sponsoring a child care 
 facility in an executive facility shall--
 (i) comply with child care standards 
 described in paragraph (2) that are no less 
 stringent than applicable State or local 
 licensing requirements that are related to the 
 provision of child care in the State or 
 locality involved; or
 (ii) obtain the applicable State or local 
 licenses, as appropriate, for the facility.
 (B) Compliance.--Not later than 6 months after the 
 date of enactment of this Act--
 (i) the entity shall comply, or make 
 substantial progress (as determined by the 
 Administrator) toward complying, with 
 subparagraph (A); and
 (ii) any contract or licensing agreement 
 used by an Executive agency for the provision 
 of child care services in the child care 
 facility shall include a condition that the 
 child care be provided by an entity that 
 complies with the standards described in 
 subparagraph (A)(i) or obtains the licenses 
 described in subparagraph (A)(ii).
 (2) Health, safety, and facility standards.--The 
 Administrator shall by regulation establish standards relating 
 to health, safety, facilities, facility design, and other 
 aspects of child care that the Administrator determines to be 
 appropriate for child care in executive facilities, and require 
 child care facilities, and entities sponsoring child care 
 facilities, in executive facilities to comply with the 
 standards. The standards shall include requirements that child 
 care facilities be inspected for, and be free of, lead hazards.
 (3) Accreditation standards.--
 (A) In general.--The Administrator shall issue 
 regulations requiring, to the maximum extent possible, 
 any entity sponsoring an eligible child care facility 
 (as defined by the Administrator) in an executive 
 facility to comply with standards of a child care 
 accreditation entity.
 (B) Compliance.--The regulations shall require 
 that, not later than 3 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act--
 (i) the entity shall comply, or make 
 substantial progress (as determined by the 
 Administrator) toward complying, with the 
 standards; and
 (ii) any contract or licensing agreement 
 used by an Executive agency for the provision 
 of child care services in the child care 
 facility shall include a condition that the 
child care be provided by an entity that complies with the standards.
 (4) Evaluation and compliance.--
 (A) In general.--The Administrator shall evaluate 
 the compliance, with the requirements of paragraph (1) 
 and the regulations issued pursuant to paragraphs (2) 
 and (3), as appropriate, of child care facilities, and 
 entities sponsoring child care facilities, in executive 
 facilities. The Administrator may conduct the 
 evaluation of such a child care facility or entity 
 directly, or through an agreement with another Federal 
 agency or private entity, other than the Federal agency 
 for which the child care facility is providing 
 services. If the Administrator determines, on the basis 
 of such an evaluation, that the child care facility or 
 entity is not in compliance with the requirements, the 
 Administrator shall notify the Executive agency.
 (B) Effect of noncompliance.--On receipt of the 
 notification of noncompliance issued by the 
 Administrator, the head of the Executive agency shall--
 (i) if the entity operating the child care 
 facility is the agency--
 (I) not later than 2 business days 
 after the date of receipt of the 
 notification, correct any deficiencies 
 that are determined by the 
 Administrator to be life threatening or 
 to present a risk of serious bodily 
 harm;
 (II) not later than 4 months after 
 the date of receipt of the 
 notification, develop and provide to 
 the Administrator a plan to correct any 
 other deficiencies in the operation of 
 the facility and bring the facility and 
 entity into compliance with the 
 requirements;
 (III) provide the parents of the 
 children receiving child care services 
 at the child care facility and 
 employees of the facility with a 
 notification detailing the deficiencies 
 described in subclauses (I) and (II) 
 and actions that will be taken to 
 correct the deficiencies, and post a 
 copy of the notification in a 
 conspicuous place in the facility for 5 
 working days or until the deficiencies 
 are corrected, whichever is later;
 (IV) bring the child care facility 
 and entity into compliance with the 
 requirements and certify to the 
 Administrator that the facility and 
 entity are in compliance, based on an 
 onsite evaluation of the facility 
 conducted by an individual with 
 expertise in child care health and 
 safety; and
 (V) in the event that deficiencies 
 determined by the Administrator to be 
 life threatening or to present a risk 
 of serious bodily harm cannot be 
 corrected within 2 business days after 
 the date of receipt of the 
 notification, close the child care 
 facility, or the affected portion of 
 the facility, until the deficiencies 
 are corrected and notify the 
 Administrator of the closure; and
 (ii) if the entity operating the child care 
 facility is a contractor or licensee of the 
 Executive agency--
 (I) require the contractor or 
 licensee, not later than 2 business 
 days after the date of receipt of the 
 notification, to correct any 
 deficiencies that are determined by the 
 Administrator to be life threatening or 
 to present a risk of serious bodily 
 harm;
 (II) require the contractor or 
 licensee, not later than 4 months after 
 the date of receipt of the 
 notification, to develop and provide to 
 the head of the agency a plan to 
 correct any other deficiencies in the 
 operation of the child care facility 
 and bring the facility and entity into 
 compliance with the requirements;
 (III) require the contractor or 
 licensee to provide the parents of the 
 children receiving child care services 
 at the child care facility and 
 employees of the facility with a 
 notification detailing the deficiencies 
 described in subclauses (I) and (II) 
 and actions that will be taken to 
 correct the deficiencies, and to post a 
 copy of the notification in a 
 conspicuous place in the facility for 5 
 working days or until the deficiencies 
 are corrected, whichever is later;
 (IV) require the contractor or 
 licensee to bring the child care 
 facility and entity into compliance 
 with the requirements and certify to 
 the head of the agency that the 
 facility and entity are in compliance, 
 based on an onsite evaluation of the 
 facility conducted by an independent 
 entity with expertise in child care 
 health and safety; and
 (V) in the event that deficiencies 
 determined by the Administrator to be 
 life threatening or to present a risk 
 of serious bodily harm cannot be 
 corrected within 2 business days after 
 the date of receipt of the 
 notification, close the child care 
 facility, or the affected portion of 
 the facility, until the deficiencies 
 are corrected and notify the 
 Administrator of the closure, which 
 closure may be grounds for the 
 immediate termination or suspension of 
 the contract or license of the 
 contractor or licensee.
 (C) Cost reimbursement.--The Executive agency shall 
 reimburse the Administrator for the costs of carrying 
 out subparagraph (A) for child care facilities located 
 in an executive facility other than an executive 
 facility of the General Services Administration. If an 
 entity is sponsoring a child care facility for 2 or 
 more Executive agencies, the Administrator shall 
 allocate the reimbursement costs with respect to the 
 entity among the agencies in a fair and equitable 
 manner, based on the extent to which each agency is 
 eligible to place children in the facility.
 (5) Disclosure of prior violations to parents and facility 
 employees.--
 (A) In general.--The Administrator shall issue 
 regulations that require that each entity sponsoring a 
 child care facility in an executive facility, upon 
 receipt by the child care facility or the entity (as 
 applicable) of a request by any individual who is--
 (i) a parent of any child enrolled at the 
 facility;
 (ii) a parent of a child for whom an 
 application has been submitted to enroll at the 
 facility; or
 (iii) an employee of the facility;
 shall provide to the individual the copies and 
 description described in subparagraph (B).
 (B) Copies and description.--The entity shall 
 provide--
 (i) copies of all notifications of 
 deficiencies that have been provided in the 
 past with respect to the facility under clause 
 (i)(III) or (ii)(III), as applicable, of 
 paragraph (4)(B); and
 (ii) a description of the actions that were 
 taken to correct the deficiencies.
 (b) Legislative Facilities.--
 (1) Accreditation.--The Chief Administrative Officer of the 
 House of Representatives, the Librarian of Congress, and the 
 head of a designated entity in the Senate shall ensure that, 
 not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, 
 the corresponding child care facility obtains accreditation by 
 a child care accreditation entity, in accordance with the 
 accreditation standards of the entity.
 (2) Regulations.--
 (A) In general.--If the corresponding child care 
 facility does not maintain accreditation status with a 
 child care accreditation entity, the Chief 
 Administrative Officer of the House of Representatives, 
the Librarian of Congress, or the head of the designated entity in the 
Senate shall issue regulations governing the operation of the 
corresponding child care facility, to ensure the safety and quality of 
care of children placed in the facility. The regulations shall be no 
less stringent in content and effect than the requirements of 
subsection (a)(1) and the regulations issued by the Administrator under 
paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (a), except to the extent that 
appropriate administrative officers make the determination described in 
subparagraph (B).
 (B) Modification more effective.--The determination 
 referred to in subparagraph (A) is a determination, for 
 good cause shown and stated together with the 
 regulations, that a modification of the regulations 
 would be more effective for the implementation of the 
 requirements and standards described in subsection (a) 
 for the corresponding child care facilities, and 
 entities sponsoring the corresponding child care 
 facilities, in legislative facilities.
 (3) Corresponding child care facility.--In this subsection, 
 the term ``corresponding child care facility'', used with 
 respect to the Chief Administrative Officer, the Librarian, or 
 the head of a designated entity described in paragraph (1), 
 means a child care facility operated by, or under a contract or 
 licensing agreement with, an office of the House of 
 Representatives, the Library of Congress, or an office of the 
 Senate, respectively.
 (c) Judicial Branch Standards and Compliance.--
 (1) State and local licensing requirements health, safety, 
 and facility standards, and accreditation standards.--The 
 Director of the Administrative Office of the United States 
 Courts shall issue regulations for child care facilities, and 
 entities sponsoring child care facilities, in judicial 
 facilities, which shall be no less stringent in content and 
 effect than the requirements of subsection (a)(1) and the 
 regulations issued by the Administrator under paragraphs (2) 
 and (3) of subsection (a), except to the extent that the 
 Director may determine, for good cause shown and stated 
 together with the regulations, that a modification of such 
 regulations would be more effective for the implementation of 
 the requirements and standards described in paragraphs (1), 
 (2), and (3) of subsection (a) for child care facilities, and 
 entities sponsoring child care facilities, in judicial 
 facilities.
 (2) Evaluation and compliance.--
 (A) Director of the administrative office of the 
 united states courts.--The Director of the 
 Administrative Office of the United States Courts shall 
 have the same authorities and duties with respect to 
 the evaluation of, compliance of, and cost 
 reimbursement for child care facilities, and entities 
 sponsoring child care facilities, in judicial 
 facilities as the Administrator has under subsection 
 (a)(4) with respect to the evaluation of, compliance 
 of, and cost reimbursement for such centers and 
 entities sponsoring such centers, in executive 
 facilities.
 (B) Head of a judicial office.--The head of a 
 judicial office shall have the same authorities and 
 duties with respect to the compliance of and cost 
 reimbursement for child care facilities, and entities 
 sponsoring child care facilities, in judicial 
 facilities as the head of an Executive agency has under 
 subsection (a)(4) with respect to the compliance of and 
 cost reimbursement for such centers and entities 
 sponsoring such centers, in executive facilities.
 (d) Application.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this 
section, if 8 or more child care facilities are sponsored in facilities 
owned or leased by an Executive agency, the Administrator shall 
delegate to the head of the agency the evaluation and compliance 
responsibilities assigned to the Administrator under subsection 
(a)(4)(A).
 (e) Technical Assistance, Studies, and Reviews.--The Administrator 
may provide technical assistance, and conduct and provide the results 
of studies and reviews, for Executive agencies, and entities sponsoring 
child care facilities in executive facilities, on a reimbursable basis, 
in order to assist the entities in complying with this section. The 
Chief Administrative Officer of the House of Representatives, the 
Librarian of Congress, the head of the designated Senate entity 
described in subsection (b), and the Director of the Administrative 
Office of the United States Courts, may provide technical assistance, 
and conduct and provide the results of studies and reviews, or request 
that the Administrator provide technical assistance, and conduct and 
provide the results of studies and reviews, for legislative offices and 
judicial offices, as appropriate, and entities operating child care 
facilities in legislative facilities or judicial facilities, as 
appropriate, on a reimbursable basis, in order to assist the entities 
in complying with this section.
 (f) Interagency Council.--
 (1) Composition.--The Administrator shall establish an 
 interagency council, comprised of--
 (A) representatives of all Executive agencies 
 described in subsection (d) and other Executive 
 agencies at the election of the heads of the agencies;
 (B) a representative of the Chief Administrative 
 Officer of the House of Representatives, at the 
 election of the Chief Administrative Officer;
 (C) a representative of the head of the designated 
 Senate entity described in subsection (b), at the 
 election of the head of the entity;
 (D) a representative of the Librarian of Congress, 
 at the election of the Librarian; and
 (E) a representative of the Director of the 
 Administrative Office of the United States Courts, at 
 the election of the Director.
 (2) Functions.--The council shall facilitate cooperation 
 and sharing of best practices, and develop and coordinate 
 policy, regarding the provision of child care, including the 
 provision of areas for nursing mothers and other lactation 
 support facilities and services, in the Federal Government.
 (g) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $900,000 for fiscal year 2002 
and such sums as may be necessary for each subsequent fiscal year.

SEC. 3244. FEDERAL CHILD CARE EVALUATION.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Administrator and the Director of the Office of 
Personnel Management shall jointly prepare and submit to Congress a 
report that evaluates child care provided by entities sponsoring child 
care facilities in executive facilities, legislative facilities, or 
judicial facilities.
 (b) Contents.--The evaluation shall contain, at a minimum--
 (1) information on the number of children receiving child 
 care described in subsection (a), analyzed by age, including 
 information on the number of those children who are age 6 
 through 12;
 (2) information on the number of families not using child 
 care described in subsection (a) because of the cost of the 
 child care; and
 (3) recommendations for improving the quality and cost-
 effectiveness of child care described in subsection (a), 
 including recommendations of options for creating an optimal 
 organizational structure and using best practices for the 
 delivery of the child care.

SEC. 3245. CHILD CARE SERVICES FOR FEDERAL EMPLOYEES.

 (a) In General.--In addition to services authorized to be provided 
by an agency of the United States pursuant to section 616 of the Act of 
December 22, 1987 (40 U.S.C. 490b), an Executive agency that provides 
or proposes to provide child care services for Federal employees may 
use agency funds to provide the child care services, in a facility that 
is owned or leased by an Executive agency, or through a contractor, for 
civilian employees of the agency.
 (b) Affordability.--Funds so used with respect to any such facility 
or contractor shall be applied to improve the affordability of child 
care for lower income Federal employees using or seeking to use the 
child care services offered by the facility or contractor.
 (c) Regulations.--The Administrator after consultation with the 
Director of the Office of Personnel Management, shall, within 180 days 
after the date of enactment of this Act, issue regulations necessary to 
carry out this section.
 (d) Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term ``Executive 
agency'' has the meaning given the term by section 105 of title 5, 
United States Code, but does not include the General Accounting Office.

SEC. 3246. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS RELATING TO CHILD CARE PROVIDED BY 
 FEDERAL AGENCIES.

 (a) Availability of Federal Child Care Centers for Onsite 
Contractors; Percentage Goal.--Section 616 of the Act of December 22, 
1987 (40 U.S.C. 490b) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by striking ``officer or agency of the United 
 States'' and inserting ``Federal agency or officer of a 
 Federal agency''; and
 (B) by striking paragraphs (2) and (3) and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(2) the officer or agency determines that the space will 
 be used to provide child care and related services to--
 ``(A) children of Federal employees or onsite 
 Federal contractors; or
 ``(B) dependent children who live with Federal 
 employees or onsite Federal contractors; and
 ``(3) the officer or agency determines that the individual 
 or entity will give priority for available child care and 
 related services in the space to Federal employees and onsite 
 Federal contractors.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(f)(1)(A) The Administrator of General Services shall confirm 
that at least 50 percent of aggregate enrollment in Federal child care 
centers governmentwide are children of Federal employees or onsite 
Federal contractors, or dependent children who live with Federal 
employees or onsite Federal contractors.
 ``(B) Each provider of child care services at an individual Federal 
child care center shall maintain 50 percent of the enrollment at the 
center of children described under subparagraph (A) as a goal for 
enrollment at the center.
 ``(C)(i) If enrollment at a center does not meet the percentage 
goal under subparagraph (B), the provider shall develop and implement a 
business plan with the sponsoring Federal agency to achieve the goal 
within a reasonable timeframe.
 ``(ii) The plan shall be approved by the Administrator of General 
Services based on--
 ``(I) compliance of the plan with standards established by 
 the Administrator; and
 ``(II) the effect of the plan on achieving the aggregate 
 Federal enrollment percentage goal.
 ``(2) The Administrator of General Services may enter into public-
private partnerships or contracts with nongovernmental entities to 
increase the capacity, quality, affordability, or range of child care 
and related services and may, on a demonstration basis, waive 
subsection (a)(3) and paragraph (1) of this subsection.''.
 (b) Payment of Costs of Training Programs.--Section 616(b)(3) of 
such Act (40 U.S.C. 490b(b)(3)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(3) If a Federal agency has a child care facility in a Federal 
space, or is a sponsoring agency for a child care facility in a Federal 
space, the agency or the General Services Administration may pay 
accreditation fees, including renewal fees, for that center to be 
accredited. Any Federal agency that provides or proposes to provide 
child care services for children referred to in subsection (a)(2), may 
reimburse any Federal employee or any person employed to provide the 
services for the costs of training programs, conferences, and meetings 
and related travel, transportation, and subsistence expenses incurred 
in connection with those activities. Any per diem allowance made under 
this section shall not exceed the rate specified in regulations 
prescribed under section 5707 of title 5, United States Code.''.
 (c) Technical and Conforming Amendments.--Section 616(c) of such 
Act (40 U.S.C. 490b(c)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``Federal'' before ``child care centers''; 
 and
 (2) by striking ``Federal workers'' and inserting ``Federal 
 employees''.
 (d) Provision of Child Care by Private Entities.--Section 616(d) of 
such Act (40 U.S.C. 490b(d)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(d)(1) If a Federal agency has a child care facility in a Federal 
space, or is a sponsoring agency for a child care facility in a Federal 
space, the agency, the child care center board of directors, or the 
General Services Administration may enter into an agreement with 1 or 
more private entities under which the private entities would assist in 
defraying the general operating expenses of the child care providers 
including salaries and tuition assistance programs at the facility.
 ``(2)(A) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if a Federal 
agency does not have a child care program, or if the Administrator of 
General Services has identified a need for child care for Federal 
employees at a Federal agency providing child care services that do not 
meet the requirements of subsection (a), the agency or the 
Administrator may enter into an agreement with a non-Federal, licensed, 
and accredited child care facility, or a planned child care facility 
that will become licensed and accredited, for the provision of child 
care services for children of Federal employees.
 ``(B) Before entering into an agreement, the head of the Federal 
agency shall determine that child care services to be provided through 
the agreement are more cost-effectively provided through the 
arrangement than through establishment of a Federal child care 
facility.
 ``(C) The Federal agency may provide any of the services described 
in subsection (b)(3) if, in exchange for the services, the facility 
reserves child care spaces for children referred to in subsection 
(a)(2), as agreed to by the parties. The cost of any such services 
provided by a Federal agency to a Federal child care facility on behalf 
of another Federal agency shall be reimbursed by the receiving agency.
 ``(3) This subsection does not apply to residential child care 
programs.''.
 (e) Pilot Projects.--Section 616 of such Act (40 U.S.C. 490b) is 
further amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(g)(1) Upon approval of the agency head, a Federal agency may 
conduct a pilot project not otherwise authorized by law for no more 
than 2 years to test innovative approaches to providing alternative 
forms of quality child care assistance for Federal employees. A Federal 
agency head may extend a pilot project for an additional 2-year period. 
Before any pilot project may be implemented, a determination shall be 
made by the agency head that initiating the pilot project would be more 
cost-effective than establishing a new Federal child care facility. 
Costs of any pilot project shall be paid solely by the agency 
conducting the pilot project.
 ``(2) The Administrator of General Services shall serve as an 
information clearinghouse for pilot projects initiated by other Federal 
agencies to disseminate information concerning the pilot projects to 
the other Federal agencies.
 ``(3) Within 6 months after completion of the initial 2-year pilot 
project period, a Federal agency conducting a pilot project under this 
subsection shall provide for an evaluation of the impact of the project 
on the delivery of child care services to Federal employees, and shall 
submit the results of the evaluation to the Administrator of General 
Services. The Administrator shall share the results with other Federal 
agencies.''.
 (g) Definitions.--Section 616 of such Act (40 U.S.C. 490b) is 
further amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(h) In this section:
 ``(1) The term `Federal agency' has the meaning given the 
 term `Executive agency' in section 3242 of the Federal 
 Employees Child Care Act.
 ``(2) The terms `Federal building' and `Federal space' have 
 the meanings given the term `executive facility' in such 
 section 3242.
 ``(3) The term `Federal child care center' means a child 
 care center in an executive facility, as defined in such 
 section 3242.
 ``(4) The terms `Federal contractor' and `Federal employee' 
 mean a contractor and an employee, respectively, of an 
 Executive agency, as defined in such section 3242.''.

 CHAPTER 4--EARLY LEARNING

SEC. 3251. SHORT TITLE; FINDINGS.

 (a) Short Title.--This chapter may be cited as the ``Early Learning 
Linkages Act of 2001''.
 (b) Findings.--Congress finds that--
 (1) medical research demonstrates that adequate stimulation 
 of a young child's brain between birth and age 5 is critical to 
 the physical development of the young child's brain;
 (2) parents are the most significant and effective teachers 
 of their children, and they alone are responsible for choosing 
 the best early learning opportunities for their child;
 (3) parent education and parent involvement are critical to 
 the success of any early learning program or activity;
 (4) the more intensively parents are involved in their 
 child's early learning, the greater the cognitive and 
 noncognitive benefits to their children;
 (5) many parents have difficulty finding the information 
 and support the parents seek to help their children grow to 
 their full potential;
 (6) each day approximately 13,000,000 young children, 
 including 6,000,000 infants or toddlers, spend some or all of 
 their day being cared for by someone other than their parents;
 (7) quality early learning programs, including those 
 designed to promote effective parenting, can increase the 
 literacy rate, the secondary school graduation rate, the 
 employment rate, and the college enrollment rate for children 
 who have participated in voluntary early learning programs and 
 activities;
 (8) early childhood interventions can yield substantial 
 advantages to participants in terms of emotional and cognitive 
 development, education, economic well-being, and health, with 
 the latter two advantages applying to the children's families 
 as well;
 (9) participation in quality early learning programs, 
 including those designed to promote effective parenting, can 
 decrease the future incidence of teenage pregnancy, welfare 
 dependency, at-risk behaviors, and juvenile delinquency for 
 children;
 (10) several cost-benefit analysis studies indicate that 
 for each $1 invested in quality early learning programs, the 
 Federal Government can save over $5 by reducing the number of 
 children and families who participate in Federal Government 
 programs like special education and welfare;
 (11) for children placed in the care of others during the 
 workday, the low salaries paid to the child care staff, the 
 lack of career progression for the staff, and the lack of child 
 development specialists involved in early learning and child 
 care programs, make it difficult to attract and retain the 
 quality of staff necessary for a positive early learning 
 experience;
 (12) Federal Government support for early learning has 
 primarily focused on out-of-home care programs like those 
 established under the Head Start Act, the Child Care and 
 Development Block Grant of 1990, and part C of the Individuals 
 with Disabilities Education Act, and these programs--
 (A) serve far fewer than half of all eligible 
 children;
 (B) are not primarily designed to provide support 
 for parents who care for their young children in the 
 home; and
 (C) lack a means of coordinating early learning 
 opportunities in each community; and
 (13) by helping communities increase, expand, and better 
 coordinate early learning opportunities for children and their 
 families, the productivity and creativity of future generations 
 will be improved, and the Nation will be prepared for continued 
 leadership in the 21st century.

SEC. 3252. PURPOSES.

 The purposes of this chapter are--
 (1) to increase the availability of voluntary programs, 
 services, and activities that support early childhood 
 development, increase parent effectiveness, and promote the 
 learning and socio-emotional readiness of young children so 
 that young children enter school ready to learn;
 (2) to remove barriers to the provision of an accessible 
 system of early childhood learning programs in communities 
 throughout the United States;
 (3) to increase the availability and affordability of 
 professional development activities and compensation for 
 caregivers and child care providers; and
 (4) to facilitate the development of community-based 
 systems of collaborative service delivery models characterized 
 by resource sharing, linkages between appropriate supports, and 
 local planning for services.

SEC. 3253. DEFINITIONS.

 In this chapter:
 (1) Caregiver.--The term ``caregiver'' means an individual 
 (including a relative, neighbor, or family friend) who 
 regularly or frequently provides care, with or without 
 compensation, for a child for whom the individual is not the 
 parent.
 (2) Child care provider.--The term ``child care provider'' 
 means a provider of non-residential child care services 
 (including center-based, family-based, or in-home child care 
 services) for compensation who or that is legally operating 
 under State law, and complies with applicable State and local 
 requirements for the provision of child care services.
 (3) Early learning.--The term ``early learning'', used with 
 respect to a program or activity, means learning designed to 
 facilitate the development of cognitive, language, motor, and 
 social-emotional skills for, and to promote learning readiness 
 in, young children.
 (4) Early learning program.--The term ``early learning 
 program'' means--
 (A) a program of services or activities that helps 
 parents, caregivers, and child care providers 
 incorporate early learning into the daily lives of 
 young children; or
 (B) a program that directly provides early learning 
 to young children.
 (5) Indian tribe.--The term ``Indian tribe'' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 4 of the Indian Self-
 Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450b).
 (6) Local council.--The term ``Local Council'' means a 
 Local Council established or designated under section 3261(a) 
 that serves one or more localities.
 (7) Locality.--The term ``locality'' means a city, county, 
 borough, township, or area served by another general purpose 
 unit of local government, an Indian tribe, a Regional 
 Corporation, or a Native Hawaiian entity.
 (8) Migratory children.--The term ``migratory children'' 
 has the meaning given such term in section 1309 of the 
 Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 6399).
 (9) Parent.--The term ``parent'' means a biological parent, 
 an adoptive parent, a stepparent, a foster parent, or a legal 
guardian of, or a person standing in loco parentis to, a child.
 (10) Poverty line.--The term ``poverty line'' means the 
 poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and 
 Budget, and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) 
 of the Community Services Block Grant Act (42 U.S.C. 9902(2))) 
 applicable to a family of the size involved.
 (11) Prekindergarten education program.--The term 
 ``prekindergarten education program'' means a program that--
 (A) serves children ages 3, 4, and 5 years old and 
 that supports children's cognitive, social, emotional, 
 and physical development and helps prepare children for 
 the transition to kindergarten; and
 (B) complies with the Head Start performance 
 standards as in effect under section 641A(a) of the 
 Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9836a(a)).
 (12) Regional corporation.--The term ``Regional 
 Corporation'' means an entity listed in section 419(4)(B) of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 619(4)(B)).
 (13) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (14) State.--The term ``State'' means any of the several 
 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto 
 Rico, Guam, American Samoa, or the Commonwealth of the Northern 
 Mariana Islands.
 (15) Training.--The term ``training'' means instruction in 
 early learning that--
 (A) is required for certification under State and 
 local laws, regulations, and policies;
 (B) is required to receive a nationally or State 
 recognized credential or its equivalent;
 (C) is received in a postsecondary education 
 program focused on early learning or early childhood 
 development in which the individual is enrolled; or
 (D) is provided, certified, or sponsored by an 
 organization that is recognized for its expertise in 
 promoting early learning or early childhood 
 development.
 (16) Young child.--The term ``young child'' means any child 
 from birth to the age of mandatory school attendance in the 
 State where the child resides.

SEC. 3254. PROHIBITIONS.

 (a) Participation Not Required.--No person, including a parent, 
shall be required to participate in any program of early childhood 
education, early learning, parent education, or developmental screening 
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
 (b) Rights of Parents.--Nothing in this chapter shall be construed 
to affect the rights of parents otherwise established in Federal, 
State, or local law.
 (c) Nonduplication.--No funds provided under this chapter shall be 
used to carry out an activity funded under another provision of law 
providing for Federal child care or early learning programs, unless an 
expansion of such activity is identified in the local needs assessment 
and performance goals under this chapter.

SEC. 3255. AUTHORIZATION AND APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS.

 There are authorized to be appropriated to the Department of Health 
and Human Services to carry out this chapter--
 (1) $1,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2002;
 (2) $1,500,000,000 for fiscal year 2003; and
 (3) such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 2004 and 
 2005.

SEC. 3256. ALLOTMENTS TO STATES.

 (a) Amounts Reserved.--
 (1) Territories and possessions.--The Secretary shall 
 reserve not more than \1/2\ of 1 percent of the funds 
 appropriated to carry out this chapter for any fiscal year for 
 distribution to Guam, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of 
 the Northern Mariana Islands, to be allotted in accordance with 
 their respective needs.
 (2) Indian tribes and tribal organizations.--The Secretary 
 shall reserve not more than 3 percent of the funds appropriated 
 to carry out this chapter for any fiscal year for distribution 
 to Indian tribes and tribal organizations with applications 
 approved under subsection (c).
 (b) Allotments to Remaining States.--
 (1) General authority.--From the funds appropriated to 
 carry out this chapter for any fiscal year remaining after 
 reserving funds under subsection (a), the Secretary shall allot 
 to each State (excluding Guam, American Samoa, and the 
 Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands) an amount equal 
 to the sum of--
 (A) an amount that bears the same ratio to 50 
 percent of such remainder as the product of the young 
 child factor of the State and the allotment percentage 
 of the State bears to the sum of the corresponding 
 products for all States, and
 (B) an amount that bears the same ratio to 50 
 percent of such remainder as the product of the school 
 lunch factor of the State and the allotment percentage 
 of the State bears to the sum of the corresponding 
 products for all States.
 (2) Young child factor.--The term ``young child factor'' 
 means the ratio of the number of children in the State under 5 
 years of age to the number of such children in all States as 
 provided by the most recent annual estimates of population in 
 the States by the Bureau of the Census.
 (3) School lunch factor.--The term ``school lunch factor'' 
 means the ratio of the number of children in the State who are 
 receiving free or reduced price lunches under the school lunch 
 program established under the National School Lunch Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1751 et seq.) to the number of such children in all the 
 States as determined annually by the Department of Agriculture.
 (4) Allotment percentage.--
 (A) In general.--The allotment percentage for a 
 State is determined by dividing the per capita income 
 of all individuals in the United States, by the per 
 capita income of all individuals in the State.
 (B) Limitations.--If an allotment percentage 
 determined under subparagraph (A)--
 (i) is more than 1.2 percent, then the 
 allotment percentage of that State shall be 
 considered to be 1.2 percent, and
 (ii) is less than 0.8 percent, then the 
 allotment percentage of the State shall be 
 considered to be 0.8 percent. --
 (C) Per capita income.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), per capita income shall be--
 (i) determined at 2-year intervals,
 (ii) applied for the 2-year period 
 beginning on October 1 of the first fiscal year 
 beginning on the date such determination is 
 made, and
 (iii) equal to the average of the annual 
 per capita incomes for the most recent period 
 of 3 consecutive years for which satisfactory 
 data are available from the Department of 
 Commerce at the time such determination is 
 made.
 (c) Allotments to Indian Tribes and Tribal Organizations.--
 (1) Reservation of funds.--From amounts reserved under 
 subsection (a)(2), the Secretary may make allotments to Indian 
 tribes and tribal organizations that submit applications under 
 this subsection, to plan and carry out programs and activities 
 to encourage child care providers to improve their 
 qualifications and to retain qualified child care providers in 
 the child care field.
 (2) Applications and requirements.--An application for an 
 allotment to an Indian tribe or tribal organization under this 
 section shall provide that--
 (A) the applicant will coordinate, to the maximum 
 extent practicable, with the lead agency in each State 
 in which the applicant will carry out such programs and 
 activities, and
 (B) will make such reports on, and conduct such 
 audits of, programs and activities under this chapter 
 as the Secretary may require.
 (d) Data and Information.--The Secretary shall obtain from each 
appropriate Federal agency, the most recent data and information 
necessary to determine the allotments provided for in subsection (b).
 (e) Reallotments.--
 (1) In general.--Any portion of the allotment under 
 subsection (b) to a State for a fiscal year that the Secretary 
 determines will not be distributed to the State for such fiscal 
 year shall be reallotted by the Secretary to other States 
 proportionately based on allotments made under such subsection 
 to such States for such fiscal year.
 (2) Limitations.--
 (A) Reduction.--The amount of any reallotment to 
 which a State is entitled to under paragraph (1) shall 
 be reduced to the extent that such amount exceeds the 
 amount that the Secretary estimates will be distributed 
 to the State to make grants under this chapter.
 (B) Reallotments.--The amount of such reduction 
 shall be reallotted proportionately based on allotments 
 made under subsection (b) to States with respect to 
 which no reduction in an allotment, or in a 
 reallotment, is required by this subsection.
 (3) Amounts reallotted.--For purposes of this chapter 
 (other than this subsection and subsection (b)), any amount 
 reallotted to a State under this subsection shall be considered 
 to be part of the allotment made under subsection (b) to the 
 State.
 (f) Federal Share.--
 (1) In general.--The Federal share of the cost of making 
 grants under this chapter shall be 85 percent for the first and 
 second years of the grant, 80 percent for the third and fourth 
 years of the grant, and 75 percent for the subsequent years of 
 the grant.
 (2) Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the cost 
 of making grants under this chapter may be contributed in cash 
 or in kind, fairly evaluated, including facilities, equipment, 
 or services, which may be provided from State or local public 
 sources, or through donations from private entities. For the 
 purposes of this paragraph the term ``facilities'' includes the 
 use of facilities, but the term ``equipment'' means donated 
 equipment and not the use of equipment.
 (g) Maintenance of Effort.--The Secretary shall not make a grant 
under this chapter to any State unless the Secretary first determines 
that the total expenditures by the State and its political subdivisions 
to support early learning programs (other than funds used to pay the 
non-Federal share under subsection (f)(2)) for the fiscal year for 
which the determination is made is equal to or greater than such 
expenditures for the preceding fiscal year.
 (h) Supplement Not Supplant.--Amounts received under this chapter 
shall be used to supplement and not supplant other Federal, State, and 
local public funds expended to promote early learning.
 (i) Special Rule.--If funds appropriated to carry out this chapter 
are less than $150,000,000 for any fiscal year, the Secretary shall 
make grants for the fiscal year directly to Local Councils, on a 
competitive basis, to pay the Federal share of the cost of carrying out 
early learning programs in the locality served by the Local Council. In 
carrying out the preceding sentence--
 (1) subsection (g) of this section, section 3257(b), and 
 section 3259(b)(4) shall not apply;
 (2) the Secretary shall provide such technical assistance 
 and monitoring as necessary to ensure that the use of the funds 
 by Local Councils and the distribution of the funds to Local 
 Councils are consistent with this chapter; and
 (3) subject to paragraph (1), the Secretary shall assume 
 the responsibilities of the Lead State Agency under this 
 chapter, as appropriate.

SEC. 3257. ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.

 (a) Federal Administrative Costs.--The Secretary may use not more 
than 3 percent of the amount appropriated under section 3255 for a 
fiscal year to pay for the administrative costs of carrying out this 
chapter, including the monitoring and evaluation of State and local 
efforts.
 (b) State Administrative Costs.--A State that receives a grant 
under this chapter may use--
 (1) not more than 2 percent of the funds made available 
 through the grant to carry out activities designed to 
 coordinate early learning programs on the State level, 
 including programs funded or operated by the State educational 
 agency, health, children and family, and human service 
 agencies, and any State-level collaboration or coordination 
 council involving early learning and education, such as the 
 entities funded under section 640(a)(5) of the Head Start Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 9835(a)(5));
 (2) not more than 2 percent of the funds made available 
 through the grant for the administrative costs of carrying out 
 the grant program and the costs of reporting State and local 
 efforts to the Secretary; and
 (3) not more than 3 percent of the funds made available 
 through the grant for training, technical assistance, and wage 
 incentives provided by the State to Local Councils.

SEC. 3258. STATE REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary may make grants to eligible States 
that comply with section 3259, to expand access to and quality of early 
learning programs that meet requirements in section 3262.
 (b) State Applications.--
 (1) In general.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 subsection (a), a State shall submit an application in 
 accordance with this subsection to the Secretary at such time, 
 in such manner, and containing such information as the 
 Secretary may reasonably require.
 (2) Contents of state application.--The State shall include 
 in such application a plan that includes--
 (A) a statement ensuring that the State has 
 identified a Lead State Agency to administer and 
 monitor the grant and ensure State-level coordination 
 of early learning programs;
 (B) a statement describing the manner in which the 
 Lead State Agency will allocate funds received under 
 this chapter to localities as required under section 
 3259;
 (C) a description of how grant funds will be used 
 to improve access to and quality of early learning 
 programs as required under section 3262;
 (D) a description of the performance goals to be 
 achieved by funds received under this chapter and the 
 measure to be used to evaluate progress toward such 
 goals; and
 (E) a statement describing how the State will 
 provide technical assistance to ensure that Local 
 Councils receiving funds under this chapter comply with 
 the requirements of this chapter.

SEC. 3259. STATE ADMINISTRATION.

 (a) In General.--For a State to be eligible to receive a grant 
under this chapter, the State shall appoint a Lead State Agency to 
carry out the functions described in subsection (b).
 (b) Lead State Agency.--
 (1) In general.--The Lead State Agency as described in 
 subsection (a) shall allocate funds in accordance with section 
 3258 to localities.
 (2) Limitation.--The Lead State Agency shall allocate not 
 less than 93 percent of such funds that have been provided to 
 the State for a fiscal year more than 1 locality.
 (3) Functions of agency.--In addition to allocating funds 
 under paragraph (1), the Lead State Agency shall--
 (A) advise and assist Local Councils in the 
 performance of their duties under this chapter;
 (B) develop and submit the State application and 
 the State plan required under section 3258;
 (C) evaluate and approve applications submitted by 
 localities;
 (D) ensure collaboration with respect to assistance 
 provided under this chapter between the State agencies 
 responsible for education, child care, health and 
 social services;
 (E) prepare and submit to the Secretary an annual 
 report, after approval by the State Council designated 
 under subsection (c), which shall include a statement 
 describing the manner in which funds received under 
 section 3258 are expended and documentation of the 
 effects that resources under this chapter have had on--
 (i) the number of children in full day, 
 full year Head Start programs, as provided 
 under the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9831 et 
 seq.);
 (ii) the number of infants and toddlers in 
 programs that provide comprehensive Early Head 
 Start services, as provided under the Head 
 Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9831 et seq.);
 (iii) the number of children attending, and 
 types of programs providing, prekindergarten, 
 including those with special needs;
 (iv) the linkages between early learning 
 programs and health care services for young 
 children;
 (v) linkages among early learning programs;
 (vi) access to early learning activities 
 for young children with special needs;
 (vii) expansion of the days or times that 
 children are served in existing early learning 
 programs;
 (viii) removal of ancillary barriers to 
 early learning, including transportation 
 difficulties, absence of programs during 
 nontraditional work times, and family 
 affordability; and
 (ix) professional development, and 
 recruitment and retention incentives, for 
 caregivers.
 (4) State preference.--In making grants to Local Councils 
 under this chapter, the State shall give preference to 
 supporting Local Councils that meet criteria that are specified 
 by the State and approved by the Secretary, for qualifying as 
 serving areas of greatest need for improving access to and 
 quality of early learning programs.
 (c) State Council.--
 (1) In general.--The State Council referred to in 
 subsection (b)(3) shall be composed of a group of 
 representatives of agencies, institutions, and other entities, 
 as described in paragraphs (2) and (3), that provide child care 
 or early learning services in the State.
 (2) Membership.--Except as provided in paragraph (6), the 
 chief executive officer of the State shall appoint to the State 
 Council at least 1 representative from--
 (A) the office of the chief executive officer of 
 the State;
 (B) the State educational agency;
 (C) the State agency administering funds received 
 under the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 
 1990 (42 U.S.C. 9858 et seq.);
 (D) the State social services agency;
 (E) the State Head Start association;
 (F) organizations representing parents within the 
 State;
 (G) resource and referral agencies within the 
 State; and
 (H) specialists in early child development.
 (3) Additional members.--In addition to representatives 
 appointed under subparagraph (2), the chief executive officer 
 of the State may appoint to the State Council additional 
 representatives from--
 (A) the State Board of Education;
 (B) the State health agency;
 (C) the State labor or employment agency;
 (D) organizations representing teachers;
 (E) organizations representing business; and
 (F) organizations representing labor.
 (4) Representation.--To the extent practicable, the chief 
 executive officer of the State shall appoint representatives 
 under subparagraphs (2) and (3) in a manner that is diverse or 
 balanced according to the race, ethnicity, and gender of its 
 members.
 (5) Functions of the council.--The State Council shall--
 (A) conduct a needs and resources assessment, or 
 use such an assessment if conducted not later than 2 
 years prior to the date of enactment of this chapter, 
 to--
 (i) determine where early learning programs 
 are lacking or are inadequate within the State, 
 with particular attention to poor urban and 
 rural areas, and what special services are 
 needed within the State, such as services for 
 children whose native language is a language 
 other than English; and
 (ii) identify all existing State-funded 
 early learning programs, and, to the extent 
 practical, other programs serving 
 prekindergarten children in the State, 
 including parent education programs, and to 
 specify which programs might be expanded or 
 upgraded with the use of funds received under 
 section 3255; and
 (B) based on the assessment described in 
 subparagraph (A), determine funding priorities for 
 amounts received under section 3255 for the State.
 (6) Designating an existing entity as state council.--To 
 the extent that a State has a State Council or a entity that 
 functions as such before the date of enactment of this chapter 
 that is comparable to the State Council described in this 
 subsection, the State shall be considered to be in compliance 
 with this subsection.

SEC. 3260. LOCAL APPLICATION.

 (a) In General.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this 
chapter, a Local Council shall submit an application to the Lead State 
Agency at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as 
the Lead Agency may require.
 (b) Contents.--An application submitted under subsection (a) shall 
include a statement containing an assurance that the local government 
entity, Indian tribe, Regional Corporation, or Native Hawaiian entity 
has established or designated a Local Council under section 3261(a), 
and the Local Council has developed a local plan for carrying out early 
learning programs under this chapter that includes--
 (1) a needs and resources assessment concerning early 
 learning services and access to such services by families, and 
 a statement describing how early learning programs will be 
 funded consistent with the assessment;
 (2) a statement of how the Local Council will ensure that 
 funded programs will meet the performance goals referred to in 
 section 3258(b)(2)(D) established by the State; and
 (3) a description of how the Local Council will form 
 collaboratives among local child care, social, and health 
 services and educational providers to maximize resources and 
 concentrate efforts on areas of greatest need.

SEC. 3261. LOCAL ADMINISTRATION.

 (a) Local Council.--
 (1) In general.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 this chapter, a local government entity, Indian tribe, Regional 
 Corporation or Native Hawaiian entity, as appropriate, shall 
 establish or designate a Local Council, which shall be composed 
 of--
 (A) representatives of local agencies and 
 organizations directly affected by early learning 
 programs assisted under this chapter;
 (B) parents or representatives of families with 
 young children;
 (C) other individuals concerned with early learning 
 issues in the locality, such as representative entities 
 providing elementary education, child care resource and 
 referral services, early learning opportunities, child 
 care, and health services; and
 (D) other key community leaders.
 (2) Designating existing entity.--If a local government 
 entity, Indian tribe, Regional Corporation, or Native Hawaiian 
 entity has, before the date of enactment of the Early Learning 
 Development Act, a Local Council or a regional entity that is 
 comparable to the Local Council described in paragraph (1), the 
 entity, tribe, or corporation may designate the council or 
 entity as a Local Council under this chapter, and shall be 
 considered to have established a Local Council in compliance 
 with this subsection.
 (3) Functions.--The Local Council shall be responsible for 
 preparing and submitting the application described in section 
 3260.
 (b) Administration.--
 (1) Administrative costs.--Not more than 7 percent of the 
 funds received by a Local Council under this chapter shall be 
 used to pay for the administrative costs of the Local Council 
 in carrying out this chapter.
 (2) Fiscal agent.--A Local Council may designate any entity 
 with a demonstrated capacity for administering grants, that is 
 affected by, or concerned with, early learning issues, 
 including the State, to serve as fiscal agent for the 
 administration of grant funds received by the Local Council 
 under this chapter.

SEC. 3262. USE OF FUNDS.

 (a) In General.--Grants received under this chapter by Local 
Councils shall be used in accordance with this chapter to provide funds 
to service providers to--
 (1) increase the number of children served in State 
 prekindergarten education programs;
 (2) increase the number of Head Start programs providing 
 full working day, full calendar year Head Start services;
 (3) increase the number of children served in Early Head 
 Start programs carried out under section 645A of the Head Start 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 9840a);
 (4) enhance the quality of and access to education and 
 comprehensive services and support services provided through 
 the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 
 U.S.C. 9858 et seq.) to child care programs and providers, 
 including health screening and diagnosis of children, parent 
 involvement and parent education, nutrition services and 
 education, staff and personnel training in early childhood 
 development, and upgrading the salaries of early childhood 
 development staff, and the development of salary schedules for 
 staff with varying levels of experience, expertise and 
 education;
 (5) develop linkages among early learning programs within a 
 community and between early learning programs and health care 
 services for young children in ways that facilitate greater 
 access to early learning programs;
 (6) increase access to and quality of early learning 
 opportunities for young children with special needs, including 
 migratory children, children with limited English proficiency, 
 and children with developmental delays, by facilitating 
 coordination with other programs serving such young children;
 (7) improve the quality of early learning programs through 
 professional development and training activities, increased 
 compensation, and recruitment and retention incentives for 
 early learning providers;
 (8) remove ancillary barriers to early learning, including 
 transportation difficulties and family affordability of early 
 learning programs;
 (9) increase access to home visitation programs that are 
 designed to improve early learning if services are provided by 
 staff who are given sufficient training, and clinical and 
 administrative supervision, by a registered nurse or a 
 qualified early childhood professional;
 (10) improve coordination between localities carrying out 
 early learning programs and persons providing early 
 intervention services under part C of the Individuals with 
 Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1431 et seq.); or
 (11) increase the number of child care providers serving 
 families during nontraditional work time if such providers are 
 licensed by the State.

SEC. 3263. REPEALER.

 The Early Learning Opportunities Act (title VIII of the Departments 
of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and Related 
Agencies Appropriations Act, 2001) (as enacted into law by section 
1(a)(1) of Public Law 106-554) is repealed.

SEC. 3264. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This chapter shall take effect on the 1st day of the 1st fiscal 
year that begins after the date of the enactment of this Act.

 CHAPTER 5--CHILD CARE FACILITIES FINANCING

SEC. 3271. SHORT TITLE.

 This chapter may be cited as the ``Child Care Facilities Financing 
Act''.

SEC. 3272. TECHNICAL AND FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Child care facility.--The term ``child care facility'' 
 means a center-based or home-based child care facility.
 (2) Eligible intermediary.--The term ``eligible 
 intermediary'' means a private, nonprofit intermediary 
 organization that has demonstrated experience in--
 (A) providing technical or financial assistance for 
 the construction and renovation of physical facilities;
 (B) providing technical or financial assistance to 
 child care providers; and
 (C) securing private sources for capital financing 
 of child care or other low-income community 
 development.
 (3) Eligible recipient.--The term ``eligible recipient'' 
 means--
 (A) any existing or new center-based or home-based 
 child care provider that provides services to eligible 
 children under a program carried out under the Child 
 Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 
 9858 et seq.), or another program serving low-income 
 children as determined by the Secretary; and
 (B) any organization in the process of establishing 
 a center-based or home-based child care program or 
 otherwise seeking to provide child care services to 
 children described in subparagraph (A).
 (4) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (b) Grant Authority.--The Secretary may award grants on a 
competitive basis in accordance with this section to eligible 
intermediaries to assist the intermediaries in carrying out the 
activities described in subsection (e).
 (c) Applications.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this 
section an eligible intermediary shall submit to the Secretary an 
application, in such form and containing such information as the 
Secretary may require.
 (d) Priority.--In awarding grants under this section the Secretary 
shall give a priority to applicants under subsection (c) that serve 
low-income areas or individuals.
 (e) Use of Funds.--
 (1) Revolving fund.--Each eligible intermediary that 
 receives a grant under this section shall deposit the grant 
 amount into a child care revolving fund established by the 
 eligible intermediary.
 (2) Payments from fund.--Subject to subsection (f), from 
 amounts deposited into the revolving fund under paragraph (1), 
 each eligible intermediary shall provide technical and 
 financial assistance (in the form of loans, grants, 
 investments, guarantees, interest subsidies, and other 
 appropriate forms of assistance) to eligible recipients to pay 
 for the Federal share of the cost of the acquisition, 
 construction, or improvement of child care facilities or 
 equipment, or for the improvement of related management and 
 business practices, for each such recipient. The amounts may be 
 used solely for the purpose of providing technical or financial 
 assistance.
 (3) Loan repayments and investment proceeds.--Any amount 
 received by an eligible intermediary from an eligible recipient 
 in the form of a loan repayment or investment proceeds shall be 
 deposited into the child care revolving fund of the eligible 
 intermediary for redistribution to other eligible recipients in 
 accordance with this section.
 (f) Federal Share.--
 (1) In general.--The Federal share of the cost described in 
 subsection (e)(2) shall be not more than 50 percent.
 (2) Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the cost 
 may be provided in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, including 
 plant, equipment, or services.
 (g) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $500,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2002 through 2006.

 Subtitle D--Head Start Access and Improvement

SEC. 3301. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 Section 639(a) of the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9834(a)) is amended 
to read as follows:
 ``(a) There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this 
subchapter--
 ``(1) $7,199,812,000 for fiscal year 2002;
 ``(2) $8,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2003;
 ``(3) $9,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2004;
 ``(4) $10,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2005;
 ``(5) $11,002,000,000 for fiscal year 2006;
 ``(6) $12,200,000,000 for fiscal year 2007;
 ``(7) $13,605,000,000 for fiscal year 2008;
 ``(8) $15,275,000,000 for fiscal year 2009;
 ``(9) $17,280,000,000 for fiscal year 2010; and
 ``(10) $19,720,000,000 for fiscal year 2011.''.

 Subtitle E--Education Improvements

 Chapter 1--Increasing Access to Quality Prekindergarten Programs

SEC. 3401. PREKINDERGARTEN PROGRAMS.

 Title X of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 8001 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating part L as part N; and
 (2) by inserting after part K the following:

 ``PART L--PREKINDERGARTEN PROGRAMS

``SEC. 10996A. FINDINGS.

 ``Congress finds the following:
 ``(1) Countless studies have shown what every parent 
 already knows: High-quality preschool education programs work. 
 Such programs prepare children to learn when they go to school, 
 and increase the success of students throughout their lives.
 ``(2) Children who get a high-quality prekindergarten 
 education are less likely to repeat a grade level and have less 
 need for special education instruction than those with no 
 prekindergarten experience.
 ``(3) Prekindergarten programs make a significant 
 difference in the lives of children from low-income families. A 
 recent study found that children in high-quality child care 
 programs had better thinking and attention skills, better 
 mathematics and pre-reading skills, and fewer behavioral 
 problems.
 ``(4) In a study following children to age 21 who received 
 high-quality early childhood education, such children were more 
 likely to have enrolled in college, been employed, and delayed 
 parenthood.

``SEC. 10996B. DEFINITIONS.

 ``In this part:
 ``(1) Prekindergarten.--The term `prekindergarten' means a 
 program serving children ages 3, 4, and 5 years old that 
 supports children's cognitive, social, emotional, and physical 
 development and helps prepare children for the transition to 
 kindergarten.
 ``(2) Eligible prekindergarten provider.--The term 
 `eligible prekindergarten provider' means--
 ``(A) a child care program or Head Start agency 
 under the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9831 et seq.) 
 that--
 ``(i) has met applicable State licensing 
 requirements and has obtained accreditation by 
 a national accrediting body with demonstrated 
 experience in accrediting child care programs, 
 prekindergarten programs, or schools; or
 ``(ii) agrees to obtain such accreditation 
 not later than 3 years after receipt of a grant 
 under this part; and
 ``(B) a local educational agency in partnership 
 with an early childhood program, organization, or 
 agency that serves prekindergarten school children.
 ``(3) Prekindergarten Teacher.--The term `prekindergarten 
 teacher' means an individual who has, or is working toward, a 
 bachelor of arts degree in early childhood development.

``SEC. 10996C. PROGRAM AUTHORIZED.

 ``(a) In General.--From amounts made available under section 
10996G, the Secretary may provide grants to States with approved 
applications under subsection (b)(2) for the purpose of enabling to 
States to award subgrants to eligible prekindergarten providers to 
establish, enhance, or expand prekindergarten programs.
 ``(b) State Agency.--
 ``(1) In general.--A State desiring a grant under this part 
 shall designate a State agency to administer the grant.
 ``(2) Application.--
 ``(A) In general.--With respect to a State desiring 
 a grant under this part, the State agency designated 
 under paragraph (1) shall submit an application to the 
 Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing 
 such information as the Secretary may require.
 ``(B) Contents.--The application submitted under 
 subparagraph (A) shall include--
 ``(i) an assurance that the State will 
 provide non-Federal matching funds, for 
 carrying out the programs to be funded by a 
 grant under this part, in an amount equal to 
 not less than 20 percent of the grant award; 
 and
 ``(ii) a description of--
 ``(I) how grant funds will be used 
 to expand or enhance existing efforts 
 across the State in providing access to 
 high quality prekindergarten programs;
 ``(II) how the State will 
 collaborate with local child care 
 agencies and councils, including local 
 child care resource and referral 
 agencies;
 ``(III) how grant funds will be 
 used to supplement and not supplant 
 existing Federal, State, local and 
private funds used for prekindergarten programs;
 ``(IV) how the State will ensure 
 that grant funds are provided to a 
 range of types of eligible 
 prekindergarten providers;
 ``(V) how the State will help 
 eligible prekindergarten providers 
 attract and retain qualified 
 prekindergarten teachers;
 ``(VI) how the State will identify 
 eligible prekindergarten providers and 
 identify children to receive 
 prekindergarten education; and
 ``(VII) how the State will give 
 priority in awarding subgrants under 
 paragraph (3)(B) to full-time 
 prekindergarten programs, including the 
 expansion of existing part-time 
 programs into full-time programs.
 ``(3) Duties.--The State agency designated under paragraph 
 (1) shall--
 ``(A) receive and administer grant funds received 
 under this part;
 ``(B) award subgrants, from such grant funds 
 received, to eligible prekindergarten providers to 
 carry out section 10996E; and
 ``(C) conduct evaluations of prekindergarten 
 programs carried out by eligible prekindergarten 
 providers that receive subgrants under subparagraph 
 (B).

``SEC. 10996D. LOCAL APPLICATIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--An eligible prekindergarten provider that 
desires to receive a subgrant under this part shall submit an 
application to the appropriate State agency designated under section 
10996C(b)(1) at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
information as such State agency may reasonably require.
 ``(b) Content.--An application submitted under subsection (a), at a 
minimum, shall--
 ``(1) demonstrate a need for the establishment, 
 enhancement, or expansion of a prekindergarten program;
 ``(2) describe how the eligible prekindergarten provider 
 will collaborate with local early childhood councils and 
 agencies;
 ``(3) provide an assurance that each individual hired as a 
 teacher by the eligible prekindergarten provider is qualified 
 to teach children at the prekindergarten level;
 ``(4) provide an assurance that the ratio of teacher or 
 child development specialist to children at each 
 prekindergarten program administered by the provider will not 
 exceed 1-10;
 ``(5) provide a description of how funds will be used to 
 coordinate with and enhance, but not duplicate or supplant, 
 early childhood programs serving eligible children that exist 
 in the community;
 ``(6) describe how the eligible prekindergarten provider 
 will use a collaborative process with organizations and members 
 of the community that have an interest and experience in early 
 childhood development and education to establish, enhance, or 
 expand prekindergarten programs;
 ``(7) describe how the program to be funded under the 
 subgrant will meet the diverse needs of children, ages 3 
 through 5, in the community who are not enrolled in 
 kindergarten, including children with disabilities or whose 
 native language is other than English;
 ``(8) describe how the eligible prekindergarten provider 
 will collaborate with local schools to ensure a smooth 
 transition for participating students from prekindergarten to 
 kindergarten and early elementary education;
 ``(9) describe the results the prekindergarten program is 
 intended to achieve, and what tools will be used to measure the 
 progress in attaining those results; and
 ``(10) provide an assurance that none of the funds received 
 under this part will be used for the construction or renovation 
 of existing or new facilities (except for minor remodeling 
 needed to accomplish the purposes of this part).

``SEC. 10996E. LOCAL USES OF FUNDS.

 ``(a) In General.--An eligible prekindergarten provider that 
receives a subgrant under this part shall use funds received under such 
subgrant to establish, enhance, or expand prekindergarten programs for 
children, ages 3 through 5, who are not enrolled in kindergarten, 
including--
 ``(1) providing a program that focuses on the developmental 
 needs of participating children, including their social, 
 cognitive, physical, and language-development needs, and uses 
 research-based approaches that build on competencies that lead 
 to school success, particularly in language and literacy 
 development and in reading;
 ``(2) paying the costs of purchasing educational equipment, 
 including educational materials, necessary to provide a high 
 quality program;
 ``(3) pursuing accreditation by a national accreditation 
 body with demonstrated experience in accreditation of 
 prekindergarten programs, to be obtained not later than 3 years 
 after the date on which funds are first received under this 
 part;
 ``(4) helping prekindergarten teachers pursue and attain 
 the credential and degree requirements established by the State 
 and provide a stipend for attaining educational or professional 
 development; and
 ``(5) meeting the needs of working parents.
 ``(b) Permissible Uses of Funds.--An eligible prekindergarten 
provider that receives a subgrant under this part may use funds 
received under such subgrant to pay for transporting students to and 
from a prekindergarten program.

``SEC. 10996F. REPORTING.

 ``(a) Local Reports.--Each eligible prekindergarten provider that 
receives a subgrant under this part shall submit to the State agency 
designated under section 10996C(b)(1), not later than 18 months after 
the date on which the provider first receives such subgrant, a report 
relating to the period for which subgrant funds were received, 
containing information on--
 ``(1) the number and ages of children served by the 
 provider, including information disaggregated by family income, 
 race, disability, native language;
 ``(2) the number of hours of service per day and number of 
 months of service;
 ``(3) the total number of prekindergarten teachers employed 
 by the provider; and
 ``(4) other sources of Federal, State, local, and private 
 funds used to operate the prekindergarten program for which 
 subgrants funds were received under this part.
 ``(b) Report to Congress.--The Secretary shall submit an annual 
report to Congress that evaluates the prekindergarten programs 
established, enhanced, or expanded under this part.

``SEC. 10996G. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part 
$2,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, $4,000,000,000 for fiscal year 
2003, $5,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2004, $8,000,000,000 for fiscal 
year 2005, and $10,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2006.''.

 Chapter 2--Expanding Early Literacy Efforts

SEC. 3411. EARLY LITERACY.

 Part C of Title II of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 6661 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating section 2251 as section 2251A;
 (2) by inserting before section 2251A (as so redesignated) 
 the following:

``SEC. 2251. SHORT TITLE.

 ``This part may be cited as the `Reading Excellence Act'.'';
 (3) by redesignating section 2260 as section 2261;
 (4) by inserting after section 2259 the following:

``SEC. 2260. EARLY LITERACY.

 ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Early childhood educator.--The term `early childhood 
 educator' means an individual who spends most or all of the 
 program day working directly with young children and who has 
 responsibility for implementing the educational components of 
 an early childhood education program.
 ``(2) Early childhood education program.--The term `early 
 childhood education program' means a licensed or regulated 
 child care center, preschool, State-funded prekindergarten 
 program, or Head Start program.
 ``(3) Early literacy.--The term `early literacy' means the 
 development of young children's vocabulary, reading, and 
 writing skills in preparation to learn to read and write.
 ``(4) Local early literacy partnership.--The term `local 
 early literacy partnership' means a partnership, council, or 
 consortia that includes representatives of--
 ``(A) the local educational agency;
 ``(B) teachers in kindergarten through 3d grade who 
 are responsible for reading instruction, including 
 teachers working with children whose native language is 
 not English and children with disabilities;
 ``(C) early childhood educators working in a range 
 of early childhood education programs and with children 
 in a range of ages from birth through age 5, including 
 educators working with children whose native language 
 is not English and children with disabilities;
 ``(D) the local child care resource and referral 
 agency, local child care council, Head Start agency, 
 and other appropriate local child care agencies;
 ``(E) family literacy programs;
 ``(F) public libraries;
 ``(G) local institutions of higher education that 
 provide professional development in research-based 
 early literacy and scientifically based reading 
 instruction; and
 ``(H) parents of children in early childhood 
 programs and in schools.
 ``(5) Research-based early literacy.--The term `research-
 based early literacy' means the application of rigorous, 
 systemic and objective procedures to obtain valid knowledge 
 relevant to language and literacy development and instruction 
 that--
 ``(A) is based on recent national reports 
 synthesizing research on effective practices to support 
 children's literacy and prevent later reading 
 difficulties;
 ``(B) draws on high quality quantitative research;
 ``(C) uses systematic methods that draw on 
 observation or experiment;
 ``(D) relies on multiple measures;
 ``(E) meets accepted standards of evidence as 
 judged by a panel of independent experts; and
 ``(F) draws on the knowledge of effective teaching 
 strategies for young children.
 ``(6) Young children.--The term `young children' means 
 children from birth through age 5 (or until mandatory school 
 age as determined by the State).
 ``(b) Grant Program.--The Secretary shall award grants to State 
educational agencies to enable such State educational agencies to award 
subgrants to local early literacy partnerships for the purpose of 
enhancing the early literacy in early childhood programs serving 
children from birth until kindergarten.
 ``(c) Application.--A State educational agency desiring a grant 
under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such 
time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary 
may require, including--
 ``(1) how the State educational agency will disseminate 
 information to a range of early childhood education providers, 
 organizations, local educational agencies, and institutions of 
 higher education regarding the partnership grants;
 ``(2) how the State educational agency will provide 
 technical assistance to local early literacy partnerships by 
 disseminating information on research regarding early literacy 
 curricula and teaching practice; and
 ``(3) how the State educational agency will coordinate with 
 other State agencies having responsibility for early childhood 
 education programs in the selection of the local grantees and 
 in providing technical assistance and information.
 ``(d) Administration.--A State educational agency receiving a grant 
under this section may reserve not more than 2 percent of the grant 
funds received for administrative purposes.
 ``(e) Local Early Literacy Partnership Application.--A local early 
literacy partnership desiring a subgrant under this section shall 
submit an application to the State educational agency at such time, in 
such manner, and containing such information as the State educational 
agency may require. The application shall identify the lead partner 
(which shall have a demonstrated history of effective administration of 
large grants) that will act as the fiscal agent and shall describe--
 ``(1) the roles and responsibilities of each partner entity 
 in the partnership and the resources that will be made 
 available to each such partner entity to carry out those roles 
 and responsibilities;
 ``(2) how the partnership will identify early childhood 
 education programs and early childhood educators that would 
 benefit from the services and professional development to be 
 provided by the partnership under this section;
 ``(3) how the partnership will coordinate Federal, State, 
 local, and private resources related to early literacy and 
 family literacy;
 ``(4) how the research-based early literacy curricula and 
 materials will be made available to early childhood education 
 programs;
 ``(5) how ongoing professional development in research-
 based early literacy will be provided to early childhood 
 educators in a range of early childhood education programs, 
 including the use of technology to deliver such professional 
 development as appropriate;
 ``(6) how the partnership will establish the presence of an 
 early literacy specialist in the local child care resource and 
 referral agency or other appropriate early childhood education 
 agency in order to provide technical assistance and information 
to programs and early childhood educators;
 ``(7) how the services will build on existing early 
 literacy and family literacy programs and professional 
 development in the community;
 ``(8) how the early literacy activities and professional 
 development for early childhood educators will be coordinated 
 with the activities and professional development of 
 kindergarten teachers in the same geographic area;
 ``(9) how families will participate in early literacy 
 programs to enhance their children's language and literacy 
 progress;
 ``(10) how the partnership will collect and report data as 
 required under subsection (g); and
 ``(11) how the professional development and other 
 activities and materials to be supplied by the partnership 
 under this section will support the early literacy of children 
 whose native language is not English, children with 
 disabilities, and other children at risk of having reading 
 difficulties.
 ``(f) Uses of Funds.--The early literacy partnership shall use 
funds for--
 ``(1) providing research-based early literacy instruction 
 methods, strategies, and curricula to early childhood providers 
 serving children from birth through age 5 in a range of 
 settings in the community;
 ``(2) providing ongoing, regular, professional development 
 to early childhood educators in the selection and use of 
 research-based early literacy instruction methods, strategies, 
 and curricula;
 ``(3) providing a stipend or bonus of sufficient size to 
 each childhood educator who receives the ongoing professional 
 development in research-based early literacy, and who commits 
 to remaining in the same early childhood education program for 
 a minimum of 1 additional full year;
 ``(4) establishing 1 or more early literacy specialists in 
 the local child care resource and referral agency or other 
 appropriate local child care agency or council to provide 
 technical assistance and to disseminate information;
 ``(5) coordinating the delivery of early literacy and 
 family literacy services within the community; and
 ``(6) collecting and reporting information to the State 
 educational agency as required in subsection (g).
 ``(g) Evaluations and Reports.--Each local partnership that 
receives a grant under this section shall submit a report to the State 
educational agency that includes--
 ``(1) a description of the types of early childhood 
 education programs that received services through the grant, 
 including disaggregated information on the age, race, 
 ethnicity, native language, disability status, gender, and 
 family income of the children served and the qualifications, by 
 credential or degree, and compensation of the staff (including 
 directors and teachers);
 ``(2) the extent to which professional development in 
 research-based early literacy was made accessible and used by 
 early childhood education staff in the local area;
 ``(3) how early literacy activities were coordinated with 
 family literacy programs and activities; and
 ``(4) how each partner carried out the partner's respective 
 roles and responsibilities under the application.''; and
 (5) by amending section 2261 (as so redesignated) by adding 
 at the end the following:
 ``(3) Fiscal years 2002 to 2006.--There are authorized to 
 be appropriated to carry out this part--
 ``(A) $500,000,000 for fiscal year 2002;
 ``(B) $600,000,000 for fiscal year 2003;
 ``(C) $700,000,000 for fiscal year 2004;
 ``(D) $850,000,000 for fiscal year 2005; and
 ``(E) $1,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2006.''.

SEC. 3412. TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS.

 The Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6301 
et seq.) is amended--
 (1) in section 1202(c)(1), by striking ``section 
 2260(b)(3)'' and inserting ``section 2261(b)(3)'';
 (2) in section 2257, by striking ``section 2260(b)(1)'' and 
 inserting ``section 2261(b)(1)''; and
 (3) in section 2258, by striking ``2260(b)(2)'' and 
 inserting ``section 2261(b)(2)''.

 Chapter 3--Increasing the Availability of Books

SEC. 3421. SHORT TITLE.

 This chapter may be cited as the ``Book Stamp Act''.

SEC. 3422. FINDINGS.

 Congress finds the following:
 (1) Literacy is fundamental to all learning.
 (2) Between 40 and 60 percent of the Nation's children do 
 not read at grade level, particularly children in families and 
 school districts that are challenged by significant financial 
 or social instability.
 (3) Increased investments in child literacy are needed to 
 improve opportunities for children and the efficacy of the 
 Nation's education investments.
 (4) Increasing access to books in the home is an important 
 means of improving child literacy, which can be accomplished 
 nationally at modest cost.
 (5) Effective channels for book distribution already exist 
 through child care providers.

SEC. 3423. DEFINITIONS.

 In this chapter:
 (1) Early learning program.--The term ``early learning'', 
 used with respect to a program, means a program of activities 
 designed to facilitate development of cognitive, language, 
 motor, and social-emotional skills in children under age 6 as a 
 means of enabling the children to enter school ready to learn, 
 such as a Head Start or Early Head Start program carried out 
 under the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9831 et seq.), or a State 
 pre-kindergarten program.
 (2) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (3) State.--The term ``State'' means the 50 States, the 
 District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, 
 the United States Virgin Islands, American Samoa, and the 
 Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
 (4) State agency.--The term ``State agency'' means an 
 agency designated under section 658D of the Child Care and 
 Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 9858b).

SEC. 3424. GRANTS TO STATE AGENCIES.

 (a) Establishment of Program.--The Secretary shall establish and 
carry out a program to promote child literacy and improve children's 
access to books at home and in early learning and other child care 
programs, by making books available through early learning and other 
child care programs.
 (b) Grants.--
 (1) In general.--In carrying out the program, the Secretary 
 shall make grants to State agencies from allotments determined 
 under paragraph (2).
 (2) Allotments.--For each fiscal year, the Secretary shall 
 allot to each State an amount that bears the same ratio to the 
 total of the available funds for the fiscal year as the amount 
 the State receives under section 658O(b) of the Child Care and 
 Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 9858m(b)) for 
 the fiscal year bears to the total amount received by all 
 States under that section for the fiscal year.
 (c) Applications.--To be eligible to receive an allotment under 
this section, a State shall submit an application to the Secretary at 
such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the 
Secretary may require.
 (d) Accountability.--The provisions of sections 658I(b) and 658K(b) 
of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 
9858g(b), 9858i(b)) shall apply to States receiving grants under this 
chapter, except that references in those sections--
 (1) to a chapter shall be considered to be references to 
 this chapter; and
 (2) to a plan or application shall be considered to be 
 references to an application submitted under subsection (c).
 (e) Definition.--In this section, the term ``available funds'', 
used with respect to a fiscal year, means the total of--
 (1) the funds made available under section 416(c)(1) of 
 title 39, United States Code for the fiscal year; and
 (2) the amounts appropriated under section 3409 for the 
 fiscal year.

SEC. 3425. CONTRACTS TO CHILD CARE RESOURCE AND
 REFERRAL AGENCIES.

 A State agency that receives a grant under section 3404 shall use 
funds made available through the grant to enter into contracts with 
local child care resource and referral agencies to carry out the 
activities described in section 3406. The State agency may reserve not 
more than 3 percent of the funds made available through the grant to 
support a public awareness campaign relating to the activities.

SEC. 3426. USE OF FUNDS.

 (a) Activities.--
 (1) Book payments for eligible providers.--A child care 
 resource and referral agency that receives a contract under 
 section 3405 shall use the funds made available through the 
 grant to provide payments for eligible early learning program 
 and other child care providers, on the basis of local needs, to 
 enable the providers to make books available, to promote child 
 literacy and improve children's access to books at home and in 
 early learning and other child care programs.
 (2) Eligible providers.--To be eligible to receive a 
 payment under paragraph (1), a provider shall--
 (A)(i) be a center-based child care provider, a 
 group home child care provider, or a family child care 
 provider, described in section 658P(5)(A) of the Child 
 Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 
 9858n(5)(A)); or
 (ii) be a Head Start agency designated under 
 section 641 of the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9836), an 
 entity that receives assistance under section 645A of 
 such Act (42 U.S.C. 9840a) to carry out an Early Head 
 Start program or another provider of an early learning 
 program; and
 (B) provide services in an area where children face 
 high risks of literacy difficulties, as defined by the 
 Secretary.
 (b) Responsibilities.--A child care resource and referral agency 
that receives a contract under section 3405 to provide payments to 
eligible providers shall--
 (1) consult with local individuals and organizations 
 concerned with early literacy (including parents and 
 organizations carrying out the Reach Out and Read, First Book, 
 and Reading Is Fundamental programs) regarding local book 
 distribution needs;
 (2) make reasonable efforts to learn public demographic and 
 other information about local families and child literacy 
 programs carried out by the eligible providers, as needed to 
 inform the agency's decisions as the agency carries out the 
 contract;
 (3) coordinate local orders of the books made available 
 under this chapter;
 (4) distribute, to each eligible provider that receives a 
 payment under this chapter, not fewer than 1 book every 6 
 months for each child served by the provider for more than 3 of 
 the preceding 6 months;
 (5) use not more than 5 percent of the funds made available 
 through the contract to provide training and technical 
 assistance to the eligible providers on the effective use of 
 books with young children at different stages of development; 
 and
 (6) be a training resource for eligible providers that want 
 to offer parent workshops on developing reading readiness.
 (c) Discounts.--
 (1) In general.--Federal funds made available under this 
 chapter for the purchase of books may only be used to purchase 
 books on the same terms as are customarily available in the 
 book industry to entities carrying out nonprofit bulk book 
 purchase and distribution programs.
 (2) Terms.--An entity offering books for purchase under 
 this chapter shall be presumed to have met the requirements of 
 paragraph (1), absent contrary evidence, if the terms include a 
 discount of 43 percent off the catalogue price of the books, 
 with no additional charge for shipping and handling of the 
 books.
 (d) Administration.--The child care resource and referral agency 
may not use more than 6 percent of the funds made available through the 
contract for administrative costs.

SEC. 3427. REPORT TO CONGRESS.

 Not later than 2 years of the date of enactment of this chapter, 
the Secretary shall prepare and submit to Congress a report on the 
implementation of the activities carried out under this chapter.

SEC. 3428. SPECIAL POSTAGE STAMPS FOR CHILD LITERACY.

 Chapter 4 of title 39, United States Code is amended by adding at 
the end the following:
``Sec. 416. Special postage stamps for child literacy
 ``(a) In order to afford the public a convenient way to contribute 
to funding for child literacy, the Postal Service shall establish a 
special rate of postage for first-class mail under this section. The 
stamps that bear the special rate of postage shall promote childhood 
literacy and shall, to the extent practicable, contain an image 
relating to a character in a children's book or cartoon.
 ``(b)(1) The rate of postage established under this section--
 ``(A) shall be equal to the regular first-class rate of 
 postage, plus a differential of not to exceed 25 percent;
 ``(B) shall be set by the Governors in accordance with such 
 procedures as the Governors shall by regulation prescribe (in 
 lieu of the procedures described in chapter 36); and
 ``(C) shall be offered as an alternative to the regular 
 first-class rate of postage.
 ``(2) The use of the special rate of postage established under this 
section shall be voluntary on the part of postal patrons.
 ``(c)(1) Of the amounts becoming available for child literacy 
pursuant to this section, the Postal Service shall pay 100 percent to 
the Department of Health and Human Services.
 ``(2) Payments made under this subsection to the Department shall 
be made under such arrangements as the Postal Service shall by mutual 
agreement with such Department establish in order to carry out the 
objectives of this section, except that, under those arrangements, 
payments to such agency shall be made at least twice a year.
 ``(3) In this section, the term `amounts becoming available for 
child literacy pursuant to this section' means--
 ``(A) the total amounts received by the Postal Service that 
 the Postal Service would not have received but for the 
 enactment of this section; reduced by
 ``(B) an amount sufficient to cover reasonable costs 
 incurred by the Postal Service in carrying out this section, 
 including costs attributable to the printing, sale, and 
 distribution of stamps under this section,
as determined by the Postal Service under regulations that the Postal 
Service shall prescribe.
 ``(d) It is the sense of Congress that nothing in this section 
should--
 ``(1) directly or indirectly cause a net decrease in total 
 funds received by the Department of Health and Human Services, 
 or any other agency of the Government (or any component or 
 program of the Government), below the level that would 
 otherwise have been received but for the enactment of this 
section; or
 ``(2) affect regular first-class rates of postage or any 
 other regular rates of postage.
 ``(e) Special postage stamps made available under this section 
shall be made available to the public beginning on such date as the 
Postal Service shall by regulation prescribe, but in no event later 
than 12 months after the date of enactment of this section.
 ``(f) The Postmaster General shall include in each report provided 
under section 2402, with respect to any period during any portion of 
which this section is in effect, information concerning the operation 
of this section, except that, at a minimum, each report shall include 
information on--
 ``(1) the total amounts described in subsection (c)(3)(A) 
 that were received by the Postal Service during the period 
 covered by such report; and
 ``(2) of the amounts described in paragraph (1), how much 
 (in the aggregate and by category) was required for the 
 purposes described in subsection (c)(3)(B).
 ``(g) This section shall cease to be effective at the end of the 2-
year period beginning on the date on which special postage stamps made 
available under this section are first made available to the public.''.

SEC. 3429. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this chapter 
$50,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006.

 Chapter 4--Increased Accountability

SEC. 3431. LOW ACHIEVING CHILDREN MEET HIGH STANDARDS.

 The Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6301 
et seq.) is amended in the heading for title I by striking 
``DISADVANTAGED'' and inserting ``LOW-ACHIEVING''.

SEC. 3432. PURPOSE AND INTENT.

 Section 1001 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 6301) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 1001. FINDINGS; RECOGNITION OF NEED; STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.

 ``(a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 ``(1) Schools that enroll high concentrations of children 
 living in poverty face the greatest challenges, but effective 
 educational strategies based on scientifically based research 
 can succeed in educating children to high standards.
 ``(2) High-poverty schools are much more likely to be 
 identified as failing to meet State standards for satisfactory 
 progress. As a result, these schools are generally the most in 
 need of additional resources and technical assistance to build 
 the capacity of these schools to address the many needs of 
 their students.
 ``(3) The educational progress of children participating in 
 programs under this title is closely associated with their 
 being taught by a fully qualified staff, particularly in 
 schools with the highest concentrations of poverty, where 
 paraprofessionals, uncertified teachers, and teachers teaching 
 out of field frequently provide instructional services.
 ``(4) States, local educational agencies, and schools 
 should be held accountable for improving student achievement, 
 while being given appropriate flexibility.
 ``(5) Programs funded under this title must demonstrate 
 increased effectiveness in improving schools in order to ensure 
 all children achieve to high standards.
 ``(b) Recognition of Need.--The Congress recognizes the following:
 ``(1) Educational needs are particularly great for low-
 achieving children in our Nation's highest-poverty schools, 
 children with limited English proficiency, children of migrant 
 workers, children with disabilities, Indian children, children 
 who are neglected or delinquent, and young children and their 
 parents who are in need of family literacy services.
 ``(2) Despite decades of education reform efforts, a 
 sizable achievement gap remains between minority and 
 nonminority students, and between disadvantaged students and 
 their more advantaged peers.
 ``(3) States, local educational agencies and schools should 
 be held accountable for improving the academic achievement of 
 all students, and for identifying and turning around low-
 performing schools.
 ``(4) Federal education assistance is intended not only to 
 increase pupil achievement overall, but also more specifically 
 and importantly, to help ensure that all pupils, especially the 
 disadvantaged, meet challenging standards for curriculum 
 content and pupil performance. It can only be determined if 
 schools, local educational agencies, and States, are reaching 
 this goal if pupil achievement results are disaggregated by at-
 risk categories.
 ``(c) Purpose and Intent.--The purpose and intent of this title are 
to ensure that all children have a fair and equal opportunity to obtain 
a high quality education.

SEC. 3433. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 (a) Additional Assistance.--Subsection (f) of section 1002 of the 
Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6302(f)) is 
amended to read as follows:
 ``(f) School Improvement.--Each State may reserve for the purpose 
of carrying out its duties under section 1116 and 1117, the greater of 
one-half of 1 percent of the amount allocated under this part, or 
$200,000.''.
 (b) Federal Activities.--Subsection (g) of section 1002 of the 
Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6302(g)) is 
amended by striking ``1995'' each place it appears and inserting 
``2002''.
 (c) State Administration.--Section 1002 of the Elementary and 
Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6302) is amended by adding 
at the end the following:
 ``(h) State Administration.--
 ``(1) State reservation.--Each State may reserve, from the 
 grants it receives under parts A, C, and D, of this title, an 
 amount equal to the greater of--
 ``(A) 1 percent of the amount it received under 
 parts A, C, and D; or
 ``(B) $400,000 ($50,000 for each outlying area), to 
 carry out administrative duties assigned under parts A, 
 C, and D.
 ``(2) Special rule.--The amount reserved by each State 
 under this subsection may not exceed the amount of State funds 
 expended by the State educational agency to administer 
 elementary and secondary education programs in such State.
 ``(i) Assistance for Local School Improvement.--
 ``(1) Program authorized.--The Secretary shall award grants 
 to States to provide subgrants to local educational agencies 
 for the purpose of providing assistance for school improvement 
 consistent with section 1116. Such grants shall be allocated 
 among States, the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and the outlying 
 areas, in the same proportion to the grants received by each 
 State, the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and the outlying areas for 
 the fiscal year under parts A, C, and D of this title. The 
 Secretary shall expeditiously allocate a portion of such funds 
 to States for the purpose of assisting local educational 
 agencies and schools that were in school improvement status on 
 the date preceding the date of enactment of the Leave No Child 
 Behind Act of 2001.
 ``(2) Reallocations.--If a State does not apply for funds 
 under this subsection, the Secretary shall reallocate such 
 funds to other States in the same proportion that funds are 
 allocated under paragraph (1).
 ``(3) State applications.--Each State educational agency 
 that desires to receive funds under this subsection shall 
 submit an application to the Secretary at such time, and 
 containing such information as the Secretary shall reasonably 
 require, except that such requirement shall be waived if a 
 State educational agency has submitted such information as part 
 of its State plan under this part. Each State plan shall 
 describe how such funds will be allocated to ensure that the 
 State educational agency and local educational agencies comply 
 with school improvement and corrective action requirements of 
 section 1116.
 ``(4) Local educational agency grants.--A grant to a local 
 educational agency under this subsection shall be--
 ``(A) of sufficient size and scope to support the 
 activities required under sections 1116 and 1117, but 
 not less than $50,000 and not more than $500,000 to 
 each participating school;
 ``(B) integrated with other funds under this Act; 
 and
 ``(C) renewable for 2 additional 1-year periods if 
 schools are making yearly progress consistent with 
 State and local educational agency plans developed 
 under section 1116.
 ``(5) Priority.--The State, in awarding such grants, shall 
 give priority to local educational agencies with the lowest 
 achieving schools, that demonstrate the greatest need for such 
 funds, and that demonstrate the strongest commitment to making 
 sure such funds are used to provide adequate resources to 
 enable such schools to meet the yearly progress goals under 
 State and local school improvement and corrective action plans 
 under section 1116.
 ``(6) Administrative costs.--A State educational agency 
 that receives a grant award under this subsection may reserve 
 not more than 5 percent of such award for administration, 
 evaluation, and technical assistance expenses.
 ``(7) Local awards.--Each local educational agency that 
 applies for assistance under this subsection shall describe how 
 it will provide the lowest achieving schools the resources 
 necessary to meet yearly progress goals under State and local 
 school improvement and corrective action plans under section 
 1116.
 ``(8) Authorization of appropriations.--There are 
 authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection, 
 $250,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, $300,000,000 for fiscal year 
 2003, $350,000,000 for fiscal year 2004, $400,000,000 for 
 fiscal year 2005, and $450,000,000 for fiscal year 2006.''.

SEC. 3434. RESERVATION AND ALLOCATION.

 Section 1003 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 6303) is repealed.

SEC. 3435. STATE PLANS.

 Section 1111 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 6311) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 1111. STATE PLANS.

 ``(a) Plans Required.--
 ``(1) In general.--Any State desiring to receive a grant 
 under this part shall submit to the Secretary a plan, developed 
 in consultation with local educational agencies, teachers, 
 pupil services personnel, administrators (including 
 administrators of programs described in other parts of this 
 title), other staff, and parents, that satisfies the 
 requirements of this section and that is coordinated with other 
 programs under this Act, the Individuals with Disabilities 
 Education Act, the Carl D. Perkins Vocational and Technical 
 Education Act of 1998, and the Head Start Act.
 ``(2) Consolidated plan.--A State plan submitted under 
 paragraph (1) may be submitted as part of a consolidated plan 
 under section 10202.
 ``(b) Standards, Assessments, and Accountability.--
 ``(1) Challenging standards.--(A) Each State plan shall 
 demonstrate that the State has adopted and implemented 
 challenging content standards and challenging student 
 performance standards that will be used by the State, its local 
 educational agencies, and its schools to carry out this part, 
 except that a State shall not be required to submit such 
 standards to the Secretary.
 ``(B) The standards required by subparagraph (A) shall be 
 the same standards that the State applies to all schools and 
 children in the State.
 ``(C) The State shall have such standards for elementary 
 school and secondary school children served under this part in 
subjects determined by the State, but including at least mathematics, 
reading or language arts, and science, which shall include the same 
knowledge, skills, and levels of performance expected of all children.
 ``(D) Standards under this paragraph shall include--
 ``(i) challenging content standards in academic 
 subjects that--
 ``(I) specify what children are expected to 
 know and be able to do;
 ``(II) contain coherent and rigorous 
 content; and
 ``(III) encourage the teaching of advanced 
 skills; and
 ``(ii) challenging student performance standards 
 that--
 ``(I) are aligned with the State's content 
 standards;
 ``(II) describe 2 levels of high 
 performance, proficient and advanced, that 
 determine how well children are mastering the 
 material in the State content standards; and
 ``(III) describe a third level of 
 performance, basic, to provide complete 
 information about the progress of the lower 
 performing children toward achieving to the 
 proficient and advanced levels of performance.
 ``(E) For the subjects in which students will be served 
 under this part, but for which a State is not required by 
 subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) to develop, and has not 
 otherwise developed such standards, the State plan shall 
 describe a strategy for ensuring that such students are taught 
 the same knowledge and skills and held to the same expectations 
 as are all children.
 ``(2) Adequate yearly progress.--
 ``(A) In general.--Each State plan shall 
 demonstrate, based on assessments described under 
 paragraph (4), what constitutes adequate yearly 
 progress of--
 ``(i) any school served under this part 
 toward enabling all children to meet the 
 State's challenging student performance 
 standards;
 ``(ii) any local educational agency that 
 received funds under this part toward enabling 
 all children in schools receiving assistance 
 under this part to meet the State's challenging 
 student performance standards; and
 ``(iii) the State in enabling all children 
 in schools receiving assistance under this part 
 to meet the State's challenging student 
 performance standards.
 ``(B) Definition.--Adequate yearly progress shall 
 be defined in a manner that--
 ``(i) applies the same high standards of 
 academic performance to all students in the 
 State;
 ``(ii) takes into account the progress of 
 all students in the State and in each local 
 educational agency and school served under 
 section 1114 or 1115;
 ``(iii) uses the State challenging content 
 and challenging student performance standards 
 and assessments described in paragraphs (1) and 
 (4);
 ``(iv) compares separately, within each 
 State, local educational agency, and school, 
 the performance and progress of students by 
 gender, each major ethnic and racial group, by 
 English proficiency status, by migrant status, 
 by students with disabilities as compared to 
 nondisabled students, and by economically 
 disadvantaged students as compared to students 
 who are not economically disadvantaged (except 
 that such disaggregation shall not be required 
 in a case in which the number of students in a 
 category is insufficient to yield statistically 
 reliable information or the results would 
 reveal individually identifiable information 
 about an individual student);
 ``(v) compares the proportions of students 
 at the `basic', `proficient', and `advanced' 
 levels of performance with the proportions of 
 students at each of the 3 levels in the same 
 grade in the previous school year;
 ``(vi) includes annual numerical goals for 
 improving the performance of all groups 
 specified in clause (iv) and narrowing gaps in 
 performance between these groups; and
 ``(vii) includes a timeline for ensuring 
 that each group of students described in clause 
 (iv) meets or exceeds the State's proficient 
 level of performance on each State assessment 
 used for the purposes of section 1111 and 
 section 1116 not later than 10 years after the 
 date of enactment of the Leave No Child Behind 
 Act of 2001; and
 ``(viii) at the State's discretion, may 
 also include other academic measures such as 
 promotion, completion of college preparatory 
 courses, and high school completion, except 
 that inclusion of such other measures may not 
 change which schools or local educational 
 agencies would otherwise be subject to 
 improvement or corrective action under section 
 1116 if the discretionary indicators were not 
 included.
 ``(C) Annual improvement for states.--For a State 
 to make adequate yearly progress under subparagraph 
 (A)(iii), not less than 90 percent of the local 
 educational agencies within its jurisdiction shall meet 
 the State's criteria for adequate yearly progress.
 ``(D) Annual improvement for local educational 
 agencies.--For a local educational agency to make 
 adequate yearly progress under subparagraph (A)(ii), 
 not less than 90 percent of the schools within its 
jurisdiction must meet the State's criteria for adequate yearly 
progress.
 ``(E) Annual improvement for schools.--For a school 
 to make adequate yearly progress under subparagraph 
 (A)(i), not less than 90 percent of each group of 
 students described in subparagraph (B)(iv) who are 
 enrolled in such school are required to take the 
 assessments consistent with section 612(a)(17)(A) of 
 the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act and 
 paragraph (4)(F)(iii) on which adequate yearly progress 
 is based. The requirement of this subparagraph must be 
 met for such assessments to be used to determine 
 whether a school is making adequate yearly progress.
 ``(F) Public notice and comment.--Each State shall 
 ensure that in developing its plan for adequate yearly 
 progress, it diligently seeks public comment from a 
 range of institutions and individuals in the State with 
 an interest in improved student achievement and that 
 the State makes and will continue to make a substantial 
 effort to ensure that information under this part is 
 widely known and understood by the public, parents, 
 teachers, and school administrators throughout the 
 State. Such efforts shall include, at a minimum, 
 publication of such information and explanatory text, 
 broadly to the public through such means as the 
 Internet, the media, and public agencies.
 ``(G) Review.--The Secretary shall review the 
 information from States on the adequate yearly progress 
 of schools and local educational agencies required 
 under subparagraphs (A) and (B) for the purpose of 
 determining State and local compliance with section 
 1116.
 ``(H) Revision.--The Secretary shall require States 
 to revise their definition of adequate yearly progress, 
 consistent with the requirements of this paragraph. 
 Such revisions shall be submitted to the Secretary for 
 approval not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of the Leave No Child Behind Act of 2001.
 ``(3) State authority.--If a State educational agency 
 provides evidence that is satisfactory to the Secretary that 
 neither the State educational agency nor any other State 
 government official, agency, or entity has sufficient 
 authority, under State law, to adopt curriculum content and 
 student performance standards, and assessments aligned with 
 such standards, that will be applicable to all students 
 enrolled in the State's public schools, then the State 
 educational agency may meet the requirements of this subsection 
 by--
 ``(A) adopting standards and assessments that meet 
 the requirements of this subsection, on a statewide 
 basis, limiting their applicability to students served 
 under this part; or
 ``(B) adopting and implementing policies that 
 ensure that each local educational agency in the State 
 that receives grants under this part will adopt 
 curriculum content and student performance standards, 
 and assessments aligned with such standards, that meet 
 all of the criteria in this subsection and any 
 regulations regarding such standards and assessments 
 that the Secretary may publish, and that are applicable 
 to all students served by each such local educational 
 agency.
 ``(4) Assessments.--Each State plan shall demonstrate that 
 the State has implemented and is administering a set of high-
 quality, yearly student assessments that include, at a minimum, 
 assessments in mathematics, reading or language arts, and 
 science as the primary means of determining the yearly 
 performance of each local educational agency and school served 
 under this title in enabling all children served under this 
 part to meet the State's challenging student performance 
 standards. Such assessments shall--
 ``(A) be the same assessments used to measure the 
 performance of all children, if the State measures the 
 performance of all children;
 ``(B) be criterion referenced and aligned with the 
 State's challenging content and student performance 
 standards and provide coherent information about 
 student attainment of such standards;
 ``(C) be used for purposes for which such 
 assessments are valid and reliable, and be consistent 
 with relevant, nationally recognized professional and 
 technical standards for such assessments;
 ``(D) measure the proficiency of students in the 
 academic subjects in which a State has adopted 
 challenging content and student performance standards 
 and be administered not less than one or more times 
 during--
 ``(i) grades 3 through 5;
 ``(ii) grades 6 through 9; and
 ``(iii) grades 10 through 12;
 ``(E) involve multiple up-to-date measures of 
 student performance, including measures that assess 
 higher order thinking skills and understanding;
 ``(F) provide for--
 ``(i) the participation in such assessments 
 of all students;
 ``(ii) the reasonable adaptations and 
 accommodations for students with disabilities 
 defined under 602(3) of the Individuals with 
 Disabilities Education Act necessary to measure 
 the achievement of such students relative to 
 State content and State student performance 
 standards; and
 ``(iii) the inclusion of limited English 
 proficient students who shall be assessed, to 
 the extent practicable, in the language and 
 form most likely to yield accurate and reliable 
 information on such students' knowledge of, and 
 skills in, the subject area being assessed;
 ``(G) include students who have attended schools in 
 a local educational agency for a full academic year but 
 have not attended a single school for a full academic 
 year, except that the performance of students who have 
 attended more than 1 school in the local educational 
 agency in any academic year shall be used only in 
 determining the progress of the local educational 
 agency;
 ``(H) provide individual student reports, which 
 include assessment scores, or other information on the 
 attainment of student performance standards; and
 ``(I) enable results to be disaggregated within 
 each State, local educational agency, and school by 
 gender, by each major racial and ethnic group, by 
 English proficiency status, by migrant status, by 
 students with disabilities as compared to nondisabled 
 students, and by economically disadvantaged students as 
 compared to students who are not economically 
 disadvantaged.
 ``(5) Special rule.--
 ``(A) In general.--Assessment measures that do not 
 meet the requirements of paragraph (4)(C) may be 
 included as one of the multiple measures, if a State 
 includes in the State plan information regarding the 
 State's efforts to validate such measures.
 ``(B) Student literacy skills.--States may measure 
 the literacy skills of students 1 or more times during 
 kindergarten through grade 2. Such measurement shall 
 serve only as a diagnostic tool, with its sole purpose 
 being the improvement of reading instruction.
 ``(6) Language assessments.--Each State plan shall identify 
 the languages other than English that are present in the 
 participating student population and indicate the languages for 
 which yearly student assessments are not available and are 
 needed. The State shall make every effort to develop such 
 assessments and may request assistance from the Secretary if 
 linguistically accessible assessment measures are needed. Upon 
 request, the Secretary shall assist with the identification of 
 appropriate assessment measures in the needed languages, but 
 shall not mandate a specific assessment or mode of instruction.
 ``(7) Requirement.--Each State plan shall describe--
 ``(A) how the State educational agency will ensure 
 that each local educational agency and school affected 
 by the State plan to develop the capacity to comply 
 with each of the requirements of sections 
 1112(c)(1)(D), 1114(c), and 1115(c) that is applicable 
 to such agency or school;
 ``(B) what specific steps the State educational 
 agency will take to assist, and provide resources to, 
 schools and local educational agencies that receive 
 funds under this part to ensure that all students 
 enrolled in such schools and local educational agencies 
 reach, at a minimum, the proficient level of 
 performance;
 ``(C) the actions the State will take to ensure 
 that critical education services and resources are 
 available in local educational agencies that receive 
 funds under this part to the extent that such services 
 are available in local educational agencies that do not 
 receive funds under this part;
 ``(D) whether services in local educational 
 agencies that receive funds under this part are of 
 comparable quality to the services in local educational 
 agencies that do not receive funds under this part;
 ``(E) at a minimum--
 ``(i) how the State will ensure, not later 
 than December 1, 2004, that students from 
 families with incomes below the poverty line 
 and minority students receive instruction from 
 fully qualified teachers at the same rate as 
 other students;
 ``(ii) how the State will ensure, not later 
 than December 1, 2004, that students from 
 families with incomes below the poverty line 
 and minority students have the same access to 
 challenging curricula and rigorous courses, 
 including advance placement courses, as do 
 other students;
 ``(iii) how the State will ensure, not 
 later than December 1, 2004, that the quality 
 and availability of instructional materials and 
 instructional resources including technology in 
 local educational agencies receiving funds 
 under this part, is comparable to such quality 
 and availability in local educational agencies 
 not receiving funds under this part; and
 ``(F) the measures that the State educational 
 agency will use annually to measure and publicly report 
 progress regarding subparagraph (E).
 ``(8) Exclusion from assessments.--
 ``(A) In general.--Local educational agencies 
 receiving funds under this part shall compile 
 information and report, by individual school, on 
 students who do not participate in assessments required 
 under paragraph (4). Such report, which shall be 
 distributed widely to the public, shall include--
 ``(i) a list of each reason that students 
 did not participate in any such assessment; and
 ``(ii) the number from each group of 
 students described in paragraph (2)(B)(iv) who 
 did not participate on any such assessment for 
 each reason.
 ``(B) Protection.--Reports required under 
 subparagraph (A) shall not report information in a case 
 in which it would reveal individually identifiable 
 information.
 ``(c) Other Provisions To Support Teaching and Learning.--Each 
State plan shall contain assurances that--
 ``(1) the State educational agency will work with other 
 agencies, including educational service agencies or other local 
 consortia, and institutions to provide technical assistance to 
 local educational agencies and schools to carry out the State 
 educational agency's responsibilities under this part, 
 including technical assistance in providing professional 
 development under section 1119 and technical assistance under 
 section 1117; and
 ``(2)(A) where educational service agencies exist, the 
 State educational agency will consider providing professional 
 development and technical assistance through such agencies; and
 ``(B) where educational service agencies do not exist, the 
 State educational agency will consider providing professional 
 development and technical assistance through other cooperative 
 agreements such as through a consortium of local educational 
 agencies;
 ``(3) the State educational agency will notify local 
 educational agencies and the public of the content and student 
 performance standards and assessments developed under this 
 section, and of the authority to operate schoolwide programs, 
 and will fulfill the State educational agency's 
 responsibilities regarding local educational agency improvement 
 and school improvement under section 1116, including such 
 corrective actions as are necessary;
 ``(4) the State educational agency will provide the least 
 restrictive and burdensome regulations for local educational 
 agencies and individual schools participating in a program 
 assisted under this part;
 ``(5) if applicable, the State educational agency will 
 inform the Secretary and the public of how and which Federal 
 laws hinder the ability of States--
 ``(A) to improve overall student achievement; and
 ``(B) to close achievement gaps between groups of 
 students described in subsection (b)(2)(B)(iv);
 ``(6) the State educational agency will encourage schools 
 to consolidate funds from other Federal, State, and local 
 sources for schoolwide reform in schoolwide programs under 
 section 1114;
 ``(7) the State educational agency will modify or eliminate 
 State fiscal and accounting barriers so that schools can easily 
consolidate funds from other Federal, State, and local sources for 
schoolwide programs under section 1114;
 ``(8) the State educational agency has involved the 
 committee of practitioners established under section 1603(b) in 
 developing the plan and monitoring its implementation; and
 ``(9) the State educational agency will inform local 
 educational agencies of the local educational agency's 
 authority to seek waivers under title X and, if the State is an 
 Ed-Flex Partnership State, waivers under the Education 
 Flexibility Partnership Act of 1999 (30 U.S.C. 589a et seq.).
 ``(d) Peer Review and Secretarial Approval.--
 ``(1) Secretarial duties.--The Secretary shall--
 ``(A) establish a peer review process to assist in 
 the review of State plans;
 ``(B) approve a State plan after its submission 
 unless the Secretary determines that the plan does not 
 meet the requirements of this section;
 ``(C) if the Secretary determines that the State 
 plan does not meet the requirements of subsection (a), 
 (b), or (c), immediately notify the State of such 
 determination and the reasons for such determination;
 ``(D) not decline to approve a State's plan 
 before--
 ``(i) offering the State an opportunity to 
 revise its plan;
 ``(ii) providing technical assistance in 
 order to assist the State to meet the 
 requirements under subsections (a), (b), and 
 (c); and
 ``(iii) providing a hearing;
 ``(E) have the authority to disapprove a State plan 
 for not meeting the requirements of this part, but 
 shall not have the authority to require a State, as a 
 condition of approval of the State plan, to include in, 
 or delete from, such plan one or more specific elements 
 of the State's content standards or to use specific 
 assessment instruments or items; and
 ``(2) State revisions.--States shall revise their plans if 
 necessary to satisfy the requirements of this section. Revised 
 plans shall be submitted to the Secretary for approval not 
 later than 1 year after the date of enactment of the Leave No 
 Child Behind Act of 2001.
 ``(e) Duration of the Plan.--
 ``(1) In general.--Each State plan shall--
 ``(A) be submitted for the first year for which 
 this part is in effect after the date of enactment of 
 the Leave No Child Behind Act of 2001;
 ``(B) remain in effect for the duration of the 
 State's participation under this part; and
 ``(C) be periodically reviewed and revised by the 
 State, as necessary, to reflect changes in the State's 
 strategies and programs under this part.
 ``(2) Additional information.--If the State makes 
 significant changes in its plan, such as the adoption of new 
 State content standards and State student performance 
 standards, new assessments, or a new definition of adequate 
 yearly progress, the State shall submit such information to the 
 Secretary.
 ``(f) Limitation on Conditions.--Nothing in this part shall be 
construed to authorize an officer or employee of the Federal Government 
to mandate, direct, or control a State, local educational agency, or 
school's specific instructional content or student performance 
standards and assessments, curriculum, or program of instruction, as a 
condition of eligibility to receive funds under this part.
 ``(g) Penalties.--
 ``(1) In general.--If a State fails to demonstrate that it 
 has in place challenging content standards and student 
 performance standards and assessments, and a system for 
 measuring and monitoring adequate yearly progress which 
 includes the disaggregation of data by groups, as described in 
 subsection (b)(2)(B)(iv), the State shall be ineligible to 
 receive any administrative funds under section 1002(h) that 
 exceed the amount received by the State for such purpose in the 
 previous year.
 ``(2) Additional funds.--Based on the extent to which the 
 requirements of paragraph (1) are not met, additional 
 administrative funds shall be withheld in such amount as the 
 Secretary determines appropriate, except that for each 
 additional year that the State fails to comply with such 
 requirements, the Secretary shall withhold not less than one-
 fifth of the amount the State receives for administrative 
 expenses under section 1002(h).
 ``(3) Waiver.--Notwithstanding title X of this Act and the 
 Education Flexibility Partnership Act of 1999 or any other 
 provision of law, a waiver shall not be granted except that a 
 State may request a 1-time, 1-year waiver to meet the 
 requirements of this section.
 ``(h) School Report Cards; Parental Information.--
 ``(1) In general.--
 ``(A) Annual report cards.--Not later than the 
 beginning of the 2002-2003 school year, a State that 
 receives assistance under this Act shall prepare and 
 publicly disseminate an annual report card on all 
 schools that receive funds under this part. States and 
 local educational agencies may issue report cards under 
 this section only for local educational agencies and 
 schools receiving funds under this part, except that if 
 a State or local educational agency issues a report 
 card for all students, the State or local educational 
 agency may include the information under this section 
 as part of such report card.
 ``(B) Implementation.--The State shall ensure the 
 dissemination of this information at all levels. Such 
 information shall be--
 ``(i) concise; and
 ``(ii) presented in a format and manner, 
 and to the extent practicable, in a language 
 that parents can understand.
 ``(2) Content of annual state report cards.--
 ``(A) Required information.--The State shall, at a 
 minimum, include in the annual State report cards 
 information for the State on each local educational 
 agency and school regarding--
 ``(i) student performance on statewide 
 assessments for the current and preceding years 
 in at least mathematics, reading or language 
 arts, and science, including--
 ``(I) a comparison of the 
 proportions of students who performed 
 at `basic', `proficient', and 
 `advanced' levels in each subject area, 
 for each grade level at which 
 assessments are required under this 
 part, with proportions in each of the 
 same 3 categories at the same grade 
 levels in the previous school year; and
 ``(II) a statement of the 
 percentage of students not tested and a 
 listing of categories of the reasons 
 why they were not tested;
 ``(ii) retention in grade, completion of 
 advanced placement courses, and 4-year 
 graduation rates;
 ``(iii) the professional qualifications of 
 teachers in the aggregate, including the 
 percentage of course sections in core academic 
 subjects taught by teachers with emergency or 
 provisional credentials, and the percentage of 
 class sections not taught by fully qualified 
 teachers; and
 ``(iv) the professional qualifications of 
 paraprofessionals, the number of 
 paraprofessionals in the aggregate and the 
 ratio of paraprofessionals to teachers in the 
 classroom.
 ``(B) Student data.--Student data in each report 
 card shall contain disaggregated results for the 
 following categories:
 ``(i) Gender.
 ``(ii) Racial and ethnic group.
 ``(iii) Migrant status.
 ``(iv) Students with disabilities, as 
 compared to students who are not disabled.
 ``(v) Economically disadvantaged students, 
 as compared to students who are not 
 economically disadvantaged.
 ``(vi) Students with limited English 
 proficiency, as compared to students who are 
 proficient in English.
 ``(C) Optional information.--A State may include in 
 its report card any other information it determines 
 appropriate to reflect school quality and school 
 achievement, including information on average class 
 size by grade level, and information on school safety, 
 such as the incidence of school violence and drug and 
 alcohol abuse, and the incidence of student suspensions 
 and expulsions.
 ``(3) Content of local educational agencies reports.--
 ``(A) Minimum requirements.--The State shall ensure 
 that each local educational agency collects appropriate 
 data and publishes and publicly disseminates an annual 
 report card for each of its schools that includes, at a 
 minimum--
 ``(i) the information described in 
 paragraphs (2)(A) and (2)(B) for each local 
 educational agency and school and--
 ``(I) in the case of a local 
 educational agency--
 ``(aa) the number and 
 percentage of schools 
 identified for school 
 improvement, including schools 
 identified under section 
 1116(b) of this Act;
 ``(bb) information that 
 shows how students in its 
 schools perform on the 
 statewide assessment compared 
 to students in the State as a 
 whole; and
 ``(II) in the case of a school--
 ``(aa) whether it has been 
 identified for school 
 improvement; and
 ``(bb) information that 
 shows how its students 
 performed on the statewide 
 assessment compared to students 
 in the local educational agency 
 and the State as a whole.
 ``(B) Other information.--A local educational 
 agency may include in its annual report card any other 
 appropriate information regardless of whether such 
 information is included in the annual State report 
 card.
 ``(4) Dissemination and accessibility of reports.--
 ``(A) State report cards.--State annual report 
 cards under paragraph (2) shall be disseminated to all 
 schools and local educational agencies in the State, 
 and made broadly available to the public through means 
 such as posting on the Internet, distribution to the 
 media, and distribution through public agencies.
 ``(B) Local educational agency reports.--Local 
 educational agency report cards under paragraph (3) 
 shall be disseminated to all schools in the school 
 district and to all parents of students attending these 
 schools and made broadly available to the public 
 through means such as posting on the Internet, 
 distribution to the media, and distribution through 
 public agencies.
 ``(5) Parent's right-to-know.--
 ``(A) Qualifications.--A local educational agency 
 that receives funds under this part shall provide, upon 
 request, in an understandable and uniform format, to 
 any parent of a student attending any school receiving 
 funds under this part, information regarding the 
 professional qualifications of the student's classroom 
 teachers, including, at a minimum, the following:
 ``(i) Whether the teacher has met State 
 qualification and licensing criteria for the 
 grade levels and subject areas in which the 
 teacher provides instruction.
 ``(ii) Whether the teacher is teaching 
 under emergency or other provisional status 
 through which State qualification or licensing 
 criteria have been waived.
 ``(iii) The baccalaureate degree major of 
 the teacher and any other graduate 
 certification or degree held by the teacher, 
 and the field of discipline of the 
 certification or degree.
 ``(iv) Whether the child is provided 
 services by paraprofessionals and the 
 qualifications of such paraprofessional.
 ``(B) Additional information.--In addition to the 
 information that parents may request under subparagraph 
 (A), and the information provided in subsection (c), a 
 school that receives funds under this part shall 
 provide to each individual parent or guardian--
 ``(i) information on the level of 
 performance of the individual student for whom 
 they are the parent or guardian in each of the 
 State assessments as required under this part; 
 and
 ``(ii) timely notice that the student for 
 whom they are the parent or guardian has been 
 assigned or has been taught for 2 or more 
 consecutive weeks by a substitute teacher or by 
 a teacher not fully qualified.
 ``(C) Notification.--A local educational agency 
 shall notify parents of students attending any school 
 receiving funds under this part, on an annual basis, of 
 their ability to request information under this 
 paragraph and initially not later than 1 year after the 
 date of enactment of the Leave No Child Behind Act of 
 2001. A local educational agency shall provide such 
 notification to parents in a format, and to the extent 
 practicable, in a language they can understand.
 ``(6) Plan content.--A State shall include in its plan 
 under subsection (b) an assurance that it has in effect a 
 policy that meets the requirements of this section.
 ``(i) Privacy.--Information collected under this section shall be 
collected and disseminated in a manner that protects the privacy of 
individuals.
 ``(j) Special Rule on Science Standards and Assessments.--
Notwithstanding subsections (b) and (h), no State shall be required to 
meet the requirements under this title relating to science standards or 
assessments until the beginning of the 2006-2007 school year.''.

SEC. 3436. LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCY PLANS.

 (a) Plans Required.--Subsection (a) of section 1112 of the 
Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6312(a)) is 
amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``the Goals 2000: Educate 
 America Act'' and all that follows and inserting the following: 
 ``the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, the Carl D. 
 Perkins Vocational and Technical Education Act of 1998, the 
 Head Start Act, and other Acts, as appropriate.''; and
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking ``14304'' and inserting 
 ``10204''.
 (b) Plan Provisions.--Subsection (b) of section 1112 of the 
Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6312(b)) is 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``Each'' in the matter preceding paragraph 
 (1) and inserting ``In order to help low-achieving children 
 achieve to high standards, each'';
 (2) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) by striking ``part'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``title'';
 (B) in subparagraph (B), by inserting ``low-
 achieving'' before ``children'';
 (C) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph 
 (B);
 (D) by inserting ``and'' at the end of subparagraph 
 (C); and
 (E) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(D) determine the literacy levels of first 
 graders and their need for interventions, and a 
 description of how the local educational agency will 
 ensure that any such assessments--
 ``(i) are developmentally appropriate; and
 ``(ii) use multiple measures to provide 
 information about the variety of skills that 
 scientifically based research has identified as 
 leading to early acquisition of reading 
 skills.'';
 (3) in paragraph (4)(B), by striking ``under part C or who 
 were formerly eligible for services under part C in the two-
 year period preceding the date of enactment of the Improving 
 America's School Act of 1994, neglected or delinquent youth and 
 youth at risk of dropping out served under part D'' and 
 inserting ``under part C, neglected or delinquent youth, Indian 
 children served under title IX,'';
 (4) in paragraph (7), by striking ``eligible homeless 
 children'' and inserting ``homeless children'';
 (5) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (9) and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (6) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
 ``(10) a description of the actions the local educational 
 agency will take to assist its low-performing schools, 
 including schools identified for improvement under section 
 1116;
 ``(11) a description of how the agency will promote the use 
 of extended learning time, such as an extended school year and 
 before and after school and summer programs; and
 ``(12) a description of the activity established by the 
 local educational agency in accordance with section 
 1119(b)(1).''.
 (c) Assurances.--Subsection (c) of section 1112 of the Elementary 
and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6312(c)) is amended to 
read as follows:
 ``(c) Assurances.--
 ``(1) In general.--Each local educational agency plan shall 
 provide assurances that the local educational agency will--
 ``(A) inform eligible schools and parents of 
 schoolwide project authority and the ability of such 
 schools to consolidate funds from Federal, State, and 
 local sources;
 ``(B) provide technical assistance and support to 
 schoolwide programs;
 ``(C) work in consultation with schools as the 
 schools develop the schools' plans pursuant to section 
 1114 and assist schools as the schools implement such 
 plans or undertake activities pursuant to section 1115 
 so that each school can make adequate yearly progress 
 toward meeting the State student performance standards;
 ``(D) fulfill such agency's school improvement 
 responsibilities under section 1116, including taking 
 corrective actions under section 1116(b)(9);
 ``(E) provide services to eligible children 
 attending private elementary and secondary schools in 
 accordance with section 1120, and timely and meaningful 
 consultation with private school officials regarding 
 such services;
 ``(F) take into account the experience of model 
 programs for the educationally disadvantaged, and the 
 findings of relevant scientifically based research 
 indicating that services may be most effective if 
 focused on students in the earliest grades at schools 
 that receive funds under this part;
 ``(G) in the case of a local educational agency 
 that chooses to use funds under this part to provide 
 early childhood development services to low-income 
 children below the age of compulsory school attendance, 
 ensure that such services comply with the performance 
 standards established under section 641A(a) of the Head 
 Start Act;
 ``(H) inform eligible schools of the local 
 educational agency's authority to obtain waivers on the 
 school's behalf under title X of this Act, and if the 
 State is an Ed-Flex Partnership State, waivers under 
 the Education Flexibility Partnership Act of 1999;
 ``(I) coordinate and collaborate, to the extent 
 feasible and necessary as determined by the local 
 educational agency, with other agencies providing 
 services to children, youth, and families; and
 ``(J) ensure that by not later than December 1, 
 2004, students from families with incomes below the 
 poverty line and minority students are not taught by 
 teachers who are not fully qualified at a greater rate 
 than other students.
 ``(2) Special rule.--The Secretary--
 ``(A) shall consult with the Secretary of Health 
 and Human Services on the implementation of 
 subparagraph (G) and shall establish procedures (taking 
 into consideration existing State and local laws, and 
 local teacher contracts) to assist local educational 
 agencies to comply with such subparagraph; and
 ``(B) upon publication, shall disseminate to local 
 educational agencies the Head Start performance 
 standards as in effect under section 641A(a) of the 
 Head Start Act, and such agencies affected by 
 subparagraph (G) shall plan for the implementation of 
 such subparagraph (taking into consideration existing 
 State and local laws, and local teacher contracts), 
 including pursuing the availability of other Federal, 
 State, and local funding sources to assist in 
 compliance with such subparagraph.''.
 (d) Plan Development and Duration.--Section 1112 of the Elementary 
and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6312) is amended by 
striking subsection (d) and inserting the following:
 ``(d) Plan Development and Duration.--
 ``(1) Consultation.--Each local educational agency plan 
 shall be developed in consultation with teachers, 
 administrators (including administrators of programs described 
 in other parts of this title), and other appropriate school 
 personnel, and with parents of children in schools served under 
 this part.
 ``(2) Duration.--Each such plan shall be submitted for the 
 first year for which this part is in effect following the date 
 of enactment of the Leave No Child Behind Act of 2001 and shall 
 remain in effect for the duration of the agency's participation 
 under this part.
 ``(3) Review.--Each such local educational agency shall 
 periodically review, and as necessary, revise its plan.''.
 (e) State Approval.--Section 1112 of the Elementary and Secondary 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6312(e)) is amended by striking 
subsection (e) and inserting the following:
 ``(e) State Approval.--
 ``(1) In general.--Each local educational agency plan shall 
 be filed according to a schedule established by the State 
 educational agency.
 ``(2) Approval.--The State educational agency shall approve 
 a local educational agency's plan only if the State educational 
 agency determines that the local educational agency's plan--
 ``(A) will enable schools served under this part to 
 substantially help children served under this part meet 
 the standards expected of all children described in 
 section 1111(b)(1); and
 ``(B) will meet the requirements of this 
 section.''.

SEC. 3437. TARGETED ASSISTANCE SCHOOLS.

 (a) Fully Qualified Teacher.--Subsection (c)(1)(F) of section 1115 
of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
6315(c)(1)(F)) is amended by striking ``highly qualified staff;'' and 
inserting ``fully qualified teachers as defined in section 
2812(4)(A);''.
 (b) Integration of Professional Development.--Subsection (d) of 
section 1115 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 6515(d)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(d) Integration of Professional Development.--To promote the 
integration of staff supported with funds under this part, public 
school personnel who are paid with funds received under this part may 
participate in general professional development and school planning 
activities.''.

SEC. 3438. SCHOOL CHOICE.

 Subsection (b) of section 1115A of the Elementary and Secondary 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6316(b)) is amended by striking 
paragraphs (7) through (10) and inserting the following:
 ``(7) parents of eligible students in the local educational 
 agency will be given prompt notice of the existence of the 
 public school choice program and its availability to them, and 
 a clear explanation of how the program will operate;
 ``(8) the program will include charter schools and any 
 other public school and shall not include a school that is or 
 has been identified as a school in school improvement or is or 
 has been in corrective action for the past 2 consecutive years;
 ``(9) transportation services or the costs of 
 transportation may be provided by the local educational agency 
 with funds under this part; and
 ``(10) such local educational agency will comply with the 
 other requirements of this part.''.

SEC. 3439. ASSESSMENT AND LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCY AND SCHOOL 
 IMPROVEMENT.

 (a) Local Review.--Section 1116(a) of the Elementary and Secondary 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6317(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2), by striking ``1111(b)(2)(A)(i)'' and 
 inserting ``1111(b)(2)(B)'';
 (2) in paragraph (3), by striking ``individual school 
 performance profiles'' and inserting ``school reports'';
 (3) in paragraph (3), by striking ``and'' after the 
 semicolon;
 (4) in paragraph (4), by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (5) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(5) review the effectiveness of the actions and 
 activities the schools are carrying out under this part with 
 respect to parental involvement assisted under this Act.''.
 (b) School Improvement.--Section 1116 of the Elementary and 
Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6317) is amended by striking 
subsections (b), (c), and (d) and by inserting after subsection (a) the 
following:
 ``(b) School Improvement.--
 ``(1) In general.--A local educational agency shall 
 identify for school improvement any school served under this 
 part that--
 ``(A) for 2 consecutive years failed to make 
 adequate yearly progress as defined in the State's plan 
 under section 1111(b)(2); or
 ``(B) was in school improvement status under this 
 section on the day preceding the date of enactment of 
 the Leave No Child Behind Act of 2001.
 ``(2) Transition.--The 2-year period described in paragraph 
 (1)(A) shall include any continuous period of time immediately 
 preceding the date of enactment of the Leave No Child Behind 
 Act of 2001 during which a school did not make adequate yearly 
 progress as defined in the State's plan, as such plan was in 
 effect on the day preceding the date of such enactment.
 ``(3) Targeted assistance schools.--To determine if a 
 school that is conducting a targeted assistance program under 
 section 1115 should be identified as in need of improvement 
 under this subsection, a local educational agency may choose to 
 review the progress of only those students in such school who 
 are served under this part.
 ``(4) Opportunity to review and present evidence.--
 ``(A) In general.--Before identifying a school for 
 school improvement under paragraph (1), the local 
 educational agency shall provide the school with an 
 opportunity to review the school-level data, including 
 assessment data, on which the proposed identification 
 is based.
 ``(B) Supporting evidence.--If the school principal 
 believes that the proposed identification is in error 
 for statistical or other substantive reasons, the 
 principal may provide supporting evidence to the local 
 educational agency, which such agency shall consider 
 before making a final determination.
 ``(5) Notification to parents.--A local educational agency 
 shall, in an easily understandable format, provide in writing 
 to parents of each student in a school identified for school 
 improvement--
 ``(A) an explanation of what the school improvement 
 identification means and how the school compares in 
 terms of academic performance to other schools in the 
 local educational agency and State;
 ``(B) the reasons for such identification;
 ``(C) the data on which such identification is 
 based;
 ``(D) an explanation of what the school is doing to 
 address the problem of low achievement;
 ``(E) an explanation of how parents can become 
 involved in upgrading the quality of the school;
 ``(F) an explanation of the right of parents, 
 pursuant to paragraph (6), to transfer their child to 
 another public school, including a public charter 
 school, that is not in school improvement, and how such 
 transfer shall operate; and
 ``(G) notification to parents in a format and, to 
 the extent practicable, in a language they can 
 understand.
 ``(6) Public school choice option.--
 ``(A) Schools identified for improvement.--After 
 the date of enactment of the Leave No Child Behind Act 
 of 2001, a local educational agency shall provide all 
 students enrolled in a school identified for school 
 improvement with an option to transfer to any other 
 public school within the local educational agency or 
 any public school consistent with subparagraph (C), 
 including a public charter school that has not been 
 identified for school improvement, unless such option 
 to transfer is prohibited by State law, or local law, 
 which includes school board-approved local educational 
 agency policy.
 ``(B) Capacity.--If a local educational agency 
 described in subparagraph (A) demonstrates to the 
 satisfaction of the State educational agency that such 
 local educational agency lacks the capacity to provide 
 all students with the option to transfer described in 
 subparagraph (A), and after giving notice to the 
 parents of children affected that it is not possible, 
 consistent with State and local law, to accommodate the 
 transfer request of every student, the local 
 educational agency shall permit as many students as 
 possible (who shall be selected by the local 
 educational agency on an equitable basis) to transfer 
 to a public school that has not been identified for 
 school improvement under section 1116(b).
 ``(C) Cooperative agreement.--If all public schools 
 in the local educational agency to which a child may 
transfer to, are identified for school improvement, the agency shall, 
to the extent practicable, establish a cooperative agreement with other 
local educational agencies in the area for the transfer.
 ``(D) Transportation.--The local educational agency 
 in which the schools have been identified for 
 improvement may use up to 10 percent of the funds 
 received under this part to provide transportation to 
 students whose parents choose to transfer their child 
 or children to a different school.
 ``(E) Waiver.--A local educational agency using 
 funds received under this part for transportation 
 consistent with subparagraph (D) may request a waiver 
 of the limit of the use of such funds described in 
 subparagraph (D) from the Secretary.
 ``(F) Continue option.--Once a school is no longer 
 identified for school improvement, the local 
 educational agency may continue to provide public 
 school choice as an option to students in such school 
 for a period of not less than 2 years.
 ``(7) School plan.--
 ``(A) In general.--Each school identified under 
 paragraph (1) for school improvement shall, not later 
 than 3 months after being so identified, develop or 
 revise a school plan, in consultation with parents, 
 school staff, the local educational agency, and other 
 outside experts for approval by the local educational 
 agency. Such plan shall--
 ``(i) incorporate scientifically based 
 research strategies that strengthen the core 
 academic program in the school;
 ``(ii) adopt policies that have the 
 greatest likelihood of improving the 
 performance of participating children in 
 meeting the State's student performance 
 standards;
 ``(iii) address the professional 
 development needs of staff, particularly 
 teachers and principals;
 ``(iv) establish specific goals and 
 objectives the school will undertake for making 
 adequate yearly progress which include specific 
 numerical performance goals and targets for 
 each of the groups of students identified in 
 the disaggregated data pursuant to section 
 1111(b)(2), consistent with section 
 1111(b)(2)(B);
 ``(v) identify how the school will provide 
 written notification to parents, in a format 
 and to the extent practicable in a language 
 such parents can understand; and
 ``(vi) specify the responsibilities of the 
 local educational agency and the school under 
 the plan.
 ``(B) Conditional approval.--A local educational 
 agency may condition approval of a school plan, 
 including a revised plan, on inclusion of one or more 
 of the corrective actions specified in paragraph (9).
 ``(C) Implementation.--A school shall implement its 
 plan or revised plan expeditiously, but not later than 
 the beginning of the school year after which the school 
 has been identified for improvement.
 ``(D) Review.--The local educational agency shall 
 promptly review the plan, including a revised plan, 
 work with the school as necessary, and approve the plan 
 if it meets the requirements of this section.
 ``(8) Technical assistance.--
 ``(A) In general.--For each school identified for 
 school improvement under paragraph (1), the local 
 educational agency shall provide technical assistance 
 as the school develops and implements its plan, 
 including a revised plan.
 ``(B) Specific technical assistance.--Such 
 technical assistance--
 ``(i) shall include effective methods and 
 instructional strategies that are based upon 
 scientifically based research that strengthens 
 the core academic program in the school and 
 addresses the specific elements of student 
 performance problems in the school;
 ``(ii) may be provided directly by the 
 local educational agency, through mechanisms 
 authorized under section 1117, or with the 
 local educational agency's approval, by an 
 institution of higher education, a private 
 nonprofit organization, an educational service 
 agency, a comprehensive regional assistance 
 center under part A of title XIII (as such 
 center was in existence prior to the date of 
 enactment of Leave No Child Behind Act of 
 2001), or other entities with experience in 
 helping schools improve achievement.
 ``(C) Technical assistance.--Technical assistance 
 provided under this section by the local educational 
 agency or an entity authorized by such agency shall be 
 based upon scientifically based research.
 ``(9) Corrective action.--In order to help students served 
 under this part meet challenging State standards, each local 
 educational agency shall implement a system of corrective 
 action in accordance with the following:
 ``(A) In general.--After providing technical 
 assistance under paragraph (8) and subject to 
 subparagraph (F), the local educational agency--
 ``(i) may take corrective action at any 
 time with respect to a school that has been 
 identified under paragraph (1);
 ``(ii) shall take corrective action with 
 respect to any school that fails to make 
 adequate yearly progress, as defined by the 
 State, after the end of the second year 
 following its identification under paragraph 
 (1); and
 ``(iii) shall continue to provide technical 
 assistance while instituting any corrective 
 action under clause (i) or (ii).
 ``(B) Definition.--As used in this paragraph, the 
 term `corrective action' means action, consistent with 
 State and local law, that--
 ``(i) substantially and directly responds 
 to the consistent academic failure that caused 
 the local educational agency to take such 
 action and to any underlying staffing, 
 curricular, or other problems in the school; 
 and
 ``(ii) is designed to substantially 
 increase the likelihood that students will 
 perform at the proficient and advanced 
 performance levels.
 ``(C) Certain schools.--In the case of a school 
 described in subparagraph (A)(ii), the local 
 educational agency shall take not less than 1 of the 
 following corrective actions:
 ``(i) Withhold funds from the school.
 ``(ii) Decrease decisionmaking authority at 
 the school level.
 ``(iii) Make alternative governance 
 arrangements, including reopening the school as 
 a public charter school.
 ``(iv) Reconstitute the school by requiring 
 each person employed at the school to reapply 
 for future employment at the same school or for 
 any position in the local educational agency.
 ``(v) Authorize students to transfer to 
 other higher performing public schools served 
 by the local educational agency, including 
 public charter schools, and provide such 
 students transportation (or the costs of 
 transportation) to such schools in conjunction 
 with not less than 1 additional action 
 described under this subparagraph.
 ``(vi) Institute and fully implement a new 
 curriculum, including appropriate professional 
 development for all relevant staff, that is 
 based upon scientifically based research and 
 offers substantial promise of improving 
 educational achievement for low-performing 
 students.
 ``(D) Implementation delay.--A local educational 
 agency may delay, for a period not to exceed 1 year, 
 implementation of corrective action only if the failure 
 to make adequate yearly progress was justified due to 
exceptional or uncontrollable circumstances such as a natural disaster 
or a precipitous and unforeseen decline in the financial resources of 
the local educational agency or school.
 ``(E) Publication.--The local educational agency 
 shall publish, and disseminate to the public and to 
 parents in a format and, to the extent practicable, in 
 a language that they can understand, any corrective 
 action it takes under this paragraph through such means 
 as the Internet, the media, and public agencies.
 ``(F) Review.--(i) Before taking corrective action 
 with respect to any school under this paragraph, a 
 local educational agency shall provide the school an 
 opportunity to review the school level data, including 
 assessment data, on which the proposed determination is 
 made.
 ``(ii) If the school believes that the proposed 
 determination is in error for statistical or other 
 substantive reasons, it may provide supporting evidence 
 to the local educational agency, which shall consider 
 such evidence before making a final determination.
 ``(10) State educational agency responsibilities.--If a 
 State educational agency determines that a local educational 
 agency failed to carry out its responsibilities under this 
 section, it shall take such action as it finds necessary, 
 consistent with this section, to improve the affected schools 
 and to ensure that the local educational agency carries out its 
 responsibilities under this section.
 ``(c) State Review and Local Educational Agency Improvement.--
 ``(1) In general.--A State educational agency shall--
 ``(A) annually review the progress of each local 
 educational agency receiving funds under this part to 
 determine whether schools receiving assistance under 
 this part are making adequate yearly progress as 
 defined in section 1111(b)(2) toward meeting the 
 State's student performance standards; and
 ``(B) publicize and disseminate to local 
 educational agencies, teachers and other staff, 
 parents, students, and the community the results of the 
 State review consistent with section 1111, including 
 statistically sound disaggregated results, as required 
 by section 1111(b)(2).
 ``(2) Identification of local educational agency for 
 improvement.--A State educational agency shall identify for 
 improvement any local educational agency that--
 ``(A) for 2 consecutive years failed to make 
 adequate yearly progress as defined in the State's plan 
 under section 1111(b)(2); or
 ``(B) was in improvement status under this section 
 as this section was in effect on the day preceding the 
 date of enactment of the Leave No Child Behind Act of 
 2001.
 ``(3) Transition.--The 2-year period described in paragraph 
 (2)(A) shall include any continuous period of time immediately 
 preceding the date of enactment of the Leave No Child Behind 
 Act of 2001, during which a local educational agency did not 
 make adequate yearly progress as defined in the State's plan, 
 as such plan was in effect on the day preceding the date of 
 such enactment.
 ``(4) Targeted assistance schools.--For purposes of 
 targeted assistance schools in a local educational agency, a 
 State educational agency may choose to review the progress of 
 only the students in such schools who are served under this 
 part.
 ``(5) Opportunity to review and present evidence.--
 ``(A) Review.--Before identifying a local 
 educational agency for improvement under paragraph (2), 
 a State educational agency shall provide the local 
 educational agency with an opportunity to review the 
 local educational agency data, including assessment 
 data, on which that proposed identification is based.
 ``(B) Supporting evidence.--If the local educational agency 
 believes that the proposed identification is in error for 
 statistical or other substantive reasons, it may provide 
 supporting evidence to the State educational agency, which such 
 agency shall consider before making a final determination.
 ``(6) Notification to parents.--The State educational 
 agency shall promptly notify parents in a format, and to the 
 extent practicable in a language they can understand, of each 
 student enrolled in a school in a local educational agency 
 identified for improvement, of the reasons for such agency's 
 identification and how parents can participate in upgrading the 
 quality of the local educational agency.
 ``(7) Local educational agency revisions.--
 ``(A) Plan.--Each local educational agency 
 identified under paragraph (2) shall, not later than 3 
 months after being so identified, develop or revise a 
 local educational agency plan, in consultation with 
 parents, school staff, and others. Such plan shall--
 ``(i) incorporate scientifically based 
 research strategies that strengthen the core 
 academic program in the local educational 
 agency;
 ``(ii) identify specific goals and 
 objectives the local educational agency will 
 undertake to make adequate yearly progress and 
 which--
 ``(I) have the greatest likelihood 
 of improving the performance of 
 participating children in meeting the 
 State's student performance standards;
 ``(II) address the professional 
 development needs of staff; and
 ``(III) include specific numerical 
 performance goals and targets for each 
 of the groups of students identified in 
 the disaggregated data pursuant to 
 section 1111(b)(2) consistent with 
 section 1111(b)(2)(B);
 ``(iii) identify how the local educational 
 agency will provide written notification to 
 parents in a format, and to the extent 
 practicable in a language, they can understand, 
 pursuant to paragraph (6); and
 ``(iv) specify the responsibilities of the 
 State educational agency and the local 
 educational agency under the plan.
 ``(B) Implementation.--The local educational agency 
 shall implement its plan or revised plan expeditiously, 
 but not later than the beginning of the school year 
 after which the school has been identified for 
 improvement.
 ``(8) State educational agency responsibility.--
 ``(A) In general.--For each local educational 
 agency identified under paragraph (2), the State 
 educational agency shall provide technical or other 
 assistance, if requested, as authorized under section 
 1117, to better enable the local educational agency--
 ``(i) to develop and implement its revised 
 plan as approved by the State educational 
 agency consistent with the requirements of this 
 section; and
 ``(ii) to work with schools needing 
 improvement.
 ``(B) Technical assistance.--Technical assistance 
 provided under this section by the State educational 
 agency or an entity authorized by such agency shall be 
 based upon scientifically based research.
 ``(9) Corrective action.--In order to help students served 
 under this part meet challenging State standards, each State 
 educational agency shall implement a system of corrective 
 action in accordance with the following:
 ``(A) In general.--After providing technical 
 assistance under paragraph (8) and subject to 
 subparagraph (D), the State educational agency--
 ``(i) may take corrective action at any 
 time with respect to a local educational agency 
 that has been identified under paragraph (2);
 ``(ii) shall take corrective action with 
 respect to any local educational agency that 
 fails to make adequate yearly progress, as 
 defined by the State, after the end of the 
 second year following its identification under 
 paragraph (2); and
 ``(iii) shall continue to provide technical 
 assistance while instituting any corrective 
 action under clause (i) or (ii).
 ``(B) Definition.--As used in this paragraph, the 
 term `corrective action' means action, consistent with 
 State law, that--
 ``(i) substantially and directly responds 
 to the consistent academic failure that caused 
 the State educational agency to take such 
 action and to any underlying staffing, 
 curricular, or other problems in the school; 
 and
 ``(ii) is designed to meet the goal of 
 having all students served under this part 
 perform at the proficient and advanced 
 performance levels.
 ``(C) Certain local educational agencies.--In the 
 case of a local educational agency described in this 
 paragraph, the State educational agency shall take not 
 less than 1 of the following corrective actions:
 ``(i) Withhold funds from the local 
 educational agency.
 ``(ii) Reconstitute school district 
 personnel.
 ``(iii) Remove particular schools from the 
 jurisdiction of the local educational agency 
 and establish alternative arrangements for 
 public governance and supervision of such 
 schools.
 ``(iv) Appoint, through the State 
 educational agency, a receiver or trustee to 
 administer the affairs of the local educational 
 agency in place of the superintendent and 
 school board.
 ``(v) Abolish or restructure the local 
 educational agency.
 ``(vi) Authorize students to transfer from 
 a school operated by a local educational agency 
 to a higher performing public school operated 
 by another local educational agency, or to a 
 public charter school and provide such students 
 transportation (or the costs of transportation) 
 to such schools, in conjunction with not less 
 than 1 additional action described under this 
 paragraph.
 ``(D) Hearing.--Prior to implementing any 
 corrective action, the State educational agency shall 
 provide due process and a hearing to the affected local 
 educational agency, if State law provides for such 
 process and hearing.
 ``(E) Publication.--The State educational agency 
 shall publish, and disseminate to parents and the 
 public any corrective action it takes under this 
 paragraph through such means as the Internet, the 
 media, and public agencies.
 ``(F) Delay.--A State educational agency may delay, 
 for a period not to exceed 1 year, implementation of 
 corrective action if the failure to make adequate 
 yearly progress was justified due to exceptional or 
 uncontrollable circumstances such as a natural disaster 
 or a precipitous and unforeseen decline in the 
 financial resources of the local educational agency or 
 school.''.

SEC. 3440. STATE ASSISTANCE FOR SCHOOL SUPPORT AND IMPROVEMENT.

 Section 1117 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 6318) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 1117. STATE ASSISTANCE FOR SCHOOL SUPPORT AND IMPROVEMENT.

 ``(a) System for Support.--Each State educational agency shall 
establish a statewide system of intensive and sustained support and 
improvement for local educational agencies and schools receiving funds 
under this part, in order to increase the opportunity for all students 
in those agencies and schools to meet the State's content standards and 
student performance standards.
 ``(b) Priorities.--In carrying out this section, a State 
educational agency shall--
 ``(1) first, provide support and assistance to local 
 educational agencies subject to corrective action under section 
 1116 and assist schools, in accordance with section 
 1116(b)(10), for which a local educational agency has failed to 
 carry out its responsibilities under paragraph (8) or (9) of 
 section 1116(b);
 ``(2) second, provide support and assistance to other local 
 educational agencies identified for improvement under section 
 1116; and
 ``(3) third, provide support and assistance to other local 
 educational agencies and schools participating under this part 
 that need that support and assistance in order to achieve the 
 purpose of this part.
 ``(c) Approaches.--In order to achieve the purpose described in 
subsection (a), each such system shall provide technical assistance and 
support through such approaches as--
 ``(1) school support teams, composed of individuals who are 
 knowledgeable about scientifically based research on and 
 practice of teaching and learning, particularly about 
 strategies for improving educational results for low-achieving 
 children; and
 ``(2) the designation and use of ``Distinguished 
 Educators'', chosen from schools served under this part that 
 have been especially successful in improving academic 
 achievement.
 ``(d) Funds.--Each State educational agency shall use funds 
reserved under section 1002(f) and authorized under section 1002(i) for 
such purpose.
 ``(e) Alternatives.--The State may devise additional approaches to 
providing the assistance described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of 
subsection (c), such as providing assistance through institutions of 
higher education and educational service agencies or other local 
consortia, and the State may seek approval from the Secretary to use 
funds made available under section 1002(h) for such approaches as part 
of the State plan.''.

SEC. 3441. ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT AWARDS PROGRAM; IMPROVING STATE 
 ASSESSMENTS.

 Subpart 1 of part A of title I of the Elementary and Secondary 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6311 et seq.) is amended by inserting 
after section 1117 the following:

``SEC. 1117A. ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT AWARDS PROGRAM.

 ``(a) Establishment of Academic Achievement Awards Program.--
 ``(1) In general.--Each State receiving a grant under this 
 part shall establish a program for making academic achievement 
 awards to recognize and financially reward schools served under 
 this part that have--
 ``(A) significantly closed the achievement gap 
 between the groups of students defined in section 
 1111(b)(2); or
 ``(B) exceeded their adequate yearly progress 
 goals, consistent with section 1111(b)(2), for 2 or 
 more consecutive years.
 ``(2) Awards to teachers.--A State program under paragraph 
 (1) shall also recognize and provide financial awards to 
 teachers teaching in a school described in such paragraph whose 
 students consistently make significant gains in academic 
 achievement in the areas in which the teacher provides 
 instruction over multiple academic years.
 ``(b) Funding.--
 ``(1) Reservation of funds by state.--For the purpose of 
 carrying out this section, each State receiving a grant under 
 this part shall reserve, from the amount (if any) by which the 
 funds received by the State under this part for a fiscal year 
 exceed the amount received by the State under this part for the 
 preceding fiscal year, not more than 25 percent of such excess 
 amount.
 ``(2) Use within 3 years.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of law, the amount reserved under paragraph (1) by a 
 State for each fiscal year shall remain available to the State 
 until expended for a period not exceeding 3 years.
 ``(3) Special allocation rule for schools in high-poverty 
 areas.--
 ``(A) In general.--Each State receiving a grant 
 under this part shall distribute at least 85 percent of 
 the amount reserved under paragraph (1) for each fiscal 
 year to schools described in subparagraph (B), or to 
 teachers teaching in such schools.
 ``(B) Schools described.--A school described in 
 subparagraph (A) is a school whose student population 
 is in the highest quartile of schools statewide in 
 terms of the percentage of children eligible for free 
 or reduced priced lunches under the Richard B. Russell 
 National School Lunch Act.

``SEC. 1117B. GRANTS FOR THE IMPROVEMENT OF STATE ASSESSMENT SYSTEMS.

 ``(a) Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to enable States to 
improve the quality and fairness of State assessment systems and to 
ensure that such assessment systems accurately measure how well all 
children are achieving challenging State student performance standards.
 ``(b) Program Authorized.--The Secretary is authorized to award 
grants, in an amount not less than $500,000, to State educational 
agencies with final assessment systems that have been reviewed by the 
Secretary and approved as being deemed in full compliance with section 
1111(b)(4).
 ``(c) Application.--A State educational agency desiring a grant 
under this section for any fiscal year, shall submit an application to 
the Secretary for approval, at such time and containing such 
information as the Secretary may require.
 ``(d) Authorized Uses of Funds.--States having an approved 
application under subsection (c) may use grant funds for the purpose 
of--
 ``(1) assuring the continued validity and reliability of 
 State assessments;
 ``(2) refining the assessments to ensure their continued 
 alignment with the State's content standards;
 ``(3) providing for multiple measures to increase the 
 reliability and validity of student and school classifications 
 that have high stakes consequences;
 ``(4) strengthening the capacity of local educational 
 agencies and schools to provide all students the opportunity to 
 increase educational achievement and to ensure fairness and 
 equitable treatment in testing;
 ``(5) expanding the range of accommodations available to 
 limited English proficient students and students with 
 disabilities to improve rates of inclusion and to include 
 instructional material development and modified assessment 
 practices that are culturally and ability appropriate, 
 respectively;
 ``(6) improving the alignment of curricula and instruction 
 materials with the State content standards and State 
 performance standards;
 ``(7) enhancing opportunities for professional development 
 for teachers that include--
 ``(A) improving the capability of teachers to be 
 proficient in sound classroom assessment and 
 knowledgeable in State content and performance 
 standards and assessments; and
 ``(B) improving the capability of teachers to 
 provide high quality instruction within the content 
 areas;
 ``(8) providing for the collection of performance data for 
 children in kindergarten through grade 2--
 ``(A) for early diagnosis of children's needs;
 ``(B) to evaluate program effectiveness;
 ``(C) to guide curriculum and instruction; or
 ``(D) to provide information that can be used to 
 measure school and local educational agency progress;
 ``(9) expanding the range of valid and reliable assessments 
 to other academic subjects such as science, history, geography, 
 foreign languages, the arts, civic and government, and 
 economics; and
 ``(10) improving the dissemination of information on 
 student achievement and school performance to parents and the 
 community.
 ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section, $100,000,000 for fiscal year 
2002, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 4 succeeding 
fiscal years.''.

SEC. 3442. PARENTAL INVOLVEMENT CHANGES.

 (a) Local Educational Agency Policy.--Subsection (a) of section 
1118 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
6319(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``programs, activities, 
 and procedures'' and inserting ``activities and procedures''.
 (2) in paragraph (2) by striking subparagraphs (E) and (F) 
 and inserting the following:
 ``(E) conduct, with the involvement of parents, an 
 annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of 
 the parental involvement policy in improving the 
 academic quality of the schools served under this part;
 ``(F) involve parents in efforts to improve 
 academics in schools served under this part; and
 ``(G) promote consumer friendly environments at the 
 local educational agency and schools served under this 
 part.'';
 (3) in paragraph (3) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(C) Not less than 90 percent of the funds reserved under 
 subparagraph (A) shall be distributed to schools served under 
 this part.''.
 (b) Notice.--Paragraph (1) of section 1118(b) of the Elementary and 
Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6319(b)(1)) is amended by 
inserting after the first sentence the following: ``Parents shall be 
notified of the policy in a format, and to the extent practicable, in a 
language they can understand.''.
 (c) Parental Involvement.--Paragraph (4) of section 1118(c) of the 
Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6319(c)(4)) 
is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``performance profiles 
 required under section 1116(a)(3)'' and inserting ``school 
 report cards required under section 1111'';
 (2) by redesignating subparagraphs (D) and (E) as 
 subparagraphs (F) and (G), respectively;
 (3) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following new 
 subparagraphs:
 ``(D) notice of the school's status as a school 
 identified for school improvement under section 
 1116(b), if applicable, and a clear explanation of what 
 such identification means;
 ``(E) notice of the corrective action that has been 
 taken against the school under section 1116(b)(9) and 
 1116(c)(9), if applicable, and a clear explanation of 
 what such action means;''; and
 (4) in subparagraph (G) (as so redesignated), by striking 
 ``subparagraph (D)'' and inserting ``subparagraph (F)''.
 (d) Building Capacity for Involvement.--Subsection (e) of section 
1118 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C 
6319(e)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(e) Building Capacity for Involvement.--To ensure effective 
involvement of parents and to support a partnership among the school, 
parents, and the community to improve student achievement, each school 
and local educational agency--
 ``(1) shall provide assistance to participating parents in 
 such areas as understanding the State's content standards and 
 State student performance standards, the provisions of section 
 1111(b)(8), State and local assessments, the requirements of 
 this part, and how to monitor a child's progress and work with 
 educators to improve the performance of their children as well 
 as information on how parents can participate in decisions 
 relating to the education of their children;
 ``(2) shall provide materials and training, such as--
 ``(A) coordinating necessary literacy training from 
 other sources to help parents work with their children 
 to improve their children's achievement; and
 ``(B) training to help parents work with their 
 children to improve their children's achievement;
 ``(3) shall educate teachers, pupil services personnel, 
 principals, and other staff, with the assistance of parents, in 
 the value and utility of contributions of parents, and in how 
 to reach out to, communicate with, and work with parents as 
 equal partners, implement and coordinate parent programs, and 
 build ties between home and school;
 ``(4) shall coordinate and integrate parent involvement 
 programs and activities with Head Start, Even Start, the Home 
 Instruction Programs for Preschool Youngsters, the Parents as 
 Teachers Program, and public preschool programs and other 
 programs, to the extent feasible and appropriate;
 ``(5) shall conduct other activities, as appropriate and 
 feasible, such as parent resource centers and opportunities for 
 parents to learn how to become full partners in the education 
 of their children;
 ``(6) shall ensure, to the extent possible, that 
 information related to school and parent programs, meetings, 
 and other activities is sent to the homes of participating 
 children in the language used in such homes;
 ``(7) shall provide such other reasonable support for 
 parental involvement activities under this section as parents 
 may request;
 ``(8) shall expand the use of electronic communications 
 among teachers, students, and parents, such as through the use 
 of websites and e-mail communications;
 ``(9) may involve parents in the development of training 
 for teachers, principals, and other educators to improve the 
 effectiveness of such training in improving instruction and 
 services to the children of such parents in a format, and to 
 the extent practicable, in a language the parents can 
 understand;
 ``(10) may provide necessary literacy training from funds 
 received under this part if the local educational agency has 
 exhausted all other reasonably available sources of funding for 
 such activities;
 ``(11) may pay reasonable and necessary expenses associated 
 with local parental involvement activities, including 
 transportation and child care costs, to enable parents to 
 participate in school-related meetings and training sessions;
 ``(12) may train and support parents to enhance the 
 involvement of other parents;
 ``(13) may arrange meetings at a variety of times, such as 
 in the mornings and evenings, in order to maximize the 
 opportunities for parents to participate in school related 
 activities;
 ``(14) may arrange for teachers or other educators, who 
 work directly with participating children, to conduct in-home 
 conferences with parents who are unable to attend such 
 conferences at school;
 ``(15) may adopt and implement model approaches to 
 improving parental involvement, such as Even Start;
 ``(16) may establish a district-wide parent advisory 
 council to advise on all matters related to parental 
 involvement in programs supported under this part; and
 ``(17) may develop appropriate roles for community-based 
 organizations and businesses in parent involvement activities, 
 including providing information about opportunities for 
 organizations and businesses to work with parents and schools, 
 and encouraging the formation of partnerships between 
 elementary, middle, and secondary schools and local businesses 
 that include a role for parents.''.
 (e) Accessibility.--Subsection (f) of section 1118 of the 
Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6319(f)) is 
amended to read as follows:
 ``(f) Accessibility.--In carrying out the parental involvement 
requirements of this part, local educational agencies and schools, to 
the extent practicable, shall provide full opportunities for the 
participation of parents with limited English proficiency, parents with 
disabilities, and parents of migratory children, including providing 
information and school report cards required under section 1111 in a 
format, and to the extent practicable, in a language such parents 
understand.''.

SEC. 3443. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT.

 Subpart 1 of part A of title I of the Elementary and Secondary 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6311 et seq.) is amended by inserting 
after section 1119 the following:

``SEC. 1119A. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT.

 ``(a) Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to assist each local 
educational agency receiving assistance under this part in increasing 
the academic achievement of eligible children (as defined in section 
1115(b)(1)(B)) through improved teacher quality.
 ``(b) Professional Development Activities.--
 ``(1) Required activities.--Professional development 
 activities under this section shall--
 ``(A) support professional development activities 
 that give teachers, principals, and administrators the 
 knowledge and skills to provide students with the 
 opportunity to meet challenging State or local content 
 standards and student performance standards;
 ``(B) support the recruiting, hiring, and training 
 of fully qualified teachers, including teachers fully 
 qualified through State and local alternative routes;
 ``(C) advance teacher understanding of effective 
 instructional strategies based on scientifically based 
 research for improving student achievement, at a 
 minimum, in reading or language arts and mathematics;
 ``(D) be directly related to the curriculum and 
 content areas in which the teacher provides 
 instruction;
 ``(E) be designed to enhance the ability of a 
 teacher to understand and use the State's standards for 
 the subject area in which the teacher provides 
 instruction;
 ``(F) be tied to scientifically based research 
 demonstrating the effectiveness of such professional 
 development activities or programs in increasing 
 student achievement or substantially increasing the 
 knowledge and teaching skills of teachers;
 ``(G) be of sufficient intensity and duration (not 
 to include 1-day or short-term workshops and 
 conferences) to have a positive and lasting impact on 
 the teacher's performance in the classroom, except that 
 this paragraph shall not apply to an activity if such 
 activity is 1 component of a long-term comprehensive 
 professional development plan established by the 
 teacher and the teacher's supervisor based upon an 
 assessment of their needs, their students' needs, and 
 the needs of the local educational agency;
 ``(H) be developed with extensive participation of 
 teachers, principals, parents, and administrators of 
 schools to be served under this part;
 ``(I) to the extent appropriate, provide training 
 for teachers in the use of technology so that 
 technology and its applications are effectively used in 
 the classroom to improve teaching and learning in the 
 curriculum and academic content areas in which the 
 teachers provide instruction;
 ``(J) as a whole, be regularly evaluated for their 
 impact on increased teacher effectiveness and improved 
 student achievement, with the findings of such 
 evaluations used to improve the quality of professional 
 development; and
 ``(K) include strategies for identifying and 
 eliminating gender and racial bias in instructional 
 materials, methods, and practices.
 ``(2) Optional activities.--Such professional development 
 activities may include--
 ``(A) instruction in the use of data and 
 assessments to inform and instruct classroom practice;
 ``(B) instruction in ways that teachers, 
 principals, pupil services personnel, and school 
 administrators may work more effectively with parents;
 ``(C) the forming of partnerships with institutions 
 of higher education to establish school-based teacher 
 training programs that provide prospective teachers and 
 novice teachers with an opportunity to work under the 
 guidance of experienced teachers and college faculty, 
 but only if each such institution of higher education 
 meets the reporting requirements of section 207 of the 
 Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1027) and its 
 teacher preparation program has not been identified by 
 its State as low-performing under such Act;
 ``(D) the creation of career ladder programs for 
 paraprofessionals (assisting teachers under this part) 
 to obtain the education necessary for such 
 paraprofessionals to become licensed and certified 
 teachers;
 ``(E) instruction in ways to teach special needs 
 children;
 ``(F) instruction in the ways that teachers, 
 principals, and guidance counselors can work with 
 parents and students from groups such as females and 
 minorities that are under represented in careers in 
 mathematics, science, engineering, and technology, to 
 encourage and maintain the interest of such students in 
 these careers;
 ``(G) joint professional development activities 
 involving programs under this part, Head Start, Even 
 Start, or State-run preschool program personnel;
 ``(H) instruction in experiential-based teaching 
 methods such as service or applied learning;
 ``(I) mentoring programs focusing on changing 
 teacher behaviors and practices to help novice 
 teachers, including teachers who are members of a 
 minority group, develop and gain confidence in their 
 skills, to increase the likelihood that they will 
 continue in the teaching profession, and generally to 
 improve the quality of their teaching; and
 ``(J) instruction in gender-equitable methods, 
 techniques, and practices.
 ``(c) Program Participation.--Each local educational agency 
receiving assistance under this part may design professional 
development programs so that--
 ``(1) all school staff in schools participating in a 
 schoolwide program under section 1114 can participate in 
 professional development activities; and
 ``(2) all school staff in targeted assistance schools may 
 participate in professional development activities if such 
 participation will result in better addressing the needs of 
 students served under this part.
 ``(d) Parental Participation.--Parents may participate in 
professional development activities under this part if the school 
determines that parental participation is appropriate.
 ``(e) Consortia.--In carrying out such professional development 
programs, local educational agencies may provide services through 
consortia arrangements with other local educational agencies, 
educational service agencies or other local consortia, institutions of 
higher education, or other public or private institutions or 
organizations, but only if each such institution of higher education 
meets the reporting requirements of section 207 of the Higher Education 
Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1027) and its teacher preparation program has 
not been identified by its State as low-performing under such Act.
 ``(f) Consolidation of Funds.--Funds provided under this part that 
are used for professional development purposes may be consolidated with 
funds provided under title II of this Act and other sources.
 ``(g) Special Rule.--No State educational agency shall require a 
school or a local educational agency to expend a specific amount of 
funds for professional development activities under this part, except 
that this paragraph shall not apply with respect to requirements under 
section 1116(c)(9).''.

SEC. 3444. REQUIREMENTS; RECORDS.

 (a) Requirements.--Section 1120A(c)(2) of the Elementary and 
Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6322(c)(2)) is amended to 
read as follows:
 ``(2) Criteria for meeting comparability requirement.--
 ``(A) Approval.--To meet the requirement of 
 paragraph (1), a local educational agency shall obtain 
 the State educational agency's approval of a 
 comprehensive, 3-year plan to ensure comparability in 
 the use of State and local funds and educational 
 services among its schools receiving funds under this 
 part and its other schools with respect to:
 ``(i) the rates at which class sections are 
 taught by experienced and fully qualified 
 teachers, including such rates for low-income 
 and minority students;
 ``(ii) curriculum, in terms of both the 
 range of courses offered, and the opportunity 
 to participate in rigorous courses including 
 advanced placement (AP) courses, including such 
 rates for low-income and minority students; and
 ``(iii) the quality and availability of 
 instructional materials and instructional 
 resources including technology.''
 ``(B) Exclusion.--A local educational agency need 
 not include unpredictable changes in student enrollment 
 or personnel assignments that occur after the beginning 
of a school year in determining comparability of services under this 
subsection.
 ``(C) Requirements.--Notwithstanding subparagraph 
 (A), a local educational agency may continue to meet 
 the requirement of paragraph (1) by complying with 
 subparagraph (A) as such subparagraph was in effect on 
 the day preceding the date of enactment of the Leave No 
 Child Behind Act of 2001, except that each local 
 educational agency shall be required to comply with 
 subparagraph (A), as amended by such Act not later than 
 July 1, 2004.''.
 (b) Records.--Section 1120A(c)(3)(B) of the Elementary and 
Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6322(c)(3)(B)) is amended by 
striking ``biennially'' and inserting ``annually''.

SEC. 3445. COORDINATION REQUIREMENTS.

 Section 1120B of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 6323 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``to the extent 
 feasible'' and all that follows through the period and 
 inserting ``with local Head Start agencies, and if feasible, 
 other early childhood development programs.'';
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (3) by striking ``and'' after the 
 semicolon;
 (B) in paragraph (4) by striking the period and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end, the following:
 ``(5) linking the educational services provided in such 
 local educational agency with the services provided in local 
 Head Start agencies.''.

 Chapter 5--Quality Teaching and Leadership

 Subchapter A--Amendments to Title II of the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965

SEC. 3461. AMENDMENTS TO TITLE II.

 Title II of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 6601 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating part E as part J;
 (2) by redesignating sections 2401 and 2402 as sections 
 2901 and 2902 respectively; and
 (3) by inserting after part D the following:

 ``PART E--CLASS SIZE REDUCTION

``SEC. 2401. GRANT PROGRAM.

 ``(a) Purposes.--The purposes of this section are--
 ``(1) to reduce class size through the use of fully 
 qualified teachers;
 ``(2) to assist States and local educational agencies in 
 recruiting, hiring, and training 100,000 teachers in order to 
 reduce class sizes nationally, in kindergarten through grade 3, 
 to an average of 18 students per regular classroom; and
 ``(3) to improve teaching in those grades so that all 
 students can learn to read independently and well by the end of 
 the 3d grade.
 ``(b) Allotment to States.--
 ``(1) Reservation.--From the amount made available to carry 
 out this part for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall reserve 
 not more than 1 percent for the Secretary of the Interior (on 
 behalf of the Bureau of Indian Affairs) and the outlying areas 
 for activities carried out in accordance with this section.
 ``(2) State allotments.--
 ``(A) Hold harmless.--
 ``(i) In general.--Subject to subparagraph 
 (B) and clause (ii), from the amount made 
 available to carry out this part for a fiscal 
 year and not reserved under paragraph (1), the 
 Secretary shall allot to each State an amount 
 equal to the amount that such State received 
 for the preceding fiscal year under this 
 section or section 306 of the Department of 
 Education Appropriations Act, 2001, as the case 
 may be.
 ``(ii) Ratable reduction.--If the amount 
 made available to carry out this part for a 
 fiscal year and not reserved under paragraph 
 (1) is insufficient to pay the full amounts 
 that all States are eligible to receive under 
 clause (i) for such fiscal year, the Secretary 
 shall ratably reduce such amounts for such 
 fiscal year.
 ``(B) Allotment of additional funds.--
 ``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), 
 for any fiscal year for which the amount made 
 available to carry out this part and not 
 reserved under paragraph (1) exceeds the amount 
 made available to the States for the preceding 
 year under the authorities described in 
 subparagraph (A)(i), the Secretary shall allot 
 to each of those States the percentage of the 
 excess amount that is the greater of--
 ``(I) the percentage the State 
 received for the preceding fiscal year 
 of the total amount made available to 
 the States under section 1122; or
 ``(II) the percentage so received 
 of the total amount made available to 
 the States under section 6101(b), as in 
 effect on the day before the date of 
 enactment of the Leave No Child Behind 
 Act of 2001, or the corresponding 
 provision of this title, as the case 
 may be.
 ``(ii) Ratable reductions.--If the excess 
 amount for a fiscal year is insufficient to pay 
 the full amounts that all States are eligible 
 to receive under clause (i) for such fiscal 
 year, the Secretary shall ratably reduce such 
 amounts for such fiscal year.
 ``(c) Allocation to Local Educational Agencies.--
 ``(1) Allocation.--Each State that receives funds under 
 this section shall allocate 100 percent of those funds to local 
 educational agencies, of which--
 ``(A) 80 percent shall be allocated to those local 
 educational agencies in proportion to the number of 
 children, age 5 through 17, from families with incomes 
 below the poverty line (as defined by the Office of 
 Management and Budget and revised annually in 
 accordance with section 673(2) of the Community 
 Services Block Grant Act (42 U.S.C. 9902(2))) 
 applicable to a family of the size involved, who reside 
 in the school district served by that local educational 
 agency for the most recent fiscal year for which 
 satisfactory data are available, compared to the number 
 of those children who reside in the school districts 
 served by all the local educational agencies in the 
 State for that fiscal year; and
 ``(B) 20 percent shall be allocated to those local 
 educational agencies in accordance with the relative 
 enrollments of children, age 5 through 17, in public 
 and private nonprofit elementary schools and secondary 
 schools within the areas served by those agencies.
 ``(2) Exception.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1) and 
 subsection (d)(2)(B), if the award to a local educational 
 agency under this section is less than the starting salary for 
 a new fully qualified teacher for a school served by that 
 agency, that agency may use funds made available under this 
 section to--
 ``(A) help pay the salary of a full- or part-time 
 fully qualified teacher hired to reduce class size, 
 which may be done in combination with the expenditure 
 of other Federal, State, or local funds; or
 ``(B) pay for activities described in subsection 
 (d)(2)(A)(iii) that may be related to teaching in 
 smaller classes.
 ``(d) Use of Funds.--
 ``(1) Mandatory uses.--Each local educational agency that 
 receives funds under this section shall use those funds to 
 carry out effective approaches to reducing class size through 
 use of fully qualified teachers to improve educational 
 achievement for both regular and special needs children, with 
 particular consideration given to reducing class size in the 
early elementary grades for which some research has shown class size 
reduction is most effective.
 ``(2) Permissible uses.--
 ``(A) In general.--Each such local educational 
 agency may use funds made available under this section 
 for--
 ``(i) recruiting (including through the use 
 of signing bonuses and other financial 
 incentives), hiring, and training fully 
 qualified regular and special education 
 teachers (which may include hiring special 
 education teachers to team-teach with regular 
 teachers in classrooms that contain both 
 children with disabilities and non-disabled 
 children) and teachers of special needs 
 children;
 ``(ii) testing new teachers for academic 
 content knowledge, and to meet State 
 certification or licensing requirements that 
 are consistent with title II of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965; and
 ``(iii) providing professional development 
 (which may include such activities as promoting 
 retention and mentoring) for teachers, 
 including special education teachers and 
 teachers of special needs children, in order to 
 meet the goal of ensuring that all teachers 
 have the general knowledge, teaching skills, 
 and subject matter knowledge necessary to teach 
 effectively in the content areas in which the 
 teachers teach, consistent with title II of the 
 Higher Education Act of 1965.
 ``(B) Limitation on testing and professional 
 development.--
 ``(i) In general.--Except as provided in 
 clause (ii), a local educational agency may use 
 not more than a total of 25 percent of the 
 funds received by the agency under this section 
 for activities described in clauses (ii) and 
 (iii) of subparagraph (A).
 ``(ii) Special rule.--A local educational 
 agency may use more than 25 percent of the 
 funds the agency receives under this section 
 for activities described in subparagraph 
 (A)(iii) for the purpose of helping teachers 
 who are not yet fully qualified in attaining 
 full qualification if 10 percent or more of the 
 elementary school classes in a school are 
 taught by individuals who are not fully 
 qualified teachers or the State educational 
 agency has waived State certification or 
 licensing requirements for 10 percent or more 
 of such teachers.
 ``(C) Use of funds by agencies that have reduced 
 class size.--Notwithstanding subparagraph (B), a local 
 educational agency that has already reduced class size 
 in the early elementary grades to 18 or fewer children 
 (or has already reduced class size to a State or local 
 class size reduction goal that was in effect on 
 November 28, 1999 if that goal is 20 or fewer children) 
 may use funds received under this section--
 ``(i) to make further class size reductions 
 in kindergarten through third grade;
 ``(ii) to reduce class size in other 
 grades; or
 ``(iii) to carry out activities to improve 
 teacher quality, including professional 
 development.
 ``(3) Supplement, not supplant.--Each such agency shall use 
 funds made available under this section only to supplement, and 
 not to supplant, State and local funds that, in the absence of 
 funds made available under this section, would otherwise be 
 expended for activities described in this section.
 ``(4) Limitation on use for salaries and benefits.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), no funds made available under this 
 section may be used to increase the salaries of, or 
 provide benefits (other than participation in 
 professional development and enrichment programs) to, 
 teachers who are not hired under this section.
 ``(B) Exception.--Funds made available under this 
 section may be used to pay the salaries of teachers 
 hired under section 306 of the Department of Education 
 Appropriations Act, 2001.
 ``(e) Reports.--
 ``(1) State activities.--Each State receiving funds under 
 this section shall prepare and submit to the Secretary a 
 biennial report on activities carried out in the State under 
 this section that provides the information described in section 
 6202(a)(2) with respect to the activities.
 ``(2) Progress concerning class size and qualified 
 teachers.--Each State and local educational agency receiving 
 funds under this section shall annually report to parents and 
 the public, in numeric form as compared to the previous year, 
 on--
 ``(A) the agency's progress in reducing class size, 
 and increasing the percentage of classes in core 
 academic areas taught by fully qualified teachers ; and
 ``(B) the impact that hiring additional fully 
 qualified teachers and reducing class size, has had, if 
 any, on increasing student academic achievement.
 ``(3) Notice.--Each local educational agency that receives 
 funds under this section shall provide, to each individual 
 parent of a child who attends a school served by such local 
 educational agency, timely, written notice if the child has 
 been assigned or has been taught for 2 or more consecutive 
 weeks by a substitute teacher, as defined by such local 
 educational agency, or a teacher who is not fully qualified.
 ``(f) Private Schools.--If a local educational agency uses funds 
made available under this section for professional development 
activities, the agency shall ensure the equitable participation of 
private nonprofit elementary schools and secondary schools in such 
activities in accordance with section 6402. Section 6402 shall not 
apply to other activities carried out under this section.
 ``(g) Administrative Expenses.--A local educational agency that 
receives funds under this section may use not more than 3 percent of 
such funds for local administrative costs.
 ``(h) Application.--Each local educational agency that desires to 
receive funds under this section shall submit an application to the 
State educational agency at such time, in such manner, and containing 
such information as the State educational agency may require. Each such 
application shall include a description of the agency's program to 
reduce class size by hiring additional fully qualified teachers.
 ``(i) Certification, Licensing, and Competency.--No funds made 
available under this section may be used to pay the salary of any 
teacher unless such teacher is fully qualified.
 ``(j) Definition.--As used in this section, the term `certified' 
includes certification through State or local alternative routes.

``SEC. 2402. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part 
$2,537,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, $3,452,000,000 for fiscal year 
2003, $4,336,000,000 for fiscal year 2004, and $5,281,000,000 for each 
of fiscal years 2005 and 2006.

 ``PART F--TROOPS TO TEACHERS

``SEC. 2501. FINDINGS.

 ``Congress finds the following:
 ``(1) School districts will need to hire more than 
 2,000,000 teachers during the first decade of the 21st century.
 ``(2) The need for teachers in the areas of mathematics, 
 science, foreign languages, special education, and bilingual 
 education, and for teachers able to teach in high-poverty 
 school districts, will be particularly high. To meet this need, 
 talented Americans of all ages should be recruited to become 
 successful, qualified teachers.
 ``(3) Nearly 13 percent of teachers of academic subjects 
 have neither an undergraduate major nor minor in their main 
assignment fields. This problem is most acute in high-poverty local 
educational agencies, where the out-of-field teaching percentage is 22 
percent.
 ``(4) The Third International Math and Science Study 
 (TIMSS) ranked United States high school seniors last among 16 
 countries in physics and next to last in mathematics. It is 
 also evident, mainly from the TIMSS data, that based on 
 academic scores, a stronger emphasis needs to be placed on the 
 academic preparation of our children in mathematics and 
 science.
 ``(5) One-fourth of high-poverty local educational agencies 
 find it very difficult to fill bilingual teaching positions, 
 and nearly half of public school teachers have students in 
 their classrooms for whom English is a second language.
 ``(6) Many career-changing professionals with strong 
 content-area skills are interested in a teaching career, but 
 they need assistance in getting the appropriate pedagogical 
 training and classroom experience.
 ``(7) The teacher placement program known as the `troops-
 to-teachers program', which was established by the Secretary of 
 Defense and the Secretary of Transportation under section 1151 
 of title 10, United States Code, has been highly successful in 
 securing high-quality teachers for teaching positions in high-
 poverty local educational agencies.

``SEC. 2502. PURPOSE.

 ``The purpose of this part is to address the need of local 
educational agencies that are high-poverty local educational agencies 
or low-performing local educational agencies for fully qualified 
teachers in particular subject areas, such as mathematics, science, 
foreign languages, bilingual education, and special education, by--
 ``(1) continuing and enhancing the troops-to-teachers 
 program for recruiting and supporting the placement of former 
 members of the Armed Forces as teachers in such local 
 educational agencies; and
 ``(2) recruiting, preparing, placing, and supporting 
 career-changing professionals who have knowledge and experience 
 that will help them become such teachers.

``SEC. 2503. CONTINUATION AND SUPPORT FOR TROOPS-TO-TEACHERS PROGRAM.

 ``(a) Continuation.--The Secretary may enter into a written 
agreement with the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of 
Transportation, or take such other steps as the Secretary determines 
are appropriate, to ensure effective continuation of the troops-to-
teachers program, notwithstanding the duration of the program specified 
in section 1151(c)(1)(A) of title 10, United States Code.
 ``(b) Support.--Before providing any assistance under section 2504 
for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall first--
 ``(1) consult with the Secretary of Defense and the 
 Secretary of Transportation regarding the appropriate amount of 
 funding needed to continue and enhance the troops-to-teachers 
 program; and
 ``(2) upon agreement, transfer that amount to the Secretary 
 of Defense to carry out the troops-to-teachers program.

``SEC. 2504. TRANSITION OF CAREER-CHANGING PROFESSIONALS TO TEACHING.

 ``(a) Authority To Support Transition Programs.--The Secretary may 
use funds appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations 
in section 2507 to award grants to, and enter into contracts or 
cooperative agreements with, institutions of higher education, 
including historically Black colleges and universities and Hispanic-
serving institutions, and public and private nonprofit agencies or 
organizations to recruit, prepare, place, and support career-changing 
professionals as teachers in local educational agencies that are high-
poverty local educational agencies or low-performing local educational 
agencies.
 ``(b) Application.--Each entity described in subsection (a) that 
desires assistance under subsection (a) shall submit an application to 
the Secretary containing such information as the Secretary may require, 
including--
 ``(1) a description of the target group of career-changing 
 professionals upon which the applicant will focus in carrying 
 out its program under this part, including a description of the 
 characteristics of that target group that shows how the 
 knowledge and experience of its members are relevant to meeting 
 the purpose of this part;
 ``(2) a description of how the applicant will identify and 
 recruit career-changing professionals for its program under 
 this part;
 ``(3) a description of the training that career-changing 
 professionals will receive in the program and how that training 
 will relate to their certification as teachers;
 ``(4) a description of how the applicant will ensure that 
 career-changing professionals are placed and teach in high-
 poverty local educational agencies or low-performing local 
 educational agencies;
 ``(5) a description of the teacher induction services 
 (which may be provided through existing induction programs) 
 that the career-changing professionals in the program will 
 receive throughout at least their first year of teaching;
 ``(6) a description of how the applicant will collaborate, 
 as needed, with other institutions, agencies, or organizations 
 to recruit, train, place, and support career-changing 
 professionals under this part, including evidence of the 
 commitment of those institutions, agencies, or organizations to 
 the applicant's program;
 ``(7) a description of how the applicant will evaluate the 
 progress and effectiveness of its program, including--
 ``(A) the program's goals and objectives;
 ``(B) the performance indicators the applicant will 
 use to measure the program's progress; and
 ``(C) the outcome measures that will be used to 
 determine the program's effectiveness; and
 ``(8) an assurance that the applicant will provide to the 
 Secretary such information as the Secretary determines 
 necessary to evaluate the overall effectiveness of programs 
 under this part.

``SEC. 2505. USES OF FUNDS AND PERIOD OF SERVICE.

 ``(a) Authorized Activities.--Funds provided under section 2504 may 
be used for--
 ``(1) recruiting career-changing professionals, including 
 informing them of opportunities under the program and putting 
 them in contact with other institutions, agencies, or 
 organizations that will train, place, and support them;
 ``(2) training stipends and other financial incentives for 
 career-changing professionals in the program, such as moving 
 expenses, not to exceed $5,000, in the aggregate, per 
 participant;
 ``(3) assisting institutions of higher education or other 
 providers of teacher training to tailor their training to meet 
 the particular needs of career-changing professionals;
 ``(4) placement activities, including identifying high-
 poverty, low-performing local educational agencies with needs 
 for the particular skills and characteristics of the newly 
 trained career-changing professionals and assisting those 
 persons to obtain employment in those local educational 
 agencies; and
 ``(5) post-placement induction or support activities.
 ``(b) Period of Service.--A career-changing professional selected 
to participate in a program under this part who completes his or her 
training shall serve in a high-poverty local educational agency or a 
low-performing local educational agency for at least 3 years.
 ``(c) Repayment.--The Secretary shall establish such requirements 
as the Secretary determines appropriate to ensure that career-changing 
professionals who receive a training stipend or other financial 
incentive under subsection (a)(2), but who fail to complete their 
service obligation under subsection (b), repay all or a portion of such 
stipend or other incentive.

``SEC. 2506. EQUITABLE DISTRIBUTION.

 ``To the extent practicable, the Secretary shall make awards and 
enter into contracts and cooperative agreements under section 2504 to 
support teacher placement programs for career-changing professionals in 
different geographic regions of the United States.

``SEC. 2507. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry 
out this part, $40,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 and such sums as may be 
necessary for the next 4 succeeding fiscal years.

 ``PART G--EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATOR PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT

``SEC. 2601. PURPOSE.

 ``In support of the national effort to attain the first of 
America's Education Goals, the purpose of this part is to enhance the 
school readiness of young children, particularly disadvantaged young 
children, and to prevent them from encountering difficulties once they 
enter school, by improving the knowledge and skills of early childhood 
educators who work in communities that have high concentrations of 
children living in poverty.

``SEC. 2602. PROGRAM AUTHORIZED.

 ``(a) Grants to Partnerships.--The Secretary shall carry out the 
purpose of this part by awarding grants, on a competitive basis, to 
partnerships consisting of--
 ``(1)(A) one or more institutions of higher education that 
 provide professional development for early childhood educators 
 who work with children from low-income families in high-need 
 communities; or
 ``(B) another public or private, nonprofit entity that 
 provides such professional development;
 ``(2) one or more public agencies (including local 
 educational agencies, State educational agencies, State human 
 services agencies, and State and local agencies administering 
 programs under the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act 
 of 1990), Head Start agencies, or private, nonprofit 
 organizations; and
 ``(3) to the extent feasible, an entity with demonstrated 
 experience in providing training to educators in early 
 childhood education programs in identifying and preventing 
 behavior problems or working with children identified or 
 suspected to be victims of abuse.
 ``(b) Duration and Number of Grants.--
 ``(1) Duration.--Each grant under this part shall be 
 awarded for not more than 4 years.
 ``(2) Number.--No partnership may receive more than 1 grant 
 under this part.

``SEC. 2603. APPLICATIONS.

 ``(a) Applications Required.--Any partnership that desires to 
receive a grant under this part shall submit an application to the 
Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information 
as the Secretary may require.
 ``(b) Contents.--Each such application shall include--
 ``(1) a description of the high-need community to be served 
 by the project, including such demographic and socioeconomic 
 information as the Secretary may request;
 ``(2) information on the quality of the early childhood 
 educator professional development program currently conducted 
 by the institution of higher education or other provider in the 
 partnership;
 ``(3) the results of the needs assessment that the entities 
 in the partnership have undertaken to determine the most 
 critical professional development needs of the early childhood 
 educators to be served by the partnership and in the broader 
 community, and a description of how the proposed project will 
 address those needs;
 ``(4) a description of how the proposed project will be 
 carried out, including--
 ``(A) how individuals will be selected to 
 participate;
 ``(B) the types of research-based professional 
 development activities that will be carried out;
 ``(C) how research on effective professional 
 development and on adult learning will be used to 
 design and deliver project activities;
 ``(D) how the project will coordinate with and 
 build on, and will not supplant or duplicate, early 
 childhood education professional development activities 
 that exist in the community;
 ``(E) how the project will train early childhood 
 educators to provide services that are based on 
 developmentally appropriate practices and the best 
 available research on child social, emotional, physical 
 and cognitive development and on early childhood 
 pedagogy;
 ``(F) how the program will train early childhood 
 educators to meet the diverse educational needs of 
 children in the community, including children who have 
 limited English proficiency, disabilities, or other 
 special needs; and
 ``(G) how the project will train early childhood 
 educators in identifying and preventing behavioral 
 problems or working with children identified as or 
 suspected to be victims of abuse;
 ``(5) a description of--
 ``(A) the specific objectives that the partnership 
 will seek to attain through the project, and how the 
 partnership will measure progress toward attainment of 
 those objectives; and
 ``(B) how the objectives and the measurement 
 activities align with the performance indicators 
 established by the Secretary under section 2606(a);
 ``(6) a description of the partnership's plan for 
 institutionalizing the activities carried out under the 
 project, so that the activities continue once Federal funding 
 ceases;
 ``(7) an assurance that, where applicable, the project will 
 provide appropriate professional development to volunteers 
 working directly with young children, as well as to paid staff; 
 and
 ``(8) an assurance that, in developing its application and 
 in carrying out its project, the partnership has consulted 
 with, and will consult with, relevant agencies, early childhood 
 educator organizations, and early childhood providers that are 
 not members of the partnership.

``SEC. 2604. SELECTION OF GRANTEES.

 ``(a) Criteria.--The Secretary shall select partnerships to receive 
funding on the basis of the community's need for assistance and the 
quality of the applications.
 ``(b) Geographic Distribution.--In selecting partnerships, the 
Secretary shall seek to ensure that communities in different regions of 
the Nation, as well as both urban and rural communities, are served.

``SEC. 2605. USES OF FUNDS.

 ``(a) In General.--Each partnership receiving a grant under this 
part shall use the grant funds to carry out activities that will 
improve the knowledge and skills of early childhood educators who are 
working in early childhood programs that are located in high-need 
communities and serve concentrations of children from low-income 
families.
 ``(b) Allowable Activities.--Such activities may include--
 ``(1) professional development for individuals working as 
 early childhood educators, particularly to familiarize those 
 individuals with the application of recent research on child, 
 language, and literacy development and on early childhood 
 pedagogy;
 ``(2) professional development for early childhood 
 educators in working with parents, based on the best current 
 research on child social, emotional, physical and cognitive 
 development and parent involvement, so that the educators can 
 prepare their children to succeed in school;
 ``(3) professional development for early childhood 
 educators to work with children who have limited English 
 proficiency, disabilities, and other special needs;
 ``(4) professional development to train early childhood 
 educators in identifying and preventing behavioral problems in 
children or working with children identified or suspected to be victims 
of abuse;
 ``(5) activities that assist and support early childhood 
 educators during their first three years in the field;
 ``(6) development and implementation of early childhood 
 educator professional development programs that make use of 
 distance learning and other technologies;
 ``(7) professional development activities related to the 
 selection and use of screening and diagnostic assessments to 
 improve teaching and learning; and
 ``(8) data collection, evaluation, and reporting needed to 
 meet the requirements of this part relating to accountability.

``SEC. 2606. ACCOUNTABILITY.

 ``(a) Performance Indicators.--Simultaneously with the publication 
of any application notice for grants under this part, the Secretary 
shall announce performance indicators for this part, which shall be 
designed to measure--
 ``(1) the quality and accessibility of the professional 
 development provided;
 ``(2) the impact of that professional development on the 
 early childhood education provided by the individuals who are 
 trained; and
 ``(3) such other measures of program impact as the 
 Secretary determines appropriate.
 ``(b) Annual Reports; Termination.--
 ``(1) Annual reports.--Each partnership receiving a grant 
 under this part shall report annually to the Secretary on the 
 partnership's progress against the performance indicators.
 ``(2) Termination.--The Secretary may terminate a grant 
 under this part at any time if the Secretary determines that 
 the partnership is not making satisfactory progress against the 
 indicators.

``SEC. 2607. COST-SHARING.

 ``(a) In General.--Each partnership shall provide, from other 
sources, which may include other Federal sources--
 ``(1) at least 50 percent of the total cost of its project 
 for the grant period; and
 ``(2) at least 20 percent of the project cost in each year.
 ``(b) Acceptable Contributions.--A partnership may meet the 
requirement of subsection (a) through cash or in-kind contributions, 
fairly valued.
 ``(c) Waivers.--The Secretary may waive or modify the requirements 
of subsection (a) in cases of demonstrated financial hardship.

``SEC. 2608. DEFINITIONS.

 ``In this part:
 ``(1) High-need community.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `high-need community' 
 means--
 ``(i) a municipality, or a portion of a 
 municipality, in which at least 50 percent of 
 the children are from low-income families; or
 ``(ii) a municipality that is one of the 10 
 percent of municipalities within the State 
 having the greatest numbers of such children.
 ``(B) Determination.--In determining which 
 communities are described in subparagraph (A), the 
 Secretary shall use such data as the Secretary 
 determines are most accurate and appropriate.
 ``(2) Low-income family.--The term `low-income family' 
 means a family with an income below the poverty line (as 
 defined by the Office of Management and Budget and revised 
 annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Community 
 Services Block Grant Act (42 U.S.C. 9902(2))) applicable to a 
 family of the size involved for the most recent fiscal year for 
 which satisfactory data are available.
 ``(3) Early childhood educator.--The term `early childhood 
 educator' means a person providing or employed by a provider of 
 non-residential child care services (including center-based, 
 family-based, and in-home child care services) for compensation 
 that is legally operating under State law, and that complies 
 with applicable State and local requirements for the provision 
 of child care services to children at any age from birth 
 through kindergarten.

``SEC. 2609. FEDERAL COORDINATION.

 ``The Secretary and the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
shall coordinate activities under this part and other early childhood 
programs administered by the two Secretaries.

``SEC. 2610. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``For the purpose of carrying out this part, there are authorized 
to be appropriated $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 and such sums as 
may be necessary for each of the 6 succeeding fiscal years.

 ``PART H--PRINCIPAL LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT

``SEC. 2701. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT FOR PRINCIPALS AS LEADERS OF 
 SCHOOL REFORM.

 ``(a) Competitive Grants.--The Secretary is authorized to award, on 
a competitive basis, grants to eligible partnerships--
 ``(1) consisting of--
 ``(A) one or more institutions of higher education 
 that provide professional development for principals 
 and other school administrators; and
 ``(B) one or more local educational agencies; and
 ``(2) that may include other entities, agencies, and 
 organizations, such as a State educational agency, a State 
 agency for higher education, and professional organizations for 
 principals, administrators, teachers, and parents.
 ``(b) Application.--An eligible partnership that desires to receive 
a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary 
at such time, in such form, and containing such information as the 
Secretary may require. Each such application shall include--
 ``(1) a description of the activities the partnership will 
 carry out to meet the purpose of this part;
 ``(2) a description of how those activities will build on 
 and be coordinated with other professional development 
 activities, including activities under this title and title II 
 of the Higher Education Act of 1965;
 ``(3) a description of how principals, teachers, and other 
 interested parties were involved in developing the application 
 and will be involved in planning and carrying out the 
 activities under this section; and
 ``(4) a description of how the professional development 
 will result in the acquisition of a license, degree, or 
 continuing education unit.
 ``(c) Use of Funds.--An eligible partnership that receives a grant 
under this section shall use the grant funds to provide professional 
development to principals and other school administrators to enable 
them to be effective school leaders and prepare all students to achieve 
to challenging State content and student performance standards, 
including professional development on--
 ``(1) comprehensive school reform;
 ``(2) leadership skills;
 ``(3) recruitment, assignment, retention, and evaluation of 
 teacher and other instructional staff;
 ``(4) State content standards;
 ``(5) effective instructional practice;
 ``(6) using smaller classes effectively; and
 ``(7) parental and community involvement.
 ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this part, $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, 
and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal 
years.

``PART I--COMPETITIVE GRANTS TO ESTABLISH PROGRAMS FOR TEACHER QUALITY 
 IMPROVEMENT

``SEC. 2801. ALLOTMENTS TO STATES.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary is authorized to make grants to 
eligible State educational agencies for the improvement of teaching and 
learning through sustained and intensive high-quality professional 
development, mentoring, and recruitment activities (and covered 
recruitment, at the election of a local educational agency) at the 
State and local levels. Each grant shall consist of the allotment 
determined for the State under subsection (b).
 ``(b) Determination of Amount of Allotment.--
 ``(1) Reservation of funds.--
 ``(A) In general.--From the total amount made 
 available to carry out this part for any fiscal year, 
 the Secretary shall reserve--
 ``(i) \1/2\ of 1 percent for allotments for 
 the outlying areas to be distributed among 
 those outlying areas on the basis of their 
 relative need, as determined by the Secretary, 
 for professional development, mentoring, and 
 recruitment activities carried out in 
 accordance with the purposes of this part; and
 ``(ii) \1/2\ of 1 percent for the Secretary 
 of the Interior for programs carried out in 
 accordance with the purposes of this part to 
 provide professional development, mentoring, 
 and recruitment activities for teachers and 
 other staff in schools operated or funded by 
 the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
 ``(B) Limitation.--Notwithstanding subparagraph 
 (A), the Secretary shall not reserve, for either the 
 outlying areas under subparagraph (A)(i) or the schools 
 operated or funded by the Bureau of Indian Affairs 
 under subparagraph (A)(ii), more than the amount 
 reserved for those areas or schools for fiscal year 
 2000 under the authority described in paragraph 
 (2)(A)(i).
 ``(2) State allotments.--
 ``(A) Hold harmless.--
 ``(i) In general.--Subject to subparagraph 
 (B), from the total amount made available to 
 carry out this part for any fiscal year and not 
 reserved under paragraph (1), the Secretary 
 shall allot to each of the 50 States, the 
 District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of 
 Puerto Rico an amount equal to the amount that 
 the State received for fiscal year 2000 under 
 section 2202(b) of this Act (as in effect on 
 the day before the date of enactment of the 
 Leave No Child Behind Act of 2001).
 ``(ii) Ratable reduction.--If the total 
 amount made available to carry out this part 
 for any fiscal year and not reserved under 
 paragraph (1) is insufficient to pay the full 
 amounts that all States are eligible to receive 
 under clause (i) for any fiscal year, the 
 Secretary shall ratably reduce such amounts for 
 such fiscal year.
 ``(B) Allotment of additional funds.--
 ``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), 
 for any fiscal year for which the total amount 
 made available to carry out this part and not 
 reserved under paragraph (1) exceeds the total 
 amount made available to the 50 States, the 
 District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of 
 Puerto Rico for fiscal year 2000 under the 
 authority described in subparagraph (A)(i), the 
 Secretary shall allot to each of those States 
 the sum of--
 ``(I) an amount that bears the same 
 relationship to 40 percent of the 
 excess amount as the number of 
 individuals age 5 through 17 in the 
 State, as determined by the Secretary 
 on the basis of the most recent 
 satisfactory data, bears to the number 
 of those individuals in all such 
 States, as so determined; and
 ``(II) an amount that bears the 
 same relationship to 60 percent of the 
 excess amount as the number of 
 individuals age 5 through 17 from 
 families with incomes below the poverty 
 line in the State, as determined by the 
 Secretary on the basis of the most 
 recent satisfactory data, bears to the 
 number of those individuals in all such 
 States, as so determined.
 ``(ii) Exception.--No State receiving an 
 allotment under clause (i) may receive less 
 than \1/2\ of 1 percent of the total excess 
 amount allotted under clause (i) for a fiscal 
 year.
 ``(3) Reallotment.--If any State described in paragraph (2) 
 does not apply for an allotment under paragraph (2) for any 
 fiscal year, the Secretary shall reallot such amount to the 
 remaining such States in accordance with paragraph (2).

``SEC. 2802. STATE APPLICATIONS.

 ``(a) Applications Required.--
 ``(1) In general.--Each State desiring to receive a grant 
 under this part shall submit an application to the Secretary at 
 such time, in such manner, and containing such information as 
 the Secretary may reasonably require.
 ``(2) Development.--The State educational agency shall 
 develop the State application--
 ``(A) in consultation with the State agency for 
 higher education, community-based and other nonprofit 
 organizations, and institutions of higher education; 
 and
 ``(B) with the extensive participation of teachers, 
 teacher educators, school administrators, and content 
 specialists.
 ``(b) Contents.--Each such application shall include--
 ``(1) a description of the State's shortages of fully 
 qualified teachers relating to high-poverty school districts 
 and high-need academic subjects (as such districts or subjects 
 are determined by the State);
 ``(2) an assessment of the need for professional 
 development for veteran teachers in the State and the need for 
 strong mentoring programs for beginning teachers that are--
 ``(A) developed with the involvement of teachers; 
 and
 ``(B) based on student achievement data in the core 
 academic subjects and other indicators of the need for 
 professional development and mentoring programs;
 ``(3) a description of how the State educational agency 
 will use funds made available under this part to improve the 
 quality of the State's teaching force, eliminate the use of 
 out-of-field placement of teachers, and eliminate the use of 
 teachers hired with emergency or other provisional credentials 
 by setting numerical, annual improvement goals, and meet the 
 requirements of this section;
 ``(4) a description of how the State educational agency 
 will align activities assisted under this part with State 
 content and student performance standards, and State 
 assessments, by setting numerical, annual improvement goals;
 ``(5) a description of how the State educational agency 
 will coordinate activities funded under this part with 
 professional development, mentoring, and recruitment activities 
 that are supported with funds from other relevant Federal and 
 non-Federal programs;
 ``(6) a plan, developed with the extensive participation of 
 teachers, for addressing long-term teacher recruitment, 
 retention, professional development, and mentoring needs, which 
 may include--
 ``(A) providing technical assistance to help school 
 districts reform hiring and employment practices to 
 improve the recruitment and retention of fully 
 qualified teachers, especially with respect to high-
 poverty schools; and
 ``(B) establishing State or regional partnerships 
 to address teacher shortages;
 ``(7) a description of how the State educational agency 
 will assist local educational agencies in implementing 
 effective and sustained professional development and mentoring 
 activities and high-quality recruitment activities under this 
 part;
 ``(8) an assurance that the State will consistently monitor 
 the progress of each local educational agency and school in the 
State in achieving the goals specified in the information submitted 
under paragraphs (1) through (7);
 ``(9) a description of how the State educational agency 
 will work with recipients of grants awarded for recruitment 
 activities under section 2805(b) to ensure that recruits who 
 successfully complete a teacher corps program will be certified 
 or licensed; and
 ``(10) the assurances and description referred to in 
 section 2810.
 ``(c) Approval.--The Secretary shall, using a peer-review process, 
approve a State application if the application meets the requirements 
of this section and holds reasonable promise of achieving the purposes 
of this part.

``SEC. 2803. STATE USE OF FUNDS.

 ``(a) In General.--Of the funds allotted to a State under section 
2801 for a fiscal year--
 ``(1) not more than 6 percent shall be used by the State 
 educational agency to carry out State activities described in 
 section 2804, or for the administration of this part (other 
 than the administration of section 2809) except that not more 
 than 3 percent shall be used for the administration of this 
 part;
 ``(2) 60 percent shall be used by the State educational 
 agency to provide grants to local educational agencies under 
 section 2805(a) for professional development and mentoring 
 (except as provided in section 2807(c));
 ``(3) 30 percent shall be used by the State educational 
 agency--
 ``(A) except as provided in subparagraph (B), to 
 provide grants to recruitment partnerships under 
 section 2805(b) for recruitment activities; or
 ``(B) if the State educational agency determines 
 that all elementary school and secondary school 
 teachers in the State that are teaching core academic 
 subjects are fully qualified, to provide the grants 
 described in paragraph (2); and
 ``(4) 4 percent (or 4 percent of the amount the State would 
 have been allotted if the appropriation for this part were 
 $1,730,000,000, whichever is greater) shall be used by the 
 State agency for higher education to provide grants to 
 partnerships under section 2809.
 ``(b) Priority for Professional Development and Mentoring in 
Mathematics and Science.--
 ``(1) Priority.--
 ``(A) Appropriations of not more than 
 $300,000,000.--Except as provided in section 2807(c), 
 for any fiscal year for which the appropriation for 
 this part is $300,000,000 or less, each State 
 educational agency that receives funds under this part, 
 working jointly with the State agency for higher 
 education, shall ensure that all funds received under 
 this part are used for--
 ``(i) professional development and 
 mentoring in mathematics and science that are 
 aligned with State content and student 
 performance standards; and
 ``(ii) recruitment activities to attract 
 fully qualified math and science teachers to 
 high-poverty schools.
 ``(B) Appropriations of more than $300,000,000.--
 Except as provided in section 2807(c), for any fiscal 
 year for which the appropriation for this part is 
 greater than $300,000,000, the State educational agency 
 and the State agency for higher education shall jointly 
 ensure that the total amount of funds that the agencies 
 receive under this part and that the agencies use for 
 activities described in subparagraph (A) is at least as 
 great as the allotment the State would have received if 
 that appropriation had been $300,000,000.
 ``(2) Interdisciplinary activities.--A State may use funds 
 received under this part for activities that focus on more than 
 1 core academic subject, and apply the funds toward meeting the 
 requirements of paragraph (1), if the activities include a 
 strong focus on improving instruction in mathematics or 
 science.
 ``(3) Additional funds.--Except as provided in section 
 2807(c), each State educational agency that receives funds 
 under this part and the State agency for higher education shall 
 jointly ensure that any portion of the funds that exceeds the 
 amount required by paragraph (1) to be spent on activities 
 described in paragraph (1)(A) is used to provide--
 ``(A) professional development and mentoring in 1 
 or more of the core academic subjects that are aligned 
 with State content and student performance standards; 
 and
 ``(B) recruitment activities involving teachers of 
 1 or more of the core academic subjects.

``SEC. 2804. STATE LEVEL ACTIVITIES.

 ``(a) Activities.--Each State educational agency that receives a 
grant described in section 2801 shall use the funds made available 
under section 2803(a)(1) to carry out statewide strategies and 
activities to improve teacher quality, including--
 ``(1) establishing, expanding, or improving alternative 
 routes to State certification or licensing of teachers, for 
 highly qualified individuals with a baccalaureate degree, mid-
 career professionals from other occupations, or 
 paraprofessionals, that are at least as rigorous as the State's 
 standards for initial certification or licensing of teachers;
 ``(2) developing or improving systems to evaluate the 
 effectiveness of professional development, mentoring, and 
 recruitment activities in improving teacher quality, skills, 
 and content knowledge, and the impact of the professional 
 development, mentoring, and recruitment activities on 
 increasing student academic achievement and student performance 
 with performance measures drawn from assessments that 
 objectively measure student achievement against State 
 performance standards;
 ``(3) funding projects to promote reciprocity of teacher 
 certification or licensure between or among States;
 ``(4) providing assistance to local educational agencies to 
 reduce out-of-field placements and the use of emergency 
 credentials;
 ``(5) supporting certification by the National Board for 
 Professional Teaching Standards of teachers who are teaching or 
 will teach in high-poverty schools;
 ``(6) providing assistance to local educational agencies in 
 implementing effective programs of recruitment activities, and 
 professional development and mentoring, including supporting 
 efforts to encourage and train teachers to become mentor 
 teachers;
 ``(7) increasing the rigor and quality of State 
 certification and licensure tests for individuals entering the 
 field of teaching, including subject matter tests for 
 elementary school, middle school, and secondary school 
 teachers; and
 ``(8) implementing teacher recognition programs.
 ``(b) Coordination.--A State that receives a grant to carry out 
this part and a grant under section 202 of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 shall coordinate the activities carried out under this section and 
the activities carried out under that section 202.

``SEC. 2805. GRANTS TO LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCIES.

 ``(a) Grants for Professional Development and Mentoring 
Activities.--
 ``(1) In general.--A State educational agency that receives 
 a grant described in section 2801 shall use the funds made 
 available under section 2803(a)(2) (and any funds made 
 available under section 2803(a)(3)(B)) to make grants to 
 eligible local educational agencies, from allocations made 
 under paragraph (2), to carry out the activities described in 
 section 2807(a) (except as provided in section 2807(c)).
 ``(2) Allocations.--The State educational agency shall 
 allocate to each eligible local educational agency the sum of--
 ``(A) an amount that bears the same relationship to 
 20 percent of the funds described in paragraph (1) as 
 the number of individuals enrolled in public and 
 private nonprofit elementary schools and secondary 
 schools in the geographic area served by the agency 
 bears to the number of those individuals in the 
 geographic areas served by all the local educational 
 agencies in the State; and
 ``(B) an amount that bears the same relationship to 
 80 percent of the funds as the number of individuals 
 age 5 through 17 from families with incomes below the 
 poverty line, in the geographic area served by the 
 agency, as determined by the Secretary on the basis of 
 the most recent satisfactory data, bears to the number 
 of those individuals in the geographic areas served by 
 all the local educational agencies in the State, as so 
 determined.
 ``(3) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant from 
 a State educational agency under this subsection, a local 
educational agency shall serve schools that include--
 ``(A) high-poverty schools;
 ``(B) schools that need support for improving 
 teacher quality based on low achievement of students 
 served;
 ``(C) schools that have low teacher retention 
 rates;
 ``(D) schools that need to improve or expand the 
 knowledge and skills of new and veteran teachers in 
 high-priority content areas;
 ``(E) schools that have high out-of-field placement 
 rates; or
 ``(F) high-poverty schools that have been 
 identified for improvement in accordance with section 
 1116.
 ``(4) Equitable geographic distribution.--A State 
 educational agency shall ensure an equitable distribution of 
 grants under this subsection among eligible local educational 
 agencies serving urban and rural areas.
 ``(b) Grants for Recruitment Activities.--
 ``(1) In general.--A State educational agency that receives 
 a grant under section 2801 shall use the funds made available 
 under section 2803(a)(3)(A) to make grants to eligible 
 recruitment partnerships, on a competitive basis, to carry out 
 the recruitment activities and meet requirements described in 
 section 2807(b).
 ``(2) Eligibility.--
 ``(A) In general.--To be eligible to receive a 
 grant from a State educational agency under this 
 subsection, a recruitment partnership--
 ``(i) shall include an eligible local 
 educational agency, or a consortium of eligible 
 local educational agencies;
 ``(ii) shall include an institution of 
 higher education, a tribal college, or a 
 community college; and
 ``(iii) may include other members, such as 
 a nonprofit organization or professional 
 education organization.
 ``(B) Eligible local educational agency.--In 
 subparagraph (A), the term `eligible local educational 
 agency' means a local educational agency that receives 
 assistance under part A of title I, and meets any 
 additional eligibility criteria that the appropriate 
 State educational agency may establish.
 ``(3) Equitable geographic distribution.--A State 
 educational agency shall ensure an equitable distribution of 
 grants under this subsection among eligible recruitment 
 partnerships serving urban and rural areas.

``SEC. 2806. LOCAL APPLICATIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--A local educational agency or a recruitment 
partnership seeking to receive a grant from a State educational agency 
under section 2805 to carry out activities described in section 2807 
shall submit an application to the State educational agency at such 
time, in such manner, and containing such information as the State 
educational agency may reasonably require.
 ``(b) Contents Relating to Professional Development and Mentoring 
Activities.--If the local educational agency seeks a grant under 
section 2805(a) to carry out activities described in section 2807(a), 
the local application described in subsection (a) shall include in the 
application, at a minimum, the following:
 ``(1) A description of how the local educational agency 
 intends to use the funds provided through the grant to carry 
 out activities that meet requirements described in section 
 2807(a).
 ``(2) An assurance that the local educational agency will 
 target the funds to high-poverty, low-performing schools served 
 by the local educational agency that--
 ``(A) have the lowest proportions of qualified 
 teachers;
 ``(B) are identified for school improvement and 
 corrective action under section 1116; or
 ``(C) are identified for school improvement in 
 accordance with other measures of school quality as 
 determined and documented by the local educational 
 agency.
 ``(3) A description of how the local educational agency 
 will coordinate professional development and mentoring 
 activities described in section 2807(a) with professional 
 development and mentoring activities provided through other 
 Federal, State, and local programs, including programs 
 authorized under--
 ``(A) titles I, IV, and V, and part A of title VII; 
 and
 ``(B) where applicable, the Individuals with 
 Disabilities Education Act, the Carl D. Perkins 
 Vocational and Technical Education Act of 1998, and 
 title II of the Higher Education Act of 1965.
 ``(4) A description of how the local educational agency 
 will integrate funds received to carry out activities described 
 in section 2807(a) with funds received under title V that are 
 used for professional development and mentoring in order to 
 carry out professional development and mentoring activities 
 that--
 ``(A) train teachers, paraprofessionals, 
 counselors, pupil services personnel, administrators, 
 and other school staff, including school library media 
 specialists, in how to use technology to improve 
 learning and teaching; and
 ``(B) take into special consideration the different 
 learning needs for, and exposures to, technology for 
 all students, including females, students with 
 disabilities, students with limited English 
 proficiency, and students who have economic and 
 educational disadvantages.
 ``(5) A description of how the local application was 
 developed with extensive participation of teachers, 
 paraprofessionals, principals, and parents.
 ``(6) A description of how the professional development and 
 mentoring activities described in section 2807(a) will address 
 the ongoing professional development and mentoring of teachers, 
 paraprofessionals, counselors, pupil services personnel, 
 administrators, and other school staff, including school 
 library media specialists.
 ``(7) A description of how the professional development and 
 mentoring activities described in section 2807(a) will have a 
 substantial, measurable, and positive impact on student 
 achievement and how the activities will be used as part of a 
 broader strategy to eliminate the achievement gap that 
 separates low-income and minority students from other students.
 ``(8) A description of how the local educational agency 
 will address the needs of teachers of students with 
 disabilities, students with limited English proficiency, and 
 other students with special needs.
 ``(9) A description of how the local educational agency 
 will provide training to teachers to enable the teachers to 
 work with parents, involve parents in their child's education, 
and encourage parents to become collaborators with schools in promoting 
their child's education.
 ``(10) The assurances and description referred to in 
 section 2811, with respect to professional development and 
 mentoring activities.
 ``(c) Development and Contents Relating to Recruitment 
Activities.--If an eligible local educational agency (as defined in 
section 2805(b)) seeks a grant under section 2805(b) to carry out 
activities described in section 2807(b)--
 ``(1) the eligible local educational agency shall enter 
 into a recruitment partnership, which shall jointly prepare and 
 submit the local application described in subsection (a); and
 ``(2) at a minimum, the application shall include--
 ``(A) a description of how the recruitment 
 partnership will meet the teacher corps program 
 requirements described in section 2808;
 ``(B) a description of the individual and 
 collective responsibilities of members of the 
 recruitment partnership in meeting the requirements and 
 goals of a teacher corps program described in section 
 2808;
 ``(C) information demonstrating that the State 
 agency responsible for teacher licensure or 
 certification in the State in which a recruitment 
 partnership is established will--
 ``(i) ensure that a corps member who 
 successfully completes a teacher corps program 
 will have the academic requirements necessary 
 for initial certification or licensure as a 
 teacher in the State; and
 ``(ii) work with the recruitment 
 partnership to ensure the partnership uses 
 high-quality methods and establishes high-
 quality requirements concerning alternative 
 routes to certification or licensing, in order 
 to meet State requirements for certification or 
 licensure; and
 ``(D) the assurances and description referred to in 
 section 2811, with respect to recruitment activities.
 ``(d) Contents Relating to Covered Recruitment.--If the local 
educational agency seeks a grant under section 2805(a) to carry out 
activities described in section 2807(c), the local application 
described in subsection (a) shall include, at a minimum, a description 
of the activities and the manner in which the activities will 
contribute to accomplishing the objectives of section 2811, and how the 
activities are in compliance with the requirements of title I.
 ``(e) Approval.--A State educational agency shall approve a local 
educational agency's or recruitment partnership's application under 
this section only if the State educational agency determines that the 
application is of high quality and holds reasonable promise of 
achieving the purposes of this part.

``SEC. 2807. LOCAL ACTIVITIES.

 ``(a) Professional Development and Mentoring Activities.--Except as 
provided in subsection (c), each local educational agency receiving a 
grant under section 2805(a) shall use the funds made available through 
the grant to carry out activities that--
 ``(1) are professional development activities (as defined 
 in section 2812(12)(A)) that--
 ``(A) improve teacher knowledge of--
 ``(i) 1 or more of the core academic 
 subjects;
 ``(ii) effective instructional strategies, 
 methods, and skills for improving student 
 achievement in core academic subjects, 
 including strategies for identifying and 
 eliminating gender and racial bias;
 ``(iii) the use of data and assessments to 
 inform teachers about and thereby help teachers 
 improve classroom practice; and
 ``(iv) innovative instructional 
 methodologies designed to meet the 
diverse learning needs of individual students, including methodologies 
that integrate academic and technical skills and applied learning (such 
as service learning), methodologies for interactive and 
interdisciplinary team teaching, and other alternative teaching 
strategies, such as strategies for experiential learning, career-
related education, and environmental education, that integrate real 
world applications into the core academic subjects;
 ``(B) provide teachers and paraprofessionals (and 
 other staff as appropriate) with information on recent 
 research findings on how children learn to read and 
 with staff development on research-based instructional 
 strategies for the teaching of reading;
 ``(C) replicate effective instructional practices 
 that involve collaborative groups of teachers and 
 administrators from the same school or district, using 
 strategies such as--
 ``(i) provision of dedicated time for 
 collaborative lesson planning and curriculum 
 development meetings;
 ``(ii) provision of collaborative 
 professional development experiences for 
 veteran teachers based on the standards in the 
 core academic subjects of the National Board 
 for Professional Teaching Standards;
 ``(iii) consultation with exemplary 
 teachers;
 ``(iv) provision of short-term and long-
 term visits to classrooms and schools;
 ``(v) participation of teams of teachers in 
 summer institutes and summer immersion 
 activities that are focused on preparing 
 teachers to enable all students to meet high 
 standards in 1 or more of the core academic 
 subjects; and
 ``(vi) establishment and maintenance of 
 local professional networks that provide a 
 forum for interaction among teachers and 
 administrators and that allow for the exchange 
 of information on advances in content knowledge 
 and teaching skills;
 ``(D) provide for the participation of 
 paraprofessionals, pupil services personnel, and other 
 school staff;
 ``(E) include strategies for fostering meaningful 
 parental involvement and relations with parents to 
 encourage parents to become collaborators in their 
 children's education, for improving classroom 
 management and discipline, and for integrating 
 technology into a curriculum;
 ``(F) as a whole, are regularly evaluated for their 
 impact on increased teacher effectiveness and improved 
 student achievement, with the findings of the 
 evaluations used to improve the quality of activities 
 described in this paragraph;
 ``(G) include, to the extent practicable, the 
 establishment of a partnership with an institution of 
 higher education, another local educational agency, a 
 teacher organization, or another organization, for the 
 purpose of carrying out activities described in this 
 paragraph; and
 ``(H) include ongoing and school-based support for 
 activities described in this paragraph, such as support 
 for peer review, coaching, or study groups, and the 
 provision of release time as needed for the activities; 
 and
 ``(2) are mentoring activities.
 ``(b) Recruitment Activities.--Each recruitment partnership 
receiving a grant under section 2805(b) shall use the funds made 
available through the grant to carry out recruitment activities 
described in section 2808.
 ``(c) Covered Recruitment.--A local educational agency receiving a 
grant under section 2805(a) for a fiscal year may elect to use a 
portion of the funds made available through the grant, but not more 
than the agency's share of 10 percent of the funds allotted to the 
State involved under section 2801 for the fiscal year, to carry out 
recruitment (including recruitment through the use of signing bonuses 
and other financial incentives) and hiring of fully qualified teachers.

``SEC. 2808. RECRUITMENT ACTIVITIES THROUGH A TEACHER CORPS PROGRAM.

 ``(a) Teacher Corps Program Requirements.--
 ``(1) Recruitment.--A recruitment partnership that receives 
 a grant under section 2805(b) shall broadly recruit and screen 
 for a teacher corps a highly qualified pool of candidates who 
demonstrate the potential to become effective teachers. Each candidate 
shall meet--
 ``(A) standards to ensure that--
 ``(i) each corps member possesses 
 appropriate, high-level credentials and 
 presents the likelihood of becoming an 
 effective teacher; and
 ``(ii) each group of corps members includes 
 people who have expertise in academic subjects 
 and otherwise meet the specific needs of the 
 district to be served; and
 ``(B) any additional standard that the recruitment 
 partnership establishes to enhance the quality and 
 diversity of candidates and to meet the academic and 
 grade level needs of the partnership.
 ``(2) Required curriculum and placement.--Members of the 
 recruitment partnership shall work together to plan and develop 
 a program that includes--
 ``(A) a rigorous curriculum that includes a 
 preservice training program (incorporating innovative 
 approaches to preservice training, such as distance 
 learning), for a period not to exceed 1 year, that 
 provides corps members with the skills and knowledge 
 necessary to become effective teachers, by--
 ``(i) requiring completed course work in 
 basic areas of teaching, such as principles of 
 learning and child development, effective 
 teaching strategies, assessments, and classroom 
 management, and in the pedagogy related to the 
 academic subjects in which a corps member 
 intends to teach;
 ``(ii) providing extensive preparation in 
 the pedagogy of reading to corps members, 
 including preparation components that focus 
 on--
 ``(I) understanding the psychology 
 of reading, and human growth and 
 development;
 ``(II) understanding the structure 
 of the English language; and
 ``(III) learning and applying the 
 best teaching methods to all aspects of 
 reading instruction;
 ``(iii) providing training in the use of 
 technology as a tool to enhance a corps 
 member's effectiveness as a teacher and improve 
 the achievement of the corps member's students; 
 and
 ``(iv) focusing on the teaching skills and 
 knowledge that corps members need to enable all 
 students to meet the State's highest 
 challenging content and student performance 
 standards;
 ``(B) placement of a corps member with the local 
 educational agency participating in the recruitment 
 partnership, in a teaching internship that--
 ``(i) includes intensive mentoring;
 ``(ii) provides a reduced teaching load; 
 and
 ``(iii) provides regular opportunities for 
 the corps member to co-teach with a mentor 
 teacher, observe other teachers, and be 
 observed and coached by other teachers;
 ``(C) individualized inservice training over the 
 course of the corps member's first 2 years of full-time 
 teaching that provides--
 ``(i) high-quality professional 
 development, coordinated jointly by members of 
 the recruitment partnership, and the course 
 work necessary to provide additional or 
 supplementary knowledge to meet the specific 
 needs of the corps member; and
 ``(ii) ongoing mentoring by a teacher who 
 meets the criteria for a mentor teacher 
 described in paragraph (4)(B), including the 
 requirements of section 2812(10); and
 ``(D) collaboration between the recruitment 
 partnership and local community student and parent 
 groups, to assist corps members in enhancing their 
 understanding of the community in which the members are 
 placed.
 ``(3) Evaluation.--A recruitment partnership shall evaluate 
 a corps member's progress in course study and classroom 
 practice at regular intervals. Each recruitment partnership 
 shall have a formal process to identify corps members who seem 
 unlikely to become effective teachers and terminate their 
 participation in the program.
 ``(4) Mentor teachers.--
 ``(A) In general.--A recruitment partnership shall 
 develop a plan for the program, which shall include 
 strategies for identifying, recruiting, training, and 
 providing ongoing support to individuals who will serve 
 as mentor teachers to corps members.
 ``(B) Mentor teacher requirements.--The plan 
 described in subparagraph (A) shall specify the 
 criteria that the recruitment partnership will use to 
 identify and select mentor teachers and, at a minimum, 
 shall--
 ``(i) require a mentor teacher to meet the 
 requirements of section 2812(10); and
 ``(ii) require that consideration be given 
 to teachers with national board certification.
 ``(C) Compensation.--The plan shall specify the 
 compensation--
 ``(i) for mentor teachers, including 
 monetary compensation, release time, or a 
 reduced work load to ensure that mentor 
 teachers can provide ongoing support for corps 
 members; and
 ``(ii) for corps members, including salary 
 levels and the stipends, if any, that will be 
 provided during a corps member's preservice 
 training.
 ``(5) Assurances.--The plan shall include assurances that--
 ``(A) a corps member will be assigned to teach only 
 academic subjects and grade levels for which the member 
 is fully qualified;
 ``(B) corps members, to the extent practicable, 
 will be placed in schools with teams of corps members; 
 and
 ``(C) every mentor teacher will be provided 
 sufficient time to meet the needs of the corps members 
 assigned to the mentor teacher.
 ``(b) Corps Member Qualifications.--
 ``(1) Candidates intending to teach in elementary 
 schools.--At a minimum, to be accepted by a teacher corps 
 program, a candidate who intends to teach at the elementary 
 school level shall--
 ``(A) have a bachelor's degree;
 ``(B) possess an outstanding commitment to working 
 with children and youth;
 ``(C) possess a strong professional or 
 postsecondary record of achievement; and
 ``(D) pass all basic skills and subject matter 
 tests required by the State for teacher certification 
 or licensure.
 ``(2) Candidates intending to teach in secondary schools.--
 At a minimum, to be accepted by a teacher corps program, a 
 candidate who intends to teach at the secondary school level 
 shall--
 ``(A) meet the requirements described in paragraph 
 (1); and
 ``(B)(i) possess at least an academic major or 
 postsecondary degree in each academic subject in which 
 the candidate intends to teach; or
 ``(ii) if the candidate did not major or earn a 
 postsecondary degree in an academic subject in which 
 the candidate intends to teach, have completed a 
 rigorous course of instruction in that subject that is 
 equivalent to having majored in the subject.
 ``(3) Special rule.--Notwithstanding paragraph (2)(B), the 
 recruitment partnership may consider the candidate to be an 
 eligible corps member and accept the candidate for a teacher 
 corps program if the candidate has worked successfully and 
 directly in a field and in a position that provided the 
 candidate with direct and substantive knowledge in the academic 
subject in which the candidate intends to teach.
 ``(c) Three-Year Commitment to Teaching in Eligible Districts.--
 ``(1) In general.--In return for acceptance to a teacher 
 corps program, a corps member shall commit to 3 years of full-
 time teaching in a school or district served by a local 
 educational agency participating in a recruitment partnership 
 receiving funds under this part.
 ``(2) Reimbursement.--
 ``(A) In general.--If a corps member leaves the 
 school district to which the corps member has been 
 assigned prior to the end of the 3-year period 
 described in paragraph (1), the corps member shall be 
 required to reimburse the Secretary for the amount of 
 the Federal share of the cost of the corps member's 
 participation in the teacher corps program.
 ``(B) Partnership claims.--A recruitment 
 partnership that provides a teacher corps program to a 
 corps member who leaves the school district, as 
 discussed in subparagraph (A), may submit a claim to 
 the corps member requiring the corps member to 
 reimburse the recruitment partnership for the amount of 
 the partnership's share of the cost described in 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(C) Reduction.--Reimbursements required under 
 this paragraph may be reduced proportionally based on 
 the amount of time a corps member remained in the 
 teacher corps program beyond the corps member's initial 
 2 years of service.
 ``(D) Waiver.--The Secretary may waive 
 reimbursements required under subparagraph (A) in the 
 case of severe hardship to a corps member who leaves 
 the school district, as described in subparagraph (A).
 ``(d) Federal Share; Non-Federal Share.--
 ``(1) Payment of federal share.--The Secretary shall pay to 
 each recruitment partnership carrying out a teacher corps 
 program under this section the Federal share of the cost of the 
 activities described in the partnership's application under 
 section 2806(c).
 ``(2) Non-federal share.--A recruitment partnership's share 
 of the cost of the activities described in the partnership's 
 application under section 2806(c)--
 ``(A) may be provided in cash or in kind, fairly 
 evaluated, including plant, equipment, or services; and
 ``(B)(i) for the first year for which the 
 partnership receives assistance under this part, shall 
 be not less than 10 percent;
 ``(ii) for the second such year, shall be not less 
 than 20 percent;
 ``(iii) for the third year such year, shall be not 
 less than 30 percent;
 ``(iv) for the fourth such year, shall be not less 
 than 40 percent; and
 ``(v) for the fifth such year, shall be not less 
 than 50 percent.

``SEC. 2809. GRANTS TO PARTNERSHIPS OF INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION 
 AND LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCIES.

 ``(a) Administration.--A State agency for higher education may use, 
from the funds made available to the agency under section 2803(a)(4) 
for any fiscal year, not more than 3\1/3\ percent for the expenses of 
the agency in administering this section, including conducting 
evaluations of activities on the performance measures described in 
section 2804(a)(2).
 ``(b) Grants to Partnerships.--
 ``(1) In general.--The State agency for higher education 
 shall use the remainder of the funds, in cooperation with the 
 State educational agency, to make grants to (including entering 
 into contracts or cooperative agreements with) partnerships 
 of--
 ``(A) institutions of higher education that are in 
 full compliance with all reporting requirements of 
 title II of the Higher Education Act of 1965 or 
 nonprofit organizations of demonstrated effectiveness 
 in providing professional development and mentoring in 
 the core academic subjects; and
 ``(B) eligible local educational agencies (as 
 defined in section 2805(b)(2)), to carry out activities 
 (and only activities) described in subsection (e).
 ``(2) Size; duration.--Each grant made under this section 
 shall be--
 ``(A) in a sufficient amount to carry out the 
 objectives of this section effectively; and
 ``(B) for a period of 3 years, which the State 
 agency for higher education may extend for an 
 additional 2 years if the agency determines that the 
 partnership is making substantial progress toward 
 meeting the specific goals set out in the written 
 agreement required in subsection (c) and on the 
 performance measures described in section 2804(a)(2).
 ``(3) Applications.--To be eligible to receive a grant 
 under this section, a partnership shall submit an application 
 to the State agency for higher education at such time, in such 
 manner, and containing such information as the agency may 
 reasonably require.
 ``(4) Award process and basis.--The State agency for higher 
 education shall make the grants on a competitive basis, using a 
 peer review process.
 ``(5) Priority.--In making the grants, the State agency for 
 higher education shall give priority to partnerships submitting 
 applications for projects that focus on mentoring programs for 
 beginning teachers.
 ``(6) Considerations.--In making such a grant for a 
 partnership, the State agency for higher education shall 
 consider--
 ``(A) the need of the local educational agency 
 involved for the professional development and mentoring 
 activities proposed in the application;
 ``(B) the quality of the program proposed in the 
 application and the likelihood of success of the 
 program in improving classroom instruction and student 
 academic achievement; and
 ``(C) such other criteria as the agency finds to be 
 appropriate.
 ``(c) Agreements.--
 ``(1) In general.--No partnership may receive a grant under 
 this section unless the institution of higher education or 
 nonprofit organization involved enters into a written agreement 
 with at least 1 eligible local educational agency (as defined 
 in section 2805(b)(2)) to provide professional development and 
 mentoring for elementary school and secondary school teachers 
 in the schools served by that agency in the core academic 
 subjects.
 ``(2) Goals.--Each such agreement shall identify specific 
 measurable annual goals concerning how the professional 
 development and mentoring that the partnership provides will 
 enhance the ability of the teachers to prepare all students to 
 meet challenging State and local content and student 
 performance standards.
 ``(d) Joint Efforts Within Institutions of Higher Education.--Each 
professional development and mentoring activity assisted under this 
section by a partnership containing an institution of higher education 
shall involve the joint effort of the institution of higher education's 
school or department of education and the schools or departments of the 
institution in the specific disciplines in which the professional 
development and mentoring will be provided.
 ``(e) Uses of Funds.--A partnership that receives funds under this 
section shall use the funds for activities (and only for activities) 
that consist of--
 ``(1) professional development and mentoring in the core 
 academic subjects, aligned with State or local content 
 standards, for teams of teachers from a school or school 
 district and, where appropriate, administrators and 
 paraprofessionals;
 ``(2) research-based professional development and mentoring 
 programs to assist beginning teachers, which may include--
 ``(A) mentoring and coaching by trained mentor 
 teachers that lasts at least 2 years;
 ``(B) team teaching with veteran teachers who have 
 a consistent record of helping their students make 
 substantial academic gains;
 ``(C) provision of time for observation of, and 
 consultation with, veteran teachers;
 ``(D) provision of reduced teaching loads; and
 ``(E) provision of additional time for preparation;
 ``(3) the provision of technical assistance to school and 
 agency staff for planning, implementing, and evaluating 
 professional development and mentoring;
 ``(4) the provision of training for teachers to help the 
 teachers develop the skills necessary to work most effectively 
 with parents; and
 ``(5) in appropriate cases, the provision of training to 
 address areas of teacher and administrator shortages.
 ``(f) Coordination.--Any partnership that carries out professional 
development and mentoring activities under this section shall 
coordinate the activities with activities carried out under title II of 
the Higher Education Act of 1965, if a local educational agency or 
institution of higher education in the partnership is participating in 
programs funded under that title.
 ``(g) Annual Reports.--
 ``(1) In general.--Beginning with fiscal year 2002, each 
 partnership that receives a grant under this section shall 
 prepare and submit to the appropriate State agency for higher 
 education, by a date set by that agency, an annual report on 
 the progress of the partnership on the performance measures 
 described in section 2804(a)(2).
 ``(2) Contents.--Each such report shall--
 ``(A) include a copy of each written agreement 
 required by subsection (c) that is entered into by the 
 partnership; and
 ``(B) describe how the members of the partnership 
 have collaborated to achieve the specific goals set out 
 in the agreement, and the results of that 
 collaboration.
 ``(3) Copy.--The State agency for higher education shall 
 provide the State educational agency with a copy of each such 
 report.

``SEC. 2810. STATE APPLICATION ACCOUNTABILITY PROVISIONS.

 ``(a) Assurances.--Each State application submitted under section 
2802 shall contain assurances that--
 ``(1) beginning on the date of enactment of the Leave No 
 Child Behind Act of 2001, no school in the State that is served 
 under this part will use funds received under this part to hire 
 a teacher who is not a fully qualified teacher; and
 ``(2) not later than 4 years after the date of enactment of 
 the Leave No Child Behind Act of 2001, each teacher in the 
 State who provides services to students served under this part 
 shall be a fully qualified teacher.
 ``(b) Withholding.--If a State fails to meet the requirements 
described in subsection (a)(2) for a fiscal year in which the 
requirements apply--
 ``(1) the Secretary shall withhold, for the following 
 fiscal year, a portion of the funds that would otherwise be 
 available to the State under section 2803(a)(1) for the 
 administration of this part; and
 ``(2) the State shall be subject to such other penalties as 
 are provided by law for a violation of this Act.
 ``(c) Assistance by State Educational Agency.--Each State 
application submitted under section 2802 shall describe how the State 
educational agency will help each local educational agency and school 
in the State develop the capacity to comply with the requirements of 
this section.

``SEC. 2811. LOCAL APPLICATION ACCOUNTABILITY PROVISIONS.

 ``Each local application submitted under section 2806 shall contain 
assurances that--
 ``(1) the agency will not hire a teacher with funds made 
 available to the agency under this part, unless the teacher is 
 a fully qualified teacher;
 ``(2) the local educational agency and schools served by 
 the agency will work to ensure, through voluntary agreements 
 and incentive programs, that elementary school and secondary 
 school teachers in high-poverty schools served by the local 
 educational agency will be at least as well qualified, in terms 
 of experience and credentials, as the instructional staff in 
 schools served by the same local educational agency that are 
 not high-poverty schools;
 ``(3) any teacher who receives certification from the 
 National Board for Professional Teaching Standards will be 
 considered fully qualified to teach in the academic subjects in 
 which the teacher is certified in high-poverty schools in any 
 school district or community served by the local educational 
 agency; and
 ``(4) the agency will--
 ``(A) make available, on request and in an 
 understandable and uniform format, to any parent of a 
 student attending any school served by the local 
 educational agency, information regarding the 
 professional qualifications of the student's classroom 
 teachers with regard to--
 ``(i) whether the teacher has met State 
 certification or licensing criteria for the 
 academic subjects and grade level in which the 
 teacher teaches the student;
 ``(ii) whether the teacher is teaching with 
 emergency credentials or whether any State 
 certification or licensing standard has been 
 waived for the teacher; and
 ``(iii) the academic qualifications of the 
 teacher in the academic subjects and grade 
 levels in which the teacher teaches; and
 ``(B) inform parents that the parents are entitled 
 to receive the information upon request.

``SEC. 2812. DEFINITIONS.

 ``In this part:
 ``(1) Beginning teacher.--The term `beginning teacher' 
 means a fully qualified teacher who has taught for 3 years or 
 less.
 ``(2) Core academic subjects.--The term `core academic 
 subjects' means--
 ``(A) mathematics;
 ``(B) science;
 ``(C) reading (or language arts) and English;
 ``(D) social studies (consisting of history, 
 civics, government, geography, and economics);
 ``(E) foreign languages; and
 ``(F) fine arts (consisting of music, dance, drama, 
 and the visual arts).
 ``(3) Covered recruitment.--The term `covered recruitment' 
 means activities described in section 2807(c).
 ``(4) Fully qualified.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `fully qualified', used 
 with respect to a teacher, means a teacher who--
 ``(i)(I) is certified or licensed and has 
 demonstrated the academic subject knowledge, 
 teaching knowledge, and teaching skills 
 necessary to teach effectively in the academic 
 subject in which the teacher teaches, according 
 to the standards described in subparagraph (B) 
 or (C), as appropriate; and
 ``(II) shall not be a teacher for whom 
 State certification or licensing requirements 
 have been waived or who is teaching under 
 emergency credentials; or
 ``(ii) meets the standards of the National 
 Board for Professional Teaching Standards.
 ``(B) Elementary school instructional staff.--For 
 purposes of complying with subparagraph (A)(i), each 
 elementary school teacher (other than a middle school 
 teacher) in the State shall, at a minimum--
 ``(i) have State certification or a State 
 license to teach (which may include 
 certification or licensing obtained through 
 alternative routes); and
 ``(ii) hold a bachelor's degree and 
 demonstrate the academic subject knowledge, 
 teaching knowledge, and teaching skills 
 required to teach effectively in reading, 
 writing, mathematics, social studies, science, 
 and other academic subjects.
 ``(C) Middle school and secondary school 
 instructional staff.--For purposes of complying with 
 subparagraph (A)(i), each middle school or secondary 
 school teacher in the State shall, at a minimum--
 ``(i) have State certification or a State 
 license to teach (which may include 
 certification or licensing obtained through 
 alternative routes); and
 ``(ii) hold a bachelor's degree or higher 
 degree and demonstrate a high level of 
 competence in all academic subjects in which 
 the teacher teaches through--
 ``(I) achievement of a high level 
 of performance on rigorous academic 
 subject tests;
 ``(II) completion of an academic 
 major (or courses totaling an 
 equivalent number of credit hours) in 
 each of the academic subjects in which 
 the teacher teaches; or
 ``(III) for a teacher hired prior 
 to the date of enactment of the Leave 
 No Child Behind Act of 2001, completion 
 of appropriate course work for mastery 
 of such academic subjects.
 ``(5) High-poverty.--The term `high-poverty', used with 
 respect to a school, means a school that serves a high number 
 or percentage of children from families with incomes below the 
 poverty line, as determined by the State in which the school is 
 located.
 ``(6) High-poverty local educational agency.--The term 
 `high-poverty local educational agency' means a local 
 educational agency for which the number of children served by 
 the agency who are age 5 through 17, and from families with 
 incomes below the poverty line--
 ``(A) is not less than 20 percent of the number of 
 all children served by the agency; or
 ``(B) is more than 10,000.
 ``(7) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 `institution of higher education'--
 ``(A) has the meaning given the term in section 
 101(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965; and
 ``(B) if such an institution prepares teachers and 
 receives Federal funds, means such an institution 
 that--
 ``(i) is in full compliance with the 
 requirements of section 207 of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965; and
 ``(ii) does not have a teacher preparation 
 program identified by a State as low-
 performing.
 ``(8) Low-performing school.--The term `low-performing 
 school' means--
 ``(A) a school identified by a local educational 
 agency for school improvement under section 1116(c); or
 ``(B) a school in which the great majority of 
 students, as determined by the State in which the 
 school is located, fail to meet State student 
 performance standards based on assessments the local 
 educational agency is using under part A of title I.
 ``(9) Mentoring.--The term `mentoring' means activities 
 that--
 ``(A) consist of structured guidance and regular 
 and ongoing support for beginning teachers, that--
 ``(i) is designed to help the teachers 
 continue to improve their practice of teaching 
 and to develop their instructional skills; and
 ``(ii)(I) is part of a multiyear, 
 developmental induction process;
 ``(II) involves the assistance of a mentor 
 teacher and other appropriate individuals from 
 a school, local educational agency, or 
 institution of higher education; and
 ``(III) may include coaching, classroom 
 observation, team teaching, and reduced 
 teaching loads; and
 ``(B) may include the establishment of a 
 partnership by a local educational agency with an 
 institution of higher education, another local 
 educational agency, teacher organization, or another 
 organization, for the purpose of carrying out the 
 activities described in subparagraph (A).
 ``(10) Mentor teacher.--The term `mentor teacher' means a 
 fully qualified teacher who--
 ``(A) is a highly competent classroom teacher who 
 is formally selected and trained to work effectively 
 with beginning teachers (including corps members 
 described in section 2808);
 ``(B) is full-time, and is assigned and qualified 
 to teach in the content area or grade level in which a 
 beginning teacher (including a corps member described 
 in section 2808), to whom the teacher provides 
 mentoring, intends to teach;
 ``(C) has been consistently effective in helping 
 diverse groups of students make substantial achievement 
 gains; and
 ``(D) has been selected to provide mentoring 
 through a peer review process that uses, as the primary 
 selection criterion for the process, the teacher's 
 ability to help students achieve academic gains.
 ``(11) Poverty line.--The term `poverty line' means the 
 poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and 
 Budget, and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) 
 of the Community Services Block Grant Act (42 U.S.C. 9902(2))) 
 applicable to a family of the size involved.
 ``(12) Professional development.--The term `professional 
 development' means activities that are--
 ``(A)(i) an integral part of broad schoolwide and 
 districtwide educational improvement plans and enhance 
 the ability of teachers and other staff to help all 
 students, including females, students with 
 disabilities, students with limited English 
 proficiency, and students who have economic and 
 educational disadvantages, meet high State and local 
 content and student performance standards;
 ``(ii) sustained, intensive, school-embedded, tied 
 to State standards, and of high quality and sufficient 
 duration to have a positive and lasting impact on 
 classroom instruction (not one-time workshops); and
 ``(iii) based on the best available research on 
 teaching and learning; and
 ``(B) described in subparagraphs (A) through (F) of 
 section 2807(a)(1).
 ``(13) Recruitment activities.--The term `recruitment 
 activities' means activities carried out through a teacher 
 corps program as described in section 2808 to attract highly 
 qualified individuals, including individuals taking 
 nontraditional routes to teaching, to enter teaching and 
 support the individuals during necessary certification and 
 licensure activities.
 ``(14) Recruitment partnership.--The term `recruitment 
 partnership' means a partnership described in section 
 2805(b)(2).

``SEC. 2813. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part, 
$1,730,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 and for each of the 4 succeeding 
fiscal years.''.

 Subchapter B--National Board Certification Program

SEC. 3471. PURPOSE.

 It is the purpose of this subchapter to assist 105,000 elementary 
school or secondary school teachers in becoming board certified by the 
year 2006.

SEC. 3472. GRANTS TO EXPAND PARTICIPATION IN THE NATIONAL BOARD 
 CERTIFICATION PROGRAM.

 (a) Definitions.--The terms used in this section have the meanings 
given the terms in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary 
Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 8801).
 (b) Grants Authorized.--From amounts appropriated under subsection 
(f), the Secretary shall award grants to States to enable such States 
to provide subsidies to elementary school and secondary school teachers 
who enroll in the certification program of the National Board for 
Professional Teaching Standards.
 (c) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
subsection (b), a State shall prepare and submit to the Secretary an 
application at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
information as the Secretary may require.
 (d) Amount of Grant.--The amount of a grant awarded to a State 
under subsection (b) shall be determined by the Secretary.
 (e) Use of Funds.--
 (1) In general.--A State shall use amounts received under a 
 grant under this section to provide a subsidy to an eligible 
 teacher who enrolls and completes the teaching certification 
 program of the National Board for Professional Teaching 
 Standards.
 (2) Eligibility.--
 (A) In general.--To be eligible to receive a 
 subsidy under this section an individual shall--
 (i) be a teacher in an elementary school or 
 secondary school, served by a local educational 
 agency that meets the eligibility requirements 
 described in subparagraph (B), in the State 
 involved;
 (ii) prepare and submit to the State an 
 application at such time, in such manner, and 
 containing such information as the State may 
 require; and
 (iii) certify to the State that the 
 individual intends to enroll and complete the 
 teaching certification program of the National 
 Board for Professional Teaching Standards.
 (B) Local educational agency.--A local educational 
 agency described in subparagraph (A)(i) is a local 
 educational agency that--
 (i) serves low achieving students as 
 measured by low graduation rates or low scores 
 on assessment exams;
 (ii) has a low teacher retention rate in 
 the schools served by the local educational 
 agency;
 (iii) has a high rate of out-of-field 
 placement of teachers in the schools served by 
 the local educational agency; and
 (iv) has a shortage of teachers of 
 mathematics or physical science in the schools 
 served by the local educational agency.
 (3) Amount of subsidy.--Subject to the availability of 
 funds, a State shall provide a teacher who has an application 
 approved under paragraph (2) with a subsidy in an amount equal 
 to 90 percent of the cost of enrollment in the program 
 described in paragraph (2)(A)(iii).
 (f) Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to 
carry out this section, $37,800,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002 
through 2006.

 Subchapter C--Student Loan Forgiveness for Teachers

SEC. 3481. STUDENT LOAN FORGIVENESS FOR TEACHERS.

 (a) Guaranteed Loans.--Section 428J of the Higher Education Act of 
1965 (20 U.S.C. 1078-10) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 428J. LOAN FORGIVENESS FOR TEACHERS.

 ``(a) Statement of Purpose.--It is the purpose of this section to 
encourage individuals to enter and continue in the teaching profession.
 ``(b) Program Authorized.--The Secretary shall carry out a program, 
through the holder of the loan, of assuming the obligation to repay in 
accordance with subsection (c) a qualified loan amount for a loan made 
under section 428 or 428H for any borrower who--
 ``(1) is employed as a full-time teacher during the 
 academic year beginning in calendar year 2001 or during any 
 subsequent academic year--
 ``(A) in a school that qualifies under section 
 465(a)(2)(A) for loan cancellation for Perkins loan 
 recipients who teach in such schools;
 ``(B) if employed as a secondary school teacher, is 
 teaching--
 ``(i) a subject area that is relevant to 
 the borrower's academic major as certified by 
 the chief administrative officer of the public 
 or nonprofit private secondary school in which 
 the borrower is employed; or
 ``(ii) special education or bilingual 
 education;
 ``(C) if employed as an elementary school teacher, 
 has demonstrated, as certified by the chief 
 administrative officer of the public or nonprofit 
 private elementary school in which the borrower is 
 employed, knowledge and teaching skills in reading, 
 writing, mathematics, special education, bilingual 
 education, or other areas of the elementary school 
 curriculum; and
 ``(D) is fully qualified, as such term is defined 
 in section 2812(4)(A) of the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965; and
 ``(2) is not in default on a loan for which the borrower 
 seeks forgiveness.
 ``(c) Qualified Loans Amount.--
 ``(1) In general.--Of the aggregate loan obligations of a 
 borrower on loans made under section 428 or 428H that are 
 outstanding after the completion of the first complete school 
 year of teaching described in subsection (b)(1) for which the 
 borrower applies for repayment under this section, the 
 Secretary shall repay not more than--
 ``(A) $3,000 for each of the first and second such 
 complete school years;
 ``(B) $4,000 for the third such complete school 
 year; and
 ``(C) $5,000 for each of the fourth and fifth such 
 complete school years.
 ``(2) Treatment of consolidation loans.--A loan amount for 
 a loan made under section 428C may be a qualified loan amount 
 for the purposes of this subsection only to the extent that 
 such loan amount was used to repay a Federal Direct Stafford 
 Loan, a Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loan, or a loan 
 made under section 428 or 428H for a borrower who meets the 
 requirements of subsection (b), as determined in accordance 
 with regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
 ``(d) Regulations.--The Secretary is authorized to issue such 
regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this 
section.
 ``(e) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to 
authorize any refunding of any repayment of a loan.
 ``(f) List.--If the list of schools in which a teacher may perform 
service pursuant to subsection (b) is not available before May 1 of any 
year, the Secretary may use the list for the year preceding the year 
for which the determination is made to make such service determination.
 ``(g) Additional Eligibility Provisions.--
 ``(1) Continued eligibility.--Any teacher who performs 
 service in a school that--
 ``(A) meets the requirements of subsection 
 (b)(1)(A) in any year during such service; and
 ``(B) in a subsequent year fails to meet the 
 requirements of such subsection,
 may continue to teach in such school and shall be eligible for 
 loan forgiveness pursuant to subsection (b).
 ``(2) Prevention of double benefits.--No borrower may, for 
 the same service, receive a benefit under both this subsection 
 and subtitle D of title I of the National and Community Service 
 Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12571 et seq.). No borrower may receive 
 a reduction of loan obligations under both this section and 
 section 460.
 ``(h) Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `year', 
where applied to service as a teacher, means an academic year as 
defined by the Secretary.''.
 (b) Direct Loans.--Section 460 of such Act (20 U.S.C. 1087j) is 
amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 460. LOAN FORGIVENESS FOR TEACHERS.

 ``(a) Statement of Purpose.--It is the purpose of this section to 
encourage individuals to enter and continue in the teaching profession.
 ``(b) Program Authorized.--The Secretary shall carry out a program 
of canceling the obligation to repay a qualified loan amount in 
accordance with subsection (c) for Federal Direct Stafford Loans and 
Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loans made under this part for any 
borrower who--
 ``(1) is employed as a full-time teacher during the 
 academic year beginning in calendar year 2001 or during any 
 subsequent academic year--
 ``(A) in a school that qualifies under section 
 465(a)(2)(A) for loan cancellation for Perkins loan 
 recipients who teach in such schools;
 ``(B) if employed as a secondary school teacher, is 
 teaching--
 ``(i) a subject area that is relevant to 
 the borrower's academic major as certified by 
 the chief administrative officer of the public 
 or nonprofit private secondary school in which 
 the borrower is employed; or
 ``(ii) special education or bilingual 
 education;
 ``(C) if employed as an elementary school teacher, 
 has demonstrated, as certified by the chief 
 administrative officer of the public or nonprofit 
 private elementary school in which the borrower is 
 employed, knowledge and teaching skills in reading, 
 writing, mathematics, special education, bilingual 
 education, and other areas of the elementary school 
 curriculum; and
 ``(D) is fully qualified, as such term is defined 
 in section 2812(4)(A) of the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965; and
 ``(2) is not in default on a loan for which the borrower 
 seeks forgiveness.
 ``(c) Qualified Loans Amount.--
 ``(1) In general.--Of the aggregate loan obligations of a 
 borrower on Federal Direct Stafford Loans and Federal Direct 
 Unsubsidized Stafford Loans made under this part that are 
 outstanding after the completion of the first complete school 
 year of teaching described in subsection (b)(1) for which the 
 borrower applies for cancellation under this section, the 
 Secretary shall cancel not more than--
 ``(A) $3,000 for each of the first and second such 
 complete school years;
 ``(B) $4,000 for the third such complete school 
 year; and
 ``(C) $5,000 for each of the fourth and fifth such 
 complete school years.
 ``(2) Treatment of consolidation loans.--A loan amount for 
 a Federal Direct Consolidation Loan may be a qualified loan 
 amount for the purposes of this subsection only to the extent 
 that such loan amount was used to repay a Federal Direct 
 Stafford Loan, a Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loan, or 
 a loan made under section 428 or 428H, for a borrower who meets 
 the requirements of subsection (b), as determined in accordance 
 with regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
 ``(d) Regulations.--The Secretary is authorized to issue such 
regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this 
section.
 ``(e) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to 
authorize any refunding of any repayment of a loan.
 ``(f) List.--If the list of schools in which a teacher may perform 
service pursuant to subsection (b) is not available before May 1 of any 
year, the Secretary may use the list for the year preceding the year 
for which the determination is made to make such service determination.
 ``(g) Additional Eligibility Provisions.--
 ``(1) Continued eligibility.--Any teacher who performs 
 service in a school that--
 ``(A) meets the requirements of subsection 
 (b)(1)(A) in any year during such service; and
 ``(B) in a subsequent year fails to meet the 
 requirements of such subsection,
 may continue to teach in such school and shall be eligible for 
 loan forgiveness pursuant to subsection (b).
 ``(2) Prevention of double benefits.--No borrower may, for 
 the same service, receive a benefit under both this subsection 
 and subtitle D of title I of the National and Community Service 
 Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12571 et seq.). No borrower may receive 
 a reduction of loan obligations under both this section and 
 section 428J.
 ``(h) Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `year', 
where applied to service as a teacher, means an academic year as 
defined by the Secretary.''.

 CHAPTER 6--SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION

 Subchapter A--School Modernization Bonds

SEC. 3501. SHORT TITLE.

 This subchapter may be cited as the ``America's Better Classroom 
Act of 2001''.

SEC. 3502. EXPANSION OF INCENTIVES FOR PUBLIC SCHOOLS.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is 
amended by adding at the end the following:

 ``Subchapter Y--Public School Modernization Provisions

 ``Sec. 1400K. Credit to holders of qualified public school 
 modernization bonds.
 ``Sec. 1400L. Qualified school construction bonds.
 ``Sec. 1400M. Qualified zone academy bonds.

``SEC. 1400K. CREDIT TO HOLDERS OF QUALIFIED PUBLIC SCHOOL 
 MODERNIZATION BONDS.

 ``(a) Allowance of Credit.--In the case of a taxpayer who holds a 
qualified public school modernization bond on a credit allowance date 
of such bond which occurs during the taxable year, there shall be 
allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for such 
taxable year an amount equal to the sum of the credits determined under 
subsection (b) with respect to credit allowance dates during such year 
on which the taxpayer holds such bond.
 ``(b) Amount of Credit.--
 ``(1) In general.--The amount of the credit determined 
 under this subsection with respect to any credit allowance date 
 for a qualified public school modernization bond is 25 percent 
 of the annual credit determined with respect to such bond.
 ``(2) Annual credit.--The annual credit determined with 
 respect to any qualified public school modernization bond is 
 the product of--
 ``(A) the applicable credit rate, multiplied by
 ``(B) the outstanding face amount of the bond.
 ``(3) Applicable credit rate.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (1), the applicable credit rate with respect to an issue is the 
rate equal to an average market yield (as of the day before the date of 
issuance of the issue) on outstanding long-term corporate debt 
obligations (determined under regulations prescribed by the Secretary).
 ``(4) Special rule for issuance and redemption.--In the 
 case of a bond which is issued during the 3-month period ending 
 on a credit allowance date, the amount of the credit determined 
 under this subsection with respect to such credit allowance 
 date shall be a ratable portion of the credit otherwise 
 determined based on the portion of the 3-month period during 
 which the bond is outstanding. A similar rule shall apply when 
 the bond is redeemed.
 ``(c) Limitation Based on Amount of Tax.--
 ``(1) In general.--The credit allowed under subsection (a) 
 for any taxable year shall not exceed the excess of--
 ``(A) the sum of the regular tax liability (as 
 defined in section 26(b)) plus the tax imposed by 
 section 55, over
 ``(B) the sum of the credits allowable under part 
 IV of subchapter A (other than subpart C thereof, 
 relating to refundable credits).
 ``(2) Carryover of unused credit.--If the credit allowable 
 under subsection (a) exceeds the limitation imposed by 
 paragraph (1) for such taxable year, such excess shall be 
 carried to the succeeding taxable year and added to the credit 
 allowable under subsection (a) for such taxable year.
 ``(d) Qualified Public School Modernization Bond; Credit Allowance 
Date.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Qualified public school modernization bond.--The term 
 `qualified public school modernization bond' means--
 ``(A) a qualified zone academy bond, and
 ``(B) a qualified school construction bond.
 ``(2) Credit allowance date.--The term `credit allowance 
 date' means--
 ``(A) March 15,
 ``(B) June 15,
 ``(C) September 15, and
 ``(D) December 15.
 Such term includes the last day on which the bond is 
 outstanding.
 ``(e) Other Definitions.--For purposes of this subchapter--
 ``(1) Local educational agency.--The term `local 
 educational agency' has the meaning given to such term by 
 section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 
 1965. Such term includes the local educational agency that 
 serves the District of Columbia but does not include any other 
 State agency.
 ``(2) Bond.--The term `bond' includes any obligation.
 ``(3) State.--The term `State' includes the District of 
 Columbia and any possession of the United States.
 ``(4) Public school facility.--The term `public school 
 facility' shall not include--
 ``(A) any stadium or other facility primarily used 
 for athletic contests or exhibitions or other events 
 for which admission is charged to the general public, 
 or
 ``(B) any facility which is not owned by a State or 
 local government or any agency or instrumentality of a 
 State or local government.
 ``(f) Credit Included in Gross Income.--Gross income includes the 
amount of the credit allowed to the taxpayer under this section 
(determined without regard to subsection (c)) and the amount so 
included shall be treated as interest income.
 ``(g) Bonds Held by Regulated Investment Companies.--If any 
qualified public school modernization bond is held by a regulated 
investment company, the credit determined under subsection (a) shall be 
allowed to shareholders of such company under procedures prescribed by 
the Secretary.
 ``(h) Credits May Be Stripped.--Under regulations prescribed by the 
Secretary--
 ``(1) In general.--There may be a separation (including at 
 issuance) of the ownership of a qualified public school 
 modernization bond and the entitlement to the credit under this 
 section with respect to such bond. In case of any such 
 separation, the credit under this section shall be allowed to 
 the person who on the credit allowance date holds the 
 instrument evidencing the entitlement to the credit and not to 
 the holder of the bond.
 ``(2) Certain rules to apply.--In the case of a separation 
 described in paragraph (1), the rules of section 1286 shall 
 apply to the qualified public school modernization bond as if 
 it were a stripped bond and to the credit under this section as 
 if it were a stripped coupon.
 ``(i) Treatment for Estimated Tax Purposes.--Solely for purposes of 
sections 6654 and 6655, the credit allowed by this section to a 
taxpayer by reason of holding a qualified public school modernization 
bonds on a credit allowance date shall be treated as if it were a 
payment of estimated tax made by the taxpayer on such date.
 ``(j) Credit May Be Transferred.--Nothing in any law or rule of law 
shall be construed to limit the transferability of the credit allowed 
by this section through sale and repurchase agreements.
 ``(k) Reporting.--Issuers of qualified public school modernization 
bonds shall submit reports similar to the reports required under 
section 149(e).
 ``(l) Termination.--This section shall not apply to any bond issued 
after September 30, 2006.

``SEC. 1400L. QUALIFIED SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION BONDS.

 ``(a) Qualified School Construction Bond.--For purposes of this 
subchapter, the term `qualified school construction bond' means any 
bond issued as part of an issue if--
 ``(1) 95 percent or more of the proceeds of such issue are 
 to be used for the construction, rehabilitation, or repair of a 
 public school facility or for the acquisition of land on which 
 such a facility is to be constructed with part of the proceeds 
 of such issue,
 ``(2) the bond is issued by a State or local government 
 within the jurisdiction of which such school is located,
 ``(3) the issuer designates such bond for purposes of this 
 section, and
 ``(4) the term of each bond which is part of such issue 
 does not exceed 15 years.
 ``(b) Limitation on Amount of Bonds Designated.--The maximum 
aggregate face amount of bonds issued during any calendar year which 
may be designated under subsection (a) by any issuer shall not exceed 
the sum of--
 ``(1) the limitation amount allocated under subsection (d) 
 for such calendar year to such issuer, and
 ``(2) if such issuer is a large local educational agency 
 (as defined in subsection (e)(4)) or is issuing on behalf of 
 such an agency, the limitation amount allocated under 
 subsection (e) for such calendar year to such agency.
 ``(c) National Limitation on Amount of Bonds Designated.--There is 
a national qualified school construction bond limitation for each 
calendar year. Such limitation is--
 ``(1) $11,000,000,000 for 2002,
 ``(2) $11,000,000,000 for 2003, and
 ``(3) except as provided in subsection (f), zero after 
 2003.
 ``(d) 60 Percent of Limitation Allocated Among States.--
 ``(1) In general.--60 percent of the limitation applicable 
 under subsection (c) for any calendar year shall be allocated 
 by the Secretary among the States in proportion to the 
 respective numbers of children in each State who have attained 
 age 5 but not age 18 for the most recent fiscal year ending 
 before such calendar year. The limitation amount allocated to a 
 State under the preceding sentence shall be allocated by the 
 State to issuers within such State and such allocations may be 
made only if there is an approved State application.
 ``(2) Minimum allocations to states.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall adjust the 
 allocations under this subsection for any calendar year 
 for each State to the extent necessary to ensure that 
 the sum of--
 ``(i) the amount allocated to such State 
 under this subsection for such year, and
 ``(ii) the aggregate amounts allocated 
 under subsection (e) to large local educational 
 agencies in such State for such year,
 is not less than an amount equal to such State's 
 minimum percentage of the amount to be allocated under 
 paragraph (1) for the calendar year.
 ``(B) Minimum percentage.--A State's minimum 
 percentage for any calendar year is the minimum 
 percentage described in section 1124(d) of the 
 Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 6334(d)) for such State for the most recent 
 fiscal year ending before such calendar year.
 ``(3) Allocations to certain possessions.--The amount to be 
 allocated under paragraph (1) to any possession of the United 
 States other than Puerto Rico shall be the amount which would 
 have been allocated if all allocations under paragraph (1) were 
 made on the basis of respective populations of individuals 
 below the poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management 
 and Budget). In making other allocations, the amount to be 
 allocated under paragraph (1) shall be reduced by the aggregate 
 amount allocated under this paragraph to possessions of the 
 United States.
 ``(4) Allocations for indian schools.--In addition to the 
 amounts allocated under this subsection, $200,000,000 for 
 calendar year 2002, and $200,000,000 for calendar year 2003, 
 shall be allocated by the Secretary of the Interior for 
 purposes of the construction, rehabilitation, and repair of 
 schools funded by the Bureau of Indian Affairs. In the case of 
 amounts allocated under the preceding sentence, Indian tribal 
 governments (as defined in section 7871) shall be treated as 
 qualified issuers for purposes of this subchapter.
 ``(5) Approved state application.--For purposes of 
 paragraph (1), the term `approved State application' means an 
 application which is approved by the Secretary of Education and 
 which includes--
 ``(A) the results of a recent publicly-available 
 survey (undertaken by the State with the involvement of 
 local education officials, members of the public, and 
 experts in school construction and management) of such 
 State's needs for public school facilities, including 
 descriptions of--
 ``(i) health and safety problems at such 
 facilities,
 ``(ii) the capacity of public schools in 
 the State to house projected enrollments, and
 ``(iii) the extent to which the public 
 schools in the State offer the physical 
 infrastructure needed to provide a high-quality 
 education to all students, and
 ``(B) a description of how the State will allocate 
 to local educational agencies, or otherwise use, its 
 allocation under this subsection to address the needs 
 identified under subparagraph (A), including a 
 description of how it will--
 ``(i) ensure that the needs of both rural 
 and urban areas will be recognized,
 ``(ii) give highest priority to localities 
 with the greatest needs, as demonstrated by 
 inadequate school facilities coupled with a low 
 level of resources to meet those needs,
 ``(iii) use its allocation under this 
 subsection to assist localities that lack the 
 fiscal capacity to issue bonds on their own, 
 and
 ``(iv) ensure that its allocation under 
 this subsection is used only to supplement, and 
 not supplant, the amount of school 
 construction, rehabilitation, and repair in the 
 State that would have occurred in the absence 
 of such allocation.
 Any allocation under paragraph (1) by a State shall be binding 
 if such State reasonably determined that the allocation was in 
 accordance with the plan approved under this paragraph.
 ``(e) 40 Percent of Limitation Allocated Among Largest School 
Districts.--
 ``(1) In general.--40 percent of the limitation applicable 
 under subsection (c) for any calendar year shall be allocated 
 under paragraph (2) by the Secretary among local educational 
 agencies which are large local educational agencies for such 
 year. No qualified school construction bond may be issued by 
 reason of an allocation to a large local educational agency 
 under the preceding sentence unless such agency has an approved 
 local application.
 ``(2) Allocation formula.--The amount to be allocated under 
 paragraph (1) for any calendar year shall be allocated among 
 large local educational agencies in proportion to the 
 respective amounts each such agency received for Basic Grants 
 under subpart 2 of part A of title I of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6331 et seq.) for 
 the most recent fiscal year ending before such calendar year.
 ``(3) Allocation of unused limitation to state.--The amount 
 allocated under this subsection to a large local educational 
 agency for any calendar year may be reallocated by such agency 
 to the State in which such agency is located for such calendar 
 year. Any amount reallocated to a State under the preceding 
 sentence may be allocated as provided in subsection (d)(1).
 ``(4) Large local educational agency.--For purposes of this 
 section, the term `large local educational agency' means, with 
 respect to a calendar year, any local educational agency if 
 such agency is--
 ``(A) among the 100 local educational agencies with 
 the largest numbers of children aged 5 through 17 from 
 families living below the poverty level, as determined 
 by the Secretary using the most recent data available 
 from the Department of Commerce that are satisfactory 
 to the Secretary, or
 ``(B) 1 of not more than 25 local educational 
 agencies (other than those described in subparagraph 
 (A)) that the Secretary of Education determines (based 
 on the most recent data available satisfactory to the 
 Secretary) are in particular need of assistance, based 
 on a low level of resources for school construction, a 
 high level of enrollment growth, or such other factors 
 as the Secretary deems appropriate.
 ``(5) Approved local application.--For purposes of 
 paragraph (1), the term `approved local application' means an 
 application which is approved by the Secretary of Education and 
 which includes--
 ``(A) the results of a recent publicly-available 
 survey (undertaken by the local educational agency or 
 the State with the involvement of school officials, 
 members of the public, and experts in school 
 construction and management) of such agency's needs for 
 public school facilities, including descriptions of--
 ``(i) the overall condition of the local 
 educational agency's school facilities, 
 including health and safety problems,
 ``(ii) the capacity of the agency's schools 
 to house projected enrollments, and
 ``(iii) the extent to which the agency's 
 schools offer the physical infrastructure 
 needed to provide a high-quality education to 
 all students,
 ``(B) a description of how the local educational 
 agency will use its allocation under this subsection 
to address the needs identified under subparagraph (A), and
 ``(C) a description of how the local educational 
 agency will ensure that its allocation under this 
 subsection is used only to supplement, and not 
 supplant, the amount of school construction, 
 rehabilitation, or repair in the locality that would 
 have occurred in the absence of such allocation.
 A rule similar to the rule of the last sentence of subsection 
 (d)(5) shall apply for purposes of this paragraph.
 ``(f) Carryover of Unused Limitation.--If for any calendar year--
 ``(1) the amount allocated under subsection (d) to any 
 State, exceeds
 ``(2) the amount of bonds issued during such year which are 
 designated under subsection (a) pursuant to such allocation,
the limitation amount under such subsection for such State for the 
following calendar year shall be increased by the amount of such 
excess. A similar rule shall apply to the amounts allocated under 
subsection (d)(5) or (e).
 ``(g) Special Rules Relating to Arbitrage.--
 ``(1) In general.--A bond shall not be treated as failing 
 to meet the requirement of subsection (a)(1) solely by reason 
 of the fact that the proceeds of the issue of which such bond 
 is a part are invested for a temporary period (but not more 
 than 36 months) until such proceeds are needed for the purpose 
 for which such issue was issued.
 ``(2) Binding commitment requirement.--Paragraph (1) shall 
 apply to an issue only if, as of the date of issuance, there is 
 a reasonable expectation that--
 ``(A) at least 10 percent of the proceeds of the 
 issue will be spent within the 6-month period beginning 
 on such date for the purpose for which such issue was 
 issued, and
 ``(B) the remaining proceeds of the issue will be 
 spent with due diligence for such purpose.
 ``(3) Earnings on proceeds.--Any earnings on proceeds 
 during the temporary period shall be treated as proceeds of the 
 issue for purposes of applying subsection (a)(1) and paragraph 
 (1) of this subsection.

``SEC. 1400M. QUALIFIED ZONE ACADEMY BONDS.

 ``(a) Qualified Zone Academy Bond.--For purposes of this 
subchapter--
 ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified zone academy bond' 
 means any bond issued as part of an issue if--
 ``(A) 95 percent or more of the proceeds of such 
 issue are to be used for a qualified purpose with 
 respect to a qualified zone academy established by a 
 local educational agency,
 ``(B) the bond is issued by a State or local 
 government within the jurisdiction of which such 
 academy is located,
 ``(C) the issuer--
 ``(i) designates such bond for purposes of 
 this section,
 ``(ii) certifies that it has written 
 assurances that the private business 
 contribution requirement of paragraph (2) will 
 be met with respect to such academy, and
 ``(iii) certifies that it has the written 
 approval of the local educational agency for 
 such bond issuance, and
 ``(D) the term of each bond which is part of such 
 issue does not exceed 15 years.
 Rules similar to the rules of section 1400L(g) shall apply for 
 purposes of paragraph (1).
 ``(2) Private business contribution requirement.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1), 
 the private business contribution requirement of this 
 paragraph is met with respect to any issue if the local 
 educational agency that established the qualified zone 
 academy has written commitments from private entities 
 to make qualified contributions having a present value 
 (as of the date of issuance of the issue) of not less 
 than 10 percent of the proceeds of the issue.
 ``(B) Qualified contributions.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), the term `qualified contribution' 
 means any contribution (of a type and quality 
 acceptable to the local educational agency) of--
 ``(i) equipment for use in the qualified 
 zone academy (including state-of-the-art 
 technology and vocational equipment),
 ``(ii) technical assistance in developing 
 curriculum or in training teachers in order to 
 promote appropriate market driven technology in 
 the classroom,
 ``(iii) services of employees as volunteer 
 mentors,
 ``(iv) internships, field trips, or other 
 educational opportunities outside the academy 
 for students, or
 ``(v) any other property or service 
 specified by the local educational agency.
 ``(3) Qualified zone academy.--The term `qualified zone 
 academy' means any public school (or academic program within a 
 public school) which is established by and operated under the 
 supervision of a local educational agency to provide education 
 or training below the postsecondary level if--
 ``(A) such public school or program (as the case 
 may be) is designed in cooperation with business to 
 enhance the academic curriculum, increase graduation 
 and employment rates, and better prepare students for 
 the rigors of college and the increasingly complex 
 workforce,
 ``(B) students in such public school or program (as 
 the case may be) will be subject to the same academic 
 standards and assessments as other students educated by 
 the local educational agency,
 ``(C) the comprehensive education plan of such 
 public school or program is approved by the local 
 educational agency, and
 ``(D)(i) such public school is located in an 
 empowerment zone or enterprise community (including any 
 such zone or community designated after the date of the 
 enactment of this section), or
 ``(ii) there is a reasonable expectation (as of the 
 date of issuance of the bonds) that at least 35 percent 
 of the students attending such school or participating 
 in such program (as the case may be) will be eligible 
 for free or reduced-cost lunches under the school lunch 
 program established under the National School Lunch 
 Act.
 ``(4) Qualified purpose.--The term `qualified purpose' 
 means, with respect to any qualified zone academy--
 ``(A) constructing, rehabilitating, or repairing 
 the public school facility in which the academy is 
 established,
 ``(B) acquiring the land on which such facility is 
 to be constructed with part of the proceeds of such 
 issue,
 ``(C) providing equipment for use at such academy,
 ``(D) developing course materials for education to 
 be provided at such academy, and
 ``(E) training teachers and other school personnel 
 in such academy.
 ``(b) Limitations on Amount of Bonds Designated.--
 ``(1) In general.--There is a national zone academy bond 
 limitation for each calendar year. Such limitation is--
 ``(A) $400,000,000 for 1998,
 ``(B) $400,000,000 for 1999,
 ``(C) $400,000,000 for 2000,
 ``(D) $400,000,000 for 2001,
 ``(E) $1,400,000,000 for 2002,
 ``(F) $1,400,000,000 for 2003, and
 ``(G) except as provided in paragraph (3), zero 
 after 2003.
 ``(2) Allocation of limitation.--
 ``(A) Allocation among states.--
 ``(i) 1998, 1999, 2000, and 2001 
 limitations.--The national zone academy bond 
 limitations for calendar years 1998, 1999, 
 2000, and 2001 shall be allocated by the 
 Secretary among the States on the basis of 
 their respective populations of individuals 
 below the poverty line (as defined by the 
 Office of Management and Budget).
 ``(ii) Limitation after 2001.--The national 
 zone academy bond limitation for any calendar 
 year after 2001 shall be allocated by the 
 Secretary among the States in proportion to the 
 respective amounts each such State received for 
 Basic Grants under subpart 2 of part A of title 
 I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act 
 of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 6331 et seq.) for the most 
 recent fiscal year ending before such calendar 
 year.
 ``(B) Allocation to local educational agencies.--
 The limitation amount allocated to a State under 
 subparagraph (A) shall be allocated by the State to 
 qualified zone academies within such State.
 ``(C) Designation subject to limitation amount.--
 The maximum aggregate face amount of bonds issued 
 during any calendar year which may be designated under 
 subsection (a) with respect to any qualified zone 
 academy shall not exceed the limitation amount 
 allocated to such academy under subparagraph (B) for 
 such calendar year.
 ``(3) Carryover of unused limitation.--If for any calendar 
 year--
 ``(A) the limitation amount under this subsection 
 for any State, exceeds
 ``(B) the amount of bonds issued during such year 
 which are designated under subsection (a) (or the 
 corresponding provisions of prior law) with respect to 
 qualified zone academies within such State,
 the limitation amount under this subsection for such State for 
 the following calendar year shall be increased by the amount of 
 such excess.''
 (b) Reporting.--Subsection (d) of section 6049 of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to returns regarding payments of 
interest) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(8) Reporting of credit on qualified public school 
 modernization bonds.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a), 
 the term `interest' includes amounts includible in 
 gross income under section 1400K(f) and such amounts 
 shall be treated as paid on the credit allowance date 
 (as defined in section 1400K(d)(2)).
 ``(B) Reporting to corporations, etc.--Except as 
 otherwise provided in regulations, in the case of any 
 interest described in subparagraph (A) of this 
 paragraph, subsection (b)(4) of this section shall be 
 applied without regard to subparagraphs (A), (H), (I), 
 (J), (K), and (L)(i).
 ``(C) Regulatory authority.--The Secretary may 
 prescribe such regulations as are necessary or 
 appropriate to carry out the purposes of this 
 paragraph, including regulations which require more 
 frequent or more detailed reporting.''
 (c) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Subchapter U of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code 
 of 1986 is amended by striking part IV, by redesignating part V 
 as part IV, and by redesignating section 1397F as section 
 1397E.
 (2) The table of subchapters for chapter 1 of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the 
 following:

 ``Subchapter Y. Public school 
 modernization provisions.''
 (3) The table of parts of subchapter U of chapter 1 of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking the last 2 
 items and inserting the following:

 ``Part IV. Regulations.''
 (e) Effective Dates.--
 (1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this 
 subsection, the amendments made by this section shall apply to 
 obligations issued after December 31, 2001.
 (2) Repeal of restriction on zone academy bond holders.--In 
 the case of bonds to which section 1397E of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 (as in effect before the date of enactment 
 of this Act) applies, the limitation of such section to 
 eligible taxpayers (as defined in subsection (d)(6) of such 
 section) shall not apply after the date of enactment of this 
 Act.

SEC. 3503. APPLICATION OF CERTAIN LABOR STANDARDS ON CONSTRUCTION 
 PROJECTS FINANCED UNDER PUBLIC SCHOOL MODERNIZATION 
 PROGRAM.

 Section 439 of the General Education Provisions Act (relating to 
labor standards) (20 U.S.C. 1232b) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(a)'' before ``All laborers and 
 mechanics''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(b)(1) For purposes of this section, the term `applicable 
program' also includes the qualified zone academy bond provisions 
enacted by section 226 of the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 and the 
program established by section 3502 of the America's Better Classroom 
Act of 2001.
 ``(2) A State or local government participating in a program 
described in paragraph (1) shall--
 ``(A) in the awarding of contracts, give priority to 
 contractors with substantial numbers of employees residing 
in the local education area to be served by the school being 
constructed; and
 ``(B) include in the construction contract for such school 
 a requirement that the contractor give priority in hiring new 
 workers to individuals residing in such local education area.
 ``(3) In the case of a program described in paragraph (1), nothing 
in this subsection or subsection (a) shall be construed to deny any tax 
credit allowed under such program. If amounts are required to be 
withheld from contractors to pay wages to which workers are entitled, 
such amounts shall be treated as expended for construction purposes in 
determining whether the requirements of such program are met.''.

 Subchapter B--Schools as Centers of the Community

SEC. 3551. FINDINGS.

 Congress makes the following findings:
 (1) Communities across the Nation need to build and 
 modernize thousands of public elementary schools and secondary 
 schools in the coming decade in ways that reflect new 
 approaches to teaching and learning, and in ways that reflect 
 the fact that learning is a lifelong process for persons of all 
 ages. These schools can make an enduring difference for these 
 communities by affecting not just students but entire 
 neighborhoods for generations.
 (2) The National Symposium on School Design has recommended 
 that local educational agencies hold community dialogues that 
 discuss the planning and design of their new school buildings. 
 Community partnerships of parents, educators, architects, urban 
 planners, students, and other interested parties can assist 
 local educational agencies to design new schools that better 
 meet the needs of their communities now and in the future.
 (3) Establishing such community partnerships for the 
 purpose of broadening public participation in the planning and 
 design of schools encourages broader community involvement in 
 the schools, generates creativity in the planning process, and 
 promotes savings, cost-sharing, and the most effective use of 
 the school building by the entire community. Such partnerships 
 can help create schools that are centers of teaching and 
 learning for the entire community.

SEC. 3552. PURPOSE.

 The purpose of this subchapter is to assist local educational 
agencies and their communities to increase the involvement of parents, 
teachers, students, and community groups in the planning and design of 
new and renovated public elementary school and secondary school 
buildings that--
 (1) enhance teaching and learning, and accommodate the 
 needs of all learners;
 (2) serve as a center of the community;
 (3) promote health, safety, and security;
 (4) effectively use all available resources; and
 (5) are flexible and can accommodate changing community 
 needs.

SEC. 3553. PROGRAM AUTHORIZED.

 (a) Grants Authorized.--
 (1) In general.--From funds appropriated under section 
 3556, the Secretary shall award grants to local educational 
 agencies participating in eligible consortia to enable the 
 eligible consortia to support the planning and design of--
 (A) new elementary school or secondary school 
 buildings; or
 (B) the renovation of existing elementary school or 
 secondary school buildings.
 (2) Definition of eligible consortium.--In this subchapter, 
 the term ``eligible consortium'' means a consortium that--
 (A) shall include at least 1 local educational 
 agency; and
 (B) may include such organizations and individuals 
 as a State educational agency, a community-based 
 organization, a local government, a business or 
 industry, an architect, a parent, teacher, or senior 
 citizen group, a library, or a museum.
 (b) Requirements.--
 (1) Duration.--Grants under this subchapter shall be 
 awarded for not more than 1 year.
 (2) Limitation.--Not more than 1 grant provided under this 
 subchapter may be used to plan or design the same school.
 (3) Matching.--A grant under this subchapter shall not be 
 used to pay for more than 50 percent of the cost of a planning 
 or design project. A recipient of a grant under this subchapter 
 shall provide at least 50 percent of the cost of the planning 
 or design project from non-Federal sources, which may include 
 in-kind contributions, fairly evaluated.
 (c) Geographic Distribution.--In awarding grants under this 
subchapter, the Secretary is authorized to take such steps as are 
necessary to ensure an equitable geographic distribution of the grants, 
including distributing the grants among rural, urban, and suburban 
local educational agencies.

SEC. 3554. USE OF FUNDS.

 A grant under this subchapter shall be used by a local educational 
agency to support the planning or design of a new school building, or 
of the renovation of an existing school building, and may be used for 
activities such as--
 (1) community outreach activities (including the 
 development and circulation of explanatory materials and the 
 cost of meetings) designed to encourage greater participation 
 by the community;
 (2) the development, with the involvement of all 
 stakeholders, of a master plan for a school district; and
 (3) necessary administrative support for the eligible 
 consortium.

SEC. 3555. APPLICATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Each local educational agency desiring a grant 
under this subchapter shall submit to the Secretary an application at 
such time, and containing such information, as the Secretary may 
require.
 (b) Contents.--Each application submitted under this subchapter 
shall describe--
 (1) the community to be served by the new or renovated 
 school, including the needs of that community with respect to 
 such school;
 (2) the individuals and groups that compose the eligible 
 consortium and their respective functions;
 (3) the project activities to be supported by the grant and 
 how the activities will help meet the needs of that community 
 and the purpose of this subchapter; and
 (4) the availability of resources for the project, and how 
 the resources will be obtained.

SEC. 3556. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this 
subchapter $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and such sums as may be 
necessary for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.

 Chapter 7--Child Opportunity Zone Family Centers

SEC. 3571. CHILD OPPORTUNITY ZONE FAMILY CENTERS.

 Title X of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 8001 et seq.), as amended by section 3401, is further amended by 
inserting after part L the following:

 ``PART M--CHILD OPPORTUNITY ZONE FAMILY CENTERS

``SEC. 10997A. SHORT TITLE.

 ``This part may be cited as the `Child Opportunity Zone Family 
Center Act of 2001'.

``SEC. 10997B. PURPOSE.

 ``The purpose of this part is to encourage eligible partnerships to 
establish or expand child opportunity zone family centers in public 
elementary schools and secondary schools in order to provide 
comprehensive support services for children and their families, and to 
improve the children's educational, health, mental health, and social 
outcomes.

``SEC. 10997C. DEFINITIONS.

 ``In this part:
 ``(1) Child opportunity zone family center.--The term 
 `child opportunity zone family center' means a school-based or 
 school-linked community service center that provides and links 
 children and their families with comprehensive information, 
 support, services, and activities to improve the education, 
 health, mental health, safety, and economic well-being of the 
 children and their families.
 ``(2) Eligible partnership.--The term `eligible 
 partnership' means a partnership--
 ``(A) that contains--
 ``(i) at least 1 public elementary school 
 or secondary school that--
 ``(I) receives assistance under 
 title I and for which a measure of 
 poverty determination is made under 
 section 1113(a)(5) with respect to a 
 minimum of 40 percent of the children 
 in the school; and
 ``(II) demonstrates parent 
 involvement and parent support for the 
 partnership's activities;
 ``(ii) a local educational agency;
 ``(iii) a public agency, other than a local 
 educational agency, such as a local or State 
 department of health, mental health, or social 
 services;
 ``(iv) a nonprofit community-based 
 organization, providing health, mental health, 
 or social services;
 ``(v) a local child care resource and 
 referral agency; and
 ``(vi) a local organization representing 
 parents; and
 ``(B) that may contain--
 ``(i) an institution of higher education; 
 and
 ``(ii) other public or private nonprofit 
 entities with experience in providing services 
 to disadvantaged families.

``SEC. 10997D. GRANTS AUTHORIZED.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary may award, on a competitive basis, 
grants to eligible partnerships to pay for the Federal share of the 
cost of establishing and expanding child opportunity zone family 
centers.
 ``(b) Duration.--The Secretary shall award grants under this 
section for periods of 5 years.

``SEC. 10997E. REQUIRED ACTIVITIES.

 ``Each eligible partnership receiving a grant under this part shall 
use the grant funds--
 ``(1) in accordance with the needs assessment described in 
 section 10997F(b)(1), to provide or link children and their 
 families with information, support, activities, or services in 
 core areas such as education, child care, before- and after-
 school care and enrichment programs, health services, mental 
 health services, family support, nutrition, literacy services, 
 parenting skills, and drop-out prevention;
 ``(2) to provide intensive, high-quality, research-based 
 programs that--
 ``(A) provide violence prevention education for 
 families and developmentally appropriate instructional 
 services to children (including children below the age 
 of compulsory school attendance); and
 ``(B) provide effective strategies for nurturing 
 and supporting the emotional, social, and cognitive 
 growth of children; and
 ``(3) to provide training, information, and support to 
 families to enable the families to participate effectively in 
 their children's education, and to help their children meet 
 challenging standards, including assisting families to--
 ``(A) understand the applicable accountability 
 systems, including State and local content standards, 
 performance standards, and assessments, their 
 children's educational performance in comparison to the 
 standards, and the steps the school is taking to 
 address the children's needs and to help the children 
 meet the standards; and
 ``(B) communicate effectively with personnel 
 responsible for providing educational services to the 
 families' children, and to participate in the 
 development and implementation of school-parent 
 compacts, parent involvement policies, and school 
 plans.

``SEC. 10997F. APPLICATIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--Each eligible partnership desiring a grant under 
this part shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in 
such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may 
require.
 ``(b) Contents.--Each application submitted pursuant to subsection 
(a) shall--
 ``(1) include a needs assessment, including a description 
 of how the partnership will ensure that the activities to be 
 assisted under this part will be tailored to meet the specific 
 needs of the children and families to be served;
 ``(2) describe arrangements that have been formalized 
 between the participating public elementary school or secondary 
 school, and other partnership members;
 ``(3) describe how the partnership will effectively 
 coordinate with the centers under section 1118 and utilize 
 Federal, State, and local sources of funding that provide 
 assistance to families and their children;
 ``(4) describe the partnership's plan to--
 ``(A) develop and carry out the activities assisted 
 under this part with extensive participation of 
 parents, administrators, teachers, pupil services 
 personnel, social and human service agencies, and 
 community organizations and leaders; and
 ``(B) coordinate the activities assisted under this 
 part with the education reform efforts of the 
 participating public elementary school or secondary 
 school, and the participating local educational agency;
 ``(5) describe how the partnership will ensure that 
 underserved populations such as families of students with 
 limited English proficiency, and families of students with 
 disabilities, are effectively involved, informed, and assisted;
 ``(6) describe how the partnership will collect and analyze 
 data, and will utilize specific performance measures and 
 indicators to--
 ``(A) determine the impact of activities assisted 
 under this part as described in section 10997I(a); and
 ``(B) improve the activities assisted under this 
 part; and
 ``(7) describe how the partnership will protect the privacy 
 of families and their children participating in the activities 
 assisted under this part.

``SEC. 10997G. FEDERAL SHARE.

 ``The Federal share of the cost of establishing and expanding child 
opportunity zone family centers--
 ``(1) for the first year for which an eligible partnership 
 receives assistance under this part shall not exceed 90 
 percent;
 ``(2) for the second such year, shall not exceed 80 
 percent;
 ``(3) for the third such year, shall not exceed 70 percent;
 ``(4) for the fourth such year, shall not exceed 60 
 percent; and
 ``(5) for the fifth such year, shall not exceed 50 percent.

``SEC. 10997H. FUNDING.

 ``(a) Continuation of Funding.--Each eligible partnership that 
receives a grant under this part shall, after the third year for which 
the partnership receives funds through the grant, be eligible to 
continue to receive the funds if the Secretary determines that the 
partnership has made significant progress in meeting the performance 
measures used for the partnership's local evaluation under section 
10997I(a).
 ``(b) Limitation on Use of Funds To Offset Other Programs.--
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, none of the funds received 
under a grant under this part may be used to pay for expenses related 
to any other Federal program, including treating such funds as an 
offset against such a Federal program.

``SEC. 10997I. EVALUATIONS AND REPORTS.

 ``(a) Local Evaluations.--Each partnership receiving funds under 
this part shall conduct annual evaluations and submit to the Secretary 
reports containing the results of the evaluations. The reports shall 
include the results of the partnership's performance assessment 
effectiveness in reaching and meeting the needs of families and 
children served under this part, including performance measures 
demonstrating--
 ``(1) improvements in areas such as student achievement, 
 family participation in schools, and access to health care, 
 mental health care, child care, and family support services, 
 resulting from activities assisted under this part; and
 ``(2) reductions in such areas as violence among youth, 
 truancy, suspension, and dropout rates, resulting from 
 activities assisted under this part.
 ``(b) National Evaluations.--The Secretary shall reserve not more 
than 3 percent of the amount appropriated under this part to carry out 
a national evaluation of the effectiveness of the activities assisted 
under this part. Such evaluation shall be completed not later than 3 
years after the date of enactment of the Child Opportunity Zone Family 
Center Act of 2001, and every year thereafter and shall be submitted to 
Congress.
 ``(c) Exemplary Activities.--The Secretary shall broadly 
disseminate information on exemplary activities developed under this 
part.

``SEC. 10997J. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part 
$100,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and such sums as may be necessary 
for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2005.''.

 TITLE IV--FAIR START--LIFTING CHILDREN OUT OF POVERTY

 Subtitle A--Expanding the Child Tax Credit

SEC. 4001. EXPANSION OF CHILD TAX CREDIT; CREDIT MADE PARTIALLY 
 REFUNDABLE.

 (a) Increase in Amount Allowed.--Subsection (a) of section 24 of 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to allowance of credit) is 
amended to read as follows:
 ``(a) Allowance of Credit.--
 ``(1) In general.--There shall be allowed as a credit 
 against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year 
 with respect to each qualifying child of the taxpayer an amount 
 equal to the applicable amount.
 ``(2) Applicable amount.--For purposes of paragraph (1), 
 the applicable amount shall be determined as follows:

``In the case of any taxable year The applicable amount is--
 beginning in--
 2002.......................................... $600 
 2003.......................................... 700 
 2004.......................................... 800 
 2005.......................................... 900 
 2006 or thereafter............................ 1,000.''.
 (b) Credit Allowed Against Alternative Minimum Tax.--
 (1) In general.--Section 24(b) of the Internal Revenue Code 
 of 1986 (relating to limitation based on adjusted gross income) 
 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(3) Limitation based on amount of tax.--The credit 
 allowed under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not 
 exceed the excess of--
 ``(A) the sum of the regular tax liability (as 
 defined in section 26(b)) plus the tax imposed by 
 section 55, over
 ``(B) the sum of the credits allowable under this 
 subpart (other than this section) and section 27 for 
 the taxable year.''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Section 24(d) of such Code is amended--
 (i) by striking ``section 26(a)'' each 
 place it appears and inserting ``subsection 
 (b)(3)'', and
 (ii) in paragraph (1)(B) by striking 
 ``aggregate amount of credits allowed by this 
 subpart'' and inserting ``amount of credit 
 allowed by this section''.
 (B) Paragraph (1) of section 26(a) of such Code is 
 amended by inserting ``(other than section 24)'' after 
 ``this subpart''.
 (C) Subsection (c) of section 23 is amended by 
 striking ``and section 1400C'' and inserting ``and 
 sections 24 and 1400C''.
 (D) Subparagraph (C) of section 25(e)(1) is amended 
 by inserting ``, 24,'' after ``sections 23''.
 (E) Section 904(h) of such Code is amended by 
 inserting ``(other than section 24)'' after 
 ``chapter''.
 (F) Subsection (d) of section 1400C is amended by 
 inserting ``and section 24'' after ``this section''.
 (G) The heading for section 24(b) of such Code is 
 amended to read as follows: ``Limitations.--''.
 (H) The heading for section 24(b)(1) of such Code 
 is amended to read as follows: ``Limitation based on 
 adjusted gross income.--''.
 (c) Portion of Child Credit Treated as Refundable.--
 (1) In general.--Paragraph (1) of section 24(d) of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to additional credit 
 for families with 3 or more children), as amended by subsection 
 (b)(2)(A), is amended to read as follows:
 ``(1) In general.--The aggregate credits allowed to a 
 taxpayer under subpart C shall be increased by the sum of the 
 credits allowable under this section for all qualifying 
 children of the taxpayer (determined without regard to this 
 subsection and the limitation under subsection (b)(3)). The 
 amount of the credit allowed under this subsection shall not be 
 treated as a credit allowed under this subpart and shall reduce 
 the amount of credit otherwise allowable under subsection (a) 
 without regard to subsection (b)(3).''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--
 (A) Section 24(d) of such Code is amended by 
 striking paragraphs (2) and (3).
 (B) The heading for section 24(d) of such Code is 
 amended to read as follows: ``Additional Credit for 
 Certain Families.--''.
 (C) Section 32 of such Code is amended by striking 
 subsection (m).
 (d) Coordination With Federal Means-Tested Programs.--Section 24(d) 
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to additional credit for 
certain families), as amended by subsection (c), is amended by adding 
at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(2) Coordination with means-tested programs.--For 
 purposes of any benefits, assistance, or supportive services 
 under any Federal program or under any State or local program 
 financed, in whole or in part, with Federal funds or with State 
 funds, taken into account under any maintenance of effort 
 requirements, which imposes income limitations on eligibility 
 for such program, any refund made to an individual (or the 
 spouse of an individual) by reason of this subsection shall not 
 be treated as income (and shall not be taken into account in 
 determining resources for the month of its receipt and the 
 following month).''.
 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.

 Subtitle B--Strengthening the Earned Income Tax Credit

SEC. 4101. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Tax Relief for Working Families 
Act of 2001''.

SEC. 4102. INCREASED EARNED INCOME TAX CREDIT FOR 2 OR MORE QUALIFYING 
 CHILDREN.

 (a) In General.--The table in section 32(b)(1)(A) of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to percentages) is amended--
 (1) in the second item--
 (A) by striking ``or more'', and
 (B) by striking ``21.06'' and inserting ``19.06'', 
 and
 (2) by inserting after the second item the following:

``3 or more qualifying children.... 45.................................. 19.06''.

 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.

SEC. 4103. SIMPLIFICATION OF DEFINITION OF EARNED INCOME.

 (a) In General.--Section 32(c)(2)(A)(i) of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 (defining earned income) is amended by inserting ``, but 
only if such amounts are includible in gross income for the taxable 
year'' after ``other employee compensation''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 32(c)(2)(B) of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 (defining earned income) is amended by striking 
``and'' at the end of clause (iv), by striking the period at the end of 
clause (v) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the 
following:
 ``(vi) the requirement under subparagraph 
 (A)(i) that an amount be includible in gross 
 income shall not apply if such amount is exempt 
 from tax under section 7873 or is derived 
 directly from restricted and allotted land 
 under the Act of February 8, 1887 (commonly 
 known as the Indian General Allotment Act) (25 
 U.S.C. 331 et seq.) or from land held under 
 Acts or treaties containing an exception 
 provision similar to the Indian General 
 Allotment Act.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to amounts received in taxable years beginning after December 31, 
2001.

SEC. 4104. SIMPLIFICATION OF DEFINITION OF CHILD DEPENDENT.

 (a) Removal of Support Test for Certain Individuals.--Section 
152(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to general 
definition) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(a) General Definition.--For purposes of this subtitle--
 ``(1) Dependent.--The term `dependent' means--
 ``(A) any individual described in paragraph (2) 
 over half of whose support, for the calendar year in 
 which the taxable year of the taxpayer begins, was 
 received from the taxpayer (or is treated under 
 subsection (c) as received from the taxpayer), or
 ``(B) any individual described in subsection (f).
 ``(2) Individuals.--An individual is described in this 
 paragraph if such individual is--
 ``(A) a brother, sister, stepbrother, or stepsister 
 of the taxpayer,
 ``(B) the father or mother of the taxpayer, or an 
 ancestor of either,
 ``(C) a stepfather or stepmother of the taxpayer,
 ``(D) a son or daughter of a brother or sister of 
 the taxpayer,
 ``(E) a brother or sister of the father or mother 
 of the taxpayer,
 ``(F) a son-in-law, daughter-in-law, father-in-law, 
 mother-in-law, brother-in-law, or sister-in-law of the 
 taxpayer, or
 ``(G) an individual (other than an individual who 
 at any time during the taxable year was the spouse, 
 determined without regard to section 7703, of the 
 taxpayer) who, for the taxable year of the taxpayer, 
 has as their principal place of abode the home of the 
 taxpayer and is a member of the taxpayer's 
 household.''.
 (b) Other Modifications.--Section 152 of the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986 (relating to dependent defined) is amended by adding at the end 
the following:
 ``(f) Subsection (f) Dependents.--
 ``(1) In general.--An individual is described in this 
 subsection for the taxable year if such individual--
 ``(A) bears a relationship to the taxpayer 
 described in paragraph (2),
 ``(B) except in the case of an eligible foster 
 child or as provided in subsection (e), has the same 
 principal place of abode as the taxpayer for more than 
 one-half of such taxable year, and
 ``(C)(i) has not attained the age of 19 at the 
 close of the calendar year in which the taxable year 
 begins, or
 ``(ii) is a student (within the meaning of section 
 151(c)(4)) who has not attained the age of 24 at the 
 close of such calendar year.
 ``(2) Relationship test.--An individual bears a 
 relationship to the taxpayer described in this paragraph if 
 such individual is--
 ``(A) a son or daughter of the taxpayer, or a 
 descendant of either, or
 ``(B) a stepson or stepdaughter of the taxpayer.
 ``(3) Special rules.--
 ``(A) 2 or more claiming dependent.--Except as 
 provided in subparagraph (B), if an individual may be 
 claimed as a dependent by 2 or more taxpayers (but for 
 this subparagraph) for a taxable year beginning in the 
 same calendar year, only the taxpayer with the highest 
 adjusted gross income for such taxable year shall be 
 allowed the deduction with respect to such individual.
 ``(B) Release of claim to exemption.--Subparagraph 
 (A) shall not apply with respect to an individual if--
 ``(i) the taxpayer with the highest 
 adjusted gross income under subparagraph (A), 
 for any calendar year signs a written 
 declaration (in such manner and form as the 
 Secretary may by regulations prescribe) that 
 such taxpayer will not claim such individual as 
 a dependent for any taxable year beginning in 
 such calendar year,
 ``(ii) the other taxpayer provides over 
 half of such individual's support for the 
 calendar year in which the taxable year of such 
 other taxpayer begins, and
 ``(iii) such other taxpayer attaches such 
 written declaration to such taxpayer's return 
 for the taxable year beginning during such 
 calendar year.''.
 (c) Rules Relating to Foster Child.--Section 152(b)(2) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to rules relating to general 
definition) is amended by striking ``a foster child'' and all that 
follows through ``individual)'' and inserting ``an eligible foster 
child (as defined in section 32(c)(3)(B)(iii)) of an individual''.
 (d) Exemption From Gross Income Test.--Section 151(c)(3) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to definition of child) is 
amended by striking ``or stepdaughter'' and inserting ``stepdaughter, 
or a descendant of such individual''.
 (e) Waiver of Deduction for Divorced Parents.--
 (1) In general.--So much of section 152(e) as precedes 
 paragraph (4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to 
support test in case of child of divorced parents, etc.) is amended to 
read as follows:
 ``(e) Special Rules for Child of Divorced Parents.--
 ``(1) Release of claim to exemption.--In the case of a 
 child (as defined in section 151(c)(3)) of parents--
 ``(A) who are divorced or legally separated under a 
 decree of divorce or separate maintenance,
 ``(B) who are separated under a written separation 
 agreement, or
 ``(C) who live apart at all times during the last 6 
 months of the calendar year,
 the custodial parent who is entitled to the deduction under 
 section 151 for a taxable year with respect to such child may 
 release such deduction to the noncustodial parent.
 ``(2) Procedure.--The noncustodial parent may claim a child 
 described in paragraph (1) as a dependent for the taxable year 
 if--
 ``(A) the custodial parent signs a written 
 declaration (in such manner and form as the Secretary 
 may by regulations prescribe) that such custodial 
 parent will not claim such child as a dependent for any 
 taxable year beginning in such calendar year,
 ``(B) the custodial parent and the noncustodial 
 parent provide over half of such child's support for 
 the calendar year in which the taxable years of such 
 parents begin, and
 ``(C) the noncustodial parent attaches such written 
 declaration to such noncustodial parent's return for 
 the taxable year beginning during such calendar year.
 ``(3) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection--
 ``(A) Custodial parent.--The term `custodial 
 parent' means, with regard to an individual, a parent 
 who has custody of such individual for a greater 
 portion of the calendar year than the noncustodial 
 parent.
 ``(B) Noncustodial parent.--The term `noncustodial 
 parent' means the parent who is not the custodial 
 parent.''.
 (2) Pre-1985 instruments.--Section 152(e)(4)(A) of such 
 Code (relating to exception for certain pre-1985 instruments) 
 is amended by striking ``A child'' and all that follows through 
 ``noncustodial parent'' and inserting ``A noncustodial parent 
 described in paragraph (1) shall be entitled to the deduction 
 under section 151 for a taxable year with respect to a child 
 if''.
 (f) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 1(g)(5)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
 is amended by inserting ``as in effect on the day before the 
 date of the enactment of the Tax Relief for Working Families 
 Act of 2001'' after ``152(e)''.
 (2) Section 2(b)(1)(A)(i) of such Code is amended by 
 striking ``paragraph (2) or (4) of''.
 (3) Section 2(b)(3)(B)(i) of such Code is amended by 
 striking ``paragraph (9)'' and inserting ``paragraph (2)(G)''.
 (4) Section 21(e)(5)(A) of such Code is amended by striking 
 ``paragraph (2) or (4) of''.
 (5) Section 21(e)(5) of such Code is amended in the matter 
 following subclause (B) by inserting ``as in effect on the day 
 before the date of the enactment of the Tax Relief for Working 
 Families Act of 2001'' after ``152(e)(1)''.
 (6) Section 32(c)(1)(G) of such Code is amended by striking 
 ``(3)(D).'' and inserting ``(1)(C). An individual whose 
 qualifying child or qualifying children are not taken into 
 account under subsection (b) solely by reason of paragraph 
 (3)(D) shall be treated as an eligible individual if such 
 individual otherwise meets the requirements of subparagraph 
 (A)(ii).''.
 (7) Section 32(c)(3)(B)(ii) of such Code is amended by 
 striking ``paragraph (2) or (4) of''.
 (8) Section 51(i)(1)(C) of such Code is amended by striking 
 ``152(a)(9)'' and inserting ``152(a)(2)(G)''.
 (9) Section 152(b) of such Code is amended by striking 
 ``specified in subsection (a)'' and inserting ``specified in 
 subsection (a)(2) or (f)(2)''.
 (10) Section 152(c) of such Code is amended by striking 
 ``(a)'' and inserting ``(a)(1)''.
 (11) Section 7703(b)(1) of such Code is amended by striking 
 ``paragraph (2) or (4) of''.
 (12) The following provisions of such Code are each amended 
 by striking ``paragraphs (1) through (8) of section 152(a)'' 
 and inserting ``subparagraphs (A) through (F) of subsection 
 (a)(2) or subsection (f)(2) of section 152'':
 (A) Section 170(g)(3).
 (B) Subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section 51(i)(1).
 (C) The second sentence of section 213(d)(11).
 (D) Section 529(e)(2)(B).
 (E) Section 7702B(f)(2)(C)(iii).
 (g) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.

SEC. 4105. OTHER MODIFICATIONS TO EARNED INCOME TAX CREDIT.

 (a) Modification of Joint Return Requirement.--Section 32(d) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to married individuals) is 
amended to read as follows:
 ``(d) Married Individuals.--
 ``(1) In general.--If the taxpayer is married at the close 
 of the taxable year, the credit shall be allowed under 
 subsection (a) only if the taxpayer and his spouse file a joint 
 return for the taxable year.
 ``(2) Marital status.--For purposes of paragraph (1), an 
 individual legally separated from his spouse under a decree of 
 divorce or of separate maintenance shall not be considered as 
 married.
 ``(3) Certain married individuals living apart.--For 
 purposes of paragraph (1), if--
 ``(A) an individual--
 ``(i) is married and files a separate 
 return, and
 ``(ii) has a qualifying child who is a son, 
 daughter, stepson, or stepdaughter of such 
 individual, and
 ``(B) during the last 6 months of such taxable 
 year, such individual and such individual's spouse do 
 not have the same principal place of abode,
 such individual shall not be considered as married.''.
 (b) Modification of Rule Where There Are 2 or More Eligible 
Individuals.--Subparagraph (C) of section 32(c)(1) of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to 2 or more eligible individuals) is 
amended to read as follows:
 ``(C) 2 or more eligible individuals.--
 ``(i) In general.--Except as provided in 
 clause (ii), if 2 or more individuals would 
 (but for this subparagraph and after 
 application of subparagraph (B)) be treated as 
 eligible individuals with respect to the same 
 qualifying child for taxable years beginning in 
 the same calendar year, only the individual 
 with the highest modified adjusted gross income 
 for such taxable years shall be treated as an 
 eligible individual with respect to such 
 qualifying child.
 ``(ii) Exception for certain parents.--An 
 otherwise eligible individual who is not 
 treated under clause (i) as the only eligible 
 individual with respect to any qualifying child 
 shall be treated as an eligible individual with 
 respect to such child if--
 ``(I) such child is the son, 
 daughter, stepson, or stepdaughter of 
 such individual,
 ``(II) such child is not taken into 
 account under subsection (b) by any 
 other individual, and
 ``(III) the limitation under 
 subsection (a)(2) for the individual 
 who would (but for this clause) be 
 treated under clause (i) as the only 
eligible individual with respect to such child would be greater than 
zero (determined as if such individual had 2 qualifying children).''.
 (c) Expansion of Mathematical Error Authority.--Paragraph (2) of 
section 6213(g) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to 
definitions) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph 
(K), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (L) and 
inserting ``, and'', and by inserting after subparagraph (L) the 
following new subparagraph:
 ``(M) the entry on the return claiming the credit 
 under section 32 with respect to a child if, according 
 to the Federal Case Registry of Child Support Orders 
 established under section 453(h) of the Social Security 
 Act, the taxpayer is a noncustodial parent of such 
 child.''.
 (d) Effective Dates.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years 
 beginning after December 31, 2000.
 (2) Expansion of mathematical error authority.--The 
 amendment made by subsection (c) shall apply to taxable years 
 beginning after December 31, 2001.

 Subtitle C--Marriage Penalty Relief

SEC. 4201. MARRIAGE PENALTY RELIEF FOR EARNED INCOME CREDIT.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (2) of section 32(b) of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to percentages and amounts) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``Amounts.--The earned'' and inserting 
 ``Amounts.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
 earned''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(B) Joint returns.--In the case of a joint 
 return, the earned income amount determined under 
 subparagraph (A) shall be 120 percent of the otherwise 
 applicable amount. If any amount determined under the 
 preceding sentence is not a multiple of $10, such 
 amount shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of 
 $10.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.

 Subtitle D--Expanding the Dependent Care Tax Credit

SEC. 4301. DEPENDENT CARE TAX CREDIT.

 (a) Dependent Care Services.--Subpart C of part IV of subchapter A 
of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to 
refundable credits), as amended by section 4001(b)(1), is amended by 
redesignating section 36 as section 37 and by inserting after section 
35 the following new section:

``SEC. 36. DEPENDENT CARE SERVICES.

 ``(a) Allowance of Credit.--
 ``(1) In general.--In the case of an individual who 
 maintains a household which includes as a member 1 or more 
 qualifying individuals, there shall be allowed as a credit 
 against the tax imposed by this subtitle for the taxable year 
 an amount equal to the applicable percentage of the sum of--
 ``(A) the employment-related expenses paid by such 
 individual during the taxable year, plus
 ``(B) the respite care expenses paid by such 
 individual during the taxable year.
 ``(2) Applicable percentage defined.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1), 
 the term `applicable percentage' means 50 percent 
 reduced (but not below 20 percent) by 1 percentage 
 point for each full $1,000 amount by which the 
 taxpayer's adjusted gross income for the taxable year 
 exceeds $15,000.
 ``(B) Cost-of-living adjustment.--
 ``(i) In general.--In the case of a taxable 
 year beginning in a calendar year after 2001, 
 subparagraph (A) shall be applied by increasing 
 the $15,000 amount contained therein by the 
 cost-of-living adjustment (as defined in 
 section 1(f)(3)) for such calendar year 
 determined by substituting `2000' for `1992' in 
 subparagraph (B) of section 1(f)(3).
 ``(ii) Rounding.--If any increase 
 determined under clause (i) is not a multiple 
 of $10, such increase shall be rounded to the 
 nearest multiple of $10 (or if such increase is 
 a multiple of $5, such increase shall be 
 increased to the next highest multiple of $10).
 ``(b) Employment-Related Expenses.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Determination of eligible expenses.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `employment-related 
 expenses' means amounts paid for the following 
 expenses, but only if such expenses are incurred to 
 enable the taxpayer to be gainfully employed for any 
 period for which there are 1 or more qualifying 
 individuals with respect to the taxpayer:
 ``(i) expenses for household services, and
 ``(ii) expenses for the care of a 
 qualifying individual.
 Such term shall not include any amount paid for 
 services outside the taxpayer's household at a camp 
 where the qualifying individual stays overnight and 
 shall not include any respite care expense taken into 
 account under subsection (a).
 ``(B) Exception.--Employment-related expenses 
 described in subparagraph (A) which are incurred for 
 services outside the taxpayer's household shall be 
 taken into account only if incurred for the care of--
 ``(i) a qualifying individual described in 
 subsection (d)(1), or
 ``(ii) a qualifying individual (not 
 described in subsection (d)(1)) who regularly 
 spends at least 8 hours each day in the 
 taxpayer's household.
 ``(C) Dependent care centers.--Employment-related 
 expenses described in subparagraph (A) which are 
 incurred for services provided outside the taxpayer's 
 household by a dependent care center (as defined in 
 subparagraph (D)) shall be taken into account only if--
 ``(i) such center complies with all 
 applicable laws and regulations of a State or 
 unit of local government, and
 ``(ii) the requirements of subparagraph (B) 
 are met.
 ``(D) Dependent care center defined.--For purposes 
 of this paragraph, the term `dependent care center' 
 means any facility which--
 ``(i) provides care for more than 6 
 individuals (other than individuals who reside 
 at the facility), and
 ``(ii) receives a fee, payment, or grant 
 for providing services for any of the 
 individuals (regardless of whether such 
 facility is operated for profit).
 ``(2) Dollar limit on amount creditable.--
 ``(A) In general.--The amount of the employment-
 related expenses incurred during any taxable year which 
 may be taken into account under subsection (a) shall 
 not exceed--
 ``(i) $2,400 if there is 1 qualifying 
 individual with respect to the taxpayer for 
 such taxable year, or
 ``(ii) $4,800 if there are 2 or more 
 qualifying individuals with respect to the 
 taxpayer for such taxable year.
 The amount determined under clause (i) or (ii) 
 (whichever is applicable) shall be reduced by the 
 aggregate amount excludable from gross income under 
section 129 for the taxable year.
 ``(B) Reduction in limit for amount of respite care 
 expenses.--The limitation of subparagraph (A) shall be 
 reduced by the amount of the respite care expenses 
 taken into account by the taxpayer under subsection (a) 
 for the taxable year.
 ``(3) Earned income limitation.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in 
 this paragraph, the amount of the employment-related 
 expenses incurred during any taxable year which may be 
 taken into account under subsection (a) shall not 
 exceed--
 ``(i) in the case of an individual who is 
 not married at the close of such year, such 
 individual's earned income for such year, or
 ``(ii) in the case of an individual who is 
 married at the close of such year, the lesser 
 of such individual's earned income or the 
 earned income of his spouse for such year.
 ``(B) Special rule for spouse who is a student or 
 incapable of caring for himself.--In the case of a 
 spouse who is a student or a qualified individual 
 described in subsection (d)(3), for purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), such spouse shall be deemed for each 
 month during which such spouse is a full-time student 
 at an educational institution, or is such a qualifying 
 individual, to be gainfully employed and to have earned 
 income of not less than--
 ``(i) $200 if paragraph (2)(A)(i) applies 
 for the taxable year, or
 ``(ii) $400 if paragraph (2)(A)(ii) applies 
 for the taxable year.
 In the case of any husband and wife, this subparagraph 
 shall apply with respect to only one spouse for any one 
 month.
 ``(c) Respite Care Expenses.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) In general.--The term `respite care expenses' means 
 expenses paid (whether or not to enable the taxpayer to be 
 gainfully employed) for--
 ``(A) the care of a qualifying individual--
 ``(i) who has attained the age of 13, or
 ``(ii) who is under the age of 13 but has a 
 physical or mental impairment which results in 
 the individual being incapable of caring for 
 himself,
 during any period when such individual regularly spends 
 at least 8 hours each day in the taxpayer's household, 
 or
 ``(B) the care (for not more than 14 days during 
 the calendar year) of a qualifying individual described 
 in subparagraph (A) during any period during which the 
 individual does not regularly spend at least 8 hours 
 each day in the taxpayer's household.
 ``(2) Dollar limit.--The amount of the respite care 
 expenses incurred during any taxable year which may be taken 
 into account under subsection (a) shall not exceed--
 ``(A) $1,200 if such expenses are incurred with 
 respect to only 1 qualifying individual for the taxable 
 year, or
 ``(B) $2,400 if such expenses are incurred for 2 or 
 more qualifying individuals for such taxable year.
 ``(d) Qualifying Individual.--For purposes of this section, the 
term `qualifying individual' means--
 ``(1) a dependent of the taxpayer who is under the age of 
 13 and with respect to whom the taxpayer is entitled to a 
 deduction under section 151(c),
 ``(2) a dependent of the taxpayer who is physically or 
 mentally incapable of caring for himself, or
 ``(3) the spouse of the taxpayer, if he is physically or 
 mentally incapable of caring for himself.
 ``(e) Special Rules.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Maintaining household.--An individual shall be 
 treated as maintaining a household for any period only if over 
 half the cost of maintaining the household for such period is 
 furnished by such individual (or, if such individual is married 
 during such period, is furnished by such individual and his 
 spouse).
 ``(2) Married couples must file joint return.--If the 
 taxpayer is married at the close of the taxable year, the 
 credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) only if the 
 taxpayer and his spouse file a joint return for the taxable 
 year.
 ``(3) Marital status.--An individual legally separated from 
 his spouse under a decree of divorce or of separate maintenance 
 shall not be considered as married.
 ``(4) Certain married individuals living apart.--If--
 ``(A) an individual who is married and who files a 
 separate return--
 ``(i) maintains as his home a household 
 that constitutes for more than one-half of the 
 taxable year the principal place of abode of a 
 qualifying individual, and
 ``(ii) furnishes over half the cost of 
 maintaining such household during the taxable 
 year, and
 ``(B) during the last 6 months of such taxable year 
 such individual's spouse is not a member of such 
 household,
 such individual shall not be considered as married.
 ``(5) Special dependency test in case of divorced parents, 
 etc.--If--
 ``(A) paragraph (2) or (4) of section 152(e) 
 applies to any child with respect to any calendar year, 
 and
 ``(B) such child is under the age of 13 or is 
 physically or mentally incapable of caring for himself,
 in the case of any taxable year beginning in such calendar 
 year, such child shall be treated as a qualifying individual 
 with respect to the custodial parent (within the meaning of 
 section 152(e)(1)), and shall not be treated as a qualifying 
 individual with respect to the noncustodial parent.
 ``(6) Payments to related individuals.--No credit shall be 
 allowed under subsection (a) for any amount paid by the 
 taxpayer to an individual--
 ``(A) with respect to whom, for the taxable year, a 
 deduction under section 151(c) (relating to deduction 
 for personal exemptions for dependents) is allowable 
 either to the taxpayer or his spouse, or
 ``(B) who is a child of the taxpayer (within the 
 meaning of section 151(c)(3)) who has not attained the 
 age of 19 at the close of the taxable year.
 For purposes of this paragraph, the term `taxable year' means 
 the taxable year of the taxpayer in which the service is 
 performed.
 ``(7) Student.--The term `student' means an individual who 
 during each of 5 calendar months during the taxable year is a 
 full-time student at an educational organization.
 ``(8) Educational organization.--The term `educational 
 organization' means an educational organization described in 
 section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii).
 ``(9) Identifying information required with respect to 
 service provider.--No credit shall be allowed under subsection 
 (a) for any amount paid to any person unless--
 ``(A) the name, address, and taxpayer 
 identification number of such person are included on 
 the return claiming the credit, or
 ``(B) if such person is an organization described 
 in section 501(c)(3) and exempt from tax under section 
 501(a), the name and address of such person are 
 included on the return claiming the credit.
 In the case of a failure to provide the information required 
 under the preceding sentence, the preceding sentence shall not 
apply if it is shown that the taxpayer exercised due diligence in 
attempting to provide the information so required.
 ``(f) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations 
as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 21 of such Code is repealed.
 (2) Section 23(f)(1) of such Code and section 129(a)(2)(C) 
 of such Code are each amended by striking ``section 21(e)'' and 
 inserting ``section 36(e)''.
 (3) Section 129(b)(2) of such Code is amended by striking 
 ``section 21(d)(2)'' and inserting ``section 36(b)(3)(B)''.
 (4) Section 129(e)(1) of such Code is amended by striking 
 ``under section 21(b)(2) (relating to expenses for household 
 and dependent care services necessary for gainful employment)'' 
 and inserting ``or respite care services under section 36 
 (relating to dependent care services)''.
 (5) Section 213(e) of such Code is amended by striking 
 ``section 21'' and inserting ``section 36''.
 (6) Section 6213(g)(2)(H) of such Code is amended by 
 striking ``section 21 (related to expenses for household and 
 dependent care services necessary for gainful employment)'' and 
 inserting ``section 36 (relating to dependent care services)''.
 (c) Technical Amendments.--(1) The table of sections for subpart C 
of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by 
striking the item relating to section 36 and inserting the following:

 ``Sec. 36. Dependent care services.
 ``Sec. 37. Overpayments of tax.''.
 (2) The table of sections for subpart A of such part IV is amended 
by striking the item relating to section 21.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2000.

 TITLE V--FAIR START--SUPPORT TO PROMOTE WORK AND REDUCE POVERTY

 Subtitle A--Gateways Grant Program

SEC. 5001. GATEWAYS GRANT PROGRAM.

 (a) Purposes.--The purposes of this section are to--
 (1) inform low-income families with children about programs 
 available to families leaving welfare and other programs to 
 support low-income families with children;
 (2) provide incentives to States and counties to improve 
 and coordinate application and renewal procedures for low-
 income family with children support programs; and
 (3) track the extent to which low-income families with 
 children receive the benefits and services for which they are 
 eligible.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Locality.--The term locality means a municipality that 
 does not administer a temporary assistance for needy families 
 program funded under part A of title IV of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) (in this section referred to as 
 ``TANF'').
 (2) Low-income family with children support program.--The 
 term ``low-income family with children support program'' means 
 a program designed to provide low-income families with 
 assistance or benefits to enable the family to become self-
 sufficient and includes--
 (A) TANF;
 (B) the food stamp program established under the 
 Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.) (in this 
 section referred to as ``food stamps'');
 (C) the medicaid program funded under title XIX of 
 the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.);
 (D) the State children's health insurance program 
 (SCHIP) funded under title XXI of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1397aa et seq.);
 (E) the child care program funded under the Child 
 Care Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 
 9858 et seq.);
 (F) the child support program funded under part D 
 of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 651 
 et seq.);
 (G) the earned income tax credit under section 32 
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986;
 (H) the low-income home energy assistance program 
 (LIHEAP) established under the Low-Income Home Energy 
 Assistance Act of 1981 (42 U.S.C 8621 et seq.);
 (I) the special supplemental nutrition program for 
 women, infants, and children (WIC) established under 
 section 17 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 
 U.S.C. 1786);
 (J) programs under the Workforce Investment Act of 
 1998 (29 U.S.C. 2801 et seq.); and
 (K) any other Federal or State funded program 
 designed to provide family and work support to low-
 income families with children.
 (3) Nonprofit.--The term ``nonprofit'', as applied to a 
 school, agency, organization, or institution means a school, 
 agency, organization, or institution owned and operated by 1 or 
 more nonprofit corporations or associations, no part of the net 
 earnings of which inures, or may lawfully inure, to the benefit 
 of any private shareholder or individual.
 (4) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (5) State.--The term ``State'' means each of the several 
 States of the United States, the District of Columbia, the 
 Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, American Samoa, Guam, and the 
 United States Virgin Islands.
 (c) Authorization of Grants.--
 (1) States and counties.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary is authorized to 
 award grants to States and counties to pay the Federal 
 share of the costs involved in improving the 
 administration of low-income family with children 
 support programs, including simplifying application, 
 recertification, reporting, and verification rules.
 (B) Federal share.--The Federal share shall be 80 
 percent.
 (2) Nonprofits and localities.--The Secretary is authorized 
 to award grants to nonprofits and localities to distribute 
 information about and develop service centers for low-income 
 family with children support programs.
 (d) Grant Approval Criteria.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation with the 
 Secretary of Agriculture, shall establish criteria for approval 
 of an application for a grant under this section that include 
 consideration of--
 (A) an applicant's record of serving low-income 
 populations;
 (B) an applicant's ability to reach hard-to-serve 
 populations;
 (C) the level of innovation in the applicant's 
 grant proposal; and
 (D) any partnerships between the public and private 
 sector in the applicant's grant proposal.
 (2) Separate criteria.--Separate criteria shall be 
 established for the grants authorized under paragraphs (1) and 
 (2) of subsection (c).
 (e) Uses of Funds.--
 (1) States and counties.--
 (A) Improvements in programs.--Grants awarded to 
 States and counties under subsection (c)(1) shall be 
 used to--
 (i) simplify low-income family with 
 children support program application, 
 recertification, reporting, and verification 
 rules;
 (ii) create uniformity in eligibility 
 criteria for low-income family with children 
 support programs;
 (iii) develop options for families to apply 
 for low-income family with children support 
 programs through the telephone, mail, 
 facsimile, Internet, or electronic mail, and 
 submit any recertifications or reports required 
 for such families through these options;
 (iv) co-locate eligibility workers for 
 various low-income family with children support 
 programs at strategically located sites; and
 (v) develop or enhance one-stop service 
 centers for low-income family with children 
 support programs, including establishing 
 evening and weekend hours at these centers.
 (B) Customer surveys.--
 (i) In general.--A grant awarded to a State 
 or county under subsection (c)(1) shall be used 
 to carry out a customer survey.
 (ii) Model surveys.--The customer survey 
 under clause (i) shall be modeled after a form 
 developed by the Secretary under subsection 
 (g).
 (iii) Reports to secretary.--Not later than 
 1 year after a State or county is awarded a 
 grant under subsection (c)(1), and annually 
 thereafter, the State or county shall submit a 
 report to the Secretary detailing the results 
 of the customer survey carried out under clause 
 (i).
 (iv) Reports to public.--A State or county 
 receiving a grant under subsection (c)(1) and 
 the Secretary shall make the report required 
 under clause (iii) available to the public.
 (v) Public comment.--A State or county 
 receiving a grant under subsection (c)(1) shall 
 accept public comments and hold public hearings 
 on the report made available under clause (iv).
 (C) Tracking systems.--
 (i) In general.--A grant awarded to a State 
 or county under subsection (c)(1) shall be used 
 to implement a tracking system to determine the 
 level of participation in low-income family 
 with children support programs of the eligible 
 population.
 (ii) Reports.--Not later than 1 year after 
 a State or county is awarded a grant under 
 subsection (c)(1), and annually thereafter, the 
 State or county shall submit a report to the 
 Secretary detailing the effectiveness of the 
 tracking system implemented under clause (i).
 (D) Reporting.--A State or county awarded a grant 
 under subsection (c)(1) shall adopt the most favorable 
 options available under Federal law to reduce or 
 eliminate requirements for low-income families 
 receiving assistance under TANF or food stamps to 
 report changes in income, residence, or employment, 
 including such requirements as they relate to the 
 determination of State expenditures to meet TANF 
 maintenance of effort requirements.
 (E) In-person interviews.--A State or county 
 awarded a grant under subsection (c)(1)--
 (i) may expend funds made available under 
 the grant to provide for reporting and 
 recertification procedures through the 
 telephone, mail, facsimile, Internet, or 
 electronic mail; and
 (ii) shall adopt the most favorable options 
 available under Federal law to reduce or 
 eliminate requirements for in-person interviews 
 for redeterminations of eligibility for TANF or 
 food stamps.
 (F) Sharing documentation and verification 
 information.--A grant awarded to a State or county 
 under subsection (c)(1) shall be used to develop 
 procedures by which--
 (i) a low-income family is relieved of the 
 requirement to present documentation to 
 establish eligibility for various low-income 
 family with children support programs where 
 information concerning the family's income 
 exists in State databases and the family is 
 provided adequate opportunity to review, 
 correct, and contest such information;
 (ii) a low-income family is given the 
 option to present the same documentation to 
 establish eligibility for various low-income 
 family with children support programs; and
 (iii) verification of the documentation 
 presented under clause (ii) is shared among 
 agencies with responsibility for the 
 administration of low-income family with 
 children support programs.
 (G) Jurisdiction-wide implementation.--
 (i) In general.--A grant awarded to a State 
 or county under subsection (c)(1) shall be used 
 for activities throughout the jurisdiction.
 (ii) Exception.--A State or county awarded 
 a grant under subsection (c)(1) may use grant 
 funds to develop one-stop service centers and 
 telephone, mail, facsimile, Internet, or 
 electronic mail application and renewal 
 procedures for low-income family with children 
 support programs without regard to the 
 requirements of clause (i).
 (H) Supplement not supplant.--Funds provided to a 
 State or county under a grant awarded under subsection 
 (c)(1) shall be used to supplement and not supplant 
 other State or county public funds expended to provide 
 support services for low-income families.
 (2) Nonprofits and localities.--A grant awarded to a 
 nonprofit or locality under subsection (c)(2) shall be used 
 to--
 (A) develop one-stop service centers for low-income 
 family with children support programs in cooperation 
 with States and counties; and
 (B) provide information about and referrals to low-
 income family with children support programs through 
 the dissemination of materials at strategic locations, 
 including schools, clinics, and shopping locations.
 (f) Application.--
 (1) In general.--Each applicant desiring a grant under 
 paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (c) shall submit an 
 application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and 
 accompanied by such information as the Secretary may reasonably 
 require.
 (2) States and counties.--
 (A) Non-federal share.--Each State or county 
 applicant shall provide assurances that the applicant 
 will pay the non-Federal share of the activities for 
 which a grant is sought.
 (B) Certification periods.--
 (i) In general.--In order to receive a 
 grant under subsection (c)(1), each State or 
 county applicant shall provide assurances that 
 the applicant will establish certification 
 periods of at least 1 year for TANF and food 
 stamps.
 (ii) Exception.--The certification period 
 under clause (i) may be extended to 2 years for 
 households in which all members of the 
 household are elderly or disabled.
 (C) Partnerships.--Each State or county applicant 
 shall submit a memorandum of understanding 
 demonstrating that the applicant has entered into a 
 partnership to coordinate its efforts under the grant 
 with the efforts of other State and county agencies 
 that have responsibility for providing low-income 
 families with assistance or benefits.
 (g) Duties of the Secretary.--
 (1) Survey form.--The Secretary, in cooperation with other 
 relevant agencies, shall develop a customer survey form to 
 determine whether low-income families--
 (A) encounter any impediments in applying for or 
 renewing their participation in low-income family with 
 children support programs; and
 (B) are unaware of low-income family with children 
 support programs for which they are eligible.
 (2) Reports.--
 (A) Annual reports.--Not later than 1 year after 
 the date of enactment of this Act, and annually 
 thereafter, the Secretary shall submit a report to 
 Congress describing the uses of grant funds awarded 
 under this section.
 (B) Results of tracking systems and surveys.--The 
 Secretary shall submit a report to Congress detailing 
 the results of the tracking systems implemented and 
 customer surveys carried out by States and counties 
 under subsection (e) as the information becomes 
 available.
 (h) Miscellaneous.--
 (1) Matching funds.--
 (A) In general.--Matching funds required from a 
 State or county awarded a grant under subsection (c)(1) 
 may--
 (i) include in-kind services and 
 expenditures by municipalities and private 
 entities; and
 (ii) be considered a qualified State 
 expenditure for purposes of determining whether 
 the State has satisfied the maintenance of 
 effort requirements of the temporary assistance 
 for needy families program under section 
 409(a)(7) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 609(a)(7)).
 (B) Conforming amendment.--Section 409(a)(7)(B)(iv) 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 609(a)(7)(B)(iv)) 
 is amended by striking ``title.'' and inserting 
 ``title, and also includes State funds which are 
 expended as a condition of receiving Federal funds 
 under a grant made under section 5001 of the Leave No 
 Child Behind Act.''.
 (2) Limitation on expenditures.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to paragraph 3--
 (i) not more than 20 percent of a grant 
 awarded under subsection (c) shall be expended 
 on customer surveys or tracking systems; and
 (ii) except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B), not more than 15 percent of a grant 
 awarded under subsection (c) shall be expended 
 on administrative costs.
 (B) Automation exception.--The limitation on 
 administrative expenditures under subparagraph (A)(ii) 
 shall not apply to expenditures for the acquisition, 
 implementation, or maintenance of information 
 technology, computerization, or other automated data 
 processing to accomplish the purposes of a grant 
 awarded under subsection (c).
 (3) Reversion of funds.--Any funds not expended by a 
 grantee within 2 years after awarded a grant shall be available 
 for redistribution among other grantees in such manner and 
 amount as the Secretary may determine, unless the Secretary 
 extends by regulation the 2-year time period to expend funds.
 (4) Nonapportionment.--Notwithstanding any other provision 
 of law, a State, county, locality, or nonprofit awarded a grant 
 under subsection (c) is not required to apportion the costs of 
 providing information about low-income family with children 
 support programs among all low-income family with children 
 support programs.
 (5) Administrative costs of the secretary.--Not more than 5 
 percent of the funds appropriated to carry out this section 
 shall be expended on administrative costs of the Secretary.
 (i) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $500,000,000 for the period of 
fiscal years 2002 through 2006.

 Subtitle B--Support From Both Parents

 CHAPTER 1--CHILD SUPPORT DISTRIBUTION

SEC. 5101. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Child Support Distribution Act 
of 2001''.

 Subchapter A--Distribution of Child Support

SEC. 5111. DISTRIBUTION OF CHILD SUPPORT COLLECTED BY STATES ON BEHALF 
 OF CHILDREN RECEIVING CERTAIN WELFARE BENEFITS.

 (a) Modification of Rule Requiring Assignment of Support Rights as 
a Condition of Receiving TANF.--Section 408(a)(3) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 608(a)(3)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(3) No assistance for families not assigning certain 
 support rights to the state.--A State to which a grant is made 
 under section 403 shall require, as a condition of providing 
 assistance to a family under the State program funded under 
 this part, that a member of the family assign to the State any 
 rights the family member may have (on behalf of the family 
 member or of any other person for whom the family member has 
 applied for or is receiving such assistance) to support from 
 any other person, not exceeding the total amount of assistance 
 so provided to the family, which accrues during the period that 
 the family receives assistance under the program.''.
 (b) Increasing Child Support Payments to Families and Simplifying 
Child Support Distribution Rules.--
 (1) Distribution rules.--
 (A) In general.--Section 457(a) of such Act (42 
 U.S.C. 657(a)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(a) In General.--Subject to subsections (e) and (f), the amounts 
collected on behalf of a family as support by a State pursuant to a 
plan approved under this part shall be distributed as follows:
 ``(1) Families receiving assistance.--In the case of a 
 family receiving assistance from the State, the State shall--
 ``(A) pay to the Federal Government the Federal 
 share of the amount collected, subject to paragraph 
 (3)(A);
 ``(B) retain, or pay to the family, the State share 
 of the amount collected, subject to paragraph (3)(B); 
 and
 ``(C) pay to the family any remaining amount.
 ``(2) Families that formerly received assistance.--In the 
 case of a family that formerly received assistance from the 
 State:
 ``(A) Current support.--To the extent that the 
 amount collected does not exceed the current support 
 amount, the State shall pay the amount to the family.
 ``(B) Arrearages.--To the extent that the amount 
 collected exceeds the current support amount, the 
 State--
 ``(i) shall first pay to the family the 
 excess amount, to the extent necessary to 
 satisfy support arrearages not assigned 
 pursuant to section 408(a)(3);
 ``(ii) if the amount collected exceeds the 
 amount required to be paid to the family under 
 clause (i), shall--
 ``(I) pay to the Federal 
 Government, the Federal share of the 
 excess amount described in this clause, 
 subject to paragraph (3)(A); and
 ``(II) retain, or pay to the 
 family, the State share of the excess 
 amount described in this clause, 
 subject to paragraph (3)(B); and
 ``(iii) shall pay to the family any 
 remaining amount.
 ``(3) Limitations.--
 ``(A) Federal reimbursements.--The total of the 
 amounts paid by the State to the Federal Government 
 under paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection with 
 respect to a family shall not exceed the Federal share 
 of the amount assigned with respect to the family 
 pursuant to section 408(a)(3).
 ``(B) State reimbursements.--The total of the 
 amounts retained by the State under paragraphs (1) and 
 (2) of this subsection with respect to a family shall 
 not exceed the State share of the amount assigned with 
 respect to the family pursuant to section 408(a)(3).
 ``(4) Families that never received assistance.--In the case 
 of any other family, the State shall pay the amount collected 
 to the family.
 ``(5) Families under certain agreements.--Notwithstanding 
 paragraphs (1) through (4), in the case of an amount collected 
 for a family in accordance with a cooperative agreement under 
 section 454(33), the State shall distribute the amount 
 collected pursuant to the terms of the agreement.
 ``(6) State financing options.--To the extent that the 
 State share of the amount payable to a family for a month 
 pursuant to paragraph (2)(B) of this subsection exceeds the 
 amount that the State estimates (under procedures approved by 
 the Secretary) would have been payable to the family for the 
 month pursuant to former section 457(a)(2) (as in effect for 
 the State immediately before the date this subsection first 
 applies to the State) if such former section had remained in 
 effect, the State may elect to use the grant made to the State 
 under section 403(a) to pay the amount, or to have the payment 
 considered a qualified State expenditure for purposes of 
 section 409(a)(7), but not both.
 ``(7) State option to pass through additional support with 
 federal financial participation.--
 ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) 
 and (2), a State shall not be required to pay to the 
 Federal Government the Federal share of an amount 
 collected on behalf of a family that is not a recipient 
 of assistance under the State program funded under part 
 A, to the extent that the State pays the amount to the 
 family.
 ``(B) Recipients of tanf for less than 5 years.--
 ``(i) In general.--Notwithstanding 
 paragraphs (1) and (2), a State shall not be 
 required to pay to the Federal Government the 
 Federal share of an amount collected on behalf 
 of a family that is a recipient of assistance 
 under the State program funded under part A and 
 that has received the assistance for not more 
 than 5 years after the date of enactment of 
 this paragraph, to the extent that--
 ``(I) the State pays the amount to 
 the family; and
 ``(II) subject to clause (ii), the 
 amount is disregarded in determining 
 the amount and type of the assistance 
 provided to the family.
 ``(ii) Limitation.--Of the amount 
 disregarded as described in clause (i)(II), the 
 maximum amount that may be taken into account 
 for purposes of clause (i) shall not exceed 
 $400 per month, except that, in the case of a 
 family that includes 2 or more children, the 
 State may elect to increase the maximum amount 
 to not more than $600 per month.''.
 (B) Approval of estimation procedures.--Not later 
 than October 1, 2001, the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services, in consultation with the States (as defined 
 for purposes of part D of title IV of the Social 
 Security Act), shall establish the procedures to be 
 used to make the estimate described in section 
 457(a)(6) of such Act.
 (2) Current support amount defined.--Section 457(c) of such 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 657(c)) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(5) Current support amount.--The term `current support 
 amount' means, with respect to amounts collected as support on 
 behalf of a family, the amount designated as the monthly 
 support obligation of the noncustodial parent in the order 
 requiring the support.''.
 (c) Ban on Recovery of Medicaid Costs for Certain Births.--Section 
454 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 654) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (32);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (33) and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (33) the following:
 ``(34) provide that the State shall not use the State 
 program operated under this part to collect any amount owed to 
 the State by reason of costs incurred under the State plan 
 approved under title XIX for the birth of a child for whom 
 support rights have been assigned pursuant to section 
 408(a)(3), 471(a)(17), or 1912.''.
 (d) State Option To Discontinue Certain Support Assignments.--
Section 457(b) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 657(b)) is amended by striking 
``shall'' and inserting ``may''.
 (e) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 409(a)(7)(B)(i)(I)(aa) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 609(a)(7)(B)(i)(I)(aa)) is amended by striking ``457(a)(1)(B)'' 
 and inserting ``457(a)(1)''.
 (2) Section 404(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 604(a)) is 
 amended--
 (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (1);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph 
 (2) and inserting ``; or''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) to fund payment of an amount pursuant to clause (i) 
 or (ii) of section 457(a)(2)(B), but only to the extent that 
 the State properly elects under section 457(a)(6) to use the 
 grant to fund the payment.''.
 (3) Section 409(a)(7)(B)(i) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 609(a)(7)(B)(i)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(V) Portions of certain child 
 support payments collected on behalf of 
 and distributed to families no longer 
 receiving assistance.--Any amount paid 
 by a State pursuant to clause (i) or 
 (ii) of section 457(a)(2)(B), but only 
 to the extent that the State properly 
 elects under section 457(a)(6) to have 
 the payment considered a qualified 
 State expenditure.''.
 (f) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall 
 take effect on October 1, 2006, and shall apply to payments 
 under parts A and D of title IV of the Social Security Act for 
 calendar quarters beginning on or after such date, and without 
 regard to whether regulations to implement such amendments (in 
 the case of State programs operated under such part D) are 
 promulgated by such date.
 (2) State option to accelerate effective date.--In 
 addition, a State may elect to have the amendments made by this 
 section apply to the State and to amounts collected by the 
 State, on and after such date as the State may select that is 
 after the date of enactment of this Act and before October 1, 
 2006.

 Subchapter B--Review and Adjustment of Child Support Orders

SEC. 5116. MANDATORY REVIEW AND MODIFICATION OF CHILD SUPPORT ORDERS 
 FOR TANF RECIPIENTS.

 (a) Review Every 3 Years.--Section 466(a)(10)(A)(i) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 666(a)(10)(A)(i)) is amended in the matter 
preceding subclause (I)--
 (1) by striking ``or,'' and inserting ``or''; and
 (2) by striking ``upon the request of the State agency 
 under the State plan or of either parent,''.
 (b) Review Upon Leaving TANF.--
 (1) Notice of certain families leaving tanf.--Section 
 402(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 602(a)) is amended by adding at 
 the end the following:
 ``(8) Certification that the child support enforcement 
 program will be provided notice of certain families leaving 
 tanf program.--A certification by the chief executive officer 
 of the State that the State has established procedures to 
 ensure that the State agency administering the child support 
 enforcement program under the State plan approved under part D 
 will be provided notice of the impending discontinuation of 
 assistance to an individual under the State program funded 
 under this part if the individual has custody of a child whose 
 other parent is alive and not living at home with the child.''.
 (2) Review.--Section 466(a)(10) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 666(a)(10)) is amended--
 (A) in the paragraph heading, by striking ``upon 
 request'';
 (B) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``this 
 paragraph'' and inserting ``subparagraph (A) or (B)''; 
 and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(D) Review upon leaving tanf.--On receipt of a 
 notice issued pursuant to section 402(a)(8), the State 
 child support enforcement agency shall--
 ``(i) examine the case file involved;
 ``(ii) determine what actions (if any) are 
 needed to locate any noncustodial parent, 
 establish paternity or a support order, or 
 enforce a support order in the case;
 ``(iii) immediately take the actions; and
 ``(iv) if there is a support order in the 
 case which the State has not reviewed during 
 the 1-year period ending with receipt of the 
 notice, notwithstanding subparagraph (B), 
 review and, if appropriate, adjust the order in 
 accordance with subparagraph (A).''.

 Subchapter C--Demonstrations of Expanded Information and Enforcement

SEC. 5121. GUIDELINES FOR INVOLVEMENT OF PUBLIC NON-IV-D CHILD SUPPORT 
 ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES IN CHILD SUPPORT ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) In General.--Not later than October 1, 2002, the Secretary, in 
consultation with States, local governments, and individuals or 
companies knowledgeable about involving public non-IV-D child support 
enforcement agencies in child support enforcement, shall develop 
recommendations which address the participation of public non-IV-D 
child support enforcement agencies in the establishment and enforcement 
of child support obligations. The matters addressed by the 
recommendations shall include substantive and procedural rules which 
should be followed with respect to privacy safeguards, data security, 
due process rights, administrative compatibility with Federal and State 
automated systems, eligibility requirements (such as registration, 
licensing, and posting of bonds) for access to information and use of 
enforcement mechanisms, recovery of costs by charging fees, penalties 
for violations of the rules, treatment of collections for purposes of 
section 458 of such Act, and avoidance of duplication of effort.
 (b) Definitions.--In this title:
 (1) Child support.--The term ``child support'' has the 
 meaning given in section 459(i)(2) of the Social Security Act.
 (2) Public non-iv-d child support enforcement agency.--The 
 term ``public non-IV-D child support enforcement agency'' means 
 an agency, of a political subdivision of a State, which is 
 principally responsible for the operation of a child support 
 registry or for the establishment or enforcement of an 
 obligation to pay child support other than pursuant to the 
 State plan approved under part D of title IV of such Act, or a 
 clerk of court office of a political subdivision of a State.
 (3) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (4) State.--The term ``State'' shall have the meaning given 
 in section 1101(a)(1) of the Social Security Act for purposes 
 of part D of title IV of such Act.

SEC. 5122. DEMONSTRATIONS INVOLVING ESTABLISHMENT AND ENFORCEMENT OF 
 CHILD SUPPORT OBLIGATIONS BY PUBLIC NON-IV-D CHILD 
 SUPPORT ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES.

 (a) Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to determine the 
extent to which public non-IV-D child support enforcement agencies may 
contribute effectively to the establishment and enforcement of child 
support obligations.
 (b) Applications.--
 (1) Consideration.--The Secretary shall consider all 
 applications received from States desiring to conduct 
 demonstration projects under this section.
 (2) Preferences.--In considering which applications to 
 approve under this section, the Secretary shall give preference 
 to applications submitted by States that had a public non-IV-D 
 child support enforcement agency as of January 1, 2001.
 (3) Approval.--
 (A) Timing; limitation on number of projects.--On 
 July 1, 2003, the Secretary may approve not more than 
 10 applications for projects providing for the 
 participation of a public non-IV-D child support 
 enforcement agency in the establishment and enforcement 
 of child support obligations, and, if the Secretary 
 receives at least 5 such applications that meet such 
 requirements as the Secretary may establish, shall 
 approve not less than 5 such applications.
 (B) Requirements.--The Secretary may not approve an 
 application for a project unless--
 (i) the applicant and the Secretary have 
 entered into a written agreement which 
 addresses at a minimum, privacy safeguards, 
 data security, due process rights, automated 
 systems, liability, oversight, and fees, and 
 the applicant has made a commitment to conduct 
 the project in accordance with the written 
 agreement and such other requirements as the 
 Secretary may establish;
 (ii) the project includes a research plan 
 (but such plan shall not be required to use 
 random assignment) that is focused on assessing 
 the costs and benefits of the project; and
 (iii) the project appears likely to 
 contribute significantly to the achievement of 
 the purpose of this title.
 (c) Demonstration Authority.--On approval of an application 
submitted by a State under this section--
 (1) the State agency responsible for administering the 
 State plan under part D of title IV of the Social Security Act 
 may, subject to the privacy safeguards of section 454(26) of 
 such Act, provide to any public non-IV-D child support 
 enforcement agency participating in the demonstration project 
 all information in the State Directory of New Hires and any 
 information obtained through information comparisons under 
 section 453(j)(3) of such Act about an individual with respect 
 to whom the public non-IV-D agency is seeking to establish or 
 enforce a child support obligation, if the public non-IV-D 
 agency meets such requirements as the State may establish and 
 has entered into an agreement with the State under which the 
 public non-IV-D agency has made a binding commitment to carry 
 out establishment and enforcement activities with respect to 
 the child support obligation subject to the same data security, 
 privacy protection, and due process requirements applicable to 
 the State agency and in accordance with procedures approved by 
 the head of the State agency;
 (2) the State agency may charge and collect fees from any 
 such public non-IV-D agency to recover costs incurred by the 
 State agency in providing information and services to the 
 public non-IV-D agency under the demonstration project;
 (3) if a public non-IV-D child support enforcement agency 
 has agreed to collect past-due support (as defined in section 
 464(c) of such Act) owed by a named individual, and the State 
 agency has submitted a notice to the Secretary of the Treasury 
 pursuant to section 464 of such Act on behalf of the public 
 non-IV-D agency, then the Secretary of the Treasury shall 
 consider the State agency to have agreed to collect such 
 support for purposes of such section 464, and the State agency 
 may collect from the public non-IV-D agency any fee which the 
 State is required to pay for the cost of applying the offset 
 procedure in the case;
 (4) for so long as a public non-IV-D child support 
 enforcement agency is participating in the demonstration 
 project, the public non-IV-D agency shall be considered part of 
 the State agency for purposes of section 469A of such Act; and
 (5) for so long as a public non-IV-D child support 
 enforcement agency is participating in the demonstration 
 project, the public non-IV-D agency shall be considered part of 
 the State agency for purposes of section 303(e) of such Act but 
 only with respect to any child support obligation that the 
 public non-IV-D agency has agreed to collect.
 (d) Waiver Authority.--The Secretary may waive or vary the 
applicability of any provision of sections 303(e), 454(31), 464, 
466(a)(7), 466(a)(17), and 469A of the Social Security Act to the 
extent necessary to enable the conduct of demonstration projects under 
this section, subject to the preservation of the data security, privacy 
protection, and due process requirements of part D of title IV of such 
Act.
 (e) Federal Audit.--
 (1) In general.--The Comptroller General of the United 
 States shall conduct an audit of the demonstration projects 
 conducted under this section for the purpose of examining and 
 evaluating the manner in which information and enforcement 
 tools are used by the public non-IV-D child support enforcement 
 agencies participating in the projects.
 (2) Report to congress.--
 (A) In general.--The Comptroller General of the 
 United States shall submit to Congress a report on the 
 audit required by paragraph (1).
 (B) Timing.--The report required by subparagraph 
 (A) shall be so submitted not later than October 1, 
 2005.
 (f) Secretarial Report to Congress.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall submit to Congress a 
 report on the demonstration projects conducted under this 
 section, which shall include the results of any research or 
 evaluation conducted pursuant to this title, and shall include 
 policy recommendations regarding the establishment and 
 enforcement of child support obligations by the agencies 
 involved.
 (2) Timing.--The report required by paragraph (1) shall be 
 so submitted not later than October 1, 2006.

SEC. 5123. GAO REPORT TO CONGRESS ON PRIVATE CHILD SUPPORT ENFORCEMENT 
 AGENCIES.

 (a) In General.--Not later than October 1, 2002, the Comptroller 
General of the United States shall submit to Congress a report on the 
activities of private child support enforcement agencies that shall be 
designed to help Congress determine whether the agencies are providing 
a needed service in a fair manner using accepted debt collection 
practices and at a reasonable fee.
 (b) Matters To Be Addressed.--Among the matters addressed by the 
report required by subsection (a) shall be the following:
 (1) The number of private child support enforcement 
 agencies.
 (2) The types of debt collection activities conducted by 
 the private agencies.
 (3) The fees charged by the private agencies.
 (4) The methods used by the private agencies to collect 
 fees from custodial parents.
 (5) The nature and degree of cooperation the private 
 agencies receive from State agencies responsible for 
 administering State plans under part D of title IV of the 
 Social Security Act.
 (6) The extent to which the conduct of the private agencies 
 is subject to Federal or State regulation, and if so, the 
 extent to which the regulations are effectively enforced.
 (7) The amount of child support owed but uncollected and 
 changes in this amount in recent years.
 (8) The average period of time required for the completion 
 of successful enforcement actions yielding collections of past-
 due child support by both the child support enforcement 
 programs operated pursuant to State plans approved under part D 
 of title IV of the Social Security Act and, to the extent 
 known, by private child support enforcement agencies.
 (9) The types of Federal and State child support 
 enforcement remedies and resources currently available to 
 private child support enforcement agencies, and the types of 
 such remedies and resources now restricted to use by State 
 agencies administering State plans referred to in paragraph 
 (8).
 (c) Private Child Support Enforcement Agency Defined.--In this 
section, the term ``private child support enforcement agency'' means a 
person or any other nonpublic entity which seeks to establish or 
enforce an obligation to pay child support (as defined in section 
459(i)(2) of the Social Security Act).

SEC. 5124. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This title shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.

 Subchapter D--Expanded Enforcement

SEC. 5126. DECREASE IN AMOUNT OF CHILD SUPPORT ARREARAGE TRIGGERING 
 PASSPORT DENIAL.

 Section 452(k) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 652(k)) is 
amended by striking ``$5,000'' and inserting ``$2,500''.

SEC. 5127. USE OF TAX REFUND INTERCEPT PROGRAM TO COLLECT PAST-DUE 
 CHILD SUPPORT ON BEHALF OF CHILDREN WHO ARE NOT MINORS.

 Section 464 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 664) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(2)(A), by striking ``(as that term is 
 defined for purposes of this paragraph under subsection (c))''; 
 and
 (2) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by striking ``(1) Except as provided in 
 paragraph (2), as used in'' and inserting 
 ``In''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``(whether or not a 
 minor)'' after ``a child'' each place it 
 appears; and
 (B) by striking paragraphs (2) and (3).

SEC. 5128. GARNISHMENT OF COMPENSATION PAID TO VETERANS FOR SERVICE-
 CONNECTED DISABILITIES IN ORDER TO ENFORCE CHILD SUPPORT 
 OBLIGATIONS.

 Section 459(h) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 659(h)) is 
amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(A)(ii)(V), by striking all that 
 follows ``Armed Forces'' and inserting a semicolon; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Limitations with respect to compensation paid to 
 veterans for service-connected disabilities.--Notwithstanding 
 any other provision of this section:
 ``(A) Compensation described in paragraph 
 (1)(A)(ii)(V) shall not be subject to withholding 
 pursuant to this section--
 ``(i) for payment of alimony; or
 ``(ii) for payment of child support if the 
 individual is fewer than 60 days in arrears in 
 payment of the support.
 ``(B) Not more than 50 percent of any payment of 
 compensation described in paragraph (1)(A)(ii)(V) may 
 be withheld pursuant to this section.''.

 Subchapter E--Miscellaneous

SEC. 5131. REPORT ON UNDISTRIBUTED CHILD SUPPORT PAYMENTS.

 Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall submit to the 
Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and the 
Committee on Finance of the Senate a report on the procedures that the 
States use generally to locate custodial parents for whom child support 
has been collected but not yet distributed due to a change in address. 
The report shall include an estimate of the total amount of such 
undistributed child support and the average length of time it takes for 
such child support to be distributed. The Secretary shall include in 
the report recommendations as to whether additional procedures should 
be established at the Federal or State level to expedite the payment of 
undistributed child support.

SEC. 5132. USE OF NEW HIRE INFORMATION TO ASSIST IN ADMINISTRATION OF 
 UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION PROGRAMS.

 (a) In General.--Section 453(j) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 653(j)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(7) Information comparisons and disclosure to assist in 
 administration of unemployment compensation programs.--
 ``(A) In general.--If a State agency responsible 
 for the administration of an unemployment compensation 
 program under Federal or State law transmits to the 
 Secretary the name and social security account number 
 of an individual, the Secretary shall, if the 
 information in the National Directory of New Hires 
 indicates that the individual may be employed, disclose 
 to the State agency the name, address, and employer 
 identification number of any putative employer of the 
 individual, subject to this paragraph.
 ``(B) Condition on disclosure.--The Secretary shall 
 make a disclosure under subparagraph (A) only to the 
 extent that the Secretary determines that the 
 disclosure would not interfere with the effective 
 operation of the program under this part.
 ``(C) Use of information.--A State agency may use 
 information provided under this paragraph only for 
 purposes of administering a program referred to in 
 subparagraph (A).''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
take effect on October 1, 2001.

SEC. 5133. IMMIGRATION PROVISIONS.

 (a) Nonimmigrant Aliens Ineligible To Receive Visas and Excluded 
From Admission for Nonpayment of Child Support.--
 (1) In general.--Section 212(a)(10) of the Immigration and 
 Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1182(a)(10)) is amended by adding at 
 the end the following:
 ``(F) Nonpayment of child support.--
 ``(i) In general.--Any nonimmigrant alien 
 is inadmissible who is legally obligated under 
 a judgment, decree, or order to pay child 
 support (as defined in section 459(i) of the 
 Social Security Act), and whose failure to pay 
 such child support has resulted in an arrearage 
 exceeding $2,500, until child support payments 
 under the judgment, decree, or order are 
 satisfied or the nonimmigrant alien is in 
 compliance with an approved payment agreement.
 ``(ii) Waiver authorized.--The Attorney 
 General may waive the application of clause (i) 
 in the case of an alien, if the Attorney 
 General--
 ``(I) has received a request for 
 the waiver from the court or 
 administrative agency having 
 jurisdiction over the judgment, decree, 
 or order obligating the alien to pay 
 child support that is referred to in 
 such clause; or
 ``(II) determines that there are 
 prevailing humanitarian or public 
 interest concerns.''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by this subsection 
 shall take effect 180 days after the date of enactment of this 
 Act.
 (b) Authorization To Serve Legal Process in Child Support Cases on 
Certain Arriving Aliens.--
 (1) In general.--Section 235(d) of the Immigration and 
 Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1225(d)) is amended by adding at the 
 end the following:
 ``(5) Authority to serve process in child support cases.--
 ``(A) In general.--To the extent consistent with 
 State law, immigration officers are authorized to serve 
 on any alien who is an applicant for admission to the 
 United States legal process with respect to any action 
 to enforce or establish a legal obligation of an 
 individual to pay child support (as defined in section 
 459(i) of the Social Security Act).
 ``(B) Definition.--For purposes of subparagraph 
 (A), the term `legal process' means any writ, order, 
 summons, or other similar process, which is issued by--
 ``(i) a court or an administrative agency 
 of competent jurisdiction in any State, 
 territory, or possession of the United States; 
 or
 ``(ii) an authorized official pursuant to 
 an order of such a court or agency or pursuant 
 to State or local law.''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by this subsection 
 shall apply to aliens applying for admission to the United 
 States on or after 180 days after the date of enactment of this 
 Act.
 (c) Authorization To Share Child Support Enforcement Information To 
Enforce Immigration and Naturalization Law.--
 (1) Secretarial responsibility.--Section 452 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 652) is amended by adding at the end 
 the following:
 ``(m) If the Secretary receives a certification by a State agency, 
in accordance with section 454(35), that an individual who is a 
nonimmigrant alien (as defined in section 101(a)(15) of the Immigration 
and Nationality Act) owes arrearages of child support in an amount 
exceeding $2,500, the Secretary may, at the request of the State 
agency, the Secretary of State, or the Attorney General, or on the 
Secretary's own initiative, provide such certification to the Secretary 
of State and the Attorney General information in order to enable them 
to carry out their responsibilities under sections 212(a)(10) and 
235(d) of such Act.''.
 (2) State agency responsibility.--Section 454 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 654), as amended by section 5111(c) of 
 this Act, is amended--
 (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph 
 (33);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph 
 (34) and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (34) the 
 following:
 ``(35) provide that the State agency will have in effect a 
 procedure for certifying to the Secretary, in such format and 
 accompanied by such supporting documentation as the Secretary 
 may require, determinations that nonimmigrant aliens owe 
 arrearages of child support in an amount exceeding $2,500.''.

SEC. 5134. CORRECTION OF ERRORS IN CONFORMING AMENDMENTS IN THE 
 WELFARE-TO-WORK AND CHILD SUPPORT AMENDMENTS OF 1999.

 The amendments made by section 2402 of Public Law 106-246 shall 
take effect as if included in the enactment of section 806 of H.R. 3424 
of the 106th Congress by section 1000(a)(4) of Public Law 106-113.

SEC. 5135. INCREASE IN PAYMENT RATE TO STATES FOR EXPENDITURES FOR 
 SHORT-TERM TRAINING OF STAFF OF CERTAIN CHILD WELFARE 
 AGENCIES.

 Section 474(a)(3)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
674(a)(3)(B)) is amended by inserting ``, or State-licensed or State-
approved child welfare agencies providing services,'' after ``child 
care institutions''.

SEC. 5136. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 (a) In General.--Except as otherwise provided in this subtitle and 
in subsection (b) of this section, this subtitle and the amendments 
made by this subtitle shall take effect on October 1, 2002, and shall 
apply to payments under part D of title IV of the Social Security Act 
for calendar quarters beginning on or after such date, and without 
regard to whether regulations to implement such amendments are 
promulgated by such date.
 (b) Delay Permitted if State Legislation Required.--In the case of 
a State plan approved under section 454 of the Social Security Act 
which requires State legislation (other than legislation appropriating 
funds) in order for the plan to meet the additional requirements 
imposed by the amendments made by this Act, the State plan shall not be 
regarded as failing to comply with the additional requirements solely 
on the basis of the failure of the plan to meet the additional 
requirements before the first day of the first calendar quarter 
beginning after the close of the first regular session of the State 
legislature that begins after the date of enactment of this Act. For 
purposes of the previous sentence, in the case of a State that has a 2-
year legislative session, each year of such session shall be deemed to 
be a separate regular session of the State legislature.

 CHAPTER 2--CHILD SUPPORT DEMONSTRATION PROGRAMS

SEC. 5141. SHORT TITLE.

 This chapter may be cited as the ``Child Support Assurance Act of 
2001''.

SEC. 5142. PURPOSES.

 The purposes of this chapter are to enable participating States to 
establish, expand, or improve child support assurance systems in order 
to improve the economic circumstances of children who do not receive a 
minimum level of child support in a given month from the noncustodial 
parents of such children, to strengthen the establishment and 
enforcement of child support awards, and to promote work by custodial 
and noncustodial parents.

SEC. 5143. DEFINITIONS.

 In this chapter:
 (1) Child.--The term ``child'' means an individual who is 
 of such an age, disability, or educational status as to be 
 eligible for child support as provided for by law.
 (2) Eligible child.--The term ``eligible child'' means a 
 child who--
 (A) is not currently receiving cash assistance 
 under the State program funded under part A of title IV 
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 601 et seq.);
 (B) meets the eligibility requirements established 
 by the State for participation in a project 
 administered under this section; and
 (C) is the subject of a support order, as defined 
 in section 453(p) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 653(p)), or for which good cause exists, as determined 
 by the appropriate State agency under section 
 454(29)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 654(29)(A)), for not 
 having or pursuing a support order.
 (3) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.

SEC. 5144. ESTABLISHMENT OF CHILD SUPPORT ASSURANCE DEMONSTRATION 
 PROJECTS.

 (a) Demonstrations Authorized.--The Secretary shall make grants to 
not less than 3 and not more than 5 States to conduct demonstration 
projects for the purpose of establishing, expanding, or improving a 
system of an assured minimum child support payment to an eligible child 
in accordance with this section.
 (b) Application and Selection.--
 (1) Application requirements.--An application for a grant 
 under this section shall be submitted by the chief executive 
 officer of a State and shall--
 (A) contain a description of the proposed child 
 support assurance project to be established, expanded, 
 or improved using amounts provided under this section, 
 including the level of the assured minimum child 
 support payment to be provided and the agencies that 
 will be involved;
 (B) specify whether the project will be carried out 
 throughout the State or in limited areas of the State;
 (C) specify the level of income, if any, at which a 
 recipient or applicant will be ineligible for an 
 assured minimum child support payment under the 
 project;
 (D) estimate the number of children who will be 
 eligible for assured minimum child support payments 
 under the project;
 (E) contain a description of the work requirements, 
 if any, for custodial parents whose children are 
 participating in the project;
 (F) contain a commitment by the State to carry out 
 the project during a period of not less than 3 and not 
 more than 5 consecutive fiscal years beginning with 
 fiscal year 2002; and
 (G) contain such other information as the Secretary 
 may require by regulation.
 (2) Selection criteria.--The Secretary shall consider--
 (A) geographic diversity in the selection of States 
 to conduct demonstration projects under this section; 
 and
 (B) any other criteria that the Secretary 
 determines will contribute to the achievement of the 
 purposes of this title.
 (c) Use of Funds.--
 (1) Grant funds.--A State shall use amounts provided under 
 a grant awarded under this section to carry out a child support 
 assurance project that is designed to provide a minimum monthly 
 child support payment for each eligible child participating in 
 the project to the extent that such minimum child support is 
 not paid in a month by the noncustodial parent.
 (2) TANF funds.--
 (A) In general.--A State selected to conduct a 
 demonstration project under this title may use, in 
 addition to the amounts provided under a grant awarded 
 under this section, funds provided under a State family 
 assistance grant under section 403(a)(1) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 603(a)(1)) for the purpose 
 described in paragraph (1).
 (B) Authority to include amounts used for purposes 
 of tanf maintenance of effort requirements.--Section 
 409(a)(7)(B)(i)(I) of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 609(a)(7)(B)(i)(I)) is amended by adding at the 
 end the following:
 ``(ff) Notwithstanding 
 clause (iv), funds provided 
 under a State family assistance 
 grant, under section 403(a)(1) 
 that are used to establish, 
 expand, or improve a system of 
 assured minimum child support 
 payments to eligible children 
 (regardless of whether such 
 children reside with an 
 eligible family, as defined in 
 subclause (IV)) in accordance 
 with the Leave No Child Behind 
 Act of 2001.''.
 (d) Treatment of Child Support Payment.--Any assured minimum child 
support payment received by an individual under this title shall be 
considered child support for purposes of determining the treatment of 
such payment under--
 (1) the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; and
 (2) any eligibility requirements for any means-tested 
 program of assistance.
 (e) Duration.--A demonstration project conducted under this section 
shall commence on October 1, 2003, and shall be conducted for not less 
than 3 and not more than 5 consecutive fiscal years, except that the 
Secretary may terminate a project before the end of such period if the 
Secretary determines that the State conducting the project is not in 
compliance with the terms of the application approved by the Secretary 
under this section.
 (f) Evaluations and Reports.--
 (1) State evaluations.--
 (A) In general.--Each State administering a 
 demonstration project under this section shall--
 (i) provide for evaluation of the project, 
 meeting such conditions and standards as the 
 Secretary may require; and
 (ii) submit to the Secretary reports, at 
 the times and in the formats as the Secretary 
 may require, and containing any information (in 
 addition to the information required under 
 subparagraph (B)) as the Secretary may require.
 (B) Required information.--A report submitted under 
 subparagraph (A)(ii) shall include information on and 
 analysis of the effect of the project with respect to--
 (i) the amount of child support collected 
 for project recipients;
 (ii) the economic circumstances and work 
 efforts of custodial parents;
 (iii) the work efforts of noncustodial 
 parents;
 (iv) the rate of compliance by noncustodial 
 parents with support orders;
 (v) project recipients' need for assistance 
 under means-tested assistance programs other 
 than the project administered under this 
 section; and
 (vi) any other matters that the Secretary 
 may specify.
 (C) Methodology.--Information required under this 
 paragraph shall be collected through the use of 
 scientifically acceptable sampling methods.
 (2) Reports to congress.--The Secretary shall, on the basis 
 of reports received from States administering projects under 
 this section, submit interim reports and, not later than 6 
 months after the conclusion of all projects administered under 
 this section, a final report to Congress. A report submitted 
 under this paragraph shall contain an assessment of the 
 effectiveness of the State projects administered under this 
 section and any recommendations for legislative action that the 
 Secretary considers appropriate.
 (g) Funding.--There shall be available to the Secretary, from 
amounts made available to carry out part D of title IV of the Social 
Security Act, for purposes of carrying out demonstration projects under 
this section, amounts not to exceed--
 (1) $27,000,000 for fiscal year 2004;
 (2) $55,000,000 for fiscal year 2005; and
 (3) $70,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2006 through 2008.

 Subtitle C--Fair Wages and Unemployment Insurance

 CHAPTER 1--FAIR MINIMUM WAGE

SEC. 5201. SHORT TITLE.

 This chapter may be cited as the ``Fair Minimum Wage Act of 2001''.

SEC. 5202. MINIMUM WAGE.

 (a) In General.--Section 6(a)(1) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 
1938 (29 U.S.C. 206(a)(1)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(1) except as otherwise provided in this section, not 
 less than--
 ``(A) $5.75 an hour beginning 30 days after the 
 date of enactment of the Fair Minimum Wage Act of 2001;
 ``(B) $6.25 an hour during the year beginning 
 January 1, 2002; and
 ``(C) $6.65 an hour beginning January 1, 2003;''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
take effect 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 5203. APPLICABILITY OF MINIMUM WAGE TO THE COMMONWEALTH OF THE 
 NORTHERN MARIANA ISLANDS.

 (a) In General.--Section 6 of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 
(29 U.S.C. 206) shall apply to the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
Islands.
 (b) Transition.--Notwithstanding subsection (a), the minimum wage 
applicable to the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands under 
section 6(a)(1) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 
206(a)(1)) shall be--
 (1) $3.55 an hour beginning 30 days after the date of 
 enactment of this Act; and
 (2) increased by $0.50 an hour (or such lesser amount as 
 may be necessary to equal the minimum wage under section 
 6(a)(1) of such Act), beginning 6 months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act and every 6 months thereafter until the 
 minimum wage applicable to the Commonwealth of the Northern 
 Mariana Islands under this subsection is equal to the minimum 
 wage set forth in such section.

 CHAPTER 2--LIVABLE WAGES FOR EMPLOYEES UNDER FEDERAL CONTRACTS

SEC. 5211. SHORT TITLE.

 This chapter may be cited as the ``Federal Living Wage 
Responsibility Act''.

SEC. 5212. FINDINGS.

 The Congress finds the following:
 (1) American workers are working harder to make ends meet.
 (2) The wages of many working Americans have not kept pace 
 with the cost of providing for their families.
 (3) The Federal Government provides billions of dollars in 
 subsidies to businesses each year through both spending 
 programs and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (4) Recipients of Federal contracts have benefited greatly 
 from the provision of taxpayers' dollars.
 (5) The Congressional Budget Office concluded that the 
 Federal Government spends more than $30 billion a year on 
 spending and credit programs.
 (6) Congress must ensure that Federal dollars are used 
 responsibly to improve the economic security and well-being of 
 Americans across the country.

SEC. 5213. POVERTY LEVEL WAGE.

 (a) Requirement.--
 (1) General rule.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), any 
 employer under a Federal contract for an amount exceeding 
 $10,000 or a subcontract under a Federal contract for such an 
 amount shall, except as provided in subsection (b), pay each of 
 the employer's employees working on or hired in conjunction 
 with such contract or subcontract--
 (A) an hourly wage necessary for such employee to 
 earn, while working 40 hours a week on a full-time 
 basis, the amount of the Federal poverty level for a 
 family of 4 (as published in the Federal Register by 
 the Department of Health and Human Services under 
the authority of section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation 
Act of 1981), or
 (B) $8.20 an hour,
 whichever is greater.
 (2) Exception.--An employer which is--
 (A) a small business concern as defined under 
 section 3 of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 632), or
 (B) a nonprofit organization exempt from Federal 
 income tax under section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986 if the ratio of the total compensation of 
 its chief executive officer to the compensation of the 
 full-time equivalent of its lowest paid employee is not 
 greater than 25 to 1,
 shall not be required to pay the wage prescribed by paragraph 
 (1).
 (3) Scope.--An employer may not avoid the requirement of 
 paragraph (1) by laying off or otherwise terminating the 
 employment of an employee with the intention of replacing such 
 employee with an employee who, under subsection (b), is not 
 eligible for the subsection (a) wage.
 (b) Exception.--An employee who is participating in--
 (1) an apprenticeship program, or
 (2) any other training program which does not exceed 6 
 months in duration and which is offered to an employee while 
 employed in productive work that provides training, technical 
 and other related skills, and personal skills that are 
 essential to the full and adequate performance of the 
 employee's employment,
is not eligible for the wage prescribed by subsection (a).
 (c) Contract Requirement.--Any contract between the Federal 
Government and any contractor and any contract between such contractor 
with a subcontractor to carry out work for the Federal Government shall 
require the contractor or subcontractor to pay the wage prescribed by 
subsection (a)(1).
 (d) Enforcement.--
 (1) Suspension.--If an employer does not pay the wage 
 required by subsection (a) the Federal contract or subcontract 
 under which such employer was employing employees shall be 
 suspended.
 (2) Ineligibility.--An employer described in paragraph (1) 
 shall not be eligible for any Federal contract or subcontract 
 for a period of 5 years beginning on the date the employer does 
 not pay the required wage.
 (3) Restitution.--An employer who does not pay the wage 
 required by subsection (a) shall be liable to the United States 
 in an amount equal to the unpaid wages and in addition an equal 
 amount as liquidated damages. The Secretary of Labor shall pay 
 to the employees who were not paid such wage the amount 
 recovered by the United States under this paragraph.

SEC. 5214. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 This chapter shall take effect with respect to Federal contracts 
entered into, renewed, or extended after 90 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act.

 CHAPTER 3--UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE

SEC. 5221. PARITY FOR PART-TIME WORKERS, FAIR COUNTING OF WAGES, AND 
 USE OF IMPROVED TECHNOLOGY FOR MAKING WAGE DATA 
 AVAILABLE.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (a) of section 3304 of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to approval of State unemployment 
compensation laws) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (18), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) by redesignating paragraph (19) as paragraph (21); and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (18) the following new 
 paragraphs:
 ``(19) compensation shall not be denied to an individual 
 solely because such individual is seeking only part-time work, 
 if--
 ``(A) such individual otherwise qualifies for 
 unemployment compensation; and
 ``(B) the part-time work sought by such individual 
 generally requires seeking suitable and comparable 
 part-time work under provisions of State law reasonably 
 implementing this provision;
 ``(20) with respect to each individual who was initially 
 determined ineligible for compensation under provisions of 
 State law relating to base period wages and employment, 
 eligibility for compensation is determined by using wage and 
 employment information received by the State agency from any 
 employer for the most recently completed calendar quarter, 
 except that nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as 
 prohibiting a State from using any additional wage and 
 employment information considered by such State for monetary 
 eligibility; and''.
 (b) Effective Dates.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in subsection (b), the 
 amendments made by this title shall apply to compensation paid 
 for weeks of unemployment beginning after June 30, 2002.
 (2) Amendment relating to use of recent wages.--Section 
 3304(a)(20) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by 
 subsection (a)(3), shall apply to compensation paid for weeks 
 of unemployment beginning after December 31, 2002.

SEC. 5222. ENSURING UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION FOR INDIVIDUALS THAT ARE 
 SEPARATED FROM EMPLOYMENT DUE TO DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.

 (a) Unemployment Compensation.--Section 3304 of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to approval of State unemployment 
compensation laws), as amended by section 5221, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in paragraph (20), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) by redesignating paragraph (21) as paragraph 
 (22); and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (20) the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(21) compensation is to be paid where an individual is 
 separated from employment due to circumstances directly 
 resulting from domestic violence; and''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(g) Construction.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a)(21), an 
 employee's separation from employment shall be treated as due 
 to circumstances directly resulting from domestic violence if 
 the separation resulted from--
 ``(A) the employee's reasonable fear of future 
 domestic violence at or en route to or from the 
 employee's place of employment;
 ``(B) the employee's wish to relocate to another 
 geographic area in order to avoid future domestic 
 violence against the employee or the employee's family;
 ``(C) the employee's need to recover from traumatic 
 stress resulting from the employee's experience of 
 domestic violence;
 ``(D) the employer's denial of the employee's 
 request for the temporary leave from employment to 
 address domestic violence and its effects; or
 ``(E) any other circumstance in which domestic 
 violence causes the employee to reasonably believe that 
 termination of employment is necessary for the future 
 safety of the employee or the employee's family.
 ``(2) Reasonable efforts to retain employment.--For 
 purposes of subsection (a)(21), if State law requires the 
 employee to have made reasonable efforts to retain employment 
 as a condition for receiving unemployment compensation, such 
 requirement shall be met if the employee--
 ``(A) sought protection from, or assistance in 
 responding to, domestic violence, including calling the 
 police or seeking legal, social work, medical, clergy, 
 or other assistance;
 ``(B) sought safety, including refuge in a shelter 
 or temporary or permanent relocation, whether or 
not the employee actually obtained such refuge or accomplished such 
relocation; or
 ``(C) reasonably believed that options such as 
 taking a leave of absence, transferring jobs, or 
 receiving an alternative work schedule would not be 
 sufficient to guarantee the employee or the employee's 
 family's safety.
 ``(3) Active search for employment.--For purposes of 
 subsection (a)(21), if State law requires the employee to 
 actively search for employment after separation from employment 
 as a condition for receiving unemployment compensation, such 
 requirement shall be treated as met where the employee is 
 temporarily unable to actively search for employment because 
 the employee is engaged in seeking safety or relief for the 
 employee or the employee's family from domestic violence, 
 including--
 ``(A) going into hiding or relocating or attempting 
 to do so, including activities associated with such 
 hiding or relocation, such as seeking to obtain 
 sufficient shelter, food, schooling for children, or 
 other necessities of life for the employee or the 
 employee's family;
 ``(B) actively pursuing legal protection or 
 remedies, including meeting with the police, going to 
 court to make inquiries or file papers, meeting with 
 attorneys, or attending court proceedings; or
 ``(C) participating in psychological, social, or 
 religious counseling or support activities to assist 
 the employee in ending domestic violence.
 ``(4) Provision of information to meet certain 
 requirements.--In determining if an employee meets the 
 requirements of paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), the unemployment 
 agency of the State in which an employee is requesting 
 unemployment compensation by reason of subsection (a)(21) may 
 require the employee to provide--
 ``(A) documentation of the domestic violence, such 
 as--
 ``(i) police or court records; or
 ``(ii) documentation from a shelter worker 
 or an employee of a domestic violence program, 
 an attorney, a clergy member, or a medical or 
 other professional from whom the employee has 
 sought assistance in addressing domestic 
 violence and its effects; or
 ``(B) other corroborating evidence, such as--
 ``(i) a statement from any other individual 
 with knowledge of the circumstances which 
 provide the basis for the claim; or
 ``(ii) physical evidence of domestic 
 violence, such as photographs or torn or bloody 
 clothes.
 All evidence of domestic violence experienced by an employee, 
 including an employee's statement, any corroborating evidence, 
 and the fact that an employee has applied for, or inquired 
 about, unemployment compensation available by reason of 
 subsection (a)(21) shall be retained in the strictest 
 confidence by such State unemployment agency, except to the 
 extent consented to by the employee where disclosure is 
 necessary to protect the employee's safety.
 ``(5) Effect of claims.--Claims filed for unemployment 
 compensation solely by reason of subsection (a)(21) shall be 
 disregarded in determining an employer's State unemployment 
 taxes based on unemployment experience.''.
 (b) Social Security Personnel Training.--Section 303(a) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 503(a)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (4) through (10) as 
 paragraphs (5) through (11), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(4) Such methods of administration as will ensure that 
 claims reviewers and hearing personnel are adequately trained 
 in--
 ``(A) the nature and dynamics of claims for 
 unemployment compensation based on domestic violence 
 under section 3304(a)(20) of the Internal Revenue Code 
 of 1986; and
 ``(B) methods of ascertaining and keeping 
 confidential information about possible experiences of 
 domestic violence to ensure that--
 ``(i) requests for unemployment 
 compensation based on domestic violence are 
 reliably screened, identified, and adjudicated; 
 and
 ``(ii) complete confidentiality is provided 
 for the employee's claim and submitted 
 evidence; and''.
 (c) Funding for Improved Technology To Assist in Determining 
Benefit Eligibility.--Section 901(c) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1101(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(6) In addition to amounts provided under paragraph (1)(A)(i), 
there is hereby appropriated out of the employment security 
administration account $60,000,000 for fiscal year 2001 (which shall 
remain available for obligation to the States through fiscal year 2003) 
for the purpose of assisting States in funding technology and other 
costs that accelerate access to wage and employment information in 
order to determine eligibility for unemployment compensation.''.
 (d) Definitions.--Section 3306 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
(relating to definitions) is amended by adding at the end the following 
new subsection:
 ``(u) Domestic Violence.--For purposes of this chapter, the term 
`domestic violence' has the meaning given such term in section 2003(1) 
of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 
(42 U.S.C. 3796gg-2).''.
 (e) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and 
 (3), the amendments made by this section shall take effect on 
 November 1, 2001.
 (2) Funding for improved technology to assist in 
 determining benefit eligibility.--The amendment made by 
 subsection (c) shall take effect on the date of enactment of 
 this Act.
 (3) Exception.--In the case of any State the legislature of 
 which has not been in session for at least 30 calendar days 
 (whether or not successive) between the date of enactment of 
 this Act and November 1, 2001, the amendments made by this 
 section shall take effect 30 calendar days after the first day 
 on which such legislature is in session on or after November 1, 
 2001.

SEC. 5223. LOSS OF CHILD CARE AS GOOD CAUSE FOR LEAVING EMPLOYMENT.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (a) of section 3304 of the Internal 
Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to approval of State unemployment 
compensation laws), as amended by section 5222, is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (21), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) by redesignating paragraph (22) as paragraph (23); and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (21) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(22) if any individual leaves employment because of loss 
 of adequate child care for a dependent child under the age of 
 12, for purposes of determining such individual's eligibility 
 for compensation for any subsequent week for which such 
 individual meets the State law requirements relating to 
 availability for work and active search for work--
 ``(A) such individual shall be treated as having 
 left such employment for good cause, and
 ``(B) any failure to return to such employment or 
 to otherwise meet such State law requirements, while 
 the lack of such child care continues, shall be 
 disregarded; and''.
 (b) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect on November 
 1, 2001.
 (2) Exception.--In the case of any State the legislature of 
 which has not been in session for at least 30 calendar days 
 (whether or not successive) between the date of enactment of 
this Act and November 1, 2001, the amendments made by subsection (a) 
shall take effect 30 calendar days after the first day on which such 
legislature is in session on or after November 1, 2001.

 Subtitle D--Jobs for Low-Income Parents

SEC. 5301. DISREGARD OF MONTHS ENGAGED IN WORK FOR PURPOSES OF 5-YEAR 
 TANF ASSISTANCE LIMIT.

 Section 408(a)(7) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 608(a)(7)) 
is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (E), (F), and (G) as 
 subparagraphs (G), (H), and (I), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after subparagraph (D), the following:
 ``(E) Disregard of months of assistance received by 
 adult while engaged in work.--In determining the number 
 of months for which an adult has received assistance 
 under a State or tribal program funded under this part, 
 the State or tribe shall disregard any month during 
 which the adult is engaged in a work activity described 
 in paragraph (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), or 
 (12) of section 407(d) in accordance with the 
 requirements of section 407(c).''.

SEC. 5302. STRENGTHENING TANF EDUCATION AND TRAINING REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 407(c) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 607(c)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking ``not fewer than 20 
 hours per week of which are attributable to an activity 
 described in paragraph (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), 
 or (12) of subsection (d),''; and
 (2) in paragraph (2)(D)--
 (A) by striking ``30 percent'' and inserting ``50 
 percent'';
 (B) by striking ``For purposes of'' and inserting 
 the following:
 ``(i) In general.--For purposes of''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(ii) Waiver.--The Secretary may waive the 
 requirements of clause (i) with respect to an 
 individual if a State demonstrates that the 
 vocational educational training or education 
 described in subparagraph (C) that the 
 individual is engaged in is part of the 
 individual's individual responsibility plan 
 developed under section 408(b) and is designed 
 to ensure that the individual has a better 
 chance of sustaining stable employment.''.
 (b) Elimination of 12-Month Limit on Vocational Educational 
Training; Inclusion of Post-Secondary Education.--Section 407(d) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 607(d)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (8), by striking ``(not to exceed 12 
 months with respect to any individual)'';
 (2) in paragraph (11), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (3) by redesignating paragraph (12) as paragraph (13); and
 (4) by inserting after paragraph (11), the following:
 ``(12) post-secondary education related to employment; 
 and''.

SEC. 5303. ADDITION OF POVERTY REDUCTION BONUS TO TANF.

 Section 403(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 603(a)), is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(6) Bonus to reward states that reduce poverty.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall make a grant 
 pursuant to this paragraph to each State for each 
 fiscal year beginning with fiscal year 2003 for which 
 the State is a qualified poverty reduction State, as 
 determined under subparagraph (C).
 ``(B) Amount of grant.--With respect to a fiscal 
 year, each State that the Secretary determines is a 
 qualified poverty reduction State for that fiscal year 
 shall receive a grant in an amount equal to the ratio 
 of the amount appropriated under subparagraph (D) for 
 that fiscal year to the total number of all such States 
 for that fiscal year.
 ``(C) Determination of qualified poverty reduction 
 states.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), a State 
 shall be considered a qualified poverty reduction State 
 for a fiscal year if the State satisfies the following:
 ``(i) Provision of certain assistance.--The 
 State demonstrates to the Secretary that the 
 State program funded under this part provides 
 in each local political subdivision of the 
 State for at least 3 of the following:
 ``(I) A work expense or 
 transportation allowance for any low-
 income family that is not receiving 
 assistance under the State program.
 ``(II) The use of income disregards 
 sufficient to allow a family to remain 
 eligible for at least partial 
 assistance under the State program 
 until the sum of the family's earned 
 income and cash assistance exceed the 
 poverty line applicable to such family.
 ``(III) On-the-job training or 
 work/study programs in occupations 
 likely to provide a livable wage. For 
 purposes of this subclause, the term 
 `livable wage' means such hourly wage 
 as is necessary for an employee to 
 earn, while working 40 hours a week on 
 a full-year basis, an amount equal to 
 the amount of the Federal poverty level 
 for a family of 4 for that year (as 
 published in the Federal Register by 
 the Department of Health and Human 
 Services under the authority of section 
 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget 
 Reconciliation Act of 1981).
 ``(IV) Temporary subsidized 
 employment that provides at least the 
 minimum wage applicable under section 6 
 of the Fair Labor Standards Act for 
 parents or caregivers who are unable to 
 find other employment.
 ``(V) Non-recurrent assistance to 
 help pay for the repair of a vehicle or 
 appliance, past-due rent, a utility or 
 fuel bill, vehicle licensing or 
 insurance costs, or for other purposes 
 deemed necessary by the State to enable 
 eligible families with children to 
 maintain stable work and living 
 situations.
 ``(VI) A minimum monthly child 
 support payment paid by the State to a 
 low-income family with at least 1 child 
 support order if the noncustodial 
 parent does not pay the minimum payment 
 required under the order.
 ``(VII) With respect to families 
 that have assigned to the State in 
 accordance with section 408(a)(3) any 
 child support rights a family member 
 may have (on behalf of the family 
 member or of any other person for whom 
 the family member has applied for or is 
 receiving such assistance), a pass 
 through of child support collections to 
 the family, with at least $100 per 
 month of the pass-through payment 
 disregarded for purposes of calculating 
 assistance for the family under the 
 State program funded under this part.
 ``(VIII) An increase in the State's 
 minimum wage to at least $6.15 per hour 
 or a State minimum wage indexed to 
 inflation.
 ``(ii) Demonstration of improved outcomes 
 for current and former recipients of 
 assistance.--
 ``(I) In general.--With respect to 
 a fiscal year, the State is one of the 
 10 States with the greatest year-to-
 year decline or, in the absence of 10 
 such States, the least year-to-year 
 increase, in the child poverty rate 
 adjusted by the severity of poverty. 
For purposes of this subclause, the child poverty rate adjusted by the 
severity of poverty shall be determined with respect to a State for a 
fiscal year by multiplying the State's percentage of children with 
family income below the poverty line for that fiscal year by the 
average difference per poor child in the State between the child's 
family income and the poverty line.
 ``(II) Determination of income.--
 For purposes of subclause (I), the 
 Secretary shall, to the extent 
 feasible, consider the following in 
 calculating a family's income:
 ``(aa) Cash income, such as 
 earnings, child support 
 received by the family, and 
 government cash payments.
 ``(bb) Benefits received 
 under the Food Stamp Act of 
 1977.
 ``(cc) Federal, State, or 
 local income taxes paid by the 
 family for the preceding 
 taxable year and the refundable 
 portion of any tax credits 
 received.
 ``(D) Appropriation.--Out of any money in the 
 Treasury of the United States not otherwise 
 appropriated, there is appropriated for fiscal year 
 2003 and each fiscal year thereafter, $200,000,000 to 
 make the grants required under this paragraph.''.

SEC. 5304. PARTICIPATION IN WORKFORCE INVESTMENT BOARDS.

 (a) State Workforce Investment Boards.--Section 111(b)(1)(C) of the 
Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (29 U.S.C. 2821(b)(1)(C)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating clause (vii) as clause (viii);
 (2) in clause (vi), by striking ``and'' at the end; and
 (3) by inserting after clause (vi) the following:
 ``(vii) a representative of a lead State 
 agency with responsibility for the State 
 program funded under part A of title IV of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 601 et seq.); 
 and''.
 (b) Local Workforce Investment Boards.--Section 117(b)(2)(A) of the 
Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (29 U.S.C. 2832(b)(2)(A)) is amended--
 (1) in clause (v), by striking ``and'' at the end; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(vii) a representative of the local 
 agency, if any, with responsibility for the 
 program funded under part A of title IV of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 601 et seq.); 
 and''.

SEC. 5305. CLARIFICATION OF TANF PURPOSE.

 Section 401(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 601(a)) is 
amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (3) and (4) as paragraphs 
 (4) and (5), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (2), the following:
 ``(3) reduce poverty among families with children;''.

SEC. 5306. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 The amendments made by this subtitle take effect on October 1, 
2001.

 Subtitle E--Incentives to Serve Families

SEC. 5401. DEVELOPMENT OF MODEL CASEWORKER TRAINING MATERIALS.

 (a) Development of Model Caseworker Training Materials.--The 
Secretary of Health and Human Services shall develop model training 
materials (including guidebooks and other resources) for caseworkers 
assigned to administer the provision of assistance to a family under 
the State program funded under part A of title IV of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 601 et seq.). The model training materials 
shall be designed to train the caseworkers to improve the access of the 
family to other services and benefits that the family, or individuals 
within the family, may be eligible for, including--
 (1) benefits under the food stamp program, as defined in 
 section 3(h) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 2012(h));
 (2) medical assistance under the medicaid program under 
 title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.);
 (3) child health assistance under the State children's 
 health insurance program under title XXI of the Social Security 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1397aa et seq.);
 (4) the special supplemental nutrition program for women, 
 infants, and children (WIC) under section 17 of the Child 
 Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786);
 (5) child care assistance;
 (6) transportation assistance;
 (7) education or training assistance;
 (8) job placement activities;
 (9) the earned income tax credit under section 32 of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986; and
 (10) services to treat or alleviate substance abuse, mental 
 illness, or family violence.
 (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to the Secretary of Health and Human Services to carry out 
this section such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2002 and 
each fiscal year thereafter.

SEC. 5402. EXCEPTION TO LIMIT ON TANF ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENDITURES FOR 
 CASEWORKER BONUSES AND OTHER STATE INITIATIVES TO 
 ELIMINATE BARRIERS TO WORK.

 Section 404(b)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 604(b)(2)) 
is amended--
 (1) in the heading, by striking ``Exception''; and 
 inserting ``Exceptions'';
 (2) by striking ``Paragraph (1)'' and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(A) Information technology and computerization.--
 Paragraph (1)''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(B) Caseworker bonuses and other state 
 initiatives to eliminate barriers to work.--
 ``(i) In general.--Paragraph (1) shall not 
 apply to the use of a grant to provide a cash 
 bonus to a caseworker for a family receiving 
 assistance under the State program funded under 
 this part based on the number of such families 
 that the State determines the caseworker 
 assists achieve a goal described in clause 
 (ii), or for expenditures incurred for other 
 State initiatives designed to eliminate 
 barriers to work for families receiving 
 assistance under the State program funded under 
 this part.
 ``(ii) Caseworker goals.--For purposes of 
 clause (i), the goals described in this clause 
 are the following:
 ``(I) Obtain employment that 
 provides wages and benefits that enable 
 the family to have income that exceeds 
 the poverty line applicable to a family 
 of the size involved.
 ``(II) Obtain supportive services 
 and benefits for which the family is 
 eligible.
 ``(III) With respect to an 
 individual within a family, overcome a 
 barrier to the individual's employment, 
 including a barrier resulting from a 
 lack of transportation or child care, a 
 life crisis due to family violence, 
 substance abuse, or a mental or 
 physical disability.
 ``(IV) With respect to an 
 individual within a family, retain 
 employment for at least 6 months.''.

SEC. 5403. STRENGTHENING OF TANF INDIVIDUAL RESPONSIBILITY PLANS.

 Section 408(b) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 608(b)) is 
amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A)--
 (i) in the matter preceding clause (i), by 
 striking ``may'' and inserting ``shall''; and
 (ii) in clause (i), by striking 
 ``immediately into private sector employment'' 
 and inserting ``into a job leading to stable 
 employment with earnings above the poverty line 
 applicable to a family of the size involved 
 (based on 35 hours of work per week) and health 
 care benefits for the employee and the 
 employee's dependents''; and
 (B) in subparagraph (B)--
 (i) in the matter preceding clause (i), by 
 striking ``may'' and inserting ``shall'';
 (ii) in clause (i), by striking ``(or, at 
 the option of the State, 180 days)'';
 (iii) in clause (ii), by striking ``(or, at 
 the option of the State, 90 days)''; and
 (2) by striking paragraph (4) and inserting the following:
 ``(4) Penalty for noncompliance by the state.--In addition 
 to any other penalties that may be imposed against a State for 
 failure to comply with the requirements of this part, the 
 Secretary may reduce the grant payable to a State under section 
 403(a)(1) if the Secretary determines that the State has 
 failed, without good cause, to comply with the requirements of 
 this subsection.''.

SEC. 5404. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 The amendments made by this subtitle take effect on October 1, 
2001.

 Subtitle F--Addressing Work Barriers

SEC. 5501. FUNDING FOR ACCESS TO JOBS PROGRAM.

 Section 3037 of the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century 
(49 U.S.C. 5309 note) is amended in subsection (l)(1)--
 (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking clauses (iv) and (v) 
 and inserting the following:
 ``(iv) $150,000,000 for fiscal year 2002;
 ``(v) $170,000,000 for fiscal year 2003;
 ``(vi) $190,000,000 for fiscal year 2004;
 ``(vii) $200,000,000 for fiscal year 2005; 
 and
 ``(viii) $225,000,000 for fiscal year 
 2006.'';
 (2) in subparagraph (B), by striking clauses (iv) and (v) 
 and inserting the following:
 ``(iv) $50,000,000 for each of fiscal years 
 2002 through 2006.''; and
 (3) in subparagraph (C)--
 (A) by inserting ``and'' after the semicolon in 
 clause (ii);
 (B) by striking ``; and'' in clause (iii) and 
 inserting a period; and
 (C) by striking clause (iv).

SEC. 5502. REQUIREMENT TO IDENTIFY AND PROVIDE SERVICES TO ADDRESS 
 BARRIERS TO EMPLOYMENT OF TANF RECIPIENTS.

 (a) Requirement To Identify as Part of Individual Responsibility 
Plan.--Section 408(b) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 608(b)), as 
amended by section 5403, is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``who--'' and all that 
 follows and inserting ``has attained 18 years of age, using 
 caseworkers who are trained to utilize assessment methods 
 approved by the State to identify recipients with severe 
 barriers to employment, such as being subjected to domestic 
 violence, having mental health, substance or alcohol abuse 
 problems, homelessness, a physical or mental disability, or 
 illiteracy problems.''; and
 (2) in paragraph (2)(A)(iv), by inserting ``overcome any 
 severe barriers to employment identified by the State under 
 paragraph (1), and to'' after ``will be able to''.
 (b) Exemption From Work Requirement If State Fails To Provide 
Services.--Section 407(e) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 607(e)) 
is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``paragraph (2)'' and 
 inserting ``paragraphs (2) and (3)'';
 (2) in paragraph (2), in the heading, by striking 
 ``Exception''; and inserting ``Single custodial parent with a 
 young child''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Individual with a severe barrier to employment to 
 whom the state fails to provide services.--Notwithstanding 
 paragraph (1), a State may not reduce assistance under the 
 State program funded under this part based on a refusal of an 
 individual to engage in work required in accordance with this 
 section if, as part of the assessment required under section 
 408(b)(1), the individual has been identified as having a 
 severe barrier to employment and the State fails to provide 
 services necessary to overcome the barrier.''.

SEC. 5503. STATE OPTION TO ESTABLISH EXCEPTIONS FROM TIME LIMIT FOR 
 RECEIPT OF TANF ASSISTANCE BASED ON SEVERE BARRIERS TO 
 EMPLOYMENT.

 Section 408(a)(7)(C) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
608(a)(7)(C)) is amended--
 (1) in clause (ii), by striking ``The average'' and 
 inserting ``Subject to clause (iv), the average''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(iv) State option for exceptions based on 
 severe barriers to employment.--At State 
 option, the limit described in clause (ii) 
 shall not apply with respect to each category 
 of exception based on severe barriers to 
 employment as the State may determine.''.

SEC. 5504. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 The amendments made by this subtitle take effect on October 1, 
2001.

 Subtitle G--Protection for Families in Need

SEC. 5601. EARN-BACK OF MONTHS OF TANF ASSISTANCE.

 Section 408(a)(7) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 608(a)(7)), 
as amended by section 5301, is amended by inserting after subparagraph 
(E) the following:
 ``(F) Earn-back of months of assistance.--In 
 determining the number of months for which an adult has 
 received assistance under a State or tribal program 
 funded under this part, the State or tribe shall 
 disregard 1 month for every 3 months that the adult is 
 engaged in a work activity defined in paragraph (1), 
 (2), or (3) of section 407(d) in accordance with the 
 requirements of section 407(c) and during which the 
 individual is not receiving assistance under the State 
 program funded under this part.''.

SEC. 5602. ESTABLISHMENT OF A FAIR CONCILIATION PROCESS FOR FAMILIES 
 UNDER TANF.

 Section 408 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 608) is amended 
by adding at the end the following:
 ``(h) Fair Conciliation Procedures.--
 ``(1) In general.--Any case closed under the State program 
 funded under this part shall be subject to a customer service 
 review in accordance with the requirements of this subsection 
 to ensure that a case is not erroneously terminated and to give 
 a family another opportunity to participate in the program.
 ``(2) Requirements.--
 ``(A) Initial review.--A customer service reviewer 
 shall examine the case record for each case closed to 
 determine--
 ``(i) whether the caseworker responsible 
 for the case has attempted to make personal 
 contact with the parent or caregiver before 
 recommending closure of the case; and
 ``(ii) whether sufficient documentation 
 exists in the case record to establish both a 
 factual and policy basis for closure of the 
 case, including documentation of written notice 
 of the closure to the parent or caregiver.
 ``(B) Return to caseworker.--Any case in which a 
 customer service reviewer determines that no personal 
 contact has been attempted before closure of the case, 
 or that insufficient documentation exists, shall be 
 returned to the caseworker for the provision of such 
 attempted contact or documentation.
 ``(C) Additional attempted personal contact.--If a 
 case is not returned to a caseworker under subparagraph 
 (A), the customer service reviewer shall attempt to 
 make personal contact with the parent or caregiver 
 involved, including, if 3 attempts are required, an 
 attempt outside of normal business hours. A case shall 
 be closed after 3 unsuccessful attempts.
 ``(D) Determination of good cause for exception to 
 closure.--
 ``(i) In general.--With respect to a case 
 in which a caseworker or a customer service 
 reviewer has made personal contact with the 
 parent or caregiver, the customer service 
 reviewer shall determine whether barriers to 
 participation in the program exist, whether 
 there are grounds for exemption from the time 
 limits or any other program requirements, or 
 whether there was an error in the application 
 of the facts or policy.
 ``(ii) Modification of individual 
 responsibility plan.--If a customer service 
 reviewer determines under clause (i) that a 
 case should not be closed, the customer service 
 reviewer shall work with the parent or 
 caregiver to modify the parent's or caregiver's 
 individual responsibility plan developed under 
 subsection (b) as appropriate, including with 
 respect to the provision of any additional 
 services needed to assist the individual in 
 becoming work-ready.
 ``(E) Plan for compliance.--If a customer service 
 reviewer determines that subparagraph (D) does not 
 apply and a parent or caregiver is not subject to the 
 time limit for receipt of assistance under subsection 
 (a)(7), the reviewer shall ask the parent or caregiver 
 if the parent or caregiver is now willing to comply 
 with program requirements, and establish a plan with 
 the parent or caregiver for compliance. If the parent 
 or caregiver does not comply with such plan, the case 
 shall be closed without regard to the preceding 
 subparagraphs of this paragraph.
 ``(F) Written notice.--With respect to a case 
 closed by a customer service reviewer under this 
 subsection, the reviewer shall send the family involved 
 a final written notice of the case closure that informs 
 the family of--
 ``(i) the specific factual basis of the 
 closure;
 ``(ii) the steps that the family can take 
 to maintain eligibility for assistance under 
 the State program; and
 ``(iii) the procedure for appealing the 
 closure decision.''.

SEC. 5603. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 The amendments made by this subtitle take effect on October 1, 
2001.

 Subtitle H--TANF Reauthorization

SEC. 5701. REAUTHORIZATION OF TANF STATE FAMILY ASSISTANCE GRANTS.

 Section 403(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 603(a)(1)) 
is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``fiscal years 1996, 
 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, and 2002'' and inserting ``the 
 fiscal years during the period beginning with fiscal year 1996 
 and ending with fiscal year 2007''; and
 (2) in subparagraph (E), by striking ``fiscal years 1996, 
 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, and 2002'' and inserting ``each 
 of the fiscal years during the period beginning with fiscal 
 year 1996 and ending with fiscal year 2007''.

SEC. 5702. PROHIBITION ON SUPPLANTATION OF TANF FUNDS.

 Section 408(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 608(a)) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(12) Supplement not supplant.--Funds made available under 
 this part shall be used to supplement, not supplant, other 
 Federal, State, or local funds that are used for existing 
 services and activities that promote the purposes of this 
 part.''.

 TITLE VI--FAIR START

 Subtitle A--Child and Adult Care Food Program

SEC. 6001. PARTICIPATION OF FOR-PROFIT CARE CENTERS IN CHILD AND ADULT 
 CARE FOOD PROGRAM.

 Section 17(a)(2)(B) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1766(a)(2)(B)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``if--'' and all that follows through 
 ``2001, at'' and inserting ``if at''; and
 (2) by striking ``meals; or'' and all that follows and 
 inserting ``meals;''.

SEC. 6002. CATEGORICAL ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS.

 Section 17(f)(3)(A)(ii) of the Richard B. Russell National School 
Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1766(f)(3)(A)(ii)) is amended by adding at the end 
the following:
 ``(V) Categorical eligibility.--In 
 making a determination of income 
 eligibility under subclauses (I)(cc) 
 and (II), a family or group day care 
 home sponsoring organization may 
 consider a provider participating in or 
 subsidized under, or a provider with a 
 child participating in or subsidized 
 under, a federally or State supported 
 child care or other benefit program 
 with an income eligibility limit that 
 does not exceed the eligibility 
 standard for free or reduced price 
 meals under section 9 to be a provider 
 whose household meets the income 
 eligibility guidelines under section 
 9.''.

SEC. 6003. INCREASE IN ADMINISTRATIVE REIMBURSEMENT RATES.

 Section 17(f)(3) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1766(f)(3)) is amended by striking subparagraph (B) and 
inserting the following:
 ``(B) Reimbursement for administrative expenses.--
 ``(i) In general.--Family or group day care 
 home sponsoring organizations shall also 
 receive reimbursement for administrative 
 expenses in amounts not exceeding the maximum 
 allowable levels prescribed by the Secretary.
 ``(ii) Adjustment.--The maximum allowable 
 levels prescribed under clause (i) shall be--
 ``(I) adjusted July 1 of each year 
 to reflect changes for the 12-month 
 period ending in the preceding June, in 
 the Consumer Price Index for All Urban 
 Consumers published by the Bureau of 
 Labor Statistics of the Department of 
 Labor, rounded to the nearest lower 
 dollar increment; and
 ``(II) in addition to the 
 adjustments required under subclause 
 (I), increased by $2.00 for each level 
 described in clause (i).''.

SEC. 6004. PROGRAM FOR AT-RISK SCHOOL CHILDREN.

 Section 17(r) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act 
(42 U.S.C. 1766(r)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(B)--
 (A) by inserting ``(i)'' after ``(B)'';
 (B) by striking ``in a geographical area'' and all 
 that follows through the period and inserting the 
 following: ``in a geographical area--
 ``(I) that is served by a school in which 
 at least 50 percent of the children are 
 eligible for free or reduced price school meals 
 under this Act or the Child Nutrition Act of 
 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1771 et seq.); or
 ``(II) in which poor economic conditions 
 exist, as determined by the Secretary based 
 on--
 ``(aa) information provided from 
 the local department of welfare, zoning 
 commission, or census tracts; or
 ``(bb) information from other 
 appropriate sources; or''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(ii) is enrolled in a program authorized under 
 this subsection operated at a site not described in 
 clause (i).'';
 (2) in paragraph (4), by striking subparagraphs (B) and (C) 
 and inserting the following:
 ``(B) Rates.--
 ``(i) Meals.--A meal shall be reimbursed 
 under this subsection--
 ``(I) for children participating in 
 a program at a site described in 
 paragraph (1)(B)(i), at the rate 
 established for free meals under 
 subsection (c); and
 ``(II) for children enrolled in a 
 program under paragraph 1(B)(ii), at 
 the applicable rate for meals 
 established under subsection (c).
 ``(ii) Supplements.--A supplement shall be 
 reimbursed under this subsection--
 ``(I) for children participating in 
 a program at a site described in 
 paragraph (1)(B)(i), at the rate 
 established for a free supplement under 
 subsection (c)(3); and
 ``(II) for children enrolled in a 
 program under paragraph 1(B)(ii), at 
 the applicable rate for supplements 
 established under subsection (c)(3).
 ``(C) No charge.--In the case of at-risk school 
 child participating in a program at a site described in 
 paragraph (1)(B)(i), a meal or supplement provided 
 under this subsection to the child shall be served 
 without charge.''; and
 (3) by striking paragraph (5).

 Subtitle B--Food Stamp Program

SEC. 6101. RESTORATION OF FOOD STAMP BENEFITS FOR QUALIFIED ALIENS.

 (a) Limited Eligibility of Qualified Aliens for Certain Federal 
Programs.--
 (1) In general.--Section 402(a) of the Personal 
 Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 
 (8 U.S.C. 1612(a)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking 
 ``Federal programs'' and inserting ``Federal 
 program'';
 (ii) in subparagraph (D)--
 (I) by striking clause (ii); and
 (II) in clause (i)--
 (aa) by striking ``(i)
 SSI.--'' and all that follows 
 through ``paragraph (3)(A)'' 
 and inserting the following:
 ``(i) In general.--With respect to the 
 specified Federal program described in 
 paragraph (3)'';
 (bb) by redesignating 
 subclauses (II) through (IV) as 
 clauses (ii) through (iv) and 
 indenting appropriately;
 (cc) by striking 
 ``subclause (I)'' each place it 
 appears and inserting ``clause 
 (i)''; and
 (dd) in clause (iv) (as 
 redesignated by item (bb)), by 
 striking ``this clause'' and 
 inserting ``this 
 subparagraph'';
 (iii) in subparagraph (E), by striking 
 ``paragraph (3)(A) (relating to the 
 supplemental security income program)'' and 
 inserting ``paragraph (3)'';
 (iv) in subparagraph (F);
 (I) by striking ``Federal 
 programs'' and inserting ``Federal 
 program'';
 (II) in clause (ii)(I)--
 (aa) by striking ``(I) in 
 the case of the specified 
 Federal program described in 
 paragraph (3)(A),''; and
 (bb) by striking ``; and'' 
 and inserting a period; and
 (III) by striking subclause (II);
 (v) in subparagraph (G), by striking 
 ``Federal programs'' and inserting ``Federal 
 program'';
 (vi) in subparagraph (H), by striking 
 ``paragraph (3)(A) (relating to the 
 supplemental security income program)'' and 
 inserting ``paragraph (3)''; and
 (vii) by striking subparagraphs (I), (J), 
 and (K); and
 (B) in paragraph (3)--
 (i) by striking ``means any'' and all that 
 follows through ``The supplemental'' and 
 inserting ``means the supplemental''; and
 (ii) by striking subparagraph (B).
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Section 402(b)(2)(F) of the 
 Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act 
 of 1996 (8 U.S.C. 1612(b)(2)(F)) is amended by striking 
 ``subsection (a)(3)(A)'' and inserting ``subsection (a)(3)''.
 (b) Five-Year Limited Eligibility of Qualified Aliens for Federal 
Means-Tested Public Benefit.--Section 403 of the Personal 
Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (8 
U.S.C. 1613) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (c)(2), by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(L) Assistance or benefits under the Food Stamp 
 Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.).''; and
 (2) in subsection (d)--
 (A) by striking ``not apply'' and all that follows 
 through ``(1) an individual'' and inserting ``not apply 
 to an individual''; and
 (B) by striking ``; or'' and all that follows 
 through ``402(a)(3)(B)''.
 (c) Authority for States To Provide for Attribution of Sponsor's 
Income and Resources to the Qualified Alien With Respect to State 
Programs.--Section 422(b) of the Personal Responsibility and Work 
Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (8 U.S.C. 1632(b)) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(8) Programs comparable to assistance or benefits under 
 the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.).''.
 (d) Requirements for Sponsor's Affidavit of Support.--Section 
423(d) of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity 
Reconciliation Act of 1996 (8 U.S.C. 1183a note; Public Law 104-193) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(12) Benefits under the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 
 2011 et seq.), if a sponsor is unable to make the reimbursement 
 because the sponsor experiences hardship (including bankruptcy, 
 disability, and indigence) or if the sponsor experiences severe 
 circumstances beyond the control of the sponsor, as determined 
 by the Secretary of Agriculture.''.
 (e) Derivative Eligibility for Benefits.--Section 436 of the 
Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 
(8 U.S.C. 1646) is repealed.
 (f) Effective Date.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), this 
 section and the amendments made by this section take effect on 
 April 1, 2002.
 (2) Exceptions.--The amendments made by subsections (a) 
 through (d) shall--
 (A) not apply to a certification period that begins 
 not later than April 1, 2002, and ends not later than 
 October 1, 2002, unless the State agency (as defined in 
 section 3 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 
 2012)) elects to make such amendments applicable before 
 the ends of the period, but not before April 1, 2002; 
 and
 (B) apply on October 1, 2002 to a certification 
 period that begins not later than April 1, 2002, and 
 ends after October 1, 2002, unless the State agency 
 elects to make the amendments applicable to the 
 certification period on a date before October 1, 2002, 
 but not before April 1, 2002.

SEC. 6102. CONFORMING FOOD STAMP AND MEDICAID INCOME DEFINITIONS; 
 SIMPLIFIED INCOME CALCULATIONS.

 Section 5(d) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 2014(d)) is 
amended--
 (1) in paragraph (3)--
 (A) by striking ``and (C)'' and inserting ``(C)''; 
 and
 (B) by adding at the end the following: `` and (D) 
 to the extent that any other educational loans on which 
 payment is deferred, grants, scholarships, fellowships, 
 veterans' educational benefits, and the like are 
 excluded under Title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.).'';
 (2) by striking `` and (15)'' and inserting ``(15)''; and
 (3) by inserting before the period at the end the 
 following: ``(16) any State complementary assistance program 
 payments that are excluded under subsections (a) and (b) of 
 section 1931 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396u-
 1(a),(b)), and (17) at the option of the State agency, any type 
 of income that the State agency does not consider when 
 determining eligibility for cash assistance under a program 
 funded under part A of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) or medical assistance under section 1931 of 
 the Social Security Act (41 U.S.C. 1396u-1): Provided, That 
 this paragraph shall not authorize a State agency to exclude 
 earned income, benefits under titles II, IV, or XVI of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 401 et seq.), or other types of 
 income that the Secretary considers necessary for the equitable 
 determinations of eligibility and benefit levels''.

SEC. 6103. PREVENTION OF HUNGER AMONG FAMILIES WITH CHILDREN.

 (a) Standard Deduction.--Section 5(e) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 
(7 U.S.C. 2014(e)) is amended by striking paragraph (1) and inserting 
the following:
 ``(1) Standard deduction.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
 Secretary shall allow a standard deduction for each 
 household in the 48 contiguous States and the District 
 of Columbia, Alaska, Hawaii, Guam, and the Virgin 
 Islands of the United States that is equal to the 
 applicable percentage established under subparagraph 
 (C) of the income standard of eligibility under 
 subsection (c)(1).
 ``(B) Limitations.--The standard deduction for each 
 household in the 48 contiguous States and the District 
 of Columbia, Alaska, Hawaii, Guam, and the Virgin 
 Islands of the United States under subparagraph (A) 
 shall not be--
 ``(i) less than $134, $229, $189, $269, and 
 $118, respectively; or
 ``(ii) more than the applicable percentage 
 specified in subparagraph (C) of the income 
 standard of eligibility established under 
 section (c)(1) for a household of 6 members.
 ``(C) Applicable percentage.--The applicable 
 percentage referred to in subparagraphs (A) and (B) 
 shall be--
 ``(i) for fiscal year 2002, 8 percent;
 ``(ii) for fiscal year 2003, 8.5 percent;
 ``(iii) for fiscal year 2004, 9 percent;
 ``(iv) for fiscal year 2005, 9.5 percent; 
 and
 ``(v) for fiscal year 2006 and each 
 subsequent fiscal year, 10 percent.''.
 (b) Application Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply on the later of--
 (1) July 1, 2002; or
 (2) at the option of a State agency of a State (as those 
 terms are defined in section 3 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 
 U.S.C. 2012)), October 1, 2002.

SEC. 6104. ENCOURAGEMENT OF COLLECTION OF CHILD SUPPORT.

 (a) In General.--Section 5(e)(2) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 
U.S.C. 2014(e)(2)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``and child support'' after ``income'';
 (2) in subparagraph (A)--
 (A) by striking ``Definition of'' and all that 
 follows through ``not include'' and inserting the 
 following: ``Limitation on deduction.--A deduction 
 under this paragraph shall not apply to'';
 (B) in clause (i), by striking ``or'';
 (C) in clause (ii), by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting ``; or''; and
 (D) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(iii) child support received to the 
 extent of any reduction in public assistance to 
 the household as a result of receiving the 
 support.''; and
 (3) in subparagraph (B)--
 (A) by striking ``with earned income''; and
 (B) by striking ``to compensate'' and all that 
 follows through the period and inserting the following: 
 ``and child support received from an identified or 
 putative parent of a child in the household if that 
 parent is not a household member.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section take 
effect on--
 (1) July 1, 2002; or
 (2) at the option of a State agency of a State (as those 
 terms are defined in section 3 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 
 U.S.C. 2012)), October 1, 2002.

SEC. 6105. ELIMINATION OF EXCESS SHELTER EXPENSE DEDUCTION CAP FOR 
 FAMILIES WITH HIGH SHELTER COSTS.

 Section 5(e)(7) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 2014(e)(7)) 
is amended--
 (1) by striking subparagraph (B); and
 (2) by redesignating subparagraph (C) as subparagraph (B).

SEC. 6106. PERIODIC REDETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY.

 (a) In General.--Section 11(e) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 
U.S.C. 2020(e)) is amended by striking paragraph (4) and inserting the 
following:
 ``(4)(A) that the State agency shall periodically require 
 the household to cooperate in a redetermination of eligibility 
 under procedures consistent with paragraph (2); and
 ``(B) that, in carrying out subparagraph (A), a State 
 agency--
 ``(i) shall require a redetermination of 
 eligibility at least once--
 ``(I) every 12 months; or
 ``(II) every 24 months, if--
 ``(aa) the State agency has contact 
 with the household at least once every 
 12 months; and
 ``(bb) all adult household members 
 are elderly or disabled;
 ``(ii) except as provided in clause (iii), shall 
 continue to provide benefits to households during the 
 redetermination process; and
 ``(iii) shall not provide further allotments to any 
 household that the State agency determines has refused 
 to cooperate in the redetermination of eligibility;''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments--
 (1) Section 3 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 2012) 
 is amended by striking subsection (c).
 (2) Section 5 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 2014) 
 is amended--
 (A) in subsection (d)(2), by striking ``in the 
 certification period''; and
 (B) in subsection (e)--
 (i) in paragraph (6)(B)(ii)(III), by 
 striking ``has been anticipated for the 
 certification period'' and inserting ``was 
 anticipated when the household applied for 
 benefits or at the most recent redetermination 
 of eligibility''; and
 (ii) in paragraph (7)(C)(iii)(II), by 
 striking ``the end of a certification period'' 
 and inserting ``each redetermination of 
 eligibility''.
 (3) Section 6(c)(1)(C)(iv) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 
 U.S.C.2015(c)(1)(C)(iv)) is amended by striking ``certification 
 period'' each place it appears and inserting ``interval between 
 required redeterminations of eligibility''.
 (4) Section 8(c) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 
 2017) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``within a 
 certification period''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``expiration of'' 
 and all that follows through ``certification period,'' 
 and inserting ``termination of benefits to a 
 household,''.
 (5) Section 11(e) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 
 2020(e) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (10)--
 (i) by striking ``within the household's 
 certification period''; and
 (ii) by striking ``until such time'' and 
 all that follows through ``occurs earlier''; 
 and
 (B) in paragraph (16), by striking 
 ``recertification'' and inserting ``redetermination of 
 the eligibility of''.

SEC. 6107. TRANSITIONAL BENEFITS OPTION.

 (a) In General.--Section 11 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 
2020) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(s) Transitional Benefits Option.--
 ``(1) In general.--A State may provide transitional food 
 stamp benefits to a household that is no longer eligible to 
 receive cash assistance under a State program funded under part 
 A of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 601 et 
 seq.).
 ``(2) Transitional benefits period.--Under paragraph (1), a 
 household may continue to receive food stamp benefits for a 
 period of not more than 6 months after the date on which cash 
 assistance is terminated.
 ``(3) Amount.--During the transitional benefits period 
 under paragraph (2), a household shall receive an amount equal 
 to the allotment received in the month immediately preceding 
 the date on which cash assistance is terminated, adjusted for--
 ``(A) the change in household income as a result of 
 the termination of cash assistance; and
 ``(B) any changes in circumstances that may result 
 in an increase in the food stamp allotment of the 
 household and that the household elects to report (as 
 verified in accordance with standards established by 
 the Secretary).
 ``(4) Determination of future eligibility.--In the final 
 month of the transitional benefits period under paragraph (2), 
 the State agency may--
 ``(A) require a household to cooperate in a 
 redetermination of eligibility to receive uninterrupted 
 benefits after the transitional benefits period; and
 ``(B) renew eligibility for a new certification 
 period for the household without regard to whether the 
 previous certification period has expired.
 ``(5) Limitation.--A household sanctioned under section 6 
 shall not be eligible for transitional benefits under this 
 subsection.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 11(e)(4)(B) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 
 U.S.C. 2020(e)(4)(B)) (as amended by section 6106(a)) is 
 amended--
 (A) in clause (ii), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (B) in clause (iii), by inserting ``and'' after the 
 semicolon; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(iv) may extend the intervals under 
 clause (i) to the end of a transitional 
 benefits period established by a State under 
 section 11(s);''.
 (2) Section 6(c) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 
 2015(c)) is amended by striking ``No household'' and inserting 
 ``Except in a case in which a household is receiving 
 transitional benefits during the transitional benefits period 
 under subsection (s), no household''.

SEC. 6108. IMPROVING STATE INCENTIVES TO SERVE WORKING FAMILIES.

 (a) Targeted Quality Control System.--Section 16(c) of the Food 
Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 2025(c)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) by striking subparagraph (C) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(C) except as provided in subparagraph (D), for 
 any fiscal year in which the Secretary determines that 
 a 95-percent statistical probability exists that the 
 payment error rate of a State agency exceeds the 
 national performance measure for payment error rates 
 under paragraph (6) by more than 1 percentage point, 
 other than for good cause shown, the State agency shall 
 pay to the Secretary an amount, to be determined by the 
 Secretary based on an investigation and finding that 
 the State administration of the program under this Act 
 was seriously negligent, that reflects the extent of 
 negligence, not to exceed 5 percent of the amount 
 provided the State agency under subsection (a); and''; 
 and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(D) if, in any 3 consecutive fiscal years, the 
 Secretary determines that a 95-percent statistical 
 probability exists that the payment error rate of a 
 State agency exceeds the national performance measure 
 for payment error rates under paragraph (6) by more 
 than 1 percentage point, other than for good cause 
 shown, the agency shall pay to the Secretary an amount 
 equal to the product of--
 ``(i) the value of all allotments issued by 
 the State agency in the fiscal year; times
 ``(ii) the lesser of--
 ``(I) the ratio of--
 ``(aa) the amount by which 
 the payment error rate of the 
 State agency for the fiscal 
 year exceeds by more than 1 
 percentage point the national 
 performance measure for the 
 fiscal year; bears to
 ``(bb) 10 percent, or
 ``(II) 1; times
 ``(iii) the amount by which the payment 
 error rate of the State agency for the fiscal 
 year exceeds by more than 1 percentage point 
 the national performance measure for the fiscal 
 year.'';
 (2) in paragraph (2)(A), by inserting before the semicolon 
 the following: ``, as adjusted downward to eliminate any 
increases that may result from the State agency serving a higher 
percentage of households--
 ``(i) with earned income than--
 ``(I) the State agency served in fiscal 
 year 1992; or
 ``(II) the national average for the current 
 year; and
 ``(ii) containing 1 or more members who are not 
 United States citizens than--
 ``(I) the State agency served in fiscal 
 year 1998; or
 ``(II) the national average for the current 
 year'';
 (3) in paragraph (4), by striking the first sentence and 
 inserting the following: ``The Secretary may require a State 
 agency to report any factors that the Secretary considers 
 necessary to determine a State agency's payment error rate, 
 enhanced administrative funding, claim for payment error, or 
 performance under the measures under paragraph (10).'';
 (4) in paragraph (5), by striking the first sentence and 
 inserting the following: ``To facilitate the implementation of 
 this subsection each State agency shall expeditiously submit to 
 the Secretary data regarding its operations in each fiscal year 
 sufficient for the Secretary to comply with paragraph (10) and 
 to establish the payment error rate for the State agency for 
 such fiscal year and determine the amount of either incentive 
 payments under paragraph (1)(A) or claims under subparagraph 
 (C) or (D) of paragraph (1).''; and
 (5) by inserting at the end the following:
 ``(10)(A) Additional performance measures.--In addition to 
 the performance measures under paragraph (1), the Secretary 
 shall measure--
 ``(i) compliance with the deadlines under 
 paragraphs (3) and (9) of section 11(e);
 ``(ii) the percentage of negative eligibility 
 decisions that are made in error; and
 ``(iii) the number of households that have--
 ``(I) incomes less than 130 percent of the 
 poverty rate;
 ``(II) annual earnings equal to at least 
 1000 times the Federal minimum hourly rate 
 under the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 
 U.S.C. 201 et seq.); and
 ``(III) children under age 18;
 that receive food stamps in the State as a percentage 
 of the number of the low-income working households with 
 children in the State.
 ``(B) Bonus payments.--For each fiscal year, with respect 
 to each of the performance measures in subparagraph (A), the 
 Secretary shall make excellence bonus payments of $1,000,000 
 to--
 ``(i) each of the 5 States with the highest 
 performance; and
 ``(ii) each of the 5 States with the performance 
 that has most improved during the fiscal year.
 ``(C) Investigation.--
 ``(1) In general.--For any fiscal year in which the 
 Secretary determines that a 95-percent statistical 
 probability exists that the performance of a State 
 agency with respect to any of the performance measures 
 in subparagraph (A) is substantially worse than a level 
 the Secretary determines reasonable, the Secretary 
 shall investigate the State agency.
 ``(2) Corrective action.--If the Secretary 
 determines that the administration by the State agency 
 has been deficient, the Secretary shall require the 
 State agency to take prompt corrective action.''.
 (b) Application Date.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 amendments made by this section shall apply to all fiscal years 
 beginning on or after October 1, 1999.
 (2) Additional performance measures.--The amendments made 
 by subsection (a)(5) shall apply to all fiscal years beginning 
 on or after October 1, 2001.

SEC. 6109. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR ADDITIONAL COMMODITIES 
 UNDER EMERGENCY FOOD ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.

 Section 214 of the Emergency Food Assistance Act of 1983 (7 U.S.C. 
7515) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--
 ``(1) In general.--In addition to any other funds that are 
 made available to carry out this section, there are authorized 
 to be appropriated to purchase and make available additional 
 commodities under this section $20,000,000 for each of fiscal 
 years 2002 through 2006.
 ``(2) Direct expenses.--Not less than 50 percent of the 
 amount made available under paragraph (1) shall be used to pay 
 direct expenses (as defined in section 204(a)(2)) incurred by 
 emergency feeding organizations to distribute additional 
 commodities to needy persons.''.

 TITLE VII--FAIR START HOUSING

 Subtitle A--Section 8 Vouchers

SEC. 7001. RENTAL ASSISTANCE VOUCHER PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development 
(referred to in this subtitle as the ``Secretary'') shall provide 
1,000,000 incremental housing vouchers for rental assistance under 
section 8(o) of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 
1437f(o)) during the 10 year period following the date of enactment of 
this Act.
 (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as necessary to carry out this section.

SEC. 7002. VOUCHER SUCCESS FUND.

 (a) Voucher Success Fund.--
 (1) Establishment.--There is established the Voucher 
 Success Fund (referred to in this section as the ``Fund'').
 (2) Purposes.--The purposes of the Fund are--
 (A) to address barriers that individuals encounter 
 in successfully utilizing voucher rental assistance 
 provided under section 8(o) of the United States 
 Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f(o)); and
 (B) to help improve the operation of that voucher 
 rental assistance program.
 (3) Uses of assistance.--The Secretary shall provide 
 assistance from the Fund to States on a competitive basis, 
 which assistance shall be used--
 (A) by communities that are determined by an 
 appropriate State agency of the State to be 
 experiencing problems in utilizing voucher rental 
 assistance provided under section 8(o) of the United 
 States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f(o)), 
 including--
 (i) difficult market conditions;
 (i) low rates of success for families 
 attempting to use voucher rental assistance 
 provided under that section;
 (iii) concentrations of assisted families 
 in high poverty neighborhoods; and
 (iv) other program difficulties; and
 (B) for activities that include--
 (i) technical assistance to local public 
 housing authorities or communities to improve 
 the success of the voucher rental assistance 
 program under section 8(o) of the United States 
 Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 1437f(o));
 (ii) assistance for families in using that 
 assistance, including mobility counseling, 
 assistance with security deposits, 
 transportation, and other activities intended 
 to increase the likelihood that families will 
 succeed in leasing units or leasing units 
 outside of areas of concentrated poverty; and
 (iii) outreach to landlords and community 
 groups to encourage participation in that 
 voucher rental assistance program.
 (4) Monitoring systems.--The Secretary may use not more 
 than 1 percent of any amount made available to the Fund under 
 this section to establish monitoring systems for the Fund.
 (5) Report.--Not later than 12 months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall--
 (A) conduct a detailed evaluation of the effect of 
 providing assistance under this section; and
 (B) submit a report to Congress regarding the 
 evaluation conducted under subparagraph (A).
 (6) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to the Fund, $50,000,000 for each of fiscal 
 years 2002 through 2011 to carry out the provisions of this 
 section.

 Subtitle B--National Affordable Housing Trust Fund

SEC. 7101. PURPOSES.

 The purposes of this subtitle are--
 (1) to fill the growing gap in the national ability to 
 build affordable housing by using profits generated by Federal 
 housing programs to fund additional housing activities, and not 
 supplant existing housing appropriations;
 (2) to enable rental housing to be built for those families 
 with the greatest need in areas with the greatest opportunities 
 in mixed-income settings; and
 (3) to promote homeownership for low-income families.

SEC. 7102. NATIONAL AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND.

 (a) Establishment of Trust Fund.--There is established in the 
Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the 
``National Affordable Housing Trust Fund'' (referred to in this 
subtitle as the ``Trust Fund'') for the purpose of promoting the 
development of affordable housing.
 (b) Deposits to the Trust Fund.--For fiscal year 2002 and each 
fiscal year thereafter, there is authorized to be appropriated to the 
Trust Fund an amount equal to the sum of--
 (1) any revenue generated by the Mutual Mortgage Insurance 
 Fund of the Federal Housing Administration in excess of the 
 amount necessary for the Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund to 
 maintain a capital ratio of 3 percent for the preceding fiscal 
 year; and
 (2) any revenue generated by the Government National 
 Mortgage Association in excess of the amount necessary to pay 
 the administrative costs and expenses necessary to ensure the 
 safety and soundness of the Government National Mortgage 
 Association for the preceding fiscal year, as determined by the 
 Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
 (c) Expenditures From the Trust Fund.--For fiscal year 2002 and 
each fiscal year thereafter, amounts appropriated to the Trust Fund 
shall be available to the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development 
for use in accordance with section 7103.

SEC. 7103. ADMINISTRATION OF NATIONAL AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Affordable housing.--The term ``affordable housing'' 
 means housing for rental that bears rents not greater than the 
 lesser of--
 (A) the existing fair market rent for comparable 
 units in the area, as established by the Secretary 
 under section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 
 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f); or
 (B) a rent that does not exceed 30 percent of the 
 adjusted income of a family whose income equals 65 
 percent of the median income for the area, as 
 determined by the Secretary, with an adjustment for the 
 number of bedrooms in the unit, except that the 
 Secretary may establish income ceilings that are higher 
 or lower than 65 percent of the median for the area if 
 the Secretary finds that such variations are necessary 
 because of prevailing levels of construction costs or 
 fair market rents, or unusually high or low family 
 incomes.
 (2) Continued assistance rental subsidy program.--The term 
 ``continued assistance rental subsidy program'' means a program 
 under which--
 (A) project-based assistance is provided, for not 
 more than 3 years, to a family in an affordable housing 
 unit developed with assistance made available under 
 subsection (c) or (d) in a project that partners with a 
 public housing agency, which agency agrees--
 (i) to provide the assisted family with a 
 priority for the receipt of a voucher under 
 section 8(o) of the United States Housing Act 
 of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f(o)) if the family 
 chooses to move after the initial year of 
 occupancy; and
 (ii) to refer eligible voucher holders to 
 the property when a vacancy occurs; and
 (B) after 3 years, subject to appropriations, 
 continued assistance is provided under section 8(o) of 
 the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 
 1437f(o)), notwithstanding any provision to the 
 contrary in that section, if--
 (i) the program is administered to provide 
 families with the option of continued 
 assistance with tenant-based vouchers if such a 
 family chooses to move after the initial year 
 of occupancy; and
 (ii) the public housing agency agrees to 
 refer eligible voucher holders to the property 
 when a vacancy occurs.
 (3) Eligible activity.--The term ``eligible activity'' 
 means an activity that relates to the development of affordable 
 housing, including--
 (A) the construction of new housing;
 (B) the acquisition of real property;
 (C) site preparation and improvement, including 
 demolition;
 (D) substantial rehabilitation of existing housing; 
 and
 (E) rental subsidy for not more than 3 years under 
 a continued assistance rental subsidy program.
 (4) Eligible entity.--The term ``eligible entity'' includes 
 any public or private nonprofit or for-profit entity, unit of 
 local government, regional planning entity, and any other 
 entity engaged in the development of affordable housing, as 
 determined by the Secretary.
 (5) Eligible intermediary.--The term ``eligible 
 intermediary'' means--
 (A) a nonprofit community development corporation;
 (B) a community development financial institution 
 (as defined in section 103 of the Community Development 
 Banking and Financial Institutions Act of 1994 (12 
 U.S.C. 4702));
 (C) a State or local trust fund;
 (D) any entity eligible for assistance under 
 section 4 of the HUD Demonstration Act of 1993 (42 
 U.S.C. 9816 note);
 (E) a national, regional, or statewide nonprofit 
 organization; and
 (F) any other appropriate nonprofit entity, as 
 determined by the Secretary.
 (6) Extremely low-income families.--The term ``extremely 
 low-income families'' means very low-income families (as 
 defined in section 3(b) of the United States Housing Act of 
 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437a(b)) whose incomes do not exceed 30 
 percent of the median family income for the area, as determined 
 by the Secretary with adjustments for smaller and larger 
 families, except that the Secretary may establish income 
 ceilings that are higher or lower than 30 percent of the median 
 for the area if the Secretary finds that such variations are 
 necessary because of unusually high or low family incomes.
 (7) Low-income families.--The term ``low-income families'' 
 has the same meaning as in section 3(b) of the United States 
 Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437a(b)).
 (8) Non-federal sources.--Non-Federal sources include--
 (A) 50 percent of funds allocable to tax credits 
 allocated under section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code 
 of 1986;
 (B) 50 percent of revenue from mortgage revenue 
 bonds issued under section 143 of that Code; and
 (C) 50 percent of proceeds from the sale of tax 
 exempt bonds.
 (9) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Housing and Urban Development.
 (10) State.--The term ``State'' has the same meaning as in 
 section 3(b) of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 
 U.S.C. 1437a(b)).
 (b) Allocation to States and Eligible Intermediaries.--For fiscal 
year 2002 and each fiscal year thereafter, of the total amount made 
available to the Secretary from the Trust Fund under section 7102(c)--
 (1) 75 percent shall be used by the Secretary to award 
 grants to States in accordance with subsection (c); and
 (2) 25 percent shall be used by the Secretary to award 
 grants to eligible intermediaries in accordance with subsection 
 (d).
 (c) Grants to States.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), from the amount 
 made available for each fiscal year under subsection (b)(1), 
 the Secretary shall award grants to States, in accordance with 
 an allocation formula established by the Secretary, based on 
 the pro rata share of each State of the total need among all 
 States for an increased supply of affordable housing, as 
 determined on the basis of--
 (A) the number and percentage of families in the 
 State that live in substandard housing;
 (B) the number and percentage of families in the 
 State that pay more than 50 percent of their annual 
 income for housing costs;
 (C) the number and percentage of persons living at 
 or below the poverty level in the State;
 (D) the cost of developing or carrying out 
 substantial rehabilitation of housing in the State;
 (E) the age of the multifamily housing stock in the 
 State; and
 (F) such other factors as the Secretary determines 
 to be appropriate.
 (2) Grant amount.--The amount of a grant award to a State 
 under this subsection shall be equal to the lesser of--
 (A) 4 times the amount of assistance provided by 
 the State from non-Federal sources; and
 (B) the allocation determined in accordance with 
 paragraph (1).
 (3) Award of state allocation to certain entities.--
 (A) In general.--If the amount provided by a State 
 from non-Federal sources is less than 25 percent of the 
 amount that would be awarded to the State under this 
 subsection based on the allocation formula described in 
 paragraph (1), then not later than 60 days after the 
 date on which the Secretary determines that the State 
 is not eligible for the full allocation determined 
 under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall publish a 
 notice regarding the availability of the funds for 
 which the State is ineligible.
 (B) Applications.--Not later than 9 months after 
 the date of publication of a notice of funding 
 availability under subparagraph (A), a nonprofit or 
 public entity (or a consortium thereof, which may 
 include units of local government working together on a 
 regional basis) may submit to the Secretary an 
 application for the available assistance or a portion 
 of the available assistance, which application shall 
 include--
 (i) a certification that the applicant will 
 provide assistance in an amount equal to 25 
 percent of the amount of assistance made 
 available to the applicant under this 
 paragraph; and
 (ii) an allocation plan that meets the 
 requirements of paragraph (4)(B) for use or 
 distribution in the State of any assistance 
 made available to the applicant under this 
 paragraph and the assistance provided by the 
 applicant for purposes of clause (i).
 (C) Award of assistance.--The Secretary shall award 
 the amount that is not awarded to a State by operation 
 of paragraph (2) to 1 or more applicants that meet the 
 requirements of subparagraph (B) of this paragraph that 
 are selected by the Secretary based on selection 
 criteria, established by regulation of the Secretary.
 (4) Distribution to eligible entities.--
 (A) In general.--Of the amount that a State 
 receives under a grant award under this subsection and 
 the assistance provided by the State from non-Federal 
 sources for purposes of paragraph (2)(A) to eligible 
 entities for the purpose of assisting those entities in 
 carrying out eligible activities in the State, the 
 State shall distribute--
 (i) 75 percent to eligible entities for 
 eligible activities relating to the development 
 of affordable housing for rental by extremely 
 low-income families in the State; and
 (ii) 25 percent to eligible entities for 
 eligible activities relating to the development 
 of affordable housing for rental by low-income 
 families in the State, or for homeownership 
 assistance for low-income families in the 
 State.
 (B) Allocation plan.--Each State shall, after 
 giving notice to the public, an opportunity for public 
 comment, and consideration of public comments received, 
 establish an allocation plan for the distribution of 
 assistance under this paragraph, which plan shall be 
 submitted to the Secretary and shall be made available 
 to the public by the State, and which shall include--
 (i) application requirements for eligible 
 entities seeking to receive assistance under 
 this paragraph, including a requirement that 
 each application include--
 (I) a certification by the 
 applicant that any housing developed 
 with assistance under this paragraph 
 will remain affordable for extremely 
 low-income families or low-income 
 families, as applicable, for not less 
 than 40 years;
 (II) a certification by the 
 applicant that the tenant contribution 
 towards rent for a family that resides 
 in a unit developed with assistance 
 under this paragraph will not exceed 30 
 percent of the adjusted income of that 
 family; and
 (III) a certification by the 
 applicant that the owner of a project 
 in which any housing developed with 
 assistance under this paragraph is 
 located will make a percentage of units 
 in the project available to families 
 assisted under the voucher program 
 under section 8(o) of the United States 
 Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 
 1437f(o)) on the same basis as other 
 families eligible for the housing 
 (except that only the expected share of 
 rent of the voucher holder shall be 
 considered), which percentage shall not 
 be less than the percentage of the 
 total cost of developing or 
 rehabilitating the project that is 
 funded with assistance under this 
 paragraph; and
 (ii) factors for consideration in selecting 
 among applicants that meet the application 
 requirements under clause (i), which factors 
 shall give preference to applicants based on--
 (I) the amount of assistance for 
 the eligible activities leveraged by 
 the applicant from private and other 
 non-Federal sources, including 
 assistance made available under section 
 8 of the United States Housing Act of 
 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f) that is devoted 
 to the project in which the housing to 
 be developed with assistance under this 
 paragraph is located;
 (II) the extent of local assistance 
 that will be provided in carrying out 
 the eligible activities, including--
 (aa) financial assistance; 
 and
 (bb) the extent to which 
 the applicant has worked with 
 the unit of local government in 
 which the housing will be 
 located to address issues of 
 siting and exclusionary zoning 
 or other policies that are 
 barriers to affordable housing;
 (III) the degree to which the 
 development in which the housing will 
 be located is mixed-income;
 (IV) whether the housing will be 
 located in a census tract in which the 
 poverty rate is less than 20 percent;
 (V) whether the housing will be 
 located in a community undergoing 
 revitalization;
 (VI) the extent of employment and 
 other opportunities for low-income 
 families in the area in which the 
 housing will be located; and
 (VII) the extent to which the 
 applicant demonstrates the ability to 
 maintain units as affordable for 
 extremely low-income or low-income 
 families, as applicable, through the 
 use of assistance made available under 
 this paragraph, assistance leveraged 
 from non-Federal sources, assistance 
 made available under section 8 of the 
 United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 
 U.S.C. 1437f), State or local 
 assistance, programs to increase tenant 
 income, cross-subsidization, and any 
 other resources.
 (C) Forms of assistance.--
 (i) In general.--Assistance distributed 
 under this paragraph may be in the form of 
 capital grants, non-interest bearing or low-
 interest loans or advances, deferred payment 
 loans, guarantees, and any other forms of 
 assistance approved by the Secretary.
 (ii) Repayments.--If a State awards 
 assistance under this paragraph in the form of 
 a loan or other mechanism by which funds are 
 later repaid to the State, any repayments 
 received by the State shall be distributed by 
 the State in accordance with the allocation 
 plan described in subparagraph (B) during the 
 following fiscal year.
 (D) Coordination with other assistance.--In 
 distributing assistance under this paragraph, each 
 State shall, to the maximum extent practicable, 
 coordinate the distribution with the provision of other 
 affordable housing assistance by the State, including--
 (i) housing credit dollar amounts allocated 
 by the State under section 42(h) of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986;
 (ii) assistance made available under the 
 HOME Investment Partnerships Act (42 U.S.C. 
 12721 et seq.) or the community development 
 block grant program; and
 (iii) private activity bonds.
 (d) National Competition.--
 (1) In general.--From the amount made available for each 
 fiscal year under subsection (b)(2), the Secretary shall award 
 grants on a competitive basis to eligible intermediaries, which 
 grants shall be used in accordance with paragraph (3) of this 
 subsection.
 (2) Application requirements and selection criteria.--The 
 Secretary, by regulation, shall establish application 
 requirements and selection criteria for the award of 
 competitive grants to eligible intermediaries under this 
 subsection, which criteria shall include--
 (A) the ability of the eligible intermediary to 
 meet housing needs of low-income families on a national 
 or regional scope;
 (B) the capacity of the eligible intermediary to 
 use the grant award in accordance with paragraph (3), 
 based on the past performance and management of the 
 applicant; and
 (C) the extent to which the eligible intermediary 
 has leveraged funding from private and other non-
 Federal sources for the eligible activities.
 (3) Use of grant award.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B), of the amount of a grant made available under this 
 subsection, an eligible intermediary shall ensure 
 that--
 (i) 75 percent shall be used for eligible 
 activities relating to the development of 
 affordable housing for rental by extremely low-
 income families; and
 (ii) 25 percent shall be used for eligible 
 activities relating to the development of 
 affordable housing for rental by low-income 
 families, or for homeownership assistance for 
 low-income families.
 (B) Exception.--
 (i) In general.--If a grant made available 
 under this subsection is used for a project 
 described in clause (ii), an eligible 
 intermediary may use that amount for eligible 
 activities relating to the development of 
 housing for rental by families whose incomes 
 are less than 60 percent of the area median 
 income, and for homeownership activities for 
 families whose incomes are less than 80 percent 
 of area median income.
 (ii) Project contributing to a concerted 
 community revitalization plan.--A project is 
 described in this clause if--
 (I) it is located in a community 
 undergoing concerted revitalization and 
 is contributing to a community 
 revitalization plan; and
 (II) it is located in a census 
 tract in which--
 (aa) the median household 
 income is less than 60 percent 
 of the area median income; or
 (bb) the rate of poverty is 
 greater than 20 percent.
 (C) Plan of use.--Each eligible intermediary that 
 receives a grant under this subsection shall establish 
 a plan for the use or distribution of the amount made 
 available under the grant, which plan shall be 
 submitted to the Secretary and shall include 
 information relating to the manner in which the 
 eligible intermediary will either use or distribute 
 that amount, including--
 (i) a certification that assistance under 
 this subsection will be used to supplement 
 assistance leveraged from private and other 
 non-Federal sources, including assistance made 
 available under section 8 of the United States 
 Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f) that is 
 devoted to the project in which the housing to 
 be developed is located;
 (ii) a certification that local assistance 
 will be provided in carrying out the eligible 
 activities, which may include--
 (I) financial assistance; and
 (II) a good faith effort to work 
 with the unit of local government in 
 which the housing will be located to 
 address issues of siting and 
 exclusionary zoning or other policies 
 that are barriers to affordable 
 housing;
 (iii) a certification that any housing 
 developed with assistance under this subsection 
 will remain affordable for extremely low-income 
 families or low-income families, as applicable, 
 for not less than 40 years;
 (iv) a certification that any housing 
 developed by the applicant with assistance 
 under this subsection will be located--
 (I) in a mixed-income development 
 in a census tract having a poverty rate 
 of not more than 20 percent, and near 
 employment and other opportunities for 
 low-income families; or
 (II) in a community undergoing 
 revitalization;
 (v) a certification that the tenant 
 contribution toward rent for a family residing 
 in a unit developed with assistance under this 
 paragraph will not exceed 30 percent of the 
 adjusted income of that family; and
 (vi) a certification by the applicant that 
 the owner of a project in which any housing 
 developed with assistance under this subsection 
 is located will make a percentage of units in 
 the project available to families assisted 
 under the voucher program under section 8(o) of 
 the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 
 U.S.C. 1437f(o)) on the same basis as other 
 families eligible for the housing (except that 
 only the expected share of rent of the voucher 
 holder shall be considered), which percentage 
 shall not be less than the percentage of the 
 total cost of developing or rehabilitating the 
 project that is funded with assistance under 
 this subsection.
 (D) Forms of assistance.--
 (i) In general.--An eligible intermediary 
 may distribute the amount made available under 
 a grant under this subsection in the form of 
 capital grants, non-interest bearing or low-
 interest loans or advances, deferred payment 
 loans, guarantees, and other forms of 
 assistance.
 (ii) Repayments.--If an eligible 
 intermediary awards assistance under this 
 subsection in the form of a loan or other 
 mechanism by which funds are later repaid to 
 the eligible intermediary, any repayments 
 received by the eligible intermediary shall be 
 distributed by the eligible intermediary in 
 accordance with the plan of use described in 
 subparagraph (C) during the following fiscal 
 year.

SEC. 7104. REGULATIONS.

 Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall promulgate 
regulations to carry out this subtitle.

 Subtitle C--Housing Preservation Matching Grants

SEC. 7201. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Housing Preservation Matching 
Grant Act of 2001''.

SEC. 7202. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds that--
 (1) more than 55,300 affordable housing dwelling units in 
 the United States have been lost through termination of low 
 income affordability requirements, which usually involves the 
 prepayment of the outstanding principal balance under the 
 mortgage on the project in which such units are located;
 (2) more than 265,000 affordable housing dwelling units in 
 the United States are at risk of prepayment;
 (3) the loss of the privately owned, federally assisted 
 affordable housing, which is occurring during a period when 
 rents for unassisted housing are increasing and few units of 
 additional affordable housing are being developed, will cause 
 unacceptable harm on current tenants of affordable housing and 
 will precipitate a national crisis in the supply of housing for 
 low-income households;
 (4) the demand for affordable housing far exceeds the 
 supply of affordable housing, as evidenced by studies in 1998 
 that found that--
 (A) 5,300,000 households (one-seventh of all 
 renters in the Nation) have worst-case housing needs; 
 and
 (B) the number of families with at least one full-
 time worker and having worst-case housing needs 
 increased from 1991 to 1995 by 265,000 to almost 
 1,400,000 (a 24 percent increase);
 (5) the shortage of affordable housing in the United States 
 reached a record high in 1995, when the number of low-income 
 households exceeded the number of low-cost rental dwelling 
 units by 4,400,000;
 (6) between 1990 and 1995, the shortage of affordable 
 housing in the United States increased by 1,000,000 dwelling 
 units, as the supply of low-cost units decreased by 100,000 and 
 the number of low-income renter households increased by 
 900,000;
 (7) there are nearly 2 low-income renters in the United 
 States for every low-cost rental dwelling unit;
 (8) 2 of every 3 low-income renters receive no housing 
 assistance, and approximately 2,000,000 low-income households 
 remain on waiting lists for affordable housing;
 (9) the shortage of affordable housing dwelling units 
 results in low-income households that are not able to acquire 
 low-cost rental units paying large proportions of their incomes 
 for rent; and
 (10) in 1995, 82 percent of low-income renter households 
 were paying more than 30 percent of their incomes for rent and 
 utilities.
 (b) Purposes.--The purposes of this subtitle are--
 (1) to promote the preservation of affordable housing units 
 by providing matching grants to States that have developed and 
 funded programs for the preservation of privately owned housing 
 that is affordable to low-income families and persons and was 
 produced for such purpose with Federal assistance;
 (2) to minimize the involuntary displacement of tenants who 
 are currently residing in such housing, many of whom are 
 elderly or disabled persons; and
 (3) to continue the partnerships among the Federal 
 Government, State and local governments, and the private sector 
 in operating and assisting housing that is affordable to low-
 income Americans.

SEC. 7203. DEFINITIONS.

 For purposes of this subtitle, the following definitions shall 
apply:
 (1) Low-income affordability restriction.--The term ``low-
 income affordability restriction'' means, with respect to a 
 housing project, any limitation imposed by regulation or 
 regulatory agreement on rents for tenants of the project, rent 
 contributions for tenants of the project, or income-eligibility 
 for occupancy in the project.
 (2) Project-based assistance.--The term ``project-based 
 assistance'' has the same meaning as in section 16(c) of the 
 United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437n(c)), except 
 that the term includes assistance under any successor program 
 to any program referred to in that section.
 (3) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Housing and Urban Development.
 (4) State.--The term ``State'' means each of the several 
 States of the United States, the District of Columbia, the 
 Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern 
 Mariana Islands, Guam, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, and 
 any other territory or possession of the United States.

SEC. 7204. AUTHORITY.

 The Secretary shall, to the extent that amounts are made available 
pursuant to section 7211, make grants under this subtitle to States for 
low-income housing preservation.

SEC. 7205. APPLICATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Each State that seeks a grant under this subtitle 
shall submit an application to the Secretary (through an appropriate 
State agency) at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such 
information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
 (b) Contents.--Each application submitted pursuant to subsection 
(a) shall contain any information and certifications necessary for the 
Secretary to determine whether the State is eligible to receive a grant 
under this subtitle.

SEC. 7206. USE OF GRANTS.

 (a) In General.--Amounts from grants made under this subtitle may 
be used by States only for assistance for acquisition, preservation 
incentives, operating costs, and capital expenditures for a housing 
project that meets the requirements of subsection (b), (c), or (d).
 (b) Projects With HUD-Insured Mortgages.--A project meets the 
requirements of this subsection only if--
 (1) the project is financed by a loan or mortgage that is--
 (A) insured or held by the Secretary under section 
 221(d)(3) of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 
 1715l(d)(3)) and the project is receiving loan 
 management assistance under section 8 of the United 
 States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f) due to a 
 conversion from section 101 of the Housing and Urban 
 Development Act of 1965 (12 U.S.C. 1701s);
 (B) insured or held by the Secretary and bears 
 interest at a rate determined under the proviso of 
 section 221(d)(5) of the National Housing Act (12 
 U.S.C. 1715l(d)(5));
 (C) insured, assisted, or held by the Secretary or 
 a State or State agency under section 236 of the 
 National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1715z-1); or
 (D) held by the Secretary and formerly insured 
 under a program referred to in subparagraph (A), (B), 
 or (C);
 (2) with respect to the mortgage referred to in paragraph 
 (1), the project is subject to an unconditional waiver of--
 (A) all rights to any prepayment of the mortgage; 
 and
 (B) all rights to any voluntary termination of the 
 mortgage insurance contract for the mortgage; and
 (3) the owner of the project has entered into binding 
 commitments (applicable to any subsequent owner) to extend all 
 low-income affordability restrictions for the project, 
 including any such restrictions imposed because of any contract 
 for project-based assistance for the project.
 (c) Projects With Section 8 Project-Based Assistance.--A project 
meets the requirements of this subsection only if--
 (1) the project is subject to a contract for project-based 
 assistance; and
 (2) the owner of the project has entered into binding 
 commitments (applicable to any subsequent owner)--
 (A) to extend the project-based assistance for the 
 maximum period allowable under law (subject to the 
 availability of amounts for such purpose); and
 (B) to extend any low-income affordability 
 restrictions applicable to the project in connection 
 with the project-based assistance.
 (d) Projects Purchased by Residents.--A project meets the 
requirements of this subsection only if the project--
 (1) is or was eligible low-income housing (as defined in 
 section 229 of the Low-Income Housing Preservation and Resident 
 Homeownership Act of 1990 (12 U.S.C. 4119); and
 (2) has been purchased by a resident council for the 
 housing, or is approved by the Secretary for such purchase, for 
 conversion to homeownership housing under a resident 
 homeownership program meeting the requirements of section 226 
 of the Low-Income Housing Preservation and Resident 
 Homeownership Act of 1990 (12 U.S.C. 4116).
 (e) Combination of Assistance.--Notwithstanding subsection (a), any 
project that is otherwise eligible for assistance with grant amounts 
provided under this subtitle because the project meets the requirements 
under subsection (b) or (c), and that also meets the requirements under 
paragraph (1) of the other of such subsections, shall be eligible for 
assistance under this subtitle only if the project complies with all of 
the requirements under such other subsection.

SEC. 7207. GRANT AMOUNT LIMITATION.

 The Secretary shall limit the portion of the aggregate amount of 
grants under this subtitle made available for any fiscal year that may 
be provided to a single State based upon the proportion of the need of 
that State (as determined by the Secretary) for assistance under this 
subtitle to the aggregate need among all States approved for assistance 
under this subtitle for that fiscal year.

SEC. 7208. MATCHING REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary may not make a grant under this 
subtitle to any State for any fiscal year in an amount that exceeds 
twice the amount that the State certifies, as the Secretary shall 
require, that the State will contribute for such fiscal year, or has 
contributed since January 1, 2001, from non-Federal sources for the 
purposes under section 7206(a).
 (b) Treatment of Previous Contributions.--Any portion of amounts 
contributed after January 1, 2001, that are counted for the purpose of 
meeting the requirement under subsection (a) for a fiscal year may not 
be counted for such purpose for any subsequent fiscal year.
 (c) Treatment of Tax Credits.--Tax credits provided under section 
42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, and proceeds from the sale of 
tax-exempt bonds by any State or local government entity shall not be 
considered non-Federal sources for purposes of this section.

SEC. 7209. TREATMENT OF SUBSIDY LAYERING REQUIREMENTS.

 Neither section 7208 nor any other provision of this subtitle may 
be construed to prevent the use of tax credits provided under section 
42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, in connection with housing 
assisted with grant amounts provided under this subtitle, to the extent 
that such use is in accordance with section 102(d) of the Department of 
Housing and Urban Development Reform Act of 1989 (42 U.S.C. 3545(d)) 
and section 911 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992 
(42 U.S.C. 3545 note).

SEC. 7210. REGULATIONS.

 The Secretary may issue regulations to carry out this subtitle.

SEC. 7211. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 There are authorized to be appropriated for grants under this 
subtitle such sums as are necessary for each of fiscal years 2002 
through 2006.

 TITLE VIII--SAFE START

 Subtitle A--Promotion of Permanency for Children

SEC. 8001. REIMBURSEMENT FOR PREVENTIVE, PROTECTIVE, CRISIS, 
 PERMANENCY, INDEPENDENT LIVING, AND POST-PERMANENCY 
 SERVICES AND ACTIVITIES.

 (a) In General.--Part E of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 670 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 474 the 
following:

``SEC. 474A. PAYMENTS FOR PREVENTIVE, PROTECTIVE, CRISIS, PERMANENCY, 
 INDEPENDENT LIVING, AND POST-PERMANENCY SERVICES AND 
 ACTIVITIES.

 ``(a) In General.--In addition to any other payments made to a 
State under this title, for each quarter beginning after September 30, 
2001, the Secretary shall pay each State which has a plan approved 
under this part and that opts to receive payments under this section, a 
payment, subject to subsection (e), equal to the Federal medical 
assistance percentage of the costs of providing the services and 
activities described in subsection (b) in order to ensure that the 
timelines set forth in section 475(5), as added by the Adoption and 
Safe Families Act of 1997, can be honored and the goals of safety and 
permanence for children will be realized.
 ``(b) Services and Activities Described.--The services and 
activities described in this subsection are as follows:
 ``(1) Preventive, protective, and crisis services.--
 ``(A) In general.--Preventive, protective, and 
 crisis services for children and parents who come to 
 the attention of the State or a local agency and whose 
 cases are referred for assessment or investigation 
 because of a concern about the risk of abuse or 
 neglect.
 ``(B) Requirements.--In the case of services other 
 than investigation and assessment--
 ``(i) the agency and the parents must have 
 agreed to the provision of such services in the 
 case plan for the family; and
 ``(ii) funding for such services under this 
 part shall be provided for not more than 18 
 months within a 48 month period, consistent 
 with the exception provided in subsection (c).
 ``(2) Permanency services.--Permanency services for 
 children and parents to help ensure that when a child is placed 
 in foster care, prompt decisions can be made about the 
 appropriate permanency plan for the child, but only if the 
 agency and the parents have agreed to the provision of such 
 services to the parents in the case plan for the family and 
 funding for such services under this part (other than foster 
 care maintenance payments under section 472) will be provided 
 for not more than 18 months within a 48 month period, 
 consistent with the exception provided in subsection (c).
 ``(3) Post-permanency services.--
 ``(A) In general.--Post-permanency services for 
 children and their parents or other caregivers when 
 children have been in foster care funded under this 
 part and are returned to their birth families, are in 
 adoptive families, or are placed permanently with a 
 legal guardian or a fit and willing relative, if the 
 agency and the child's caregivers have agreed to the 
 provision of such services in the case plan for the 
 family, but only to the extent that--
 ``(i) with respect to such services for 
 children returned to their birth families, such 
 services are provided for not more than 18 
 months within a 48 month period, consistent 
 with the exception provided in subsection (c); 
 and
 ``(ii) with respect to such services for 
 children who are adopted from foster care or 
 placed permanently with a legal guardian or a 
 fit and willing relative, such services are 
 provided on an as-needed basis consistent with 
 the child and family service plan.
 ``(4) Application to certain children.--With 
 respect to the services described in paragraph (1), 
 (2), or (3) that are provided to children who have come 
 to the attention of the State or a local agency before 
 the date of enactment of the Leave No Child Behind Act 
 of 2001, the 18-month time limit for such services for 
 such children shall commence on a date determined by 
 the State that is not more than 180 days after such 
 date of enactment.
 ``(5) Independent living services.--Independent living 
 services to help children who are likely to remain in foster 
 care until attaining 18 years of age and children who are 
 former foster care recipients who have not attained 21 years of 
 age make the transition to self-sufficiency by providing 
 services such as assistance in obtaining a high school diploma, 
 a General Equivalency Diploma, or post-secondary education or 
 training, career exploration, vocational training, job 
 placement and retention, training in daily living skills, 
 budgeting and financial management skills, substance abuse 
 prevention, preventive health activities, financial, housing, 
 counseling, personal or emotional support (through interaction 
 with dedicated adults), and other appropriate support services.
 ``(c) Safety Exception.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), beginning with 
 fiscal year 2003, a State may exempt up to the number of 
 children and parents receiving any of the services described in 
 subsection (b) that equals 20 percent of the number of such 
 children and parents who received such services during the 
 preceding fiscal year, from the time limits specified for such 
 services in such subsection in order to help ensure that 
 children will be served safely and appropriately in accordance 
 with their individual needs.
 ``(2) Biennial review.--
 ``(A) Excepted cases.--A State shall biennially 
 review the cases excepted under paragraph (1), in 
 accordance with guidelines developed by the Secretary, 
 to ensure the continued appropriateness of the 
 exceptions and to determine the circumstances under 
 which such exceptions have been made, and shall report 
 the findings of the review to the Secretary. Such 
 report shall include a recommendation, if necessary, 
 that the Secretary allow the State to adjust the 
 maximum percentage for such exceptions to address 
 changed circumstances. A State may proceed in 
 accordance with the recommendation unless the Secretary 
 disapproves the recommendation within 60 days of the 
 receipt of the recommendation.
 ``(B) Foster care children.--In addition to the 
 review required under subparagraph (A), a State shall 
 biennially review, in accordance with guidelines 
 developed by the Secretary, the cases of children who 
 have remained in foster care and for which foster care 
 maintenance payments (as defined in section 474(4)) 
 have been made for more than 18 months and submit a 
 report on such review to the Secretary. Such report 
 shall describe, with respect to each such child, the 
 child's age, special needs (if any), type of placement, 
 and the length of time that the child has been in 
 foster care.
 ``(C) Report.--Not later than January 1, 2006, and 
 January 1 of every other year thereafter, the Secretary 
 shall submit a report to Congress on the reviews and 
 recommendations required under subparagraphs (A) and 
 (B) for the preceding fiscal year. Such report shall 
 include a summary of the Secretary's findings on the 
 appropriateness of the safety exceptions and the 
 States' progress in meeting the needs of the children 
 who receive services or foster care for more than 18 
 months.
 ``(d) No Payment for Services Reimbursable Under Title XIX.--No 
payments may be made under this section for any services described in 
subsection (b) that the State is reimbursed for under title XIX.
 ``(e) Maintenance of Effort.--A State may not receive payments 
under this section unless, for fiscal year 2002 and each fiscal year 
thereafter, the total State and local expenditures for services and 
activities described in subsection (b) for that fiscal year equals or 
exceeds the total of such expenditures for fiscal year 2001.''.
 (b) State Plan Amendment.--Section 471(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
671(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (23)(B), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in paragraph (24), by striking the period and inserting 
 ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(25) provides that the State shall describe--
 ``(A) prior to the beginning of a fiscal year, the 
 types of preventive, protective, crisis, permanency, 
 independent living, and post-permanency services that 
 the State expects to be made available under the plan 
 during that fiscal year;
 ``(B) the populations expected to be provided such 
 services during the fiscal year;
 ``(C) notwithstanding paragraph (3), the geographic 
 areas in the State in which the services are likely to 
 be available during the fiscal year;
 ``(D) the role of public and nonprofit private 
 agencies and community-based organizations referred to 
 in section 432(b)(1) in the planning and decisionmaking 
 regarding which such services would be provided during 
 the fiscal year and how the services to be provided 
 would promote safety and permanence for children; and
 ``(E) prior to the beginning of the third fiscal 
 year of implementation of such services, and prior to 
 the beginning of each fiscal year thereafter, what the 
 State proposes to do to reduce the length of time 
 families need to receive services from the State 
 agency.''.

SEC. 8002. CHILD AND FAMILY SERVICE PLAN AND CASE REVIEWS.

 (a) In General.--Section 471(a)(16) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 671(a)(16)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(A)'' after ``(16)'';
 (2) by adding ``and'' after the semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(B)(i) provides for the development of a child and family 
 service plan and for case reviews by a citizen review board or 
 an administrative review body no less frequently than once 
 every 6 months for each child and family member receiving 
 preventive, protective, crisis, permanency, independent living, 
 or post-permanency services; and
 ``(ii) provides that each child and family service plan 
 developed under clause (i) shall describe the steps taken to 
 assure the safety of the child, provide the services that are 
 needed and, where applicable, have been agreed to by the agency 
 and the parent, the extent of progress that has been made 
 toward meeting the service needs of the child and the family, 
 and the continuing necessity for and appropriateness of the 
 services being provided with respect to--
 ``(I) each child, parent, or caregiver who comes to 
 the attention of the State agency and whose case is 
 referred for assessment or investigation because of a 
 concern about the risk of abuse or neglect, and who 
 receives preventive, protective, crisis, permanency, 
 independent living, or post-permanency services under 
 this part; and
 ``(II) each child, parent, or caregiver who 
 receives post-permanency services under this part when 
 a child is returned to the birth family, placed in an 
 adoptive family, or placed permanently with a legal 
 guardian or a fit and willing relative.''
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section take 
effect on October 1, 2001.

SEC. 8003. KINSHIP GUARDIANSHIP ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS FOR CHILDREN.

 (a) In General.--Part E of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 670 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 472 the 
following:

``SEC. 472A. KINSHIP GUARDIANSHIP ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS FOR CHILDREN.

 ``(a) In General.--Each State with a plan approved under this part 
may, at State option, enter into kinship guardianship assistance 
agreements to provide kinship guardianship assistance payments on 
behalf of children to grandparents and other relatives who have assumed 
legal guardianship (as defined in section 475(7)) of the children for 
whom they have cared as foster parents and for whom they have committed 
to care for on a permanent basis.
 ``(b) Kinship Guardianship Assistance Agreement.--
 ``(1) In general.--In order to receive payments under this 
 section, a State shall--
 ``(A) negotiate and enter into a written, binding, 
 kinship guardianship assistance agreement with the 
 prospective relative guardian of a child that meets the 
 requirements of this subsection; and
 ``(B) provide the prospective relative guardian 
 with a copy of the agreement.
 ``(2) Minimum requirements.--The agreement shall specify, 
 at a minimum--
 ``(A) the amount of, and manner in which, each 
 kinship guardianship assistance payment will be 
 provided under the agreement;
 ``(B) the additional services and assistance that 
 the child and relative guardian will be eligible for 
 under the agreement;
 ``(C) the procedure by which the relative guardian 
 may apply for additional services as needed, provided 
 the agency and relative guardian agree on the 
 additional services as specified in the case plan; and
 ``(D) subject to paragraph (3), that the State will 
 pay the total cost of nonrecurring expenses associated 
 with obtaining legal guardianship of the child.
 ``(2) Interstate application.--The agreement shall 
 provide--
 ``(A) that the agreement shall remain in effect 
 without regard to the State residency of the kinship 
 guardian; and
 ``(B) for the protection of the interests of the 
 child in any case where the kinship guardian and the 
 child move to another State while the agreement is in 
 effect.
 ``(3) No affect on federal reimbursement.--Nothing in 
 paragraph (1)(D) shall be construed as affecting the ability of 
 the State to obtain reimbursement from the Federal Government 
 for costs described in that paragraph.
 ``(c) Kinship Guardianship Assistance Payment.--
 ``(1) In general.--The kinship guardianship assistance 
 payment shall be based on consideration of the needs of the 
 relative guardian and of the child and shall be at least equal 
 to the amount of the foster care maintenance payment for which 
 the child would have been eligible if the child remained in 
 foster care. The payment may be readjusted periodically based 
 on relevant changes in such needs.
 ``(2) Limitation.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), no kinship guardianship assistance 
 payment may be made to a relative guardian for any 
 child who has attained age 18.
 ``(B) Exceptions.--A kinship guardianship 
 assistance payment may be made to a relative guardian 
 with respect to a child who--
 ``(i) is a full-time student in a secondary 
 school or in the equivalent level of a 
 vocational or technical training program and 
 has not attained age 19; or
 ``(ii) with respect to a child who the 
 State determines has a mental or physical 
 disability that warrants the continuation of 
 assistance to age 21.
 ``(d) Child's Eligibility for a Kinship Guardianship Assistance 
Payment.--
 ``(1) In general.--A child is eligible for a kinship 
 guardianship assistance payment under this section if the State 
 agency determines the following:
 ``(A) The child has been--
 ``(i) removed from his or her home pursuant 
 to a voluntary placement agreement or as a 
 result of a judicial determination to the 
 effect that continuation in the home would be 
 contrary to the welfare of the child; and
 ``(ii) under the care of the State agency 
 for the 12-month period ending on the date of 
 such agency determination.
 ``(B) Being returned home or adopted are not 
 appropriate permanency options for the child.
 ``(C) The child demonstrates a strong attachment to 
 the prospective relative guardian and the relative 
 guardian has a strong commitment to caring permanently 
 for the child.
 ``(D) With respect to a child who has attained age 
 14, the child has been consulted regarding the kinship 
 guardianship arrangement.
 ``(2) Treatment of siblings.--With respect to a child who 
 is described in paragraph (1) whose sibling or siblings are not 
 so described--
 ``(A) the child and any sibling of the child may be 
 placed in the same kinship guardianship arrangement if 
 the State agency and the relative agree on the 
 appropriateness of the arrangement for the siblings; 
 and
 ``(B) kinship guardianship assistance payments may 
 be paid for the child and each sibling so placed.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) State plan requirement.--Section 471(a)(20) of such Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 671(a)(20) is amended by striking ``before the 
 foster or adoptive parent may be finally approved for placement 
 of a child on whose behalf foster care maintenance payments or 
 adoption assistance payments'' and inserting ``or relative 
 guardian before the foster or adoptive parent or relative 
 guardian may be finally approved for placement of a child on 
 whose behalf foster care maintenance payments, adoption 
 assistance payments, or kinship guardianship assistance 
 payments''.
 (2) Definitions.--Section 475(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 675(1)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(F) In the case of a child with respect to whom 
 the permanency plan is placement with a relative and 
 receipt of kinship guardianship assistance payments 
 under section 472A, a description of--
 ``(i) the steps that the agency has taken 
 to determine that it is not appropriate for the 
 child to be returned home or adopted;
 ``(ii) the reasons why a permanent 
 placement with a fit and willing relative 
 through a kinship guardianship assistance 
 arrangement is in the child's best interests;
 ``(iii) the ways in which the child meets 
 the eligibility requirements for a kinship 
 guardianship assistance payment;
 ``(iv) the efforts the agency has made to 
 discuss adoption by the child's relative foster 
 parent as a more permanent alternative to legal 
 guardianship and, in the case of a relative 
 foster parent who has chosen not to pursue 
 adoption, documentation of the reasons why; and
 ``(v) the efforts made by the State agency 
 to secure the consent of the child's parent or 
 parents to the kinship guardianship assistance 
 arrangement, or the reasons why such efforts 
 were not made.''.

SEC. 8004. ELIMINATION OF FINANCIAL ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENT FOR FOSTER 
 CARE MAINTENANCE AND ADOPTION ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS.

 (a) Foster Care Maintenance Payments.--Section 472(a) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 672(a)) is amended--
 (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking 
 ``would have met the requirements of section 406(a) (as so in 
 effect) or of section 407 (as such sections were in effect on 
 July 16, 1996) but for his removal from the home of a relative 
 (specified in section 406(a)),'' and inserting ``has been 
 removed from his or her home'';
 (2) in paragraph (2), by adding ``and'' at the end;
 (3) in paragraph (3), by striking ``; and'' and inserting a 
 period;
 (4) by striking paragraph (4); and
 (5) by striking the last 2 sentences of that section.
 (b) Adoption Assistance Payments.--Section 473(a)(2) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 673(a)(2)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A)(i)--
 (A) by striking ``met the requirements of section 
 406(a) or section 407 (as such sections were in effect 
 on July 16, 1996) or would have met such requirements 
 except for his removal from the home of a relative 
 (specified in section 406(a) (as so in effect))'' and 
 inserting ``has been removed from his or her home''; 
 and
 (B) by striking ``(or 403 (as such section was in 
 effect on July 16, 1996))'';
 (2) in subparagraph (A)(iii), by adding ``and'' at the end;
 (3) by striking subparagraph (B);
 (4) by redesignating subparagraph (C) as subparagraph (B); 
 and
 (5) by striking ``The last sentence of section 472(a)'' and 
 all that follows and inserting ``Any child who meets the 
 requirements of subparagraph (B), who was determined eligible 
 for adoption assistance payments under this part with respect 
 to a prior adoption, who is available for adoption because the 
 prior adoption has been dissolved and the parental rights of 
 the adoptive parents have been terminated or because the 
 child's adoptive parents have died, and who fails to meet the 
 requirements of subparagraph (A) but would meet such 
 requirements if the child were treated as if the child were in 
 the same circumstances the child was in the last time the child 
 was determined eligible for adoption assistance payments under 
 this part and the prior adoption were treated as never having 
 occurred, shall be treated as meeting the requirements of this 
 paragraph for purposes of paragraph (1)(B)(ii).''.

SEC. 8005. ESTABLISHMENT OF UNIFORM FEDERAL MATCHING RATE.

 (a) In General.--Section 474(a) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 674(a)) is amended--
 (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1)--
 (A) by striking ``of--'' and inserting ``of the 
 following:'';
 (B) by striking ``(1) an amount'' and all that 
 follows through the end of paragraph (3) and inserting 
 the following:
 ``(1) The Federal medical assistance percentage (as defined 
 in section 1905(b)) of each of the following:
 ``(A) The total amount expended during such quarter 
 as foster care maintenance payments under section 472 
 for children in foster family homes or child-care 
 institutions.
 ``(B) The total amount expended during such quarter 
 as kinship guardianship assistance payments under 
 section 472A for children with a kinship guardianship 
 assistance agreement.
 ``(C) The total amount expended during such quarter 
 as adoption assistance payments under section 473 
 pursuant to adoption assistance agreements.
 ``(D) Subject to paragraph (3), the total amount 
 expended during such quarter for preventive, 
 protective, crisis, permanency, independent living, and 
 post-permanency services and activities under section 
 474A.
 ``(E) The total amounts expended during such 
 quarter as found necessary by the Secretary for the 
 provision of child placement services and for the 
 proper and efficient administration of the State plan.
 ``(F) The total amounts expended during such 
 quarter as found necessary by the Secretary for the 
 training of--
 ``(i) personnel employed or preparing for 
 employment by the State agency or by the local agency 
 administering the plan in the political subdivision 
 (including short- and long-term training at educational 
 institutions through grants to such institutions or by 
 direct financial assistance to students enrolled in 
 such institutions);
 ``(ii) current or prospective foster or adoptive 
 parents and the members of the staff of State-licensed 
 or State-approved child care institutions providing 
 care to foster and adopted children receiving 
assistance under this part, in ways that increase the ability of such 
current or prospective parents, staff members, and institutions to 
provide support and assistance to foster and adopted children, whether 
incurred directly by the State or by contract but only for such 
expenditures (including travel and per diem expenses) that are incurred 
for short-term training;
 ``(iii) the staff of private State licensed or 
 State approved child welfare agencies that provide 
 preventive, crisis, protective permanency, post-
 permanency, and independent living services or care to 
 foster and adopted children and children with relative 
 guardians who are eligible for assistance under this 
 part (including joint training and cross training of 
 such staff);
 ``(iv) court staff, including judges, judicial 
 personnel, law enforcement personnel, agency attorneys, 
 attorneys representing parents in proceedings conducted 
 by or under the supervision of an abuse or neglect 
 court, attorneys representing children in such 
 proceedings, guardian ad litems, volunteers who 
 participate in court-appointed special advocate (CASA) 
 programs, and citizen review board members when under 
 court auspices to keep children safe and provide 
 permanent families for children, but only to the extent 
 that any training offered to judges or any judicial 
 personnel is offered by, or under contract with, the 
 State or local agency in collaboration with the 
 judicial conference or other appropriate judicial 
 governing body operating in the State; and
 ``(v) staff employed by State, local, or private 
 nonprofit substance abuse prevention and treatment 
 agencies, mental health providers, domestic violence 
 prevention and treatment providers, health agencies, 
 child care agencies, schools, and community service 
 agencies that are collaborating with the State or local 
 agency administering the State plan under this part to 
 keep children safe and provide permanent families for 
 children, including adoptive families.
 ``(G) The total amounts expended during such 
 quarter as found necessary by the Secretary for the 
 planning, design, development, installation, or 
 operation of statewide mechanized data collection and 
 information retrieval systems (including expenditures 
 for hardware components for such systems) but only to 
 the extent that such systems--
 ``(i) meet the requirements imposed by 
 regulations promulgated pursuant to section 
 479(b)(2);
 ``(ii) to the extent practicable, are 
 capable of interfacing with the State data 
 collection system that collects information 
 relating to child abuse and neglect; and
 ``(iii) are determined by the Secretary to 
 be likely to provide more efficient, 
 economical, and effective administration of the 
 programs carried out under a State plan 
 approved under part B or this part.'';
 (2) in paragraph (4)--
 (A) by striking ``the lesser'' and inserting ``The 
 lesser''; and
 (B) by redesignating such paragraph as paragraph 
 (2); and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(3) With respect to a State that elects to provide 
 preventive, protective, crisis, permanency, independent living, 
 and post-permanency services and activities under section 474A, 
 that begins the process for accreditation of the State agency 
 administering the program under this part within 3 years after 
 the date of enactment of the Leave No Child Behind Act of 2001, 
 and that has such State agency accredited by a nationally 
 recognized accrediting agency approved by the Secretary to 
 provide such accreditation, the Federal medical assistance 
 percentage for the State shall be increased by 1 percentage 
 point a year for each of the 4 consecutive years in which the 
 agency is so accredited for purposes of making the payments 
 described in paragraph (1)(D), beginning with the first fiscal 
 year quarter that begins after the State submits to the 
 Secretary evidence of such accreditation.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 473(a)(6)(B) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 673(a)(6)(B)) is amended by striking ``474(a)(3)(E)'' and 
 inserting ``474(a)(1)(E)''.
 (2) Section 477(h) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 677(h)) is 
 amended by striking ``474(a)(4)'' and inserting ``474(a)(2)''.

SEC. 8006. ELIMINATION OF DISINCENTIVE FOR FOSTER PARENTS TO ADOPT 
 CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS WHO HAVE BEEN IN THEIR FOSTER 
 CARE.

 The last sentence of section 473(a)(3) of the Social Security Act 
(42 U.S.C 673(a)(3)) is amended to read as follows: ``However, an 
adoptive parent shall be eligible to receive an adoption assistance 
payment under clause (ii) of paragraph (1)(B) that is at least equal to 
the foster care maintenance payment which would have been paid during 
the period if the child with respect to whom the adoption assistance 
payment is made had been in a foster family home.''.

SEC. 8007. EXTENSION OF ADOPTION ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS.

 Section 473(a)(4) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 673(a)(4)) 
is amended by striking ``(or,'' and inserting ``(or, in the case of a 
child who is a full-time student in a secondary school or in the 
equivalent educational level of a vocational or technical training 
program, the age of nineteen, or''.

SEC. 8008. REIMBURSEMENT FOR ROOM AND BOARD IN FOSTER FAMILY HOMES, 
 CHILD CARE INSTITUTIONS, OR SUPERVISED LIVING 
 ARRANGEMENTS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE AGING OUT OF FOSTER CARE.

 Section 472 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 672) is amended 
by adding at the end the following:
 ``(i)(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this part, a State 
may make foster care maintenance payments (as defined in section 
475(4)) under this section on behalf of eligible individuals described 
in paragraph (2) for reimbursement of room and board expenses incurred 
for such individuals in a foster family home, child care institution, 
or other supervised living arrangement as approved by the State agency, 
in order to assist such individuals to leave foster care and transition 
to self-sufficiency.
 ``(2) An eligible individual described in this paragraph is an 
individual who--
 ``(A) was in foster care on the date that the individual 
 attained age 17 and had been in foster care for at least 1 year 
 prior to that date;
 ``(B) has not attained age 22;
 ``(C) is in the process of completing secondary education, 
 enrolled in an institution that provides postsecondary 
 education or vocational training, or is employed for at least 
 80 hours per month;
 ``(D) is participating in independent living activities of 
 the type that may be supported under the John H. Chafee Foster 
 Care Independence Program under section 477; and
 ``(E) has a case plan that includes a specific plan for how 
 the individual will achieve independent living and that 
 provides for the individual to reside in a setting that 
 promotes personal responsibility and encourages self-
 sufficiency.
 ``(3)(A) A State may not receive payments under section 
474(a)(1)(A) for expenditures under this subsection unless with respect 
to fiscal year 2002 and each fiscal year thereafter, the total Federal, 
State, and local expenditures for reimbursements described in paragraph 
(1) in the State (or for related independent living services) equals or 
exceeds the total of such expenditures for fiscal year 2001.
 ``(B) The amount of total Federal, State, and local expenditures 
required under subparagraph (A) to be maintained for a fiscal year may 
be reduced appropriately if the total Federal expenditures for that 
fiscal year are less than such the amount of such expenditures for 
fiscal year 2001.
 ``(4) With respect to a fiscal year, a State that makes foster care 
maintenance payments under this subsection shall submit to the 
Secretary an annual report that includes the following:
 ``(A) The number of eligible individuals described in 
 paragraph (2) who received foster care maintenance payments 
 under this subsection and the nature of the settings in which 
 such individuals were housed.
 ``(B) A description of the steps being undertaken in the 
 State to promote housing opportunities for individuals 
 transitioning from foster care after attaining age 18 and for 
 individuals that have already transitioned out of foster care 
 as a result of age.
 ``(C) Recommendations regarding the types of Federal 
 assistance that would assist the State to better meet the 
 housing need of the individuals described in subparagraph 
 (B).''.

SEC. 8009. FUNDING FOR VOUCHERS TO ASSIST YOUNG PEOPLE AGING OUT OF 
 FOSTER CARE MAKE THE TRANSITION TO SELF-SUFFICIENCY.

 Section 477 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 677) is amended 
by adding at the end the following:
 ``(i) Vouchers To Assist the Transition to Self-Sufficiency.--
 ``(1) Grants to states.--
 ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of this part, and in addition to payments 
 made to a State under section 474(a)(2), the Secretary 
 shall make grants to States for vouchers to help 
 eligible individuals described in paragraph (2) make 
 the transition to self-sufficiency.
 ``(B) Application.--A State that desires to receive 
 a grant under this subsection shall submit an 
 application to the Secretary at such time, and in such 
 form and manner as the Secretary shall require.
 ``(C) Competitive grants.--The Secretary shall 
 award grants to States under this subsection on a 
 competitive basis, based on criteria established by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(2) Eligible individuals described.--An eligible 
 individual described in this paragraph is an individual who--
 ``(A) is described in section 472(i)(2); or
 ``(B) has been adopted from foster care, or placed 
 with a relative with a kinship guardianship assistance 
 agreement, on or after the individual's 16th birthday 
 and has not yet attained age 22.
 ``(3) Voucher requirements.--A State receiving a grant 
 under this subsection shall use the funds provided under the 
 grant to provide a voucher of up to $5000 per year for the 
 costs incurred by an eligible individual described in paragraph 
 (2) who applies for the voucher of obtaining--
 ``(A) a General Equivalency Diploma (and related 
 supports provided to assist an eligible individual in 
 obtaining such a degree);
 ``(B) a post-secondary education; or
 ``(C) vocational training.
 ``(4) Matching requirement.--A State may not receive a 
 grant under this subsection unless the State agrees to provide 
 $1 for every $3 awarded under the grant.
 ``(5) Maintenance of effort requirement.--A State may not 
 receive a grant under this subsection unless with respect to 
 fiscal year 2002 and each fiscal year thereafter, the total 
 State, and local expenditures for vouchers described in 
 paragraph (3) in such State (or for similar expenditures) 
 equals or exceeds the total of such expenditures for fiscal 
 year 2001.
 ``(6) Annual report.--Each State that receives a grant 
 under this subsection shall submit an annual report to the 
 Secretary that includes the following:
 ``(A) The number of eligible individuals described 
 in paragraph (2) who received vouchers during the year 
 involved, the nature of the activities that were 
 supported by the vouchers, and a description of the 
 institutions where the vouchers were used.
 ``(B) The number of individuals who applied for a 
 voucher funded under this section during such year, 
 were determined to be eligible for a voucher, but did 
 not receive a voucher because funding was not 
 available.
 ``(C) A description of other steps being undertaken 
 in the State to promote educational and training 
 opportunities for individuals who are in foster care 
 and are about to age out of such care and for 
 individuals who have aged out of foster care.
 ``(D) Recommendations regarding the types of 
 Federal assistance that would assist the State to 
 better meet the educational and training needs of 
 individuals described in subparagraph (C).
 ``(7) Authorization of appropriations.--To carry out this 
 section, there are authorized to be appropriated to the 
 Secretary $120,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 
 2006.''.

SEC. 8010. ADDITIONAL ACCOUNTABILITY.

 Section 471(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 671(a)), as 
amended by section 8001(b), is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (24), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in paragraph (25)(E), by striking the period and 
 inserting a semicolon;
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(26) provides that, beginning with January 1, 2004, and 
 each January 1 thereafter, the State agency shall prepare and 
 submit to the Secretary, and make available to the public, 
 including through posting on the State agency's Internet 
 website, a report that, with respect to the 2 preceding fiscal 
 years that are the subject of the report, describes--
 ``(A) how the funding made available under section 
 474A has been used;
 ``(B) the impact that the services and activities 
 undertaken with such funding has had on--
 ``(i) preventing the abuse and neglect and 
 repeat abuse and neglect of children;
 ``(ii) preventing the entry and re-entry of 
 children into foster care;
 ``(iii) decreasing the length of stay of 
 children in foster care in the State; and
 ``(iv) promoting permanent placements for 
 children;
 ``(C) efforts by the State agency to improve the 
 quality and retention of supervisors and staff who are 
 delivering services under the State plan approved under 
 this part, directly or under contract, and to improve 
 the workloads of staff;
 ``(D) efforts by the State agency or local agencies 
 to use community partners to promote safety and 
 permanence for children, including a description of--
 ``(i) collaborative work with substance 
 abuse, mental health, health, or domestic 
 violence agencies or providers to address the 
 needs of the families assisted under this part;
 ``(ii) the involvement of community-based 
 organizations with the State agency;
 ``(iii) how parents are engaged in the 
 delivery of services; and
 ``(iv) efforts to utilize family team 
 meeting, family group decisionmaking, or other 
 activities that build on family strengths and 
 address what families need;
 ``(E) the procedures that are in place to ensure 
 that children who are returned home or placed in other 
 permanent settings receive the support they need to 
 remain home or in such a setting; and
 ``(F) the status of the State's most recent child 
 and family services review and its program improvement 
 plan activities, if applicable; and
 ``(27) provides that, beginning on January 1, 2004, the 
 independent body charged with reviewing cases of children (such 
 as a court, citizen review board, or independent administrative 
 review body) biannually shall submit a report to the Secretary, 
 in such form and manner as the Secretary shall require, that 
 describes--
 ``(A) the status of children in the State, as 
 reflected in the reviews conducted by such body;
 ``(B) the barriers to moving children in the State 
 in accordance with the permanency plans for such 
 children; and
 ``(C) recommendations for the amount of resources, 
 fiscal and otherwise, that are needed to better meet 
 the goals of safety and permanence for children 
 established in the Adoption and Safe Families Act of 
 1997.''.

SEC. 8011. AUTHORITY OF INDIAN TRIBES TO RECEIVE FEDERAL FUNDS FOR 
 FOSTER CARE AND ADOPTION ASSISTANCE.

 (a) Children Placed in Tribal Custody Eligible for Foster Care 
Funding.--Section 472(a)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
672(a)(2)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``or (B)'' and inserting ``(B)''; and
 (2) by inserting before the semicolon the following: ``, or 
 (C) an Indian tribe (as defined in section 479B(e)) or an 
 intertribal consortium if the Indian tribe or consortium is not 
 operating a program pursuant to section 479B and (i) has a 
 cooperative agreement with a State pursuant to section 479B(c) 
 or (ii) submits to the Secretary a description of the 
 arrangements (jointly developed or developed in consultation 
 with the State) made by the Indian tribe or consortium for the 
 payment of funds and the provision of the child welfare 
 services and protections required by this title''.
 (b) Programs Operated by Indian Tribal Organizations.--Part E of 
title IV of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 670 et seq.) is amended 
by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 479B. PROGRAMS OPERATED BY INDIAN TRIBAL ORGANIZATIONS.

 ``(a) Application.--Except as provided in subsection (b), this part 
shall apply to an Indian tribe that elects to operate a program under 
this part in the same manner as this part applies to a State.
 ``(b) Modification of Plan Requirements.--
 ``(1) In general.--In the case of an Indian tribe 
 submitting a plan for approval under section 471, the plan 
 shall--
 ``(A) in lieu of the requirement of section 
 471(a)(3), identify the service area or areas and 
 population to be served by the Indian tribe; and
 ``(B) in lieu of the requirement of section 
 471(a)(10), provide for the approval of foster homes 
 pursuant to tribal standards and in a manner that 
 ensures the safety of, and accountability for, children 
 placed in foster care.
 ``(2) Determination of federal share.--
 ``(A) Per capita income.--
 ``(i) In general.--For purposes of 
 determining the Federal medical assistance 
 percentage applicable to an Indian tribe 
 eligible for payments under section 474(a), the 
 calculation of an Indian tribe's per capita 
 income shall be based upon the service 
 population of the Indian tribe as defined in 
 its plan in accordance with paragraph (1)(A).
 ``(ii) Consideration of other 
 information.--An Indian tribe may submit to the 
 Secretary such information as the Indian tribe 
 considers relevant to the calculation of the 
 per capita income of the Indian tribe, and the 
 Secretary shall consider such information 
 before making the calculation.
 ``(B) Sources of non-federal share.--An Indian 
 tribe may use Federal or State funds to match payments 
 for which the Indian tribe is eligible under section 
 474.
 ``(3) Modification of other requirements.--Upon the request 
 of an Indian tribe or tribes, the Secretary may modify any 
 requirement under this part if, after consulting with the 
 Indian tribe or tribes, the Secretary determines that 
 modification of the requirement would advance the best 
 interests and the safety of children served by the Indian tribe 
 or tribes.
 ``(4) Consortium.--The participating Indian tribes of an 
 intertribal consortium may develop and submit a single plan 
 under section 471 that meets the requirements of this section.
 ``(c) Cooperative Agreements.--An Indian tribe or intertribal 
consortium and a State may enter into a cooperative agreement for the 
administration or payment of funds pursuant to this part. In any case 
where an Indian tribe or intertribal consortium and a State enter into 
a cooperative agreement that incorporates any of the provisions of this 
section, those provisions shall be valid and enforceable. Any such 
cooperative agreement that is in effect as of the date of enactment of 
this section, shall remain in full force and effect subject to the 
right of either party to the agreement to revoke or modify the 
agreement pursuant to the terms of the agreement.
 ``(d) Regulations.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of this section, the Secretary shall, in full consultation 
with Indian tribes and tribal organizations, promulgate regulations to 
carry out this section.
 ``(e) Definitions of Indian Tribe; Tribal Organizations.--In this 
section, the terms `Indian tribe' and `tribal organization' have the 
meanings given those terms in subsections (e) and (l) of section 4 of 
the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 
450b), respectively.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section take 
effect on the date of enactment of this Act without regard to 
regulations to implement such amendments being promulgated by such 
date.

 Subtitle B--Promoting Safe and Stable Families

SEC. 8101. EXPANSION OF THE PROMOTING SAFE AND STABLE FAMILIES PROGRAM.

 (a) Reauthorization and Increase in Funding.--Section 430(b) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 629(b)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (7), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in paragraph (8), by striking the period and inserting 
 ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(9) for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006, 
 $705,000,000.''.
 (b) Continuation of Reservation of Funds for Evaluation, Research, 
Training, and Technical Assistance.--Section 430(d)(1) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 629(d)(1)) is amended by striking ``, 1996, 
1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, and 2001'' and inserting ``through 2006''.
 (c) Increase in Reservation of Funds for State Court Assessments.--
Section 430(d)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 629(d)(2)) is 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``and'' after ``1995,''; and
 (2) by striking ``, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, and 2001,'' and 
 inserting ``through 2001, $15,000,000 of the amounts so 
 described for each of fiscal years 2002 and 2003, and 
 $20,000,000 of the amounts so described for each of fiscal 
 years 2004 through 2006,''.
 (d) Increase in Reservation of Funds for Indian Tribes.--Section 
430(d)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 629(d)(3)) is amended 
by striking ``1 percent'' and inserting ``3 percent''.

 Subtitle C--Social Services Block Grant

SEC. 8201. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Social Services Block Grant 
Restoration Act of 2001''.

SEC. 8202. FINDINGS.

 Congress makes the following findings:
 (1) Since 1975, title XX of the Social Security Act (42 
 U.S.C. 1397 et seq.), commonly referred to as the Social 
 Services Block Grant (in this section referred to as ``SSBG''), 
 has authorized funding for social services to ensure that at-
 risk children and families, the elderly, and physically and 
 mentally disabled individuals remain stable, independent, and 
 economically self sufficient. In 1981, Congress and the Reagan 
 Administration converted SSBG into a block grant designed to 
 give maximum flexibility to States to serve these fundamental 
 purposes.
 (2) Funds provided under the SSBG focus cost-effective 
 support at the community level that prevents the need for 
 inappropriate institutional care which is more costly for 
 Federal and State programs such as the medicaid, medicare, and 
 the social security disability benefits programs.
 (3) The SSBG helps to further the goals set forth in the 
 Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act 
 of 1996 (Public Law 104-193; 110 Stat. 2105) by supporting the 
 Temporary Assistance to Needy Families program (TANF) and 
 support-related programs such as on-the-job training, child 
 care, transportation, counseling, and other services that 
 facilitate long-term family stability and economic self-
 sufficiency.
 (4) The SSBG provides essential funding to many States for 
 child welfare services that support the goals of the Adoption 
 and Safe Families Act of 1997 (Public Law 105-89; 111 Stat. 
 2115) to promote a safe family environment and encourage 
 adoption to move children into stable and permanent families.
 (5) The SSBG helps promote independent living for 
 vulnerable and low-income elderly individuals by supporting 
 home care services, including home-delivered meals, adult 
 protective services, adult day care, and other essential case 
 management services provided in every State.
 (6) It is reported that 820,000 older Americans are abused 
 and neglected in this country each year. There are additional 
 concerns about the under reporting of elderly abuse and 
 neglect. The SSBG supports adult protective services that 
 prevent widespread abuse and neglect of older Americans and 
 help more than 651,000 elderly individuals in 31 States.
 (7) More than 570,000 disabled individuals receive a range 
 of community-based services and supports nationwide. The SSBG 
 provides significant resources to fill the funding gaps in the 
 developmental disabilities system by supporting such services 
 as early intervention and crisis intervention, adult day care, 
 respite care, transportation, employment training, and 
 independent living services in 38 States.
 (8) The SSBG supports essential mental health and related 
 services to ensure that vulnerable adults and children receive 
 early intervention to prevent more serious and costly mental 
 health crises in the future. Such services include the 
 provision of counseling to almost 400,000 adults and children, 
 case management services for nearly 900,000 families, and the 
 provision of information and referral assistance to more than 
 1,300,000 individuals.
 (9) There are nearly 3,000,000 reports of child abuse and 
 neglect each year. There are currently over 300,000 children in 
 the American foster care system. The SSBG enables the provision 
 of child protective services to 1,300,000 children, adoption 
 services to over 150,000 children and families, and prevention 
 and intervention services to more than 700,000 families.
 (10) The SSBG has been eroded by more than $1,000,000,000 
 over the last 6 years resulting in cuts in services in many 
 States and local communities.
 (11) Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) block 
 grants cannot be used to make up cuts to the SSBG because a 
 large percentage of SSBG funds are used for the elderly, 
 disabled, and other populations that are ineligible for TANF 
 funds.
 (12) The 104th Congress made a commitment to the SSBG in 
 the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation 
 Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-193; 110 Stat. 2105) by authorizing 
 the program at $2,380,000,000 through fiscal year 2002 and 
 returning the authorization for the program to $2,800,000,000 
 in fiscal year 2003 and each succeeding fiscal year.

SEC 8203. RESTORATION OF AUTHORITY TO TRANSFER UP TO 10 PERCENT OF TANF 
 FUNDS TO THE SOCIAL SERVICES BLOCK GRANT.

 (a) In General.--Section 404(d)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 604(d)(2)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(2) Limitation on amount transferable to title xx 
 programs.--A State may use not more than 10 percent of the 
 amount of any grant made to the State under section 403(a) for 
 a fiscal year to carry out State programs pursuant to title 
 XX.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) applies 
to amounts made available for fiscal year 2002 and each fiscal year 
thereafter.

SEC. 8204. RESTORATION OF FUNDS FOR THE SOCIAL SERVICES BLOCK GRANT.

 (a) In General.--Section 2003(c) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1397b(c)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (10), by striking ``and'' at the end; and
 (2) by striking paragraph (11) and inserting the following 
 new paragraphs:
 ``(11) $1,725,000,000 for the fiscal year 2001; and
 ``(12) $2,380,000,000 for the fiscal year 2002 and each 
 fiscal year thereafter.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
take effect as if included in the enactment of the Departments of 
Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and Related Agencies 
Appropriations Act, 2001 (as enacted into law by section 1(a)(1) of 
Public Law 106-554).

SEC. 8205. REQUIREMENT TO SUBMIT ANNUAL REPORT ON STATE ACTIVITIES.

 (a) In General.--Section 2006(c) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1397e(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
sentence: ``The Secretary shall compile the information submitted by 
the States and submit that information to Congress on an annual 
basis.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) applies 
to information submitted by States under section 2006 of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397e) with respect to fiscal year 2001 and 
each fiscal year thereafter.

 Subtitle D--Child Protection and Alcohol and Drug Partnerships

SEC. 8301. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Child Protection/Alcohol and 
Drug Partnership Act of 2001''.

SEC. 8302. CHILD PROTECTION/ALCOHOL AND DRUG PARTNERSHIPS FOR CHILDREN.

 Part B of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 620 et 
seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

 ``Subpart 3--Child Protection/Alcohol and Drug Partnerships For 
 Children

``SEC. 440. DEFINITIONS.

 ``In this subpart:
 ``(1) Alaska native organization.--The term `Alaska Native 
 Organization' means any organized group of Alaska Natives 
 eligible to operate a Federal program under the Indian Self-
 Determination Act (25 U.S.C. 450f et seq.) or such group's 
 designee.
 ``(2) Administrative costs.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `administrative costs' 
 means the costs for the general administration of 
 administrative activities, including contract costs and 
 all overhead costs.
 ``(B) Exclusion.--Such term does not include the 
 direct costs of providing services and costs related to 
 case management, training, technical assistance, 
 evaluation, establishment, and operation of information 
 systems, and such other similar costs that are also an 
 integral part of service delivery.
 ``(3) Eligible state.--The term `eligible State' means a 
 State that submits a joint application from the State agencies 
 that--
 ``(A) includes a plan that meets the requirements 
 of section 442; and
 ``(B) is approved by the Secretary for a 5-year 
 period after consultation with the Assistant Secretary 
 for the Administration for Children and Families and 
 the Administrator of the Substance Abuse and Mental 
 Health Services Administration.
 ``(4) Indian tribe.--The term `Indian tribe' means any 
 Indian tribe, band, Nation or other organized group or 
 community of Indians, including any Alaska Native Organization, 
 that is recognized as eligible for the special programs and 
 services provided by the United States to Indians because of 
 their status as Indians.
 ``(5) State.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `State' means each of 
 the 50 States, the District of Columbia, and the 
 territories described in subparagraph (B).
 ``(B) Territories.--
 ``(i) In general.--The territories 
 described in this subparagraph are Puerto Rico, 
 Guam, the United States Virgin Islands, 
 American Samoa, and the Northern Mariana 
 Islands.
 ``(ii) Authority to modify requirements.--
 The Secretary may modify the requirements of 
 this subpart with respect to a territory 
 described in clause (i) to the extent necessary 
 to allow such a territory to conduct activities 
 through funds provided under a grant made under 
 this subpart.
 ``(6) State agencies.--The term `State agencies' means the 
 State child welfare agency and the unit of State government 
 responsible for the administration of the substance abuse 
 prevention and treatment block grant provided under subpart II 
 of part B of title XIX of the Public Health Service Act (42 
 U.S.C. 300x-21 et seq.).
 ``(7) Tribal organization.--The term `tribal organization' 
 means the recognized governing body of an Indian tribe.

``SEC. 441. GRANTS TO PROMOTE CHILD PROTECTION/ALCOHOL AND DRUG 
 PARTNERSHIPS FOR CHILDREN.

 ``(a) Authority To Award Grants.--The Secretary may award grants to 
eligible States and directly to Indian tribes in accordance with the 
requirements of this subpart for the purpose of promoting joint 
activities among Federal, State, and local public child welfare and 
alcohol and drug abuse prevention and treatment agencies (and among 
child welfare and alcohol and drug abuse prevention and treatment 
agencies that are providing services to children in Indian tribes) that 
focus on families with alcohol or drug abuse problems who come to the 
attention of the child welfare system and are designed to--
 ``(1) increase the capacity of both the child welfare 
 system and the alcohol and drug abuse prevention and treatment 
 system to address comprehensively and in a timely manner the 
 needs of such families to improve child safety, family 
 stability, and permanence; and
 ``(2) promote recovery from alcohol and drug abuse 
 problems.
 ``(b) Notification.--Not later than 60 days after the date a joint 
application is submitted by the State agencies or an application is 
submitted by an Indian tribe, the Secretary shall notify a State or 
Indian tribe that the application has been approved or disapproved.

``SEC. 442. PLAN REQUIREMENTS.

 ``(a) Contents.--Subject to subsection (c), the plan shall contain 
the following:
 ``(1) A detailed description of how the State agencies will 
 work jointly to implement a range of activities to meet the 
 alcohol and drug abuse prevention and treatment needs of 
 families who come to the attention of the child welfare system 
 and to promote child safety, permanence, and family stability.
 ``(2) An assurance that the heads of the State agencies 
 shall jointly administer the grant program funded under this 
 subpart and a description of how they will do so.
 ``(3) A description of the nature and extent of the problem 
 of alcohol and drug abuse among families who come to the 
 attention of the child welfare system in the State, and of any 
 plans being implemented to further identify and assess the 
 extent of the problem.
 ``(4) A description of any joint activities already being 
 undertaken by the State agencies in the State on behalf of 
 families with alcohol and drug abuse problems who come to the 
 attention of the child welfare system (including any existing 
 data on the impact of such joint activities) such as activities 
 relating to--
 ``(A) the appropriate screening and assessment of 
 cases;
 ``(B) consultation on cases involving alcohol and 
 drug abuse;
 ``(C) arrangements for addressing confidentiality 
 and sharing of information;
 ``(D) cross training of staff;
 ``(E) co-location of services;
 ``(F) support for comprehensive treatment programs 
 for parents and their children; and
 ``(G) establishing priority of child welfare 
 families for assessment or treatment.
 ``(5)(A) A description of the joint activities to be funded 
 in whole or in part with the funds provided under the grant, 
 including the sequencing of the activities proposed to be 
 conducted under the 5-year funding cycle and the goals to be 
 achieved during such funding cycle. The activities and goals 
 shall be designed to improve the capacity of the State agencies 
 to work jointly to improve child safety, family stability, and 
 permanence for children whose families come to the attention of 
 the child welfare system and to promote their parents' recovery 
 from alcohol and drug abuse.
 ``(B) The description shall include a statement as to why 
 the State agencies chose the specified activities and goals.
 ``(6) A description as to whether and how the joint 
 activities described in paragraph (5), and other related 
 activities funded with Federal funds, will address some or all 
 of the following practices and procedures:
 ``(A) Practices and procedures designed to 
 appropriately--
 ``(i) identify alcohol and drug treatment 
 needs;
 ``(ii) assess such needs;
 ``(iii) assess risks to the safety of a 
 child and the need for permanency with respect 
 to the placement of a child;
 ``(iv) enroll families in appropriate 
 services and treatment in their communities; 
 and
 ``(v) regularly assess the progress of 
 families receiving such treatment.
 ``(B) Practices and procedures designed to provide 
 comprehensive and timely individualized alcohol and 
 drug abuse prevention and treatment services for 
 families who come to the attention of the child welfare 
 system that include a range of options that are 
 available, accessible, and appropriate, and that may 
 include the following components:
 ``(i) Preventive and early intervention 
 services for children of parents with alcohol 
 and drug abuse problems that integrate alcohol 
 and drug abuse prevention services with mental 
 health and domestic violence services, and that 
 recognize the mental, emotional, and 
 developmental problems the children may 
 experience.
 ``(ii) Prevention and early intervention 
 services for parents at risk for alcohol and 
 drug abuse problems.
 ``(iii) Comprehensive home-based, 
 outpatient, and residential treatment options.
 ``(iv) After-care support (both formal and 
 informal) for families in recovery that 
 promotes child safety and family stability.
 ``(v) Services and supports that focus on 
 parents, parents with their children, parents' 
 children, other family members, and parent-
 child interaction.
 ``(C) Elimination of existing barriers to treatment 
 and to child safety and permanence, such as 
 difficulties in sharing information among agencies and 
 differences between the values and treatment protocols 
 of the different agencies.
 ``(D) Effective engagement and retention 
 strategies.
 ``(E) Pre-service and in-service joint training of 
 management and staff of child welfare and alcohol and 
 drug abuse prevention and treatment agencies, and, 
 where appropriate, judges and other court staff, to--
 ``(i) increase such individuals' awareness 
 and understanding of alcohol and drug abuse and 
 related child abuse and neglect;
 ``(ii) more accurately identify and screen 
 alcohol and drug abuse and child abuse in 
 families;
 ``(iii) improve assessment skills of both 
 child abuse and alcohol and drug abuse staff, 
 including skills to assess risk to children's 
 safety;
 ``(iv) increase staff knowledge of the 
 services and resources that are available in 
 such individuals' communities and appropriate 
 for such families; and
 ``(v) increase awareness of the importance 
 of permanence for children and the timelines 
 for decisionmaking regarding permanence in the 
 child welfare system.
 ``(F) Progress in enhancing the abilities of the 
 State agencies to improve the data systems of such 
 agencies in order to monitor the progress of families, 
 evaluate service and treatment outcomes, and determine 
 which approaches and activities are most effective.
 ``(G) Evaluation strategies to demonstrate the 
 effectiveness of treatment and identify the aspects of 
 treatment that have the greatest impact on families in 
 different circumstances.
 ``(H) Training and technical assistance to increase 
 the capacity within the State to carry out 1 or more of 
 the activities described in this paragraph or related 
 activities that are designed to expand prevention and 
 treatment services for, and staff training to assist 
 families with alcohol and drug abuse problems who come 
 to the attention of the child welfare system.
 ``(7) A description of the jurisdictions in the State 
 (including whether such jurisdictions are urban, suburban, or 
 rural) where the joint activities will be provided, and the 
 plans for expanding such activities to other parts of the State 
 during the 5-year funding cycle.
 ``(8) A description of the methods to be used in measuring 
 progress toward the goals identified under paragraph (5), 
 including how the State agencies will jointly measure their 
 performance in accordance with section 445, and how remaining 
 barriers to meeting the needs of families with alcohol or drug 
 abuse problems who come to the attention of the child welfare 
 system will be assessed.
 ``(9) A description of what input was obtained in the 
 development of the plan and the joint application from each of 
 the following groups of individuals, and the manner in which 
 each will continue to be involved in the proposed joint 
 activities:
 ``(A) Staff who provide alcohol and drug abuse 
 prevention and treatment and related services to 
 families who come to the attention of the child welfare 
 system.
 ``(B) Advocates for children and parents who come 
 to the attention of the child welfare and alcohol and 
 drug abuse prevention and treatment systems.
 ``(C) Consumers of both child welfare and alcohol 
 and drug abuse prevention and treatment services.
 ``(D) Direct service staff and supervisors from 
 public and private child welfare and alcohol and drug 
 abuse prevention and treatment agencies.
 ``(E) Judges and court staff.
 ``(F) Representatives of the State agencies and 
 private providers providing health, mental health, 
 domestic violence, housing, education, and employment 
 services.
 ``(G) A representative of the State agency in 
 charge of administering the temporary assistance to 
 needy families program funded under part A of this 
 title.
 ``(10) An assurance of the coordination, to the extent 
 feasible and appropriate, of the activities funded under a 
 grant made under this subpart with the services or benefits 
 provided under other Federal or federally assisted programs 
 that serve families with alcohol and drug abuse problems who 
 come to the attention of the child welfare system, including 
 health, mental health, domestic violence, housing, and 
 employment programs, the temporary assistance to needy families 
 program funded under part A of this title, other child welfare 
 and alcohol and drug abuse prevention and treatment programs, 
 and the courts.
 ``(11) An assurance that not more than 10 percent of 
 expenditures under the plan for any fiscal year shall be for 
 administrative costs.
 ``(12) An assurance that alcohol and drug treatment 
 services provided at least in part with funds provided under a 
 grant made under this subpart shall be licensed, certified, or 
 otherwise approved by the appropriate State alcohol and drug 
 abuse agencies, or in the case of an Indian tribe, by a State 
 alcohol and drug abuse agency, the Indian Health Service, or 
 other designated licensing agency.
 ``(13) An assurance that Federal funds provided to the 
 State under a grant made under this subpart will not be used to 
 supplant Federal or non-Federal funds for services and 
 activities provided as of the date of the submission of the 
 plan that assist families with alcohol and drug abuse problems 
 who come to the attention of the child welfare system.
 ``(b) Amendments.--
 ``(1) In general.--An eligible State or Indian tribe may 
 amend, in whole or in part, its plan at any time through 
 transmittal of a plan amendment.
 ``(2) 60-day approval deadline.--A plan amendment is 
 considered approved unless the Secretary notifies an eligible 
 State or Indian tribe in writing, within 60 days after receipt 
 of the amendment, that the amendment is disapproved (and the 
 reasons for disapproval) or that specified additional 
 information is needed.
 ``(c) Requirements for Applications by Indian Tribes.--
 ``(1) In general.--In order to be eligible for a grant made 
 under this subpart, an Indian tribe shall--
 ``(A) submit a plan to the Secretary that 
 describes--
 ``(i) the activities the tribe will 
 undertake with both child welfare and alcohol 
 and drug agencies that serve the tribe's 
 children to address the needs of families who 
 come to the attention of the child welfare 
 agencies and have alcohol and drug problems; 
 and
 ``(ii) whether and how such activities 
 address any of the practice and policy areas in 
 subsection (a)(6); and
 ``(B) subject to paragraph (2), meet the other 
 requirements of subsection (a) unless, with respect to 
 a specific requirement of such subsection, the 
 Secretary determines that it would be inappropriate to 
 apply such requirement to an Indian tribe, taking into 
 account the resources, needs, and other circumstances 
 of the Indian tribe.
 ``(2) Administrative costs; use of federal funds.--
 Paragraphs (11) and (13) of subsection (a) shall not apply to a 
 plan submitted by an Indian tribe. The indirect cost rate 
 agreement in effect for an Indian tribe shall apply with 
 respect to administrative costs under the tribe's plan.
 ``(3) Authority for intertribal consortium.--The 
 participating Indian tribes of an intertribal consortium may 
 develop and submit a single plan that meets the applicable 
 requirements of subsection (a) (as so determined by the 
 Secretary) and paragraph (1) of this subsection.

``SEC. 443. APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS.

 ``(a) Appropriations.--For the purpose of providing allotments to 
eligible States and Indian tribes under this subpart and research and 
training under subsection (b)(3), there is appropriated out of any 
money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated--
 ``(1) for fiscal year 2002, $200,000,000;
 ``(2) for fiscal year 2003, $275,000,000;
 ``(3) for fiscal year 2004, $375,000,000;
 ``(4) for fiscal year 2005, $475,000,000; and
 ``(5) for fiscal year 2006, $575,000,000.
 ``(b) Reservation of Funds.--With respect to a fiscal year:
 ``(1) Territories.--The Secretary shall reserve 2 percent 
 of the amount appropriated under subsection (a) for such fiscal 
 year for payments to Puerto Rico, Guam, the United States 
 Virgin Islands, American Samoa, and the Northern Mariana 
 Islands.
 ``(2) Indian tribes.--The Secretary shall reserve not less 
 than 3 nor more than 5 percent of the amount appropriated under 
 subsection (a) for such fiscal year for direct payments to 
 Indian tribes and Indian tribal organizations for activities 
 intended to increase the capacity of the Indian tribes and 
 tribal organizations to expand treatment, services, and 
 training to assist families with alcohol and drug abuse 
 problems who come to the attention of the child welfare 
 agencies.
 ``(3) Research and training.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
 Secretary shall reserve 1 percent of the amount 
 appropriated under subsection (a) for such fiscal year 
 for practice-based research on the effectiveness of 
 various approaches for the screening, assessment, 
 engagement, treatment, retention, and monitoring of 
 families with alcohol and drug abuse problems who come 
 to the attention of the child welfare system, and for 
 training of staff in such areas and shall ensure that a 
 portion of such amount is used for research on the 
 effectiveness of these approaches for Indian children 
 and for the training of staff serving children from the 
 Indian tribes.
 ``(B) Determination of use of funds.--Funds 
 reserved under subparagraph (A) may only be used to 
 carry out a research agenda that addresses the areas 
 described in such subparagraph and that is established 
 by the Secretary, together with the Assistant Secretary 
 for the Administration for Children and Families and 
 the Administrator of Substance Abuse and Mental Health 
 Services Administration, with input from public and 
 private nonprofit providers, consumers, representatives 
 of Indian tribes, and advocates, as well as others with 
 expertise in research in such areas.

``SEC. 444. PAYMENTS TO ELIGIBLE STATES AND INDIAN TRIBES.

 ``(a) Amount of Grant.--
 ``(1) Eligible states other than territories.--
 ``(A) In general.--From the amount appropriated 
 under subsection (a) of section 443 for a fiscal year, 
 after the reservation of funds required under 
 subsection (b) of that section for the fiscal year and 
 subject to subparagraphs (B) and (C), the Secretary 
 shall pay to each eligible State (after the Secretary 
 has determined that the State has satisfied the 
 matching requirement under subsection (b)) an amount 
 that bears the same ratio to such amount for such 
 fiscal year as the number of children under the age of 
 18 that reside in the eligible State bears to the total 
 number of children under the age of 18 who reside in 
 all such eligible States for such fiscal year.
 ``(B) Minimum allotment.--In no case shall the 
 amount of a payment to an eligible State for a fiscal 
 year be less than an amount equal to 0.5 percent of the 
 amount appropriated under subsection (a) of section 443 
 for the fiscal year, after the reservation of funds 
 required under subsection (b) of that section.
 ``(C) Pro rata reductions.--The Secretary shall 
 make pro rata reductions in the amounts of the 
 allotments determined under subparagraph (A) for a 
 fiscal year to the extent necessary to comply with 
 subparagraph (B).
 ``(2) Territories.--From the amounts reserved under section 
 443(b)(1) for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall pay to each 
 territory described in section 440(5)(B) with an approved plan 
 that meets the requirements of section 442 (after the Secretary 
 has determined that the territory has satisfied the matching 
 requirement under subsection (b)) an amount that bears the same 
 ratio to such amount for such fiscal year as the number of 
children under the age of 18 that reside in the territory bears to the 
total number of children under the age of 18 who reside in all such 
territories for such fiscal year.
 ``(3) Indian tribes or tribal organizations.--From the 
 amount reserved under section 443(b)(2) for a fiscal year, the 
 Secretary shall pay to each Indian tribe with an approved plan 
 that meets the requirements of section 442(c) (after the 
 Secretary has determined that the Indian tribe has satisfied 
 the matching requirement under subsection (b)) an amount that 
 bears the same ratio to such reserved amount for such fiscal 
 year as the number of children under the age of 18 in the 
 Indian tribe bears to the total number of children under the 
 age of 18 in all Indian tribes with plans so approved for such 
 fiscal year, as determined by the Secretary on the basis of the 
 most current and reliable information available to the 
 Secretary. For purposes of making the allocations required 
 under the preceding sentence, an Indian tribe may submit data 
 and other information that it has on the number of Indian 
 children under the age of 18 for consideration by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(b) Matching Requirement.--
 ``(1) In general.--In order to receive a grant under this 
 subpart for a fiscal year, an eligible State or Indian tribe 
 shall provide through non-Federal contributions the applicable 
 percentage determined under paragraph (2) for such fiscal year 
 of the costs of conducting activities funded in whole or in 
 part with funds provided under the grant. Such contributions 
 shall be paid jointly by the State agencies, in the case of an 
 eligible State, or by an Indian tribe.
 ``(2) Applicable percentage.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (1), the applicable percentage for an eligible State or Indian 
 tribe for a fiscal year is--
 ``(A) 15 percent, in the case of fiscal years 2002 
 and 2003;
 ``(B) 20 percent, in the case of fiscal years 2004 
 and 2005; and
 ``(C) 25 percent, in the case of fiscal year 2006.
 ``(3) Source of match.--
 ``(A) Eligible states.--The non-Federal 
 contributions required of an eligible State under this 
 subsection may be in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, 
 including plant, equipment, or services. The 
 contributions may be made directly or through donations 
 from public or private entities. Amounts provided by 
 the Federal Government, or services assisted or 
 subsidized to any significant extent by the Federal 
 Government may not be included in determining whether 
 an eligible State has provided the applicable 
 percentage of such contributions for a fiscal year.
 ``(B) Indian tribes.--With respect to an Indian 
 tribe, such contributions may be made in cash, through 
 donated funds, through non-public third party in kind 
 contributions, or from Federal funds received under any 
 of the following provisions of law:
 ``(i) The Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978 
 (25 U.S.C. 1901 et seq.).
 ``(ii) The Indian Self-Determination and 
 Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450b et 
 seq.).
 ``(iii) Title I of the Housing and 
 Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 
 5301 et seq.).
 ``(4) Waiver.--
 ``(A) Eligible states.--In the case of an eligible 
 State, the Secretary, after consultation with the 
 Assistant Secretary for the Administration for Children 
 and Families and the Administrator of the Substance 
 Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, may 
 modify the applicable percentage determined under 
 paragraph (2) for matching funds if the Secretary 
 determines that economic conditions in the eligible 
 State justify making such modification.
 ``(B) Indian tribes.--In the case of an Indian 
 tribe, the Secretary may modify the applicable 
 percentage determined under such paragraph if the 
 Secretary determines that it would be inappropriate to 
 apply to the Indian tribe, taking into the resources 
 and needs of the tribe and the amount of funds the 
 tribe would receive under a grant made under this 
 section.
 ``(c) Use of Funds.--Funds provided under a grant made under this 
subpart may only be used to carry out activities specified in the plan, 
as approved by the Secretary.
 ``(d) Deadline for Request for Payment.--An eligible State or 
Indian tribe shall apply to be paid funds under a grant made under this 
subpart not later than the beginning of the fourth quarter of a fiscal 
year or such funds shall be reallotted under subsection (f).
 ``(e) Carryover of Funds.--Funds paid to an eligible State or 
Indian tribe under a grant made under this subpart for a fiscal year 
may be expended in that fiscal year or the succeeding fiscal year.
 ``(f) Reallotment of Funds.--
 ``(1) Eligible states.--In the case of an eligible State 
 that does not apply for funds allotted to the eligible State 
 under a grant made under this subpart for a fiscal year within 
 the time provided under subsection (d), or that does not expend 
 such funds during the time provided under subsection (e), the 
 funds which the eligible State would have been entitled to for 
 such fiscal year shall be reallotted to 1 or more other 
 eligible States on the basis of each such State's relative need 
 for additional payments, as determined by the Secretary, after 
 consultation with the Assistant Secretary for the 
 Administration for Children and Families and the Administrator 
 of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
 Administration.
 ``(2) Indian tribes.--In the case of an Indian tribe that 
 does not expend funds allotted to the tribe during the time 
 provided under subsection (e), the funds to which the Indian 
 tribe would have been entitled to for such fiscal year shall be 
 reallotted to the remaining Indian tribes that are implementing 
 approved plans in amounts that are proportional to the 
 percentage of Indian children under the age of 18 in each such 
 tribe.

``SEC. 445. PERFORMANCE ACCOUNTABILITY; REPORTS AND EVALUATIONS.

 ``(a) Performance Measurement.--
 ``(1) Establishment of indicators.--The Secretary, in 
 consultation with the Assistant Secretary for the 
 Administration for Children and Families, the Administrator of 
 the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 
 Chief Executive Officers of a State or Territory, State 
 legislators, State and local public officials responsible for 
 administering child welfare and alcohol and drug abuse 
 prevention and treatment programs, court staff, consumers of 
 the services, and advocates for children and parents who come 
 to the attention of the child welfare system, shall, within 12 
 months of the date of enactment of the Child Protection/Alcohol 
 and Drug Partnership Act of 2001, establish indicators that 
 will be used to assess periodically the performance of eligible 
 States and Indian tribes in using grant funds provided under 
 this subpart to promote child safety, permanence, and well-
 being and recovery in families who come to the attention of the 
 child welfare system.
 ``(2) Coordination.--The indicators established under 
 paragraph (1) shall be based on and coordinated with the 
 performance outcomes established for the child welfare system 
 pursuant to section 203(b) of the Adoption and Safe Families 
 Act of 1997 and the performance measures developed under 
 subpart II of part B of title XIX of the Public Health Service 
 Act (relating to the substance abuse prevention and treatment 
 block grant).
 ``(3) Purpose.--The indicators will be used to measure 
 periodically the progress made by the State agencies and by 
 child welfare and alcohol and drug abuse prevention and 
 treatment agencies serving children in Indian tribes in the 
activities that such agencies jointly engage in with such grant funds. 
An eligible State or Indian tribe will be measured against itself, 
assessing progress over time against a baseline established at the time 
the grant activities were undertaken.
 ``(4) Illustrative examples.--The indicators developed 
 should address the range of activities that eligible States and 
 Indian tribes have the option of engaging in with such grant 
 funds. Examples of the types of progress to be measured in the 
 different areas of activity include the following:
 ``(A) Improving the screening and assessment of 
 families who come to the attention of the child welfare 
 system with alcohol and drug problems, so such families 
 can be promptly referred for appropriate treatment when 
 necessary.
 ``(B) Increasing the availability of comprehensive 
 and timely individualized treatment for families with 
 alcohol and drug problems who come to the attention of 
 the child welfare system.
 ``(C) Increasing the number or proportion of 
 families who, when they come to the attention of the 
 child welfare system with alcohol and drug problems, 
 promptly enter appropriate treatment.
 ``(D) Increasing the engagement and retention in 
 treatment of families with alcohol and drug problems 
 who come to the attention of the child welfare system.
 ``(E) Decreasing the number of children who re-
 enter foster care after being returned to families who 
 had alcohol or drug problems when the children entered 
 foster care.
 ``(F) Increasing the number or proportion of staff 
 in both the public child welfare and alcohol and drug 
 abuse prevention and treatment agencies who have 
 received training on the needs of families that come to 
 the attention of the child welfare and alcohol and drug 
 abuse prevention and treatment systems for help, and 
 the help that can be provided to such families.
 ``(G) Increasing the proportion of parents who 
 complete treatment for alcohol or drug abuse and show 
 improvement in their pre-employment or employment 
 status.
 ``(5) Determination of progress.--
 ``(A) Initial report.--Not later than the end of 
 the first fiscal year in which funds are received under 
 a grant made under this subpart, the State agencies in 
 each eligible State that receives such funds, and the 
 Indian tribes that receive such funds, shall submit to 
 the Secretary a report on the activities carried out 
 during the fiscal year with such funds. The report 
 shall contain such information as the Secretary 
 determines is necessary to provide an accurate 
 description of the activities conducted with such funds 
 and of any changes in the use of such funds that are 
 planned for the succeeding fiscal year.
 ``(B) Use of indicators.--As soon as possible after 
 the establishment of indicators under paragraph (1), 
 the State agencies and Indian tribes shall conduct 
 evaluations, directly or under contract, of their 
 progress with respect to such indicators that are 
 directly related to activities the eligible State or 
 Indian tribe is engaging in with such grant funds and 
 include information on the evaluation in the reports to 
 the Secretary required under subparagraphs (C) and (D). 
 After the third year in which such activities are 
 conducted, an eligible State or Indian tribe shall 
 include in the evaluation at least some indicators that 
 address improvements in treatment for families with 
 alcohol and drug problems who come to the attention of 
 the child welfare system.
 ``(C) Subsequent reports.--After the initial report 
 is submitted under subparagraph (A), an eligible State 
 or Indian tribe shall submit to the Secretary, not 
 later than June 30 of each fiscal year thereafter in 
 which the State or tribe carries out activities with 
 grant funds provided under this subpart, a report on 
 the application of the indicators established under 
 paragraph (1) to such activities. The reports shall 
 include an explanation regarding why the specific 
 indicators used were chosen, how such indicators are 
 expected to impact a child's safety, permanence, well-
 being, and parental recovery, and the results (as of 
 the date of submission of the report) of the evaluation 
 conducted under subparagraph (B).
 ``(D) Final report.--Not later than September 30, 
 2006, each eligible State and Indian tribe with an 
 approved plan under this part shall submit a final 
 report on the evaluations conducted under subparagraph 
 (B) and the progress made in achieving the goals 
 specified in the plan of the State or Indian tribe.
 ``(E) Failure to report.--
 ``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), 
 an eligible State or Indian tribe that fails to 
 submit the reports required under this 
 paragraph or to conduct the evaluation required 
 under subparagraph (B) shall not be eligible to 
 receive grant funds provided under this subpart 
 for the fiscal year following the fiscal year 
 in which such State or Indian tribe failed to 
 submit such report or conduct such evaluation.
 ``(ii) Corrective action.--An eligible 
 State or Indian tribe to which clause (i) 
 applies may, notwithstanding such clause, 
 receive grant funds under this subpart for a 
 succeeding fiscal year if prior to September 30 
 of the fiscal year in which such failure 
 occurred, the State agencies of the eligible 
 State, or the Indian tribe, submit to the 
 Secretary a plan to monitor and evaluate in a 
 timely manner the activities conducted with 
 such funds, and such plan is approved in a 
 timely manner by the Secretary, after 
 consultation with the Administration for 
 Children and Families and the Substance Abuse 
 and Mental Health Services Administration.
 ``(b) Secretarial Reports and Evaluations.--
 ``(1) Annual reports.--On the basis of reports submitted 
 under subsection (a), the Secretary, in consultation with the 
 Assistant Secretary for the Administration for Children and 
 Families and the Administrator of the Substance Abuse and 
 Mental Health Services Administration, shall report annually, 
 beginning on October 1, 2003, to the Committee on Ways and 
 Means of the House of Representatives and the Committee on 
 Finance of the Senate on the joint activities conducted with 
 funds provided under grants made under this subpart, the 
 indicators that have been established, and the progress that 
 has been made in addressing the needs of families with alcohol 
 and drug abuse problems who come to the attention of the child 
 welfare system and in achieving the goals of child safety, 
 permanence, and family stability.
 ``(2) Evaluations.--Not later than 6 months after the end 
 of each 5-year funding cycle under this subpart, the Secretary 
 shall submit a report to the committees described in paragraph 
 (1) that summarizes the results of the evaluations conducted by 
 eligible States and Indian tribes under subsection (a)(5)(B), 
 as reported by such States and Indian tribes in accordance with 
 subparagraphs (C) and (D) of subsection (a)(5). The Secretary 
 shall include in the report required under this paragraph 
 recommendations for further legislative or administrative 
 actions that are designed to assist children and families with 
 alcohol and drug abuse problems who come to the attention of 
 the child welfare system.''.

 Subtitle E--Permanency Grants

SEC. 8401. ESTABLISHMENT OF PERMANENCY GRANTS PROGRAM.

 Part E of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 670 et 
seq.), as amended by section 8011(b), is amended by adding at the end 
the following:

``SEC. 479C. PERMANENCY GRANTS.

 ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Qualified state agency.--The term `qualified State 
 agency' means, with respect to a State, the State agency--
 ``(A) with responsibility for administering the 
 program authorized by subpart 1 of part B and the 
 program authorized under this part; and
 ``(B) that submits an application in accordance 
 with the requirements of subsection (c).
 ``(2) Waiting children.--The term `waiting children' means 
 the children described in subsection (b)(2).
 ``(b) Authority To Award Grants.--The Secretary shall award a one-
time grant to each qualified State agency for the purposes of--
 ``(1) promoting the permanency goals of the Adoption and 
 Safe Families Act of 1997; and
 ``(2) enabling the agency to reduce existing backlogs of 
 children with permanent placement plans pursuant to that Act 
 who, as of the date of enactment of that Act, were waiting to 
 be placed in permanent homes, through return to their families, 
 placement in adoptive homes, or placement with a legal guardian 
 or a fit or willing relative.
 ``(c) Application.--A State agency desiring a grant under this 
section shall submit an application for a grant, in such form and 
manner as the Secretary shall require, that contains a description of 
the following:
 ``(1) The barriers to achieving the permanency goals 
 established in the Adoption and Safe Families Act of 1997.
 ``(2) The results of the review of the permanency plans for 
 children in foster care on November 19, 1997 (the date of 
 enactment of that Act), including--
 ``(A) the number of children who have permanency 
 plans;
 ``(B) a description of the permanency goals for 
 such children;
 ``(C) the age of such children;
 ``(D) the current placements and special needs of 
 such children; and
 ``(E) the number of such children who have and the 
 number of such children who have not yet been placed in 
 accordance with those plans.
 ``(3) The activities the agency proposes, including a 
 specific plan and timetable, to--
 ``(A) move the waiting children to permanent homes; 
 and
 ``(B) reduce the backlog of waiting children.
 ``(4) How the grant funds will be used to help 
 secure permanent homes for waiting children.
 ``(5) Subject to subsection (e), the information 
 described in that subsection.
 ``(c) Use of Funds.--Funds provided under a grant made under this 
section may be used for any purpose that the Secretary determines will 
assist the State agency to secure permanent homes for waiting children.
 ``(d) Availability of Funds.--Funds awarded under a grant made 
under this section shall remain available for expenditure by a 
qualified State agency through the end of the second succeeding fiscal 
year.
 ``(e) Coordination With Grants to Courts To Reduce Backlogs.--If a 
qualified State agency receiving a grant under this section is in a 
State where the State or local courts are recipients of grants pursuant 
to the Strengthening Abuse and Neglect Courts Act of 2000 to reduce 
pending backlogs of abuse and neglect cases and promote permanency, the 
application submitted under subsection (b) shall include a description 
of how the proposed backlog reduction activities undertaken with funds 
provided under a grant under this section will be coordinated with the 
activities undertaken by the State or local courts with funds provided 
under that Act.
 ``(f) Priority of Awards.--In awarding grants under this section, 
the Secretary shall give priority to qualified State agencies that can 
demonstrate that they already have taken steps to move waiting children 
to permanent homes.
 ``(g) Report.--Not later than 60 days after the end of each fiscal 
year for which a qualified State agency expends funds under a grant 
made under this section, and 90 days after the date of the final 
expenditure of such funds, the agency shall submit a report to the 
Secretary that includes any information that the Secretary determines 
would assist other jurisdictions in achieving the permanency goals of 
the Adoption and Safe Families Act of 1997, including the following:
 ``(1) The barriers to permanence that are being or were 
 addressed with grant funds.
 ``(2) The most effective strategies used to reduce the 
 backlog of waiting children.
 ``(3) The activities funded under the grant that helped to 
 reduce such backlog.
 ``(4) The numbers of waiting children who were moved to 
 permanent homes, including the ages of such children, any 
 special needs of such children, and a description of the 
 children's placements.
 ``(5) The efforts being made to ensure that the placements 
 continue to be permanent.
 ``(6) The number of waiting children who remain in care 
 without permanent families.
 ``(h) Funding.--There is appropriated, out of any money in the 
Treasury not otherwise appropriated, $200,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2002 and 2003 for the purpose of making grants under this 
section.''.

 Subtitle F--Addressing the Needs of Children Exposed to Domestic 
 Violence

SEC. 8501. PURPOSES.

 The purposes of this subtitle are--
 (1) to expand programs, and create new interventions, 
 services, and treatment options, for children who are exposed 
 to domestic violence that take into consideration the needs of 
 both child and adult victims of domestic violence and emphasize 
 accountability for the perpetrators of domestic violence;
 (2) to improve training concerning domestic violence, and 
 the impact of domestic violence on children, for child welfare 
 and domestic violence professionals, other providers of 
 services for children, child educators and counselors, and law 
 enforcement personnel and judges;
 (3) to educate children in elementary schools and secondary 
 schools about domestic violence and expand the interventions 
 that are available to children who are exposed to domestic 
 violence; and
 (4) to expand research and data collection concerning the 
 impact of domestic violence on children in order to better meet 
 the service and therapeutic needs of children exposed to 
 domestic violence.

SEC. 8502. DEFINITIONS.

 In this subtitle:
 (1) Domestic violence.--The term ``domestic violence'' 
 includes--
 (A) an act or threat of violence, not including an 
 act of self defense, committed by--
 (i) a current or former spouse of the 
 victim;
 (ii) a person with whom the victim shares a 
 child in common;
 (iii) a person who is cohabiting with or 
 has cohabited with the victim;
 (iv) a person who is or has been in a 
 social relationship of a romantic or intimate 
 nature with the victim;
 (v) a person similarly situated to a spouse 
 of the victim under the domestic or family 
 violence laws of the jurisdiction of the 
 victim; or
 (vi) any other person against a victim who 
 is protected from that person's act under the 
 domestic or family violence laws of the 
 jurisdiction; and
 (B) sexual assault.
 (2) Exposed to domestic violence.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``exposed to domestic 
 violence'' means exposed to--
 (i) an act of domestic violence that 
 constitutes actual or attempted physical 
 assault; or
 (ii) a threat or other action that places 
 the victim in fear of domestic violence.
 (B) Exposed to.--In subparagraph (A), the term 
 ``exposed to'' means--
 (i) directly observing an act, threat, or 
 action described in subparagraph (A), or the 
 aftermath of that act, threat, or action; or
 (ii) being within earshot of an act, 
 threat, or action described in subparagraph 
 (A), or the aftermath of that act, threat, or 
 action.''.

SEC. 8503. GRANTS TO ADDRESS THE NEEDS OF CHILDREN WHO ARE EXPOSED TO 
 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.

 (a) In General.--The Family Violence Prevention and Services Act 
(42 U.S.C. 10401 et seq.), as amended by section 1203 of the Violence 
Against Women Act of 2000, is further amended by adding at the end the 
following:

``SEC. 320. MULTISYSTEM INTERVENTIONS FOR CHILDREN WHO ARE EXPOSED TO 
 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.

 ``(a) Grants Authorized.--
 ``(1) Authority.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Director of Community Services, in the Administration for 
 Children and Families, is authorized to award grants to 
 eligible entities to conduct programs to encourage the use of 
 domestic violence intervention models using multisystem 
 partnerships to address the assessed needs of children who are 
 exposed to domestic violence.
 ``(2) Term and amount.--Each grant awarded under this 
 section shall be awarded for a term of 3 years and in an amount 
 of not more than $500,000 for each such year.
 ``(3) Eligible entities.--To be eligible to receive a grant 
 under this section, an entity shall--
 ``(A) be a nonprofit private organization;
 ``(B)(i) demonstrate recognized expertise in the 
 area of domestic violence on children; or
 ``(ii) enter into a memorandum of understanding 
 regarding the intervention program that--
 ``(I) is entered into with the State or 
 tribal domestic violence coalition and entities 
 carrying out domestic violence programs that 
 provide shelter or related assistance in the 
 locality in which the intervention program will 
 be operated; and
 ``(II) demonstrates collaboration on the 
 intervention program with the coalition and 
 entities and the support of the coalition and 
 entities for the intervention program; and
 ``(C) demonstrate a history of providing advocacy, 
 health care, mental health, or other crisis-related 
 services to children.
 ``(b) Use of Funds.--An entity that receives a grant under this 
section shall use amounts provided through the grant to conduct a 
program to design or replicate, and implement, domestic violence 
intervention models that use multisystem partners to respond to the 
needs of children who are exposed to domestic violence. Such a program 
shall--
 ``(1)(A) involve collaborative partnerships with--
 ``(i) local entities carrying out domestic violence 
 programs that provide shelter or related assistance; 
 and
 ``(ii) partners that are courts, schools, social 
 service providers, health care providers, police, early 
 childhood agencies, entities carrying out Head Start 
 programs under the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9831 et 
 seq.), or entities carrying out child protection, 
 welfare, job training, housing, battered women's 
 service, or children's mental health programs; and
 ``(B) be carried out to design and implement protocols and 
 systems to identify, refer, and appropriately respond to the 
 needs of, children who are exposed to domestic violence and who 
 participate in programs administered by the partners;
 ``(2) include guidelines to evaluate the needs of a child 
 and make appropriate intervention recommendations;
 ``(3) include guidelines that respond appropriately to the 
 overlapping needs of children who are exposed to domestic 
 violence and who are also being abused or neglected;
 ``(4) include institutionalized procedures to enhance or 
 ensure the safety and security (including economic security) of 
 a battered parent, and as a result, the child of the parent;
 ``(5) provide direct counseling and advocacy for adult 
 victims of domestic violence and their children who are exposed 
 to domestic violence, including providing an evaluation of the 
 specific needs of each such child and of the nature of the 
 treatment needed by the child;
 ``(6) include the development or replication of a mental 
 health treatment model to meet the needs of children for whom 
 such treatment has been identified as appropriate;
 ``(7) include policies and protocols for maintaining the 
 confidentiality of the battered parent and child;
 ``(8) provide community outreach and training to enhance 
 the capacity of professionals who work with children to 
 appropriately identify and respond to the needs of children who 
 are exposed to domestic violence;
 ``(9) include procedures for documenting interventions used 
 for each child and family served under the program carried out 
 under the grant; and
 ``(10) include plans to perform a systematic outcome 
 evaluation to evaluate the effectiveness of the interventions.
 ``(c) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this 
section, an entity shall prepare and submit to the Secretary an 
application at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
information as the Secretary may require.
 ``(d) Technical Assistance.--Not later than 90 days after the date 
of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall identify successful 
programs providing multisystem and mental health interventions to 
address the needs of children who are exposed to domestic violence. Not 
later than 60 days before the Secretary solicits applications for 
grants under this section, the Secretary shall enter into an agreement 
with 1 or more entities carrying out the identified programs to provide 
technical assistance to the applicants and recipients of the grants. 
The Secretary may use not more than 5 percent of the amount 
appropriated for a fiscal year under subsection (e) to provide the 
technical assistance.
 ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--
 ``(1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated 
 to carry out this section $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 
 2002 through 2004 and $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2005 
 and 2006.
 ``(2) Availability.--Amounts appropriated under paragraph 
 (1) shall remain available until expended.
 ``(f) Definitions.--In this section, the terms `domestic violence' 
and `exposed to domestic violence' have the meanings given the terms in 
section 8502 of the Leave No Child Behind Act of 2001.''.
 (b) Administration.--Section 305(a) of the Family Violence 
Prevention and Services Act (42 U.S.C. 10404(a)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``an employee'' and inserting ``1 or more 
 employees''; and
 (2) by striking ``The individual'' and inserting ``Each 
 individual''.

SEC. 8504. TRAINING AND COORDINATION OF CHILD WELFARE AGENCIES AND 
 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE SERVICE PROVIDERS.

 The Family Violence Prevention and Services Act (42 U.S.C. 10401 et 
seq.), as amended by section 8503, is further amended by adding at the 
end the following:

``SEC. 321. TRAINING AND COORDINATION OF CHILD WELFARE AGENCIES AND 
 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE SERVICE PROVIDERS.

 ``(a) Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to encourage cross 
training and coordination between State and local child welfare 
agencies and domestic violence service providers--
 ``(1) to encourage the child welfare agencies, as part of 
 their ongoing child welfare responsibilities, to recognize 
 domestic violence and treat such violence as a serious problem 
 threatening the safety and well-being of child and adult 
 victims;
 ``(2) to educate the domestic violence service providers 
 about child welfare policies that affect child and adult 
 victims and the effects of domestic violence on children; and
 ``(3) to increase cooperation and collaboration between the 
 domestic violence service providers and child welfare agencies.
 ``(b) Definition.--In this section:
 ``(1) Domestic violence.--The term `domestic violence' has 
 the meaning given the term in section 8502 of the Leave No 
 Child Behind Act of 2001.
 ``(2) Exposed to domestic violence.--The term `exposed to 
 domestic violence' has the meaning given the term in such 
 section 8502.
 ``(c) Grant Authority.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Attorney General and the Secretary 
 shall jointly make grants to eligible entities to enable the 
 entities to carry out initiatives to train staff and modify 
 policies, procedures, programs, and practices so that the 
 policies, procedures, programs, and practices are consistent 
 with principles of--
 ``(A) protecting children;
 ``(B) increasing the safety and well-being of the 
 children, by--
 ``(i) increasing the safety of parents of 
 the children who are not the perpetrators of 
 domestic violence; and
 ``(ii) supporting the autonomy and capacity 
 of parents of the children who are victims of 
 domestic violence (referred to in this section 
 as `adult victims'); and
 ``(C) holding adult perpetrators, not child and 
 adult victims, accountable for stopping the domestic 
 violence.
 ``(2) Grant periods.--The Attorney General and the 
 Secretary shall make the grants for a period of 3 years.
 ``(d) Eligible Entities.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
this section, an entity shall be a partnership of--
 ``(1) a State child welfare agency, a tribal organization 
 that serves as a child welfare agency, or a local child welfare 
 agency; and
 ``(2) a domestic violence service provider, such as--
 ``(A) a State domestic violence coalition; or
 ``(B) another private nonprofit organization that 
 is concerned with domestic violence and has a 
 documented history of effective work concerning 
 domestic violence and the impact of domestic violence 
 on children.
 ``(e) Uses of Funds; Goals.--An entity that receives a grant under 
this section shall use the funds made available through the grant to 
carry out goals consisting of--
 ``(1) recognizing--
 ``(A) the overlap between child abuse and neglect, 
 including child sexual abuse, and domestic violence in 
 families;
 ``(B) the dynamics of domestic violence;
 ``(C) the dangers posed to both child and adult 
 victims of domestic violence;
 ``(D) the physical, emotional, and developmental 
 impact of domestic violence on children;
 ``(E) the needs of adult victims of domestic 
 violence and the need to hold adult perpetrators of 
 domestic violence accountable for their actions,
 in order to provide appropriate services to reduce risks to 
 children;
 ``(2) increasing collaboration between child welfare 
 agencies and domestic violence service providers, including the 
 education of domestic violence service providers about child 
 welfare practices and protocols that affect the child and adult 
 victims;
 ``(3) developing and implementing policies, procedures, 
 programs, and practice guidelines to--
 ``(A) reflect the principles stated in subsection 
 (c);
 ``(B) identify and assess, and respond 
 appropriately to, domestic violence in child protection 
 cases; and
 ``(C) ensure the confidentiality of information on 
 families that is shared between child welfare agencies 
 and entities carrying out community-based domestic 
 violence programs;
 ``(4) developing appropriate responses in cases of domestic 
 violence, including developing a safety plan and providing 
 other appropriate services and interventions that ensure the 
 safety of both the child and adult victims of the domestic 
 violence;
 ``(5) creating links between--
 ``(A) child welfare agencies;
 ``(B) entities carrying out community-based 
 domestic violence programs;
 ``(C) rape crisis centers;
 ``(D) other entities addressing the safety, health, 
 mental health, social service, housing, and economic 
 needs of child and adult victims of domestic violence;
 ``(E) juvenile, family, and criminal courts; and
 ``(F) law enforcement agencies; and
 ``(6) collecting data indicating the number of child 
 protection cases identified as involving domestic violence and 
 the number of such cases that repeatedly return to the child 
 welfare system, in order to evaluate and assess service and 
 program improvements.
 ``(f) Applications.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this 
section, an entity shall submit an application to the Attorney General 
and the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
information as the Attorney General and the Secretary may require. The 
application shall contain the following information and assurances:
 ``(1) Information outlining the specific activities that 
 will be undertaken to achieve the goals set forth in subsection 
 (e).
 ``(2) An assurance that the entity will develop, during the 
 period of the grant, in collaboration with other organizations, 
 a range of training resources, policies, procedures, programs, 
 and practices relating to child and adult victims of domestic 
 violence that include at least the following:
 ``(A)(i) Relevant protocols for the investigation 
 of and followup to reports of child abuse and neglect, 
 and the screening, intake, and assessment of, and 
 provision of appropriate services for, victims of child 
 abuse and neglect.
 ``(ii) A procedure and schedule for training child 
 welfare staff about domestic violence, the impact of 
 domestic violence on child and adult victims, and the 
 appropriate use of protocols described in clause (i).
 ``(iii) A procedure and schedule for training 
 domestic violence service providers about child welfare 
 agency protocols and procedures for victims of child 
 abuse and the impact of domestic violence on child 
 victims.
 ``(iv) Policies that require that the training 
 described in clause (ii)--
 ``(I) be provided to child welfare staff 
 including line staff, supervisors, and 
 administrators, and be provided first to staff 
 responsible for the investigation, followup, 
 screening, intake, assessment, and provision of 
 services described in clause (i); and
 ``(II) be conducted in collaboration with 
 domestic violence experts, staff from 
 community-based domestic violence programs and 
 rape crisis centers, and relevant 
 representatives of law enforcement.
 ``(v) Policies that require that, at a minimum, the 
 protocols and training described in clauses (ii) and 
 (iii) shall address--
 ``(I) the dynamics of domestic violence, 
 the impact of domestic violence on children 
 exposed to domestic violence, and the 
 relationship of domestic violence to child 
 abuse and neglect;
 ``(II) screening for domestic violence and 
 assessing danger to the child and adult victims 
 of the domestic violence;
 ``(III) applicable Federal, State, and 
 local laws pertaining to domestic violence;
 ``(IV) appropriate interventions for the 
 child and adult victims that protect the safety 
 of both types of victims and give appropriate 
 consideration to preserving the safety of 
 family members not responsible for the child 
 abuse or neglect involved;
 ``(V) appropriate interventions for adult 
 perpetrators of domestic violence to reduce the 
 risk of further violence toward child and adult 
 victims of domestic violence; 
 ``(VI) appropriate supervision of child 
 welfare staff working with families in which 
 there has been domestic violence, including 
 supervision relating to issues involving staff 
 safety;
 ``(VII) protecting the safety and 
 confidentiality of the child and adult victims, 
 consistent with laws requiring mandatory 
 reporting of child abuse and neglect; and
 ``(VIII) developing child protection case 
 plans that recognize the need to hold adult 
 perpetrators, not victims, responsible for 
 stopping domestic violence.
 ``(B) Community-based networks of services and 
 support that--
 ``(i) respond effectively to the 
 comprehensive needs of child and adult victims 
 of domestic violence;
 ``(ii) include new services and linkages to 
 existing services; and
 ``(iii) include at least the following 
 services:
 ``(I) Appropriate referrals to 
 community-based domestic violence 
 programs and rape crisis centers with 
 the capacities to support adult victims 
 of domestic violence who are parents of 
 abused or neglected children.
 ``(II) Emergency shelter and 
 transitional housing for adult victims 
 of domestic violence and their 
 children.
 ``(III) Legal assistance and 
 advocacy for victims of domestic 
 violence, including, when appropriate, 
 assistance in obtaining and entering 
 orders of protection.
 ``(IV) Support and training to 
 assist parents to help their children 
 cope with the impact of domestic 
 violence.
 ``(V) Programs to help children who 
 have been exposed to domestic violence.
 ``(VI) Treatment for adult 
 perpetrators of domestic violence whose 
 children are the subjects of child 
 protection cases to promote the safety 
 and well-being of the children, and 
 appropriate coordination of such 
 treatment with the juvenile, family, 
 and criminal courts with which the 
 perpetrators are involved.
 ``(VII) Health, mental health, and 
 other necessary supportive services.
 ``(VIII) Assistance to obtain 
 housing and necessary economic support.
 ``(3) Information that--
 ``(A) identifies the agencies and providers that 
 will be responsible for carrying out the initiative for 
 which the entity seeks the grant; and
 ``(B)(i) includes documentation from entities 
 carrying out community-based domestic violence programs 
 and rape crisis centers that the entities and centers 
 have been involved in the development of the 
 application; and
 ``(ii) describes the ongoing involvement of the 
 entities and centers in the development of the 
 training, policies, procedures, programs, and practices 
 described in paragraph (2), including a description of 
 their roles as subcontractors, if relevant.
 ``(g) Priority.--In awarding grants under this section, the 
Attorney General and the Secretary shall give priority to applicants 
that have demonstrated a commitment to educate staff of child welfare 
agencies and domestic violence service providers about--
 ``(1) the impact of domestic violence on children;
 ``(2) the special risks of child abuse and neglect; and
 ``(3) appropriate services and interventions for protecting 
 the child and adult victims of domestic violence.
 ``(h) Evaluation, Reporting, and Dissemination of Information.--
 ``(1) Evaluations and reports.--Each entity that receives a 
 grant under this section shall annually--
 ``(A) evaluate the effectiveness of activities 
 developed with the funds provided under this program; 
 and
 ``(B) prepare and submit to the Attorney General 
 and the Secretary a report containing the evaluation 
 and such additional information as the Attorney General 
 and the Secretary shall require.
 ``(2) Dissemination of information.--Not later than 6 
 months after the end of the grant period for the grants made 
 under this section, the Attorney General and the Secretary 
 shall distribute to all State child welfare agencies, State 
 domestic violence coalitions, and Congress summaries that 
 contain information on--
 ``(A) the activities implemented by the recipients 
 of the grants; and
 ``(B) related initiatives undertaken by the 
 Attorney General and the Secretary to promote attention 
 by the staff of child welfare agencies and of domestic 
 violence service providers to domestic violence and the 
 impact of domestic violence on child and adult 
 victims.''.

SEC. 8505. RESEARCH AND DATA COLLECTION ON THE IMPACT OF DOMESTIC 
 VIOLENCE ON CHILDREN.

 The Family Violence Prevention and Services Act (42 U.S.C. 10401 et 
seq.), as amended by section 8504, is further amended by adding at the 
end the following:

``SEC. 322. RESEARCH AND DATA COLLECTION.

 ``(a) Grants.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Assistant Secretary for Children and Families, may make grants, 
 on a competitive basis, to eligible entities to enable the 
 entities to conduct research and data collection concerning the 
 impact of domestic violence on children.
 ``(2) Term and amount.--The Secretary shall award grants 
 under this section for terms of 3 years and in amounts of not 
 more than $500,000 for each such year.
 ``(b) Eligible Entities.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
this section, an entity shall be an institution of higher education or 
another nonprofit organization (such as a research entity, hospital, or 
mental health institution), with documented experience with research or 
data collection concerning the impact of domestic violence on children.
 ``(c) Use of Funds.--An entity that receives a grant under this 
section shall use the amounts provided through the grant to conduct new 
or expand current research or data collection--
 ``(1) on the prevalence of childhood exposure to domestic 
 violence and the effects of the exposure in child and adult 
 victims;
 ``(2) on the co-occurrence of domestic violence, and child 
 abuse or neglect;
 ``(3) on linkages between children's exposure to domestic 
 violence and violent behavior in youth and adults;
 ``(4) that evaluates new or existing treatments aimed at 
 children exposed to domestic violence;
 ``(5) on the role of children's resilience and other 
 factors that help mitigate the effects of exposure to domestic 
 violence; and
 ``(6) on related matters, if the research or data 
 collection directly addresses the impact of domestic violence 
 on children.
 ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $2,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2002 through 2004 and $5,000,000 a year for each of fiscal years 
2005 and 2006.''.

SEC. 8506. GRANTS TO SCHOOLS AND EARLY EDUCATION AND CHILD CARE 
 PROGRAMS FOR PREVENTION OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN.

 (a) Grants Authorized.--From amounts made available under 
subsection (j), the Secretary of Education shall award grants to 
eligible entities to conduct programs--
 (1) to reduce the impact of domestic violence, including 
 sexual assault, and stalking in the lives of children and 
 youth;
 (2) to develop and implement education programs to prevent 
 children and youth from becoming victims or perpetrators of 
 domestic violence, including sexual assault, dating violence, 
 or stalking, through programs and prevention strategies 
 targeting children and youth at--
 (A) State, local, and tribal elementary, middle, 
 and secondary schools;
 (B) early education programs and child care 
 programs, including Early Head Start under section 645A 
 of the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9840a), Head Start 
 programs under the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 9831 et 
 seq.), preschool, prekindergarten, and child care 
 programs; and
 (C) other Federal, State, and locally funded youth 
 education programs;
 (3) to provide support services for children and youth 
 experiencing or exposed to domestic violence, including sexual 
 assault, dating violence, and stalking;
 (4) to provide training and support services to school and 
 program administrators, faculty, counselors, school social 
 workers, and staff with respect to issues concerning domestic 
 violence, including sexual assault, dating violence, and 
 stalking, as well as the impact on children and youth of 
 experiencing or exposure to the violence or stalking described 
 in this paragraph; and
 (5) to develop and implement school and program policies 
 regarding identification and referral procedures for children 
 and youth who are experiencing or exposed to domestic violence, 
 including sexual assault, dating violence, or stalking with the 
 goal of contributing to the safety and well-being of adult and 
 child victims and children and youth impacted by the violence 
 or stalking involved.
 (b) Eligible Entities.--
 (1) In general.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 subsection (a), an entity shall be--
 (A) a State, local, or tribal school or educational 
 agency;
 (B) an entity carrying out an early education 
 program or child care program;
 (C) a priority youth-serving organization working 
 in collaboration with a State, local, or tribal school, 
 or educational agency; or
 (D) an entity carrying out a private, nonprofit 
 domestic violence or sexual assault program working in 
 collaboration with a State, local, or tribal school, or 
 educational agency, or an entity carrying out an early 
 education program, or child care program.
 (2) Collaboration.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 subsection (a), an eligible entity described in subparagraphs 
 (A), (B), or (C) of paragraph (1) shall collaborate with 
 domestic violence or sexual assault experts from national, 
 State, or tribal domestic violence or sexual assault programs.
 (c) Publication.--The Secretary of Education shall publish 
information on the availability of grants under subsection (a) through 
announcements in professional publications for State, local, and tribal 
educational agencies, early education programs, and child care programs 
described in subsection (a)(2), and through notices in the Federal 
Register.
 (d) Equitable Distribution.--In awarding grants under subsection 
(a), the Secretary of Education shall ensure an equitable geographic 
distribution of funds to State, local, and tribal schools and 
educational agencies, entities carrying out early education programs or 
child care programs, priority youth-serving organizations, and entities 
carrying out domestic violence or sexual assault programs among areas 
throughout the United States, and among rural, urban, and suburban 
areas.
 (e) Applications.--
 (1) In general.--An eligible entity that desires to receive 
 a grant under subsection (a) shall submit to the Secretary of 
 Education an application at such time, in such manner, and 
 containing such information as the Secretary of Education may 
 require.
 (2) Contents.--An application submitted under this 
 subsection shall--
 (A) demonstrate that the education program proposed 
 to be funded by a grant under subsection (a)--
 (i) is comprehensive, engaging, and 
 appropriate to the target areas;
 (ii) is respectful and reflective of 
 cultural diversity;
 (iii) addresses the needs of underserved 
 communities;
 (iv) has the potential to change attitudes 
 and behaviors;
 (v) is based on research and experience in 
 the areas of early childhood and youth 
 education, domestic violence, including sexual 
 assault, dating violence, and stalking;
 (vi) collects data on changes in 
 participants' attitudes or behavior;
 (vii) is implemented in collaboration with 
 domestic violence and sexual assault experts; 
 and
 (viii) includes an evaluation component;
 (B) demonstrate that the proposed policy 
 development process for the program includes 
 consultation and collaboration with experts on violence 
 against women and girls as described in subsection 
 (g)(1);
 (C) incorporate a plan for appropriate remuneration 
 for collaborating partners; and
 (D) contain such other information, agreements, and 
 assurances as the Secretary of Education may require.
 (f) Use of Funds.--
 (1) In general.--An entity that receives a grant under 
 subsection (a) may use the grant funds--
 (A) to develop and implement developmentally and 
 culturally appropriate education programs or prevention 
 strategies for students and personnel in elementary 
 schools, middle schools, secondary schools, early 
 education programs, or child care programs, 
addressing domestic violence, including sexual assault, dating 
violence, and stalking;
 (B) to provide the necessary human resources and 
 intervention strategies to respond to the needs of 
 students, school personnel, and early education program 
 and child care program personnel when faced with the 
 issues of domestic violence, including sexual assault, 
 dating violence, and stalking, such as 1 or more 
 resource persons who is either onsite or on-call, and 
 who is an expert in domestic violence, sexual assault, 
 dating violence, or stalking;
 (C) to develop and implement policies regarding 
 appropriate assessment, identification, reporting, and 
 referral procedures for children and youth who may be 
 experiencing or exposed to domestic violence, including 
 sexual assault, dating violence, or stalking, with the 
 goal of contributing to the safety and well-being of 
 adult and child victims and children and youth impacted 
 by the violence or stalking involved;
 (D) to develop and implement policies to help 
 prevent students from becoming victims or perpetrators 
 of domestic violence, including sexual assault, dating 
 violence, or stalking;
 (E) to provide training for school and program 
 administrators, faculty, counselors, school social 
 workers, and staff that addresses issues concerning 
 children and youth who are experiencing or exposed to 
 domestic violence, including sexual assault, dating 
 violence, and stalking, and the impact of the violence 
 or stalking described in this paragraph on children and 
 youth;
 (F) to provide media center materials and 
 educational materials, to schools and programs, that 
 address issues concerning children and youth who are 
 experiencing or exposed to domestic violence, including 
 sexual assault, dating violence, or stalking, and the 
 impact of the violence or stalking described in this 
 paragraph on children and youth;
 (G) to conduct evaluations to assess the impact of 
 programs assisted under this section in order to 
 enhance the development of the programs;
 (H) to modify the program materials of the model 
 programs created under section 317 of the Family 
 Violence Prevention and Services Act (42 U.S.C. 10417), 
 if appropriate, in order to make the materials 
 applicable to a particular age group; and
 (I) to purchase the materials described in 
 subparagraphs (F) and (H).
 (2) Confidentiality.--Policies and programs developed and 
 implemented under paragraph (1) shall ensure the safety and 
 confidentiality of child and adult victims in a manner that is 
 consistent with applicable Federal and State laws.
 (3) Limitation.--An entity that receives a grant under 
 subsection (a) for a fiscal year shall use not more than 5 
 percent of the grant funds for administrative expenses.
 (g) Requirements.--In carrying out an educational program under a 
grant awarded under subsection (a), a State, local, or tribal school or 
educational agency, an entity carrying out an early education program 
or child care program, or priority youth-serving organization shall--
 (1) consult and collaborate with 1 or more nonprofit, 
 nongovernmental experts on violence against women and girls 
 that are:
 (A) entities operating domestic violence shelters;
 (B) entities carrying out domestic violence 
 programs;
 (C) national, State, or tribal domestic violence 
 coalitions;
 (D) national, State, or tribal sexual assault 
 coalitions; or
 (E) entities operating out of rape crisis centers;
 (2) develop the program, or acquire model program materials 
 if available; and
 (3) report the results of the program to the Secretary of 
 Education in a format provided by such Secretary.
 (h) Secretary of Education.--
 (1) Guidance.--The Secretary of Education shall disseminate 
 any Department of Education policy guidance regarding 
 preventing domestic violence, including sexual assault, dating 
 violence, or stalking.
 (2) Model programs and policies.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary of Education shall 
 study existing policies and programs as well as new 
 policies and programs funded by this section for the 
 purpose of identifying model programs and policies that 
 reduce the impact of domestic violence, including 
 sexual assault, dating violence, and stalking in the 
 lives of children and youth and that contribute to the 
 safety and well-being of adult and child victims and 
 children and youth impacted by the violence or stalking 
 involved. The Secretary of Education shall widely 
 disseminate information on the model programs and 
 policies identified.
 (B) Confidentiality.--In disseminating the 
 information under subparagraph (A), the Secretary of 
 Education shall ensure the safety, and confidentiality 
 of information concerning the identification, of 
 individuals who are victims of or impacted by violence 
 or stalking.
 (3) Study and report.--
 (A) Study.--The Secretary of Education shall study 
 existing policies and programs as well as new policies 
 and programs funded by this section and shall develop 
 recommendations for implementation of successful 
 policies for referring students to services when the 
 students may be experiencing or exposed to domestic 
 violence, including sexual assault, dating violence, or 
 stalking.
 (B) Report.--
 (i) In general.--The Secretary of Education 
 shall prepare and submit to Congress a report 
 containing the recommendations developed under 
 subparagraph (A).
 (ii) Confidentiality.--In preparing and 
 submitting the report under clause (i), the 
 Secretary of Education shall ensure the safety, 
 and confidentiality of all information 
 concerning the identification, of students.
 (C) Evaluation, monitoring, and administration.--Of 
 the amount appropriated under subsection (j) for each 
 fiscal year, not more than 3 percent shall be used by 
 the Secretary of Education for evaluation, monitoring, 
 and administrative costs under this section.
 (i) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Dating violence.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``dating violence'' means 
 violence committed by a person who is or has been in a 
 social relationship of a romantic or intimate nature 
 with the victim.
 (B) Rule.--The existence of a relationship 
 described in subparagraph (A) shall be determined based 
 on a consideration of the following factors:
 (i) The length of the relationship.
 (ii) The type of relationship.
 (iii) The frequency of interaction between 
 the persons involved in the relationship.
 (2) Exposed to.--The term ``exposed to'' means--
 (A) with regard to domestic violence, exposed to 
 domestic violence as defined in section 8502;
 (B) with regard to stalking--
 (i) directly observing a course of conduct 
 that constitutes stalking or the aftermath of 
 that course of conduct; or
 (ii) being within earshot of a course of 
 conduct that constitutes stalking; and
 (C) with regard to dating violence--
 (i) directly observing an act or threat 
 that constitutes dating violence or the 
 aftermath of that act or threat; or
 (ii) being within earshot of an act or 
 threat that constitutes dating violence;
 (3) Priority youth-serving organization.--The term 
 ``priority youth-serving organization'' means a public or 
 private organization with--
 (A) a primary focus on providing youth development 
 programs to youth ages 5 to 17;
 (B) a history of providing violence awareness and 
 prevention skills;
 (C) a proven record, as measured by specific 
 outcome objectives, of providing youth development and 
 violence awareness and prevention programs, services, 
 and activities through a comprehensive and coordinated 
 system; and
 (D) the ability to provide access to core resources 
 consisting of--
 (i) ongoing relationships with caring 
 adults;
 (ii) a safe environment and structured 
 activities;
 (iii) programs that promote positive well-
 being;
 (iv) opportunities to acquire defined 
 skills and competencies; and
 (v) opportunities for community service and 
 civic participation.
 (4) Sexual assault.--The term ``sexual assault'' means any 
 conduct proscribed by chapter 109A of title 18, United States 
 Code, regardless of whether the conduct occurs in the special 
 maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States or 
 in a Federal prison, and includes both assaults committed by 
 offenders who are strangers to the victim and assaults 
 committed by offenders who are known to the victim or related 
 by blood or marriage to the victim.
 (5) Stalking.--The term ``stalking'' means engaging in a 
 course of conduct directed at a specific person that would 
 cause a reasonable person to fear death, sexual assault, or 
 bodily injury to such person or a member of such person's 
 immediate family, if--
 (A) the person engaging in such conduct has 
 knowledge or should have knowledge that the specific 
 person will be placed in reasonable fear of death, 
 sexual assault, or bodily injury to such person or a 
 member of such person's immediate family; or
 (B) the conduct induces fear in the specific person 
 of death, sexual assault, or bodily injury to such 
 person or a member of such person's immediate family.
 (j) Authorization of Appropriations.--
 (1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated to 
 carry out this section--
 (A) $2,750,000 for fiscal year 2002;
 (B) $3,000,000 for fiscal year 2003;
 (C) $3,000,000 for fiscal year 2004;
 (D) $3,000,000 for fiscal year 2005; and
 (E) $3,000,000 for fiscal year 2006.
 (2) Availability.--Amounts appropriated under paragraph (1) 
 shall remain available until the earlier of--
 (A) the date on which those amounts are expended; 
 or
 (B) December 31, 2006.

SEC. 8507. TRAINING OF LAW ENFORCEMENT AND COURT PERSONNEL.

 (a) Grants Authorized.--The Attorney General shall award grants to 
nonprofit domestic violence programs, shelters, or organizations in 
collaboration with local police departments and local courts for 
purposes of training local police officers, judges, attorneys, and 
other court personnel, regarding appropriate treatment of children who 
have been exposed to domestic violence.
 (b) Use of Funds.--A domestic violence agency working in 
collaboration with a local police department and local courts may use 
amounts from a grant awarded under this section--
 (1) to train police officers, judges, attorneys, and other 
 court personnel in child development and issues related to 
 children exposed to domestic violence so they may 
 appropriately--
 (A) apply child development principles to their 
 work in domestic violence cases;
 (B) recognize the needs of children who are exposed 
 to domestic violence;
 (C) meet the immediate needs of those children at 
 the scene of domestic violence and during subsequent 
 court proceedings;
 (D) call for immediate and subsequent therapeutic 
 attention to be provided to the child by an advocate 
 from the collaborating domestic violence program, 
 shelter, or organization, or from a children's services 
 program with expertise in serving children exposed to 
 domestic violence; and
 (E) refer children for follow-up services; and
 (2) to establish a collaborative working relationship 
 between police officers, the courts, and local domestic 
 violence programs, shelters, and organizations.
 (c) Application.--
 (1) In general.--To be eligible for a grant under this 
 section for any fiscal year, a local domestic violence program, 
 shelter, or organization, in collaboration with a local police 
 department or local court, shall submit an application to the 
 Attorney General at such time, and in such manner, as the 
 Attorney General shall require.
 (2) Contents.--Each application submitted under paragraph 
 (1) shall--
 (A) describe the need for amounts provided under 
 the grant and the plan for implementation of the uses 
 described in subsection (b);
 (B) describe the manner in which the local domestic 
 violence program, shelter, or organization shall work 
 in collaboration with the local police department and 
 local courts; and
 (C) provide measurable goals and expected results 
 from the use of amounts provided under this section.
 (d) Authorization of Appropriations.--
 (1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated 
 from the Violent Crime Reduction Trust Fund established under 
 section 310001 of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement 
 Act of 1994 (42 U.S.C. 14211) to carry out this section--
 (A) $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 
 through 2004; and
 (B) $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2005 and 
 2006.
 (2) Availability.--Amounts made available under paragraph 
 (1) shall remain available until expended.

 Subtitle G--Enhancing Healthy Emotional Development in Young Children

SEC. 8601. ENHANCING HEALTHY EMOTIONAL DEVELOPMENT.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) Researchers have identified external risk factors that, 
 particularly when found in combination, can increase a young 
 child's risk for experiencing problems in social or emotional 
 development, including factors such as exposure to traumatic 
 events, child abuse and neglect, parental mental health 
 disorders, unsatisfactory relationships, and deprivation. 
 Experiences involving these risk factors may occur at home or 
 in the community.
 (2) There is growing evidence that positive adaptation and 
 social and emotional well-being in young children can be 
 enhanced, and that the impact of risk factors for behavioral 
 and emotional disorders can be reduced by intervening early in 
 homes, child care and other early childhood programs, and other 
 settings.
 (3) The Surgeon General's Conference on Children's Mental 
 Health has recommended the creation of tangible tools for early 
childhood service providers to help the providers assess children's 
social and emotional needs, discuss issues relating to those needs with 
families, and make referrals.
 (4) Experience demonstrates that mental health consultants 
 can help staff, as well as children and families, in early 
 childhood programs promote healthy social and emotional 
 development in young children, including those children already 
 exposed to violence and other damaging experiences.
 (5) Success in school is dependent on social and emotional 
 development, as well as the attainment of other competencies 
 and skills, and investing early in the promotion of healthy 
 development in young children will help children enter school 
 ready to learn.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services, acting through the Assistant 
 Secretary for Children and Families.
 (2) State agency.--The term ``State agency'' means--
 (A) the State office that coordinates early 
 childhood services in a State; or
 (B) if an office described in subparagraph (A) does 
 not exist in a State, the State office that is 
 responsible for early childhood programs in the State.
 (3) Young children.--The term ``young children'' means 
 individuals who are below the age of compulsory school 
 attendance for the State involved.
 (c) Grants to State Agencies.--
 (1) Grants.--The Secretary shall establish a program 
 through which the Secretary may make grants to State agencies, 
 to enable the State agencies to assist eligible entities to 
 serve young children and the families of the children by 
 addressing the mental health and developmental needs of the 
 young children in order to promote the children's resilience, 
 emotional wellness, and healthy emotional development.
 (2) Grant periods.--The Secretary shall make the grants for 
 periods of not more than 3 years.
 (d) State Applications.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
subsection (c), a State agency shall submit an application to the 
Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information 
as the Secretary may require. The application shall include the 
information and assurances described in subsection (g), with respect to 
the State.
 (e) Grants to Eligible Entities.--A State agency that receives a 
grant under subsection (c) shall use the funds made available through 
the grant to make grants to eligible entities to carry out programs to 
serve young children and the families of the children as described in 
subsection (c).
 (f) Eligible Entities.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
subsection (e), an entity shall--
 (1) be an agency or organization that carries out a home or 
 center-based early childhood program, child welfare program, 
 substance abuse treatment program, or domestic violence service 
 and treatment program, that serves or has regular contact with 
 young children;
 (2) be an established consortium of agencies or 
 organizations described in paragraph (1); or
 (3) be another entity (such as a child care resource and 
 referral agency, an early childhood service coordinating body, 
 or a community mental health center) that works with parents, 
 agencies, or organizations that serve young children in a 
 community in promoting the mental health and healthy emotional 
 development of young children; and
 (4) obtain the approval of the State agency for an 
 application submitted in accordance with subsection (g).
 (g) Local Applications.--
 (1) In general.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
 this section, an entity shall submit an application to the 
 State agency at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
 information as the State agency may require.
 (2) Contents.--At a minimum, the application shall 
 contain--
 (A) a description of the young children who are 
 targeted to be served, or are most likely to be served, 
 with the funds made available through the grant, and 
 the problems the children are facing or affected by 
 (such as exposure to parental depression, parental 
 substance abuse, child abuse or neglect, domestic 
 violence, community violence, homelessness, a parental 
 transition to the workforce, or other risk factors);
 (B) an assurance that the assistance provided with 
 funds made available through the grant will be 
 undertaken in a developmentally appropriate and 
 culturally competent manner, be child-centered, and, as 
 applicable, family-focused, and consistent with the 
 best knowledge available about effective prevention and 
 intervention strategies to promote mental health and 
 healthy emotional development in young children;
 (C) the name of the entity that would administer 
 the program carried out under the grant;
 (D) a description of the types of assistance that 
 will be provided with the funds to improve the mental 
 health and healthy emotional development of young 
 children;
 (E) a description of how the program to be carried 
 out under the grant will complement and be coordinated 
 with the activities of, or carried out by, any early 
 childhood service coordinating offices in the community 
 in which the grant activities will be carried out;
 (F) an assurance that the applicant will work 
 collaboratively with mental health, early childhood 
 development, early intervention, education, health, and 
 other specialized violence prevention or treatment 
 experts, and other experts in the applicant's community 
 to coordinate services provided under this subtitle 
 with similar services and to better address the needs 
 of the young children the applicant serves;
 (G) documentation that the applicant has explored 
 the extent to which funding under part C of the 
 Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 
 1431 et seq.) and from other related Federal and State 
 sources is available to address the needs of the young 
 children; and
 (H) an assurance that the funds made available 
 through the grant will not be used for activities that 
 the State pays for with funds made available under the 
 medicaid program carried out under title XIX of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.), under the 
 State children's health insurance program carried out 
 under title XXI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1397aa et seq.), or from State and local funds for 
 mental health programs.
 (h) Use of Funds.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and 
 (3), an entity that receives a grant under this section may use 
 the funds made available through the grant to promote the 
 mental health and healthy emotional development of young 
 children by--
 (A) providing screening and assessments of the 
 mental health and developmental needs of the young 
 children to be served under the grant and, as 
 appropriate, their families;
 (B) providing for consultations with staff of 
 programs described in subsection (f)(1) by mental 
 health and other early childhood development experts, 
 such as speech and language therapists and special 
 education consultants, who can provide programmatic and 
 individual child-centered and family-focused assistance 
 to help the staff respond in the manner most conducive 
 to promoting the mental health and healthy emotional 
 development of young children;
 (C) providing professional development, including 
 specialized training and supervision, for staff of 
 programs described in subsection (f)(1) and other 
early childhood service providers and, as appropriate, for families of 
young children, about the mental health and developmental needs of 
young children, to enable the staff and families to develop the skills 
and competencies necessary to respond to the needs of, and provide 
needed assistance to, the young children and their families to promote 
the children's mental health and healthy emotional development;
 (D) providing prevention and early intervention 
 services, including home visitation, parenting 
 education, and other activities, parent-child groups, 
 and other individualized supports for families of young 
 children (including parents, grandparents, other 
 relative caregivers, foster parents, and other 
 individuals responsible for raising young children), 
 that are designed to promote mental health and healthy 
 emotional development of young children;
 (E) providing crisis services;
 (F) facilitating access to treatment and services 
 to enable staff of programs described in subsection 
 (f)(1) to promote mental health and healthy emotional 
 development by attending appropriately to the emotional 
 and behavioral concerns facing young children and their 
 families;
 (G) providing increased collaboration between staff 
 of programs providing early childhood, child 
 development, and children's mental health services, 
 and, as appropriate, staff from other service delivery 
 systems such as--
 (i) the courts; and
 (ii) service delivery systems for substance 
 abuse treatment, domestic violence service and 
 treatment, health, and adult and child mental 
 health programs; and
 (H) providing case management services for young 
 children and, as appropriate, their families, to help 
 link the children and families who need more 
 specialized interventions to appropriate services and 
 treatment.
 (2) Planning and collaboration.--
 (A) In general.--An entity that requests authority 
 to use grant funds made available under this section 
 for planning and collaboration activities, and receives 
 a grant under this section, may use a portion of the 
 grant funds as described in subparagraph (B).
 (B) Activities.--The entity may use not more than 
 50 percent of the grant funds for a period of not more 
 than 6 months at the beginning of the grant period to 
 carry out planning and collaboration activities that 
 will help ensure that the needs of young children will 
 be addressed appropriately through the activities 
 carried out under the grant. The planning and 
 collaboration activities shall build on the work of 
 and, to the extent possible, be carried out by early 
 childhood service coordinating offices in the community 
 in which the grant activities will be carried out.
 (3) Designated activities.--The Secretary may, during the 
 3-year period beginning on the date of the establishment of the 
 program described in subsection (c), award grants to State 
 agencies under subsection (c), to enable the State agencies to 
 assist eligible entities specifically to promote the training 
 of early childhood mental health specialists, in conjunction 
 with entities such as community colleges, schools of social 
 work, and institutions offering psychology programs, through 
 degree programs or internships or fellowships in early 
 childhood mental health.
 (i) State Collaboration.--The State agency shall review 
applications submitted under subsection (g), make grants under 
subsection (e), and carry out the administration and oversight of the 
programs described in subsection (e) in collaboration with--
 (1) the State mental health agency;
 (2) the State entity designated to receive collaboration 
 grants under section 640(a)(5) of the Head Start Act (42 U.S.C. 
 9835(a)(5)); and
 (3) other State offices responsible for child welfare 
 programs, substance abuse treatment programs, or domestic 
 violence service programs, serving young children within the 
 State.
 (j) Supplement Not Supplant.--Funds appropriated pursuant to the 
authority of this section shall be used to supplement and not supplant 
other public funds expended to promote the mental health and healthy 
emotional development of young children.
 (k) Collaboration.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary 
shall collaborate with the Administrator of the Substance Abuse and 
Mental Health Services Administration, the Administrator of the Health 
Care Financing Administration, and the heads of relevant offices of the 
Department of Education that address the concerns of young children.
 (l) Report.--A State that receives a grant under this section 
shall, not later than 90 days after the end of the grant period, 
prepare and submit to the Secretary a report that includes--
 (1) information on the needs of the young children, and 
 their families, who were assisted with the grant funds;
 (2) information on the strategies for which the grant funds 
 were used, and how the funds were combined with other funds to 
 expand the strategies;
 (3) documentation that the activities provided were 
 developmentally appropriate, child-centered, and, as 
 appropriate, family-focused, and directed toward preventing 
 emotional problems, and involved collaboration with mental 
 health and other developmental experts;
 (4) a discussion of--
 (A) the extent to which entities in the State 
 increased the number of activities (similar to 
 activities carried out under this section) carried out 
 in the State that were funded from sources other than 
 funds made available under this section during the 
 grant period; and
 (B) the barriers to increasing the number of those 
 activities that were so funded; and
 (5) a discussion of how the funds made available through 
 the grant helped to improve outcomes for the young children and 
 families served, particularly with regard to the goal of school 
 readiness.
 (m) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section--
 (1) $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2002;
 (2) $40,000,000 for fiscal year 2003;
 (3) $55,000,000 for fiscal year 2004;
 (4) $70,000,000 for fiscal year 2005; and
 (5) $85,000,000 for fiscal year 2006.

 TITLE IX--SUCCESSFUL TRANSITION TO ADULTHOOD

 Subtitle A--21st Century Community Learning Centers

SEC. 9001. CENTERS.

 Part I of title X (20 U.S.C. 8241 et seq.) is amended to read as 
follows:

 ``PART I--21ST CENTURY COMMUNITY LEARNING CENTERS

``SEC. 10901. SHORT TITLE.

 ``This part may be cited as the `21st Century Community Learning 
Centers Act'.

``SEC. 10902. PURPOSE.

 ``The purpose of this part is to provide opportunities to 
communities to establish or expand activities in community learning 
centers that--
 ``(1) provide opportunities for academic enrichment, 
 including providing tutorial services to help students, 
 particularly students who attend low-performing schools, to 
 meet State and local student performance standards in core 
 academic subjects, such as reading and mathematics;
 ``(2) offer students a broad array of additional services, 
 programs, and activities, such as youth development activities, 
 drug and violence prevention programs, art, music, and 
 recreation programs, technology education programs, and 
 character education programs, that are designed to reinforce 
 and complement the regular academic program of participating 
 students; and
 ``(3) offer families of students enrolled in community 
 learning centers opportunities for lifelong learning and 
 literacy development.

``SEC. 10903. DEFINITIONS.

 ``In this part:
 ``(1) Community learning center.--The term `community 
 learning center' is an entity that--
 ``(A)(i) assists students to meet State content and 
 student performance standards in core academic 
 subjects, such as reading and mathematics, by primarily 
 providing to the students, during non-school hours or 
 periods when school is not in session, tutorial and 
 other academic enrichment services in addition to other 
 activities (such as youth development activities, drug 
 and violence prevention programs, art, music, and 
 recreation programs, technology education programs, and 
 character education programs) that reinforce and 
 complement the regular academic program of the 
 students; and
 ``(ii) offers families of students enrolled in such 
 center opportunities for lifelong learning and literacy 
 development; and
 ``(B) is operated by 1 or more local educational 
 agencies, community-based organizations, units of 
 general purpose local government, or other public or 
 private entities.
 ``(2) Covered program.--The term `covered program' means a 
 program for which--
 ``(A) the Secretary made a grant under this part 
 (as in effect on the day before the date of enactment 
 of the Leave No Child Behind Act of 2001); and
 ``(B) the grant period had not ended on that date 
 of enactment.
 ``(3) Eligible organization.--The term `eligible 
 organization' means--
 ``(A) a local educational agency, a community-based 
 organization, a unit of general purpose local 
 government, or another public or private entity; or
 ``(B) a consortium of entities described in 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(4) State.--The term `State' means the State educational 
 agency of a State (as defined in section 14101).
 ``(5) Unit of general purpose local government.--The term 
 `unit of general purpose local government' means any city, 
 town, township, parish, village, or other general purpose 
 political subdivision.

``SEC. 10904. PROGRAM AUTHORIZED.

 ``The Secretary is authorized to award grants to States to make 
awards to eligible organizations to plan, implement, or expand 
community learning centers that serve--
 ``(1) students who primarily attend--
 ``(A) schools eligible for schoolwide programs 
 under section 1114; or
 ``(B) schools that serve a high percentage of 
 students from low-income families; and
 ``(2) the families of students described in paragraph (1).

``SEC. 10905. ALLOTMENTS TO STATES.

 ``(a) Reservation.--From the funds appropriated under section 10910 
for any fiscal year, the Secretary shall reserve--
 ``(1) such amount as may be necessary to make continuation 
 awards for covered programs to grant recipients under this part 
 (under the terms of those grants), as in effect on the day 
 before the date of enactment of the Leave No Child Behind Act 
 of 2001;
 ``(2) not more than 1 percent for national activities, 
 which the Secretary may carry out directly or through grants 
 and contracts, such as providing technical assistance to 
 organizations carrying out programs under this part or 
 conducting a national evaluation; and
 ``(3) not more than 1 percent for payments to the outlying 
 areas and the Bureau of Indian Affairs, to be allotted in 
 accordance with their respective needs for assistance under 
 this part, as determined by the Secretary, to enable the areas 
 and the Bureau to carry out the objectives of this part.
 ``(b) State Allotments.--
 ``(1) Determination.--
 ``(A) Basis.--From the funds appropriated under 
 section 10910 for any fiscal year and remaining after 
 the Secretary makes reservations under subsection (a), 
 the Secretary shall allot to each State for the fiscal 
 year an amount that bears the same relationship to the 
 remainder as the amount the State received under 
 subpart 2 of part A of title I for the preceding fiscal 
 year bears to the amount all States received under that 
 subpart for the preceding fiscal year, except as 
 provided in subparagraph (B).
 ``(B) Exception.--No State receiving an allotment 
 under subparagraph (A) may receive less than \1/2\ of 1 
 percent of the total amount allotted under subparagraph 
 (A) for a fiscal year.
 ``(2) Definition.--In this subsection, the term `State' means each 
of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of 
Puerto Rico.

``SEC. 10906. STATE PLANS.

 ``Each State seeking a grant under this part shall submit to the 
Secretary a plan, which may be submitted as part of a State's 
consolidated plan under section 14302, at such time, in such manner, 
and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably 
require. At a minimum, the plan shall--
 ``(1) describe how the State will use funds received under 
 this part, including funds reserved for State-level activities;
 ``(2) contain an assurance that the State will make awards 
 under this part for eligible organizations only to eligible 
 organizations that propose to serve--
 ``(A) students who primarily attend--
 ``(i) schools eligible for schoolwide 
 programs under section 1114; or
 ``(ii) schools that serve a high percentage 
 of students from low-income families; and
 ``(B) the families of students described in 
 subparagraph (A);
 ``(3) describe the procedures and criteria the State will 
 use for reviewing applications and awarding funds to eligible 
 organizations on a competitive basis, which shall include 
 procedures and criteria that take into consideration the 
 likelihood that a proposed center will help participating 
 students meet local content and performance standards by 
 increasing their academic performance and achievement;
 ``(4) describe how the State will ensure that awards made 
 under this part are--
 ``(A) of sufficient size and scope to support high-
 quality, effective programs that are consistent with 
 the purpose of this part; and
 ``(B) in amounts that are consistent with section 
 10908(b);
 ``(5) contain an assurance that the State--
 ``(A) will not make awards for programs that exceed 
 4 years;
 ``(B) will ensure an equitable distribution of 
 awards among urban and rural areas of the State; and
 ``(C) will require each eligible organization 
 seeking such an award to submit a plan describing how 
 the center to be funded through the award will continue 
 after funding under this part ends;
 ``(6) describe the State's performance measures for 
 programs carried out under this part, including measures 
 relating to increased academic performance and achievement, and 
 how the State will evaluate the effectiveness of those 
 programs;
 ``(7) contain an assurance that funds appropriated to carry 
 out this part will be used to supplement, and not supplant, 
 other Federal, State, and local public funds expended to 
 provide programs and activities authorized under this part; and
 ``(8) contain an assurance that the State will require 
 eligible organizations to describe in their applications under 
 section 10909 how the transportation needs of participating 
 students will be addressed.

``SEC. 10907. STATE-LEVEL ACTIVITIES.

 ``(a) In General.--A State that receives an allotment under section 
10905 for a fiscal year shall use not more than 6 percent of the funds 
made available through the allotment for State-level activities 
described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (b).
 ``(b) Activities.--
 ``(1) Planning, peer review, and supervision.--The State 
 may use not more than 3 percent of the funds made available 
 through the allotment to pay for the costs of--
 ``(A) establishing and implementing a peer review 
 process for applications described in section 10909 
 (including consultation with the Governor and other 
 State agencies responsible for administering youth 
 development programs and adult learning activities);
 ``(B) supervising the awarding of funds to eligible 
 organizations (in consultation with the Governor and 
 other State agencies responsible for administering 
 youth development programs and adult learning 
 activities);
 ``(C) planning and supervising the use of funds 
 made available under this part, and processing the 
 funds; and
 ``(D) monitoring activities.
 ``(2) Evaluation, training, and technical assistance.--The 
 State may use not more than 3 percent of the funds made 
 available through the allotment to pay for the costs of--
 ``(A) comprehensive evaluation (directly, or 
 through a grant or contract) of the effectiveness of 
 programs and activities provided under this part; and
 ``(B) providing training and technical assistance 
 to eligible organizations who are applicants or 
 recipients of awards under this part.

``SEC. 10908. AWARDS TO ELIGIBLE ORGANIZATIONS.

 ``(a) Awards.--A State that receives an allotment under section 
10905 for a fiscal year shall use not less than 94 percent of the funds 
made available through the allotment to make awards on a competitive 
basis to eligible organizations.
 ``(b) Amounts.--The State shall make the awards in amounts of not 
less than $50,000.

``SEC. 10909. LOCAL APPLICATION.

 ``(a) Application.--To be eligible to receive an award under this 
part, an eligible organization shall submit an application to the State 
at such time, in such manner, and including such information as the 
State may reasonably require. Each such application shall include--
 ``(1) an evaluation of the needs, available resources, and 
 goals and objectives for the proposed community learning center 
 and a description of how the program proposed to be carried out 
 in the center will address those needs (including the needs of 
 working families); and
 ``(2) a description of the proposed community learning 
 center, including--
 ``(A) a description of how the eligible 
 organization will ensure that the program proposed to 
 be carried out at the center will reinforce and 
 complement the instructional programs of the schools 
 that students served by the program attend;
 ``(B) an identification of Federal, State, and 
 local programs that will be combined or coordinated 
 with the proposed program in order to make the most 
 effective use of public resources;
 ``(C) an assurance that the proposed program was 
 developed, and will be carried out, in active 
 collaboration with the schools the students attend;
 ``(D) evidence that the eligible organization has 
 experience, or demonstrates promise of success, in 
 providing educational and related activities that will 
 complement and enhance the students' academic 
 performance and achievement and positive youth 
 development;
 ``(E) an assurance that the program will take place 
 in a safe and easily accessible school or other 
 facility;
 ``(F) a description of how students participating 
 in the program carried out by the center will travel 
 safely to and from the center and home;
 ``(G) a description of how the eligible 
 organization will disseminate information about the 
 program to the community in a manner that is 
 understandable and accessible; and
 ``(H) a description of a preliminary plan for how 
 the center will continue after funding under this part 
 ends.
 ``(b) Priority.--In making awards under this part, the State shall 
give equal priority to applications--
 ``(1) submitted jointly by schools receiving funding under 
 part A of title I and community-based organizations or other 
 eligible organizations;
 ``(2) submitted by such schools or consortia of such 
 schools; and
 ``(3) submitted by community-based organizations or other 
 eligible organizations serving communities in which such 
 schools are located.
 ``(c) Approval of Certain Applications.--The State may approve an 
application under this part for a program to be located in a facility 
other than an elementary school or secondary school, only if the 
program--
 ``(1) will be accessible to the students proposed in the 
 application to be served; and
 ``(2) will be as effective as the program would be if the 
 program were located in such a school.

``SEC. 10910. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part 
$1,500,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 and such sums as may be necessary 
for each of the 6 succeeding fiscal years.

 Subtitle B--Youth Development

 CHAPTER 1--SHORT TITLE; POLICY; FINDINGS; DEFINITIONS

SEC. 9101. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Younger Americans Act''.

SEC. 9102. A NATIONAL YOUTH POLICY.

 It is the policy of the United States, in keeping with the 
traditional United States concept that youth are the Nation's most 
valuable resource, that youth of the Nation need, and it is the joint 
and several duty and responsibility of governments of the United 
States, of the several States and political subdivisions, and of Indian 
tribes, to assure that all youth have access to, the full array of core 
resources, including--
 (1) ongoing relationships with caring adults;
 (2) safe places with structured activities;
 (3) services that promote healthy lifestyles, including 
 services designed to improve physical and mental health;
 (4) opportunities to acquire marketable skills and 
 competencies; and
 (5) opportunities for community service and civic 
 participation.

SEC. 9103. FINDINGS.

 Congress finds that--
 (1) young people under 18 years of age are now the most 
 impoverished age group, with 1 of every 5 of the young people 
 living in poverty, a greater proportion than in 1968, with the 
 proportion of minority children who are living in poverty being 
 about twice as great;
 (2) more than 1 of 4 families is headed by a single parent 
 and the percentage of families headed by single parents has 
 risen steadily over the past few decades, and has risen 13 
 percent since 1990;
 (3) approximately 8,000,000 school-age children under 14 
 years of age spend time without adult supervision on a regular 
 basis;
 (4) an estimated 11,000,000 United States children have no 
 health insurance and 9 out of 10 of such children have parents 
 who work;
 (5) there is a need to address the developmental needs of 
 all youth while providing more intensive support for youth in 
 communities where need is greatest;
 (6) there is a need to engage youth as active participants 
 in decisionmaking that affects their lives, including the 
 design, development, implementation, and evaluation of youth 
 development programs at the Federal, State, and community 
 levels;
 (7) existing outcome driven youth development strategies, 
 pioneered by community-based organizations, hold real promise 
 for promoting positive behaviors and preventing youth problems;
 (8) formal evaluations of youth development programs have 
 documented significant improvements in interpersonal skills, 
 quality of peer and adult relationships, self-control, 
 cognitive competencies, commitment to schooling, and academic 
 achievement;
 (9) formal evaluations of youth development programs have 
 documented significant reductions in drug and alcohol use, 
 school misbehavior, aggressive behavior, violence, truancy, 
 high-risk sexual behavior, and smoking;
 (10) compared to United States youth generally, youth 
 participating in activities provided by community-based 
 organizations are more than 26 percent more likely to report 
 having received recognition for good grades than United States 
 youth generally and nearly 20 percent more likely to rate the 
 likelihood of their going to college as ``very high'' than 
 United States youth generally;
 (11) a partnership between the public and private sector is 
 necessary to promote access to the full array of core resources 
 for youth who need such resources because the private sector 
 alone does not have the capacity to promote such access; and
 (12) the availability and use of Federal resources can be 
 effective incentives to leverage broader community support to 
 enable entities carrying out or providing local programs, 
 activities, and services to provide the full array of core 
 resources, remove barriers to access, promote program 
 effectiveness, and facilitate coordination of activities and 
 collaboration within the community.

SEC. 9104. DEFINITIONS.

 In this subtitle:
 (1) Area agency on youth.--The term ``area agency on 
 youth'' means an area agency on youth designated under section 
 9124(a)(2)(A).
 (2) Associate commissioner.--The term ``Associate 
 Commissioner'' means the Associate Commissioner of the Family 
 and Youth Services Bureau of the Administration on Children, 
 Youth, and Families of the Department of Health and Human 
 Services.
 (3) Community-based.--The term ``community-based'', used 
 with respect to an organization, means an organization that--
 (A) is representative of a community or significant 
 segment of a community; and
 (B) is engaged in providing services to the 
 community.
 (4) Community board.--The term ``community board'' means a 
 community board established in accordance with section 9127(a).
 (5) Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director of 
 the Office on National Youth Policy.
 (6) Funding and coordinating agency.--The term ``funding 
 and coordinating agency'' means an organization that is 
 directed by a board with wide representation from a community, 
 that generates and distributes charitable funds for diverse 
 health and human service programs and coordinates the efforts 
 of multiple agencies as needed or requested, but that does not 
 itself provide direct services to children, youth, or their 
 families.
 (7) Indian.--The term ``Indian'' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 4(d) of the Indian Self-Determination and 
 Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450b(d)).
 (8) Native american organization.--The term ``Native 
 American organization'' means--
 (A) a tribal organization, as defined in section 
 4(l) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education 
 Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450b(l));
 (B) a Native Hawaiian Organization, as defined in 
 section 4009(4) of the Augustus F. Hawkins-Robert T. 
 Stafford Elementary and Secondary School Improvement 
 Amendments of 1988 (20 U.S.C. 4909(4)) (as in effect on 
 the day before the date of enactment of the Improving 
 America's Schools Act of 1994);
 (C) an Alaska Native Village Corporation or 
 Regional Corporation as defined in or established 
 pursuant to the Alaskan Native Claims Settlement Act 
 (43 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.); or
 (D) a private nonprofit organization established 
 for the purpose of serving youth who are Indians or 
 Native Hawaiians.
 (9) Native hawaiian.--The term ``Native Hawaiian'' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 4009(1) of the Augustus F. 
 Hawkins-Robert T. Stafford Elementary and Secondary School 
 Improvement Amendments of 1988 (20 U.S.C. 4909(1)) (as in 
 effect on the day before the date of enactment of the Improving 
 America's Schools Act of 1994).
 (10) Office.--The term ``Office'' means the Office of 
 National Youth Policy.
 (11) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (12) State.--The term ``State'' means each of the several 
 States of the United States, the District of Columbia, and the 
 Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
 (13) Unit of general purpose local government.--The term 
 ``unit of general purpose local government'' means--
 (A) a political subdivision of a State whose 
 authority is general and not limited to only 1 function 
 or combination of related functions; or
 (B) a Native American organization.
 (14) Youth.--The term ``youth'' means an individual who is 
 not younger than age 10 and not older than age 19.
 (15) Youth development organization.--The term ``youth 
 development'', used with respect to an organization, means a 
 public or private youth-serving organization with a major 
 emphasis on providing youth development programs.
 (16) Youth development programs.--The term ``youth 
 development programs'' means programs that prepare youth to 
 contribute to their communities and to meet the challenges of 
 adolescence and adulthood through a structured, progressive 
 series of activities and experiences that (in contrast to 
 deficit-based approaches that focus solely on youth problems) 
 that--
 (A) help the youth obtain social, emotional, 
 ethical, physical, and cognitive competencies; and
 (B) address the broader developmental resources all 
 children and youth need, such as the core resources 
 described in section 9102.
 (17) Youth-serving organization.--The term ``youth-
 serving'', used with respect to an organization, means a public 
 or private organization with a primary focus on providing youth 
 development programs, or health, mental health, fitness, 
 education, workforce preparation, substance abuse prevention, 
 child welfare, psychological, parenting, recreation, teen 
 pregnancy prevention, rehabilitative, or residential services, 
 to youth.

 CHAPTER 2--COORDINATION OF NATIONAL YOUTH POLICY

SEC. 9111. OFFICE ON NATIONAL YOUTH POLICY.

 (a) Establishment.--There is established in the Executive Office of 
the President an Office of National Youth Policy.
 (b) Administration.--The Office of National Youth Policy 
established under subsection (a) shall be administered by a Director 
who shall be appointed by the President with the advice and consent of 
the Senate.
 (c) Responsibilities.--The Director appointed under subsection (b) 
shall--
 (1) establish, in cooperation with the Associate 
 Commissioner, policies, objectives, and priorities for programs 
 funded under this subtitle;
 (2) serve as an effective and visible advocate for youth in 
 the Federal Government, and with other departments, agencies, 
 and instrumentalities of the Federal Government, by actively 
 reviewing and commenting on all Federal policies affecting 
 youth;
 (3) develop mechanisms to resolve administrative and 
 programmatic conflicts between Federal programs that would be 
 barriers to parents, community-based, youth-serving, and youth 
 development organizations, local government entities, education 
 entities, older adult organizations, faith-based organizations, 
 and organizations supporting youth involved in community 
 service and civic participation, related to the coordination of 
 services and funding for programs promoting access to the full 
 array of core resources described in section 9102; and
 (4) consult with and assist State and local governments 
 with respect to barriers the governments encounter related to 
 the coordination of services and funding for programs under 
 this subtitle.
 (d) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purposes of carrying 
out this chapter, there are authorized to be appropriated $500,000 for 
fiscal year 2002 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 4 
succeeding fiscal years, to remain available until expended.

SEC. 9112. COUNCIL ON NATIONAL YOUTH POLICY.

 (a) Establishment.--
 (1) In general.--There is established in the Office a 
 Council on National Youth Policy (referred to in this section 
 as the ``Council'').
 (2) Composition.--
 (A) Number.--The Council shall be composed of 12 
 members.
 (B) Qualifications.--The President shall appoint 
 the 12 members of the Council from among--
 (i) individuals who have expertise or 
 experience with youth development or youth-
 serving programs, especially programs serving 
 rural and inner-city urban youth;
 (ii) representatives of national 
 organizations with an interest in youth 
 development programs;
 (iii) representatives of business;
 (iv) representatives of minorities; and
 (v) parents.
 (C) Age.--At least \1/3\ of the individuals 
 appointed shall be younger than age 21 at the time of 
 appointment.
 (D) Limitations.--No full-time officer or employee 
 of the Federal Government may be appointed to be a 
 member of the Council.
 (b) Appointment and Terms.--
 (1) Terms.--
 (A) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in 
 this section, a member of the Council shall serve for a 
 term of 3 years.
 (B) End of term.--The term shall end on March 31 
 regardless of the actual date of the appointment of the 
 member.
 (2) Service.--Members of the Council shall serve without 
 regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code.
 (c) Service During Vacancies.--Any member appointed to fill a 
vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the term for which such 
member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed for the remainder 
of such term. Members shall be eligible for reappointment and may 
continue to serve after the expiration of their terms until their 
successors have taken office.
 (d) Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the Council shall not affect the 
powers of the Council, but shall be filled in the same manner as the 
original appointment was made.
 (e) Chairperson.--The President shall designate a Chairperson for 
the Council from among the members appointed to the Council.
 (f) Meetings.--The Council shall meet at the call of the 
Chairperson at least twice a year.
 (g) Duties.--The Council shall--
 (1) advise and assist the President on matters regarding 
 the core resources youth need and the capacity of youth to 
 contribute to the Nation and their communities;
 (2) directly advise the Director and the Associate 
 Commissioner on matters affecting the youth development needs 
 of youth for services and assistance under this subtitle;
 (3) make recommendations to the President, to the Director, 
 to the Secretary, to the Associate Commissioner, and to 
Congress with respect to Federal policies regarding youth; and
 (4) provide public forums for discussion, publicize the 
 core resources youth need, and obtain information relating to 
 assuring all youth access to the full array of core resources 
 described in section 9102, by conducting public hearings, and 
 by conducting or sponsoring conferences, workshops, and other 
 similar meetings.
 (h) Travel Expenses.--Members of the Council shall not receive 
compensation for the performance of services for the Council, but shall 
be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, 
at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of 
chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes 
or regular places of business in the performance of services for the 
Council. Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, United States Code, 
the Director may accept the voluntary and uncompensated services of 
members of the Council.
 (i) Reports.--Not later than March 31 of 2003 and each subsequent 
year, the Council shall prepare and submit to the President an annual 
report of the findings and recommendations of the Council. The 
President shall transmit each such report to Congress together with 
comments and recommendations.
 (j) Permanent Committee.--Section 14 of the Federal Advisory 
Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App.) shall not apply to the Council.
 (k) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $250,000 for fiscal year 2002 
and such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 2003 through 2006.

 CHAPTER 3--GRANTS FOR STATE AND COMMUNITY PROGRAMS

SEC. 9121. PURPOSE.

 The purpose of this chapter is to encourage and assist State 
agencies, community boards, and area agencies on youth to mobilize and 
support communities in planning, implementing, and being accountable 
for strategies that link community-based organizations, local 
government, volunteer centers, schools, faith-based organizations, 
business, and other segments of the community to assure that all youth 
have access to the full array of core resources consisting of--
 (1) ongoing relationships with caring adults;
 (2) safe places with structured activities;
 (3) services that promote healthy lifestyles, including 
 services designed to improve physical and mental health;
 (4) opportunities to acquire marketable skills and 
 competencies; and
 (5) opportunities for community service and civic 
 participation.

SEC. 9122. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this chapter 
$500,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, $750,000,000 for fiscal year 2003, 
$1,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2004, $1,500,000,000 for fiscal year 
2005, and $2,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2006.

SEC. 9123. ALLOTMENTS TO STATES.

 (a) Reservations.--From sums appropriated under section 9122 for 
each fiscal year, the Associate Commissioner shall reserve--
 (1) 95 percent of the sums for allotments to States to 
 enable the States to make allocations to area agencies on 
 youth;
 (2) 1 percent of the sums for grants to Native American 
 organizations to carry out activities consistent with the 
 objectives of this chapter;
 (3) 1 percent of the sums for grants to outlying areas to 
 carry out activities consistent with the objectives of this 
 chapter; and
 (4) 3 percent of the sums for Federal discretionary grant 
 programs aimed at demonstrating ways to respond to the special 
 developmental needs of youth--
 (A) in correctional facilities and other out-of-
 home residential settings;
 (B) in areas with high concentrations of poverty;
 (C) in rural areas; and
 (D) in situations where youth are at higher risk 
 due to abuse, neglect, disconnection from family, 
 disconnection from school, or another community risk 
 factor.
 (b) Use of Funds.--For each fiscal year for which a State receives 
a State allotment, the State shall ensure that funds made available 
through the allotment shall be used for the purpose of conducting 
community-based youth development programs that--
 (1) recognize the primary role of the family in positive 
 youth development in order to strengthen families;
 (2) promote the involvement of youth (including program 
 participants), parents, and other community members in the 
 planning and implementation of the programs;
 (3) coordinate services with other entities providing youth 
 and family services in the community;
 (4) eliminate barriers, such as transportation, cost, and 
 service delivery location, to the accessibility of core youth 
 development services;
 (5) provide, directly or through a written contract, a 
 broad variety of accessible programs, activities, and services 
 for youth that are designed to assist youth in acquiring skills 
 and competencies that are necessary to make a successful 
 transition from childhood to adulthood;
 (6) incorporate activities that foster relationships 
 between positive adult role models and youth, provide age-
 appropriate activities, and provide activities that engage 
 youth in, and promote, positive youth development, including 
 activities such as--
 (A) youth clubs, character development activities, 
 mentoring, community service, leadership development, 
 recreation, and literacy and educational tutoring;
 (B) sports, workforce readiness activities, peer 
 counseling, and fine and performing arts; and
 (C) camping and environmental education, cultural 
 enrichment, risk avoidance programs, academic 
 enrichment, and participant-defined special interest 
 group activities, courses, or club; and
 (7) employ strong outreach efforts to engage the 
 participation of a wide range of youth, families, and service 
 providers.
 (c) Allotments.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), from 
 sums reserved under subsection (a)(1), the Associate 
 Commissioner shall allot to each State the sum (referred to in 
 this chapter as the ``State allotment'') of--
 (A) an amount that bears the same relation to \1/2\ 
 of the reserved sums as the number of individuals who 
 are not younger than age 10 and not older than age 19 
 in the State bears to the number of such individuals in 
 all the States; and
 (B) an amount that bears the same relation to \1/2\ 
 of the reserved sums as the number of youth who are 
 receiving free or reduced price lunches under the 
 school lunch program established under the Richard B. 
 Russell National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1751 et 
 seq.) in the State bears to the number of such youth in 
 all the States.
 (2) State minimum.--No State shall be allotted less than 
 0.40 percent of the reserved sums for a fiscal year.
 (3) Determinations.--For purposes of this subsection, the 
 number of individuals who are not younger than age 10 and not 
 older than age 19 in any State and in all the States, and the 
 number of youth who are receiving free or reduced price lunches 
 under the school lunch program established under the Richard B. 
 Russell National School Lunch Act in any State and in all the 
 States, shall be determined by the Associate Commissioner on 
 the basis of the most recent data available from the Bureau of 
 the Census, and other reliable demographic data satisfactory to 
 the Associate Commissioner.
 (d) Reallotments.--Whenever the Associate Commissioner determines 
that any amount allotted to a State for a fiscal year under this 
section will not be used by such State for carrying out the purpose for 
which the allotment was made, the Associate Commissioner shall make 
such amount available for carrying out such purpose to 1 or more other 
States to the extent the Associate Commissioner determines that such 
other States will be able to use such amount for carrying out such 
purpose.
 (e) Withholding.--
 (1) In general.--If the Associate Commissioner finds that 
 any State has failed to meet the State plan requirements of 
 section 9125 or the allocation requirements of section 9126(b), 
 the Associate Commissioner shall withhold the State allotment 
 from such State.
 (2) Disbursal.--The Associate Commissioner shall disburse 
 the funds withheld directly to any entity that is a public or 
 private institution, organization, or agency, or unit of 
 general purpose local government of such State that submits an 
 approved plan described in section 9128, if the plan includes 
 an agreement that the entity will--
 (A) make available (directly or through donations 
 from public or private entities) non-Federal 
 contributions, in cash or in kind, in an amount equal 
 to a percentage determined for the State of the funds; 
 and
 (B) comply with the requirements of this subtitle 
 that apply to States receiving State allotments under 
 this section.

SEC. 9124. STATE AGENCIES AND PLANNING AND MOBILIZATION AREAS.

 (a) State Agencies.--In order for a State to be eligible to receive 
a State allotment under this chapter--
 (1) the State shall, in accordance with regulations issued 
 by the Associate Commissioner, designate a State agency as the 
 sole State agency to--
 (A) develop a State plan to be submitted to the 
 Associate Commissioner for approval pursuant to section 
 9125;
 (B) administer the plan in the State;
 (C) be primarily responsible for the planning, 
 policy development, administration, coordination, 
 priority setting, and evaluation of all State 
 activities related to the objectives of this subtitle;
 (D) serve as an effective and visible advocate for 
 youth by reviewing and commenting on all State plans, 
 budgets, and policies that affect youth; and
 (E) divide the State into distinct planning and 
 mobilization areas, after considering the views offered 
 by units of general purpose local government and 
 appropriate public or private agencies and 
 organizations in the State, in accordance with 
 regulations issued by the Associate Commissioner; and
 (2) the State agency shall--
 (A) designate for each such area, after 
 consideration of the views offered by the units of 
 general purpose local government and by agencies and 
 organizations in such areas, a public or private 
 nonprofit agency or organization to serve as the area 
 agency on youth for such area;
 (B) provide assurances that the State agency will 
 solicit and take into account, with regard to general 
 policy related to the development and the 
 administration of the State plan for any fiscal year, 
 the views of youth who are the recipients of services 
 provided for in the plan;
 (C) in accordance with guidelines issued by the 
 Associate Commissioner, make allocations to area 
 agencies on youth pursuant to section 9126(b);
 (D) provide reasonable assurances that Federal 
 funds made available under this chapter for the State 
 for any period will be used to supplement, and not 
 supplant, the State, local, and other funds that would 
 in the absence of such Federal funds be made available 
 for the programs, services, and activities described in 
 this chapter;
 (E) coordinate the activities of the State agency 
 with other State agencies and offices, including--
 (i) State Commissions on National and 
 Community Service established under section 178 
 of the National and Community Service Act of 
 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12638);
 (ii) entities carrying out programs under 
 the Runaway and Homeless Youth Act (42 U.S.C. 
 5701 et seq.) and other programs under the 
 Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act 
 of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5601 et seq.);
 (iii) entities carrying out independent 
 living programs;
 (iv) entities carrying out foster care 
 programs;
 (v) youth councils established under 
 section 117(h) of the Workforce Investment Act 
 of 1998 (29 U.S.C. 2832(h)); and
 (vi) entities carrying out activities 
 through 21st Century Community Learning Centers 
 under part I of title X of the Elementary and 
 Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 8241 
 et seq.); and
 (F) compile reports from area agencies on youth, 
 including outcome data and evaluation information 
 regarding programs funded under this chapter, provide 
 an annual report based on the compilation to the 
 Associate Commissioner, and provide a copy of such 
 report to the Director.
 (b) Planning and Mobilization Areas.--
 (1) Unit of general purpose local government.--
 (A) Criteria.--In carrying out subsection (a)(1), 
 the State agency may designate as a planning and 
 mobilization area any unit of general purpose local 
 government that has a population of 100,000 or more. In 
 particular, the State agency may designate such a unit 
 as a planning and mobilization area if the unit has 
 been engaged in youth development program planning and 
 mobilization, such as a community of promise 
 coordinated by America's Promise: the Alliance for 
 Youth.
 (B) Hearing.--In any case in which a unit of 
 general purpose local government applies to the State 
 agency to be designated as a planning and mobilization 
 area under this paragraph, the State agency shall, upon 
 request, provide an opportunity for a hearing to such 
 unit of general purpose local government.
 (2) Region.--The State agency may designate as a planning 
 and mobilization area under subsection (a)(1) any region in the 
 State that includes 1 or more units of general purpose local 
 government if the State agency determines that the designation 
 of such a regional planning and mobilization area is necessary 
 for, and will enhance, the effective administration of the 
 programs authorized by this chapter.
 (3) Additional areas.--The State agency may include in any 
 planning and mobilization area designated under subsection 
 (a)(1) such additional areas, adjacent to a unit of general 
 purpose local government, as the State agency determines to be 
 necessary for, and will enhance, the effective administration 
 of the programs authorized by this chapter.
 (4) Indian reservations.--The State agency, in carrying out 
 subsection (a)(1), shall to the extent practicable include all 
 portions of an Indian reservation in a single planning and 
 mobilization area.

SEC. 9125. STATE PLANS.

 (a) In General.--To be eligible to receive a State allotment under 
this chapter, a State shall prepare and submit to the Associate 
Commissioner a State plan, for a 2-, 3-, or 4-year period determined by 
the State agency, at such time, in such manner, and meeting such 
criteria as the Associate Commissioner may by regulation prescribe, and 
shall make such annual revisions as may be necessary to the plan.
 (b) Contents.--Each such State plan shall contain assurances that 
the plan is based on area plans developed under section 9128 by area 
agencies on youth in the State and that the State has prepared and 
distributed a uniform format for use by area agencies on youth in 
developing the area plans.

SEC. 9126. DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS FOR STATE ACTIVITIES AND LOCAL 
 ALLOCATIONS.

 (a) In General.--From a State allotment made under this chapter for 
any fiscal year--
 (1)(A) the State agency may use such amount as the State 
 agency determines to be appropriate, but not more than 7 
 percent, for the purposes of subparagraphs (B) and (C);
 (B) the State agency may use such amount as the State 
 agency determines to be appropriate, but not more than 4 
 percent of the State allotment, for paying the cost of--
 (i) reviewing area plans and distributing funds to 
 area agencies on youth; and
 (ii) assisting community boards and area agencies 
 on youth in carrying out activities under this chapter; 
 and
 (C) the State agency may use such amount as the State 
 agency determines to be appropriate, but not less than 3 
 percent and not more than 7 percent of the State allotment, for 
 making State discretionary grants to respond to the special 
 developmental needs of youth--
 (i) in correctional facilities and other out-of-
 home residential settings;
 (ii) in areas with high concentrations of poverty;
 (iii) in rural areas; and
 (iv) in situations where youth are at greater risk 
 due to abuse, neglect, disconnection from family, 
 disconnection from school, or another community risk 
 factor; and
 (2) the State agency shall use the remainder of such 
 allotment to make allocations under subsection (b) to area 
 agencies on youth associated with planning and mobilization 
 areas, to pay for the cost of programs under this chapter that 
 are specified in area plans that--
 (A) are developed through a comprehensive and 
 coordinated system of planning;
 (B) have been approved by the community board; and
 (C) have been approved by the State agency.
 (b) Allocations.--From the remainder of the State allotment 
described in subsection (a)(2), the State agency, using the best 
available data, shall allocate for each planning and mobilization area 
in the State the sum of--
 (1) an amount that bears the same relation to \1/2\ of the 
 remainder as the number of individuals who are not younger than 
 age 10 and not older than age 19 in the planning and 
 mobilization area bears to the number of such individuals in 
 the State; and
 (2) an amount that bears the same relation to \1/2\ of the 
 remainder as the number of youth who are receiving free or 
 reduced price lunches under the school lunch program 
 established under the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1751 et seq.) in the planning and mobilization 
 area bears to the number of such youth in the State.
 (c) Non-Federal Share.--A State that uses Federal funds provided 
under this chapter to carry out the activities described in section 
9126(a)(1)(B) shall make available (directly or through donations from 
public or private entities) non-Federal contributions in cash in an 
amount equal to not less than $1 for every $1 of the Federal funds.

SEC. 9127. COMMUNITY BOARDS AND AREA AGENCIES ON YOUTH.

 (a) Community Board.--
 (1) Selection.--
 (A) Local governments and funding and coordinating 
 agencies.--Except as otherwise provided in this 
 paragraph, in order to receive funds from a State 
 pursuant to this chapter, a planning and mobilization 
 area shall have a community board appointed and 
 convened jointly by the chief executive officer of a 
 local funding and coordinating agency in the area and 
 the chief executive officers of units of general 
 purpose local government in the area.
 (B) Private agencies and local governments.--In the 
 event that a local funding and coordinating agency is 
 not represented in the planning and mobilization area, 
 or the chief executive officer of a local funding and 
 coordinating agency in the area is unwilling or unable 
 to participate in jointly appointing and convening the 
 community board, the State agency, after consideration 
 of the views offered by the units of general purpose 
 local government and by nonprofit agencies and 
 organizations in such area, shall designate a private 
 nonprofit agency or organization in the area to appoint 
 and convene the community board jointly with the chief 
 executive officers of units of general purpose local 
 government in the area.
 (C) Local funding and coordinating agencies and 
 public entities.--In the event that a chief executive 
 officer of a unit of general purpose local government 
 in the planning and mobilization area is unwilling or 
 unable to participate in jointly appointing and 
 convening the community board, the State agency, after 
 consideration of the views offered by the units of 
 general purpose local government and by youth-serving 
 organizations in such area, shall designate an 
 executive official of a public entity in the area to 
 appoint and convene the community board jointly with 
 the chief executive officer of a local funding and 
 coordinating agency and any other chief executive 
 officers of units of general purpose local government.
 (D) Existing entity.--An existing entity in the 
 planning and mobilization area may serve as the 
 community board if--
 (i) such entity's membership meets the 
 requirements for a community board or is 
 adapted to meet such requirements;
 (ii) such entity's membership was appointed 
 by the chief executive officer of a unit of 
 general purpose local government in the area;
 (iii) such entity is approved by the State 
 agency; and
 (iv) such entity is approved by the chief 
 executive officer of a local funding and 
 coordinating agency, or by the chief executive 
 officer of a private nonprofit agency or 
 organization designated according to 
 subparagraph (B) in the event that a local 
 funding and coordinating agency is not 
 represented in the area or the chief executive 
 officer of the agency is unwilling or unable to 
 consider the approval of the entity.
 (2) Composition.--A community board shall consist of an 
 equal number of local representatives from each of the 
 following 3 groups:
 (A) A group comprised of individuals, including 
 minority individuals, under age 21 at the time of their 
 appointment.
 (B) A group comprised of representatives of--
 (i) private youth-serving and youth 
 development organizations (in existence as of 
 the date of appointment of the representatives 
 to the board);
 (ii) public youth-serving and youth 
 development organizations; and
 (iii) organizations supporting youth 
 involved in community service and civic 
 participation.
 (C) A group comprised of representatives of--
 (i) local elected officials;
 (ii) educational entities, including local 
 elementary, middle, and secondary schools, 
 community colleges, colleges, and universities;
 (iii) volunteer centers;
 (iv) philanthropic organizations, including 
 community foundations;
 (v) businesses and employee organizations;
 (vi) faith-based organizations;
 (vii) health and mental health agencies; 
 and
 (viii) parents and grandparents.
 (3) Chairperson.--After being appointed and convened, the 
 community board shall elect a chairperson from among its 
 membership.
 (4) Responsibilities.--Each community board in each 
 planning and mobilization area shall have responsibility for 
 supervising the preparation, submission, and implementation of 
 the area plan described in section 9128, including the approval 
 of grants and contracts funded pursuant to this chapter within 
 the planning and mobilization area.
 (b) Area Agency on Youth.--An area agency on youth--
 (1) shall serve as the fiscal agent for a planning and 
 mobilization area;
 (2) shall be under the supervision of the community board 
 for the planning and mobilization area with regard to 
 activities conducted pursuant to this chapter;
 (3) shall provide an assurance to the State agency, that is 
 determined to be adequate by the State agency, that such area 
 agency on youth will have the ability to develop an area plan 
 for the planning and mobilization area and to carry out, either 
 directly or indirectly through contractual or other 
 arrangements, a youth development program in accordance with 
 such plan; and
 (4) shall compile reports from entities carrying out 
 programs, services, and activities approved by the community 
 board for funding under this subtitle, including outcome data 
 and evaluation information regarding program accomplishments, 
 and provide an annual report based on the compilation to the 
 State agency.
 (c) Community Mobilization Expenses.--An area agency on youth may 
use not more than 10 percent of the allocation made to the agency under 
this chapter for expenses related to community mobilization, including 
expenses related to generating additional commitments of cash and in-
kind resources, administration, planning, monitoring, and evaluation.

SEC. 9128. AREA PLANS.

 (a) In General.--Each area agency on youth for a planning and 
mobilization area shall, in order to be approved by the State agency 
and receive an allocation under this chapter, develop, prepare, and 
submit to the State agency an area plan, approved by the community 
board, for the planning and mobilization area at such time, in such 
manner, and containing such information as the State agency may 
require. Such plan shall be for a 2-, 3-, or 4-year period determined 
by the State agency, with such annual revisions as may be necessary. 
Each such plan shall be based upon a uniform format for area plans in 
the State prepared in accordance with section 9125(b).
 (b) Contents.--Each such plan shall--
 (1) provide specific outcome objectives for youth 
 development programs, services, and activities to be carried 
 out in the planning and mobilization area, based on an 
 assessment of needs and resources, sufficient to assure that 
 all youth in the area have access through a comprehensive and 
 coordinated system to the full array of core resources that 
 consist of--
 (A) ongoing relationships with caring adults;
 (B) safe places with structured activities;
 (C) services that promote healthy lifestyles, 
 including services designed to improve physical and 
 mental health;
 (D) opportunities to acquire marketable skills and 
 competencies; and
 (E) opportunities for community service and civic 
 participation;
 (2) provide an assurance that, in awarding grants and 
 contracts to entities to implement the area plan to provide 
 youth with access to core resources described in paragraph (1) 
 through youth development programs, the agency will give 
 priority to entities as described in section 9130(b);
 (3) provide that not less than 30 percent of the funds 
 allocated under this chapter for the planning and mobilization 
 area will be used for youth development programs that respond 
 to the special developmental needs of youth--
 (A) in correctional facilities and other out-of-
 home residential settings;
 (B) in areas with high concentrations of poverty;
 (C) in rural areas; and
 (D) in situations where youth are at higher risk 
 due to abuse, neglect, disconnection from family, 
 disconnection from school, or another community risk 
 factor;
 (4) provide assurances that youth engaged in programs 
 carried out under the area plan will be treated equitably;
 (5) contain strategies for mobilizing and coordinating 
 community resources to meet the outcome objectives;
 (6) describe activities for which funds made available 
 through the allocation will be used to fill gaps between unmet 
 needs and available resources;
 (7) describe the inclusive process used by the area agency 
 on youth to engage all segments of the communities in the 
 planning and mobilization area in developing the area plan;
 (8) provide measures of program effectiveness to be used in 
 evaluating the progress of the programs, services, and 
 activities approved by the community board in the area in 
 assuring access for all youth to the full array of core 
 resources described in paragraph (1), including specific 
 measures for providing access to such resources for youth 
 living in areas with high concentrations of poverty;
 (9) describe how local requirements for providing matching 
 funds will be met, how resources will be leveraged, and the 
 uses to which matching funds and leveraged resources will be 
 applied, in carrying out the area plan;
 (10) provide for the establishment and maintenance of 
 outreach sufficient to ensure that youth and their families in 
 the planning and mobilization area are aware of programs 
 providing access to the core resources described in paragraph 
 (1);
 (11) provide that the area agency on youth, under the 
 supervision of the community board, will--
 (A) conduct periodic evaluations of, and public 
 hearings on, activities carried out under the area 
 plan;
 (B) furnish technical assistance to entities 
 carrying out programs under this chapter within the 
 planning and mobilization area;
 (C) establish effective and efficient procedures 
 for the coordination of--
 (i) entities carrying out programs under 
 this chapter within the planning and 
 mobilization area; and
 (ii) entities carrying out other Federal 
 programs for youth within the planning and 
 mobilization area;
 (D) conduct outreach, to identify youth in the area 
 and inform the youth of the availability of resources 
 under this subtitle; and
 (E) take into account in connection with matters of 
 general policy arising in the development and 
 administration of the area plan, the views of youth who 
 have participated in programs pursuant to the plan; and
 (12) provide for the utilization of entities carrying out 
 volunteer service centers and organizations supporting youth 
 involved in community service and civic participation in the 
 area to--
 (A) encourage and enlist the services of local 
 volunteer groups to provide assistance and services 
 appropriate to the unique developmental needs of youth 
 in the planning and mobilization area;
 (B) encourage, organize, and promote youth to serve 
 as volunteers to communities in the area; and
 (C) promote recognition of the contribution made by 
 youth volunteers to programs administered in the 
 planning and mobilization area.

SEC. 9129. GRANTS AND CONTRACTS TO ELIGIBLE ENTITIES.

 (a) Request for Proposals.--In implementing an area plan, once the 
plan has been submitted to and approved by the State agency, an area 
agency on youth, under the supervision of a community board, shall 
issue a request for proposals, to award grants and contracts to 
eligible entities to carry out youth development programs under the 
plan.
 (b) Grants and Contracts.--The area agency on youth, under the 
supervision of the community board, shall use the funds made available 
through the allocation made to the agency under this chapter to award 
grants on a competitive basis and contracts to eligible entities to pay 
for the Federal share of the cost of carrying out the youth development 
programs. Not more than 50 percent of the funds made available through 
the allocation made to the agency may be awarded to a single recipient 
of a grant or contract unless the recipient is a consortium as 
described in section 9130(a)(1) or approved by the Associate 
Commissioner.
 (c) Period.--The area agency on youth may award such a grant or 
contract for a period of not more than 4 years. The area agency on 
youth, under the supervision of the community board and after reviewing 
the reports (including outcome data and evaluation information) 
compiled pursuant to section 9127(b)(4), may terminate the funding made 
available through such grant or contract during such grant or contract 
period for a program if the program fails to comply with the 
requirements of this subtitle or if insufficient Federal funds are 
appropriated under section 9122 to permit continuation of funding of 
the program.
 (d) Federal Share.--
 (1) In general.--The Federal share of the cost of carrying 
 out a program described in this section shall be--
 (A) 80 percent for the first and second year for 
 which the program receives funding under this section;
 (B) 70 percent for the third such year;
 (C) 60 percent for the fourth such year; and
 (D) 50 percent for any subsequent year.
 (2) Non-federal share.--An entity that receives a grant or 
 contract under this section may provide for the non-Federal 
 share of the cost from non-Federal sources (which may include 
 State or local public sources) in cash or in kind, fairly 
 evaluated, including facilities, equipment, or services.
 (3) Adjustments.--A State agency and the Associate 
 Commissioner may jointly adjust the Federal share of the cost 
 that applies to an entity that receives a grant or contract 
 under this section from an area agency on youth, in the event 
 that the agency demonstrates significant economic need 
 sufficient to cause difficulties in area plan implementation.

SEC. 9130. ELIGIBLE ENTITIES.

 (a) In General.--To be eligible to receive a grant or contract 
under section 9129, an entity shall be--
 (1) a consortium of community-based youth-serving or youth 
 development organizations, public agencies, health and mental 
 health agencies, education entities including community 
 colleges, colleges, and universities, volunteer centers, faith-
 based organizations, older adult organizations, or 
 organizations supporting youth involved in community service 
 and civic participation; or
 (2) a community-based public or private youth-serving or 
 youth development organization.
 (b) Priority.--In awarding grants and contracts under section 9129, 
an area agency on youth shall give priority to--
 (1) entities that carry out health and human service 
 programs (as of the date of submission of the area plan) that 
 use proven methods and materials supported by evaluation and 
 have proven records of effective service delivery and 
 sustainability; and
 (2) entities that submit applications under section 9131 
 that--
 (A) evidence collaboration among community agencies 
 in providing services under an area plan; and
 (B) are outcome driven.
 (c) Administrative Expenses.--An entity that receives a grant or 
contract under section 9129 may use up to 5 percent of the funds 
received through the grant or contract for the cost of administrative 
expenses.
 (d) Limitation.--A for-profit entity that receives a grant or 
contract under section 9129 may not use funds made available through 
the grant or contract for the purposes of generating additional 
profits.

SEC. 9131. APPLICATIONS.

 To be eligible to receive a grant or contract under section 9129 to 
carry out youth development programs under an area plan, an entity 
shall submit an application to the area agency on youth for the area at 
such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the area 
agency on youth, under the direction of the community board, and the 
appropriate State agency, may reasonably require.

SEC. 9132. YOUTH DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS.

 (a) Access.--An entity that receives a grant or contract under 
section 9129 to carry out a program shall implement a program that 
promotes, either directly, through a contract, or indirectly through 
collaboration with other community entities, access to the full array 
of core resources specified in section 9102.
 (b) Activities.--An entity that receives a grant or contract under 
section 9129 to carry out a program may include among activities 
provided through the program, which are part of an effort to provide 
access to the full array of core resources specified in section 9102--
 (1) character development and ethical enrichment 
 activities;
 (2) mentoring activities, including one-to-one relationship 
 building and tutoring;
 (3) provision and support of community youth centers and 
 clubs;
 (4) nonschool hours, weekend, and summer programs and 
 camps;
 (5) sports, recreation, and other activities promoting 
 physical fitness and teamwork;
 (6) services that promote health and healthy development 
 and behavior on the part of youth, including risk avoidance 
 programs;
 (7) academic enrichment, peer counseling and teaching, and 
 literacy activities;
 (8) camping and environmental education;
 (9) cultural enrichment, including enrichment through 
 music, and fine and performing arts;
 (10) workforce preparation, youth entrepreneurship, and 
 technological and vocational skill building, including skill 
 building involving computer skills;
 (11) opportunities for community service aimed at involving 
 youth in providing the full array of core resources described 
 in section 9102 to other youth, including opportunities 
 provided in conjunction with activities being performed by 
 entities under the National and Community Service Act of 1990 
 (42 U.S.C. 12501 et seq.);
 (12) opportunities that engage youth in civic participation 
 and as partners in decisionmaking, especially opportunities 
 with respect to programs and strategies that seek to offer 
 access to the full array of core resources described in section 
 9102;
 (13) special interest group activities or courses, 
 including activities or courses regarding video production, 
 cooking, gardening, pet care, photography, and other youth-
 identified interests;
 (14) efforts focused on building the capacity of community-
 based youth workers, utilizing community colleges, colleges, 
 and universities;
 (15) public and private youth led programs, including such 
 programs provided by youth-serving or youth development 
 organizations;
 (16) transportation services to foster the participation of 
 youth in youth development programs in the community involved;
 (17) subsidies for youth from families that meet the income 
 eligibility guidelines for a free or reduced price lunch under 
 section 9(b) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1758(b)), if the provision of the subsidy allows 
 a youth to fully participate in a youth development program 
 that is part of a strategy to promote access to the full array 
 of core resources described in section 9102;
 (18) training or group counseling to assist youth, by State 
 certified counselors, psychologists, social workers, or other 
 State licensed or certified mental health professionals who are 
 qualified under State law to provide such training or 
 counseling to youth; and
 (19) referrals to State certified counselors, 
 psychologists, social workers, or other State licensed or 
 certified mental health professionals or health professionals 
 qualified under State law to provide such training or 
 counseling to youth.

 CHAPTER 4--TRAINING, RESEARCH, AND EVALUATION

SEC. 9141. PURPOSE.

 The purpose of this chapter is to expand the Nation's knowledge and 
understanding of youth, youth development programs, and community 
mobilization aimed at providing all youth with access to the full array 
of core resources described in section 9102 by--
 (1) assisting States in evaluating the effectiveness of 
 activities implemented under this subtitle, including 
 evaluating the outcomes resulting from the activities;
 (2) placing priority on the education and training of 
 personnel, with respect to youth development programs, to work 
 with youth, with a special emphasis on youth who are minority 
 individuals and youth who are low-income individuals;
 (3) conducting research and identifying effective practices 
 directly related to the field of youth development; and
 (4) disseminating information acquired through such 
 research.

SEC. 9142. GRANTS AND CONTRACTS.

 (a) In General.--The Associate Commissioner may award grants and 
contracts to eligible entities to carry out evaluation, education and 
training, research, and dissemination activities described in this 
section.
 (b) Evaluation.--
 (1) System.--The Associate Commissioner shall develop and 
 establish a system for evaluating the effectiveness of 
 activities implemented under this subtitle, including 
 mechanisms for determining and measuring programmatic outcomes 
 resulting from those activities.
 (2) Distribution.--In awarding grants and contracts under 
 subsection (a), the Associate Commissioner shall use 50 percent 
 of the funds appropriated to carry out this chapter for an 
 equitable distribution among the States to allow State agencies 
 to be responsible for evaluating the effectiveness of the 
 activities implemented in the State under this subtitle.
 (c) Education and Training.--The Associate Commissioner shall 
develop and establish a system for providing education and training of 
personnel of States, area agencies on youth, and community boards to 
increase their capacity to work with youth, with a special emphasis on 
youth who are minority individuals and youth who are low-income 
individuals, in carrying out quality youth development programs under 
this subtitle.
 (d) Impact Evaluation.--
 (1) Biennial evaluation.--The Associate Commissioner, in 
 consultation with the Director and the National Council on 
 Youth Policy, shall conduct an independent biennial evaluation 
 of the impact of programs assisted under this subtitle and of 
 other recent and new initiatives (as of the date of the 
 evaluation) to promote positive youth development. The 
 evaluation shall report on--
 (A) whether the entities carrying out the programs 
 and initiatives--
 (i) provided a thorough assessment of local 
 resources and barriers to access to the full 
 array of core resources;
 (ii) used objective data and the knowledge 
 of a wide range of community members;
 (iii) developed measurable goals and 
 objectives;
 (iv) implemented research-based programs 
 and initiatives that have been shown to be 
 effective and meet identified needs; and
 (v) conducted periodic evaluations to 
 assess progress made towards achieving goals 
 and objectives and used evaluations to improve 
 goals, objectives, and activities;
 (B) whether the programs and initiatives have been 
 designed and implemented in a manner that specifically 
 targets, if relevant to the program or initiative 
 involved--
 (i) research-based variables that are 
 predictive of healthy youth development;
 (ii) risk factors that are predictive of an 
 increased likelihood that youth will use drugs, 
 alcohol, or tobacco, or engage in violence or 
 drop out of school; or
 (iii) protective factors, buffers, or 
 assets that are known to protect youth from 
 exposure to risk, either by reducing the 
exposure to risk factors or by changing the way a youth responds to 
risk, and to increase the likelihood of positive youth development;
 (C) whether the programs and initiatives have 
 appreciably reduced individual risk-taking behavior and 
 community risk factors and increased either individual 
 or community protective factors; and
 (D) whether the entities carrying out the programs 
 and initiatives have incorporated effective youth and 
 parent involvement.
 (2) Biennial report.--Not later than January 1, 2004, and 
 every 2 years thereafter, the Associate Commissioner shall 
 submit to the President and Congress a report on the findings 
 of the evaluation conducted under paragraph (1) together with 
 the data available from other sources on the well-being of 
 youth.
 (e) Dissemination.--The Associate Commissioner shall develop a 
system to facilitate the dissemination of information acquired through 
the research to States, area agencies on youth, community boards, and 
the public about successful and promising strategies for providing all 
youth with the full array of core resources specified in section 9102.

SEC. 9143. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this chapter 
$7,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 and such sums as may be necessary for 
each of fiscal years 2003, 2004, 2005, and 2006.

 Subtitle C--Youth Programs

SEC. 9201. AMERICORPS.

 Section 501(a)(2)(A) of the National and Community Service Act of 
1990 (42 U.S.C. 12681(a)(2)(A)) is amended by striking ``$300,000,000'' 
and all that follows and inserting ``$500,000,000 for fiscal year 
2002.''.

SEC. 9202. YOUTHBUILD PROGRAM.

 Section 402 of the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing 
Act (42 U.S.C. 12870) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(d) Fiscal Year 2002.--There is authorized to be appropriated for 
grants under subtitle D, $75,000,000 for fiscal year 2002.''.

SEC. 9203. YOUTH WORKFORCE INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES.

 (a) Youth Opportunities Grants.--Section 127(b)(1)(A)(ii)(II) of 
the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (29 U.S.C. 2852(b)(1)(A)(ii)(II)) 
is amended by striking ``$1,250,000,000 or greater, $250,000,000.'' and 
inserting ``$1,391,000,000 or greater, $391,000,000.''
 (b) Youth Activities Formula Grants.--Section 137(a) of the 
Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (29 U.S.C. 2872(a)) is amended by 
striking ``such sums'' and all that follows and inserting 
``$2,427,000,000 for fiscal year 2002.''.
 (c) Job Corps.--Section 161 of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 
(29 U.S.C. 2901) is amended by striking ``such sums'' and all that 
follows and inserting ``$1,400,000,000 for fiscal year 2002.''.

SEC. 9204. TRANSITION TRAINING FOR REINTEGRATING YOUTH OFFENDERS.

 Section 821(j) of the Higher Education Amendments of 1998 (20 
U.S.C. 1151(j)) is amended by striking ``$17,000,000'' and all that 
follows and inserting ``$75,000,000 for fiscal year 2002.''.

 TITLE X--SAFE START--JUVENILE JUSTICE

 Subtitle A--Juvenile Delinquency Prevention and Protection

SEC. 10001. DEFINITION OF JUVENILE.

 Section 103 of the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act 
of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5603) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(24) the term `juvenile' means an individual who is less 
 than 18 years of age.''.

SEC. 10002. STATE PLAN ALLOCATION.

 Section 222(a)(2) of the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency 
Prevention Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5632(a)(2)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A)--
 (A) by striking ``$325,000'' and inserting 
 ``$600,000''; and
 (B) by striking ``$400,000'' and inserting 
 $750,000; and
 (2) in subparagraph (B)--
 (A) by striking ``$400,000'' and inserting 
 ``$600,000''; and
 (B) by striking ``$600,000'' and inserting 
 $750,000''.

SEC. 10003. STATE PLAN REQUIREMENTS.

 Section 223(a) of the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention 
Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5633(a)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (24) and (25) as paragraphs 
 (30) and (31), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (23) the following:
 ``(24) provide an assurance that the State shall address 
 the disparate treatment of members of minority groups at all 
 stages of the juvenile justice system, including intake, 
 arrest, detention, adjudication, disposition, and transfer;
 ``(25) provide an assurance that the State shall make the 
 amended plan submitted annually under this section available to 
 the public and shall include in the amended plan a report of 
 the State's progress in addressing the disparate treatment of 
 members of minority groups at all stages of the juvenile 
 justice system, including data on any disproportionate 
 representation of African American, Latino, Native American, 
 and Asian juveniles;
 ``(26) contain satisfactory evidence that the State has 
 held a public hearing on the plan;
 ``(27) provide an assurance that the State shall provide 
 every accused or adjudicated juvenile with reasonable safety 
 and security, adequate food, heat, light, sanitary facilities, 
 bedding, clothing, recreation, counseling, education, training, 
 and medical care, including, if necessary, mental health 
 services;
 ``(28) provide that not more than 3 percent of funds 
 received by the State under section 222 shall be expended to 
 establish a State juvenile justice coalition, which coalition 
 shall include the participation of juveniles;
 ``(29) provide that 3 percent of funds received by the 
 State under section 222 shall be expended to carry out 
 paragraph (24);''.

SEC. 10004. REPEAL OF PART H.

 Part H of title II of the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency 
Prevention Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5667f, 5667f-1, 5667f-2, and 5667f-3) 
is repealed.

SEC. 10005. FUNDING OF FEDERAL ASSISTANCE FOR STATE AND LOCAL PROGRAMS.

 Section 299 of the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act 
of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5671) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(f) Authorization for 2002.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated $150,000,000 to carry out part B of this title for fiscal 
year 2002.''.

SEC. 10006. FUNDING OF GRANTS FOR PREVENTION PROGRAMS.

 Section 505 of the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act 
of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5784) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(d) Funding.--Not less than 75 percent of funds made available 
under this title shall be used to carry out this section.''.

SEC. 10007. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 Section 506 of the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act 
of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5785) is amended by striking ``appropriated'' and 
all that follows and inserting the following: ``appropriated 
$250,000,000 for fiscal year 2002.''.

 Subtitle B--Mental Health Juvenile Justice

SEC. 10101. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Mental Health Juvenile Justice 
Act''.

SEC. 10102. TRAINING OF JUSTICE SYSTEM PERSONNEL.

 Title II of the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 
1974 (42 U.S.C. 5611 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:

 ``PART K--ACCESS TO MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE TREATMENT

``SEC. 299AA. GRANTS FOR TRAINING OF JUSTICE SYSTEM PERSONNEL.

 ``(a) In General.--The Administrator shall make grants to State and 
local juvenile justice agencies in collaboration with State and local 
mental health agencies, for purposes of training the officers and 
employees of the State juvenile justice system (including employees of 
facilities that are contracted for operation by State and local 
juvenile authorities) regarding appropriate access to mental health and 
substance abuse treatment programs and services in the State for 
juveniles who come into contact with the State juvenile justice system 
who have mental health or substance abuse problems.
 ``(b) Use of Funds.--A State or local juvenile justice agency that 
receives a grant under this section may use the grant for purposes of--
 ``(1) providing cross-training, jointly with the public 
 mental health system, for State juvenile court judges, public 
 defenders, and mental health and substance abuse agency 
 representatives with respect to the appropriate use of 
 effective, community-based alternatives to juvenile justice or 
 mental health system institutional placements; or
 ``(2) providing training for State juvenile probation 
 officers and community mental health and substance abuse 
 program representatives on appropriate linkages between 
 probation programs and mental health community programs, 
 specifically focusing on the identification of mental disorders 
 and substance abuse addiction in juveniles on probation, 
 effective treatment interventions for those disorders, and 
 making appropriate contact with mental health and substance 
 abuse case managers and programs in the community, in order to 
 ensure that juveniles on probation receive appropriate access 
 to mental health and substance abuse treatment programs and 
 services.
 ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated from the Violent Crime Reduction Trust Fund, $50,000,000 
for fiscal years 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, and 2006 to carry out this 
section.''.

SEC. 10103. BLOCK GRANT FUNDING FOR TREATMENT AND DIVERSION PROGRAMS.

 Part K of title II of the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency 
Prevention Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5611 et seq.) is amended by adding at 
the end the following:

``SEC. 299BB. GRANTS FOR STATE PARTNERSHIPS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Attorney General and the Secretary of Health 
and Human Services shall make grants to partnerships between State and 
local/county juvenile justice agencies and State and local mental 
health authorities (or appropriate children service agencies) in 
accordance with this section.
 ``(b) Use of Funds.--A partnership described in subsection (a) that 
receives a grant under this section shall use such amounts for the 
establishment and implementation of programs that address the service 
needs of juveniles who come into contact with the justice system 
(including facilities contracted for operation by State or local 
juvenile authorities) who have mental health or substance abuse 
problems, by requiring the following:
 ``(1) Diversion.--Appropriate diversion of those juveniles 
 from incarceration--
 ``(A) at imminent risk of being taken into custody;
 ``(B) at the time they are initially taken into 
 custody;
 ``(C) after they are charged with an offense or act 
 of juvenile delinquency;
 ``(D) after they are adjudicated delinquent but 
 prior to case disposition; and
 ``(E) after they are released from a juvenile 
 facility, for the purposes of attending after-care 
 programs.
 ``(2) Treatment.--
 ``(A) Screening and assessment of juveniles.--
 ``(i) In general.--Initial mental health 
 screening shall be completed for all juveniles 
 immediately upon entering the juvenile justice 
 system or a juvenile facility. Screening shall 
 be conducted by qualified health and mental 
 health professionals or by staff who have been 
 trained by qualified health, mental health, and 
 substance abuse professionals. In the case of a 
 screening by staff, the screening results 
 should be reviewed by qualified health, mental 
 health professionals not later than 24 hours 
 after the screening.
 ``(ii) Acute mental illness.--Juveniles who 
 suffer from acute mental disorders, who are 
 suicidal, or in need of detoxification shall be 
 placed in or immediately transferred to an 
 appropriate medical or mental health facility. 
 They shall be admitted to a secure correctional 
 facility only with written medical clearance.
 ``(iii) Comprehensive assessment.--All 
 juveniles entering the juvenile justice system 
 shall have a comprehensive assessment conducted 
 and an individualized treatment plan written 
 and implemented within 2 weeks. This assessment 
 shall be conducted within 1 week for juveniles 
 incarcerated in secure facilities. Assessments 
 shall be completed by qualified health, mental 
 health, and substance abuse professionals.
 ``(B) Treatment.--
 ``(i) In general.--If the need for 
 treatment is indicated by the assessment of a 
 juvenile, the juvenile shall be referred to or 
 treated by a qualified professional. A juvenile 
 who is currently receiving treatment for a 
 mental or emotional disorder shall have 
 treatment continued.
 ``(ii) Period.--Treatment shall continue 
 until additional mental health assessment 
 determines that the juvenile is no longer in 
 need of treatment. Treatment plans shall be 
 reevaluated at least every 30 days.
 ``(iii) Discharge plan.--An incarcerated 
 juvenile shall have a discharge plan prepared 
 when the juvenile enters the correctional 
 facility in order to integrate the juvenile 
 back into the family or the community. This 
 plan shall be updated in consultation with the 
 juvenile's family or guardian before the 
 juvenile leaves the facility. Discharge plans 
 shall address the provision of aftercare 
 services.
 ``(iv) Medication.--Any juvenile receiving 
 psychotropic medications shall be under the 
 care of a licensed psychiatrist. Psychotropic 
 medications shall be monitored regularly by 
 trained staff for their efficacy and side 
 effects.
 ``(v) Specialized treatment.--Specialized 
 treatment and services shall be continually 
 available to a juvenile who--
 ``(I) has a history of mental 
 health problems or treatment;
 ``(II) has a documented history of 
 sexual abuse or offenses, as victim or 
 as perpetrator;
 ``(III) has substance abuse 
 problems, health problems, learning 
 disabilities, or histories of family 
 abuse or violence; or
 ``(IV) has developmental 
 disabilities.
 ``(C) Medical and mental health emergencies.--All 
 correctional facilities shall have written policies and 
 procedures on suicide prevention. All staff working in 
 correctional facilities shall be trained and certified 
 annually in suicide prevention. Facilities shall have 
 written arrangements with a hospital or other facility 
 for providing emergency medical and mental health care. 
 Physical and mental health services shall be available 
 to an incarcerated juvenile 24 hours per day, 7 days 
 per week.
 ``(D) Classification of juveniles.--
 ``(i) In general.--Juvenile facilities 
 shall classify and house juveniles in living 
 units according to a plan that includes age, 
 gender, offense, special medical or 
mental health condition, size, and vulnerability to victimization. 
Younger, smaller, weaker, and more vulnerable juveniles shall not be 
placed in housing units with older, more aggressive juveniles.
 ``(ii) Boot camps.--juveniles who are under 
 13 years old or who have serious medical 
 conditions or mental illness shall not be 
 placed in paramilitary boot camps.
 ``(E) Confidentiality of records.--Mental health 
 and substance abuse treatment records of juveniles 
 shall be treated as confidential and shall be excluded 
 from the records that States require to be routinely 
 released to other correctional authorities and school 
 officials.
 ``(F) Mandatory reporting.--States shall keep 
 records of the incidence and types of mental health and 
 substance abuse disorders in their juvenile justice 
 populations, the range and scope of services provided, 
 and barriers to service. The State shall submit an 
 analysis of this information yearly to the Department 
 of Justice.
 ``(G) Staff ratios for correctional facilities.--
 Each secure correctional facility shall have a minimum 
 ratio of no fewer than 1 mental health counselor to 
 every 50 juveniles. Mental health counselors shall be 
 professionally trained and certified or licensed. Each 
 secure correctional facility shall have a minimum ratio 
 of 1 clinical psychologist for every 100 juveniles. 
 Each secure correctional facility shall have a minimum 
 ratio of 1 licensed psychiatrist for every 100 
 juveniles receiving psychiatric care.
 ``(H) Use of force.--
 ``(i) Written guidelines.--All juvenile 
 facilities shall have a written behavioral 
 management system based on incentives and 
 rewards to reduce misconduct and to decrease 
 the use of restraints and seclusion by staff.
 ``(ii) Limitations on restraint.--Control 
 techniques such as restraint, seclusion, 
 chemical sprays, and room confinement shall be 
 used only in response to extreme threats to 
 life or safety. Use of these techniques shall 
 be approved by the facility superintendent or 
 chief medical officer and documented in the 
 juvenile's file along with the justification 
 for use and the failure of less restrictive 
 alternatives.
 ``(iii) Limitation on isolation.--Isolation 
 and seclusion shall be used only for immediate 
 and short-term security or safety reasons. No 
 juvenile shall be placed in isolation without 
 approval of the facility superintendent or 
 chief medical officer or their official staff 
 designee. All cases shall be documented in the 
 juvenile's file along with the justification. A 
 juvenile shall be in isolation only the amount 
 of time necessary to achieve security and 
 safety of the juvenile and staff. Staff shall 
 monitor each juvenile in isolation once every 
 15 minutes and conduct a professional review of 
 the need for isolation at least every 4 hours. 
 Any juvenile held in seclusion for 24 hours 
 shall be examined by a physician or licensed 
 psychologist.
 ``(I) IDEA and rehabilitation act.--All juvenile 
 facilities shall abide by all mandatory requirements 
 and time lines set forth under the Individuals with 
 Disabilities Education Act and section 504 of the 
 Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
 ``(J) Advocacy assistance.--
 ``(i) In general.--The Secretary of Health 
 and Human Services shall make grants to the 
 systems established under part C of the 
 Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill 
 of Rights Act (42 U.S.C. 6041 et seq.) to 
 monitor the mental health and special education 
 services provided by grantees to juveniles 
 under paragraph (2) (A), (B), (C), (H), and (I) 
 of this section, and to advocate on behalf of 
 juveniles to assure that such services are 
 properly provided.
 ``(ii) Appropriation.--The Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services will reserve no less 
 than 3 percent of the funds appropriated under 
 this section for the purposes set forth in 
 paragraph (2)(J)(i).
 ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--
 ``(1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated 
 from the Violent Crime Reduction Trust Fund, $500,000,000 for 
 fiscal years 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, and 2006 to carry out this 
 section.
 ``(2) Allocation.--Of amounts appropriated under paragraph 
 (1)--
 ``(A) 35 percent shall be used for diversion 
 programs under subsection (b)(1); and
 ``(B) 65 percent shall be used for treatment 
 programs under subsection (b)(2).
 ``(3) Incentives.--The Attorney General and the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services shall give preference under 
 subsection (b)(2) to partnerships that integrate treatment 
 programs to serve juveniles with co-occurring mental health and 
 substance abuse disorders.
 ``(4) Waivers.--The Attorney General and the Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services may grant a waiver of requirements 
 under subsection (b)(2) for good cause.

``SEC. 299CC. GRANTS FOR PARTNERSHIPS.

 ``(a) In General.--Any partnership desiring to receive a grant 
under this part shall submit an application at such time, in such 
manner, and containing such information as the Attorney General and the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services may prescribe.
 ``(b) Contents.--In accordance with guidelines established by the 
Attorney General and the Secretary of Health and Human Services, each 
application submitted under subsection (a) shall--
 ``(1) set forth a program or activity for carrying out one 
 or more of the purposes specified in section 299BB(b) and 
 specifically identify each such purpose such program or 
 activity is designed to carry out;
 ``(2) provide that such program or activity shall be 
 administered by or under the supervision of the applicant;
 ``(3) provide for the proper and efficient administration 
 of such program or activity;
 ``(4) provide for regular evaluation of such program or 
 activity;
 ``(5) provide an assurance that the proposed program or 
 activity will supplement, not supplant, similar programs and 
 activities already available in the community; and
 ``(6) provide for such fiscal control and fund accounting 
 procedures as may be necessary to ensure prudent use, proper 
 disbursement, and accurate accounting of funds receiving under 
 this part.''.

SEC. 10104. INITIATIVE FOR COMPREHENSIVE, INTERSYSTEM PROGRAMS.

 Subpart 3 of part B of title V of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 290bb-31 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 520K. INITIATIVE FOR COMPREHENSIVE, INTERSYSTEM PROGRAMS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Attorney General and the Secretary, acting 
through the Director of the Center for Mental Health Services, shall 
award competitive grants to eligible entities for programs that address 
the service needs of juveniles and juveniles with serious mental 
illnesses by requiring the State or local juvenile justice system, the 
mental health system, and the substance abuse treatment system to work 
collaboratively to ensure--
 ``(1) the appropriate diversion of such juveniles and 
 juveniles from incarceration;
 ``(2) the provision of appropriate mental health and 
 substance abuse services as an alternative to incarceration and 
 for those juveniles on probation or parole; and
 ``(3) the provision of followup services for juveniles who 
 are discharged from the juvenile justice system.
 ``(b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this 
section an entity shall--
 ``(1) be a State or local juvenile justice agency, mental 
 health agency, or substance abuse agency (including community 
 diversion programs);
 ``(2) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at 
 such time, in such manner, and containing such information as 
 the Secretary may require, including--
 ``(A) an assurance that the applicant has the 
 consent of all entities described in paragraph (1) in 
 carrying out and coordinating activities under the 
 grant; and
 ``(B) with respect to services for juveniles, an 
 assurance that the applicant has collaborated with the 
 State or local educational agency and the State or 
 local welfare agency in carrying out and coordinating 
 activities under the grant;
 ``(3) be given priority if it is a joint application 
 between juvenile justice and substance abuse or mental health 
 agencies; and
 ``(4) ensure that funds from non-Federal sources are 
 available to match amounts provided under the grant in an 
 amount that is not less than--
 ``(A) with respect to the first 3 years under the 
 grant, 25 percent of the amount provided under the 
 grant; and
 ``(B) with respect to the fourth and fifth years 
 under the grant, 50 percent of the amount provided 
 under the grant.
 ``(c) Use of Funds.--
 ``(1) Initial year.--An entity that receives a grant under 
 this section shall, in the first fiscal year in which amounts 
 are provided under the grant, use such amounts to develop a 
 collaborative plan--
 ``(A) for how the guarantee will institute a system 
 to provide intensive community services--
 ``(i) to prevent high-risk juveniles from 
 coming in contact with the justice system; and
 ``(ii) to meet the mental health and 
 substance abuse treatment needs of juveniles on 
 probation or recently discharged from the 
 justice system; and
 ``(B) providing for the exchange by agencies of 
 information to enhance the provision of mental health 
 or substance abuse services to juveniles.
 ``(2) 2-5th years.--With respect to the second through 
 fifth fiscal years in which amounts are provided under the 
 grant, the grantee shall use amounts provided under the grant--
 ``(A) to furnish services, such as assertive 
 community treatment, wrap-around services for 
 juveniles, multisystemic therapy, outreach, integrated 
 mental health and substance abuse treatment, case 
 management, health care, education and job training, 
 assistance in securing stable housing, finding a job or 
 obtaining income support, other benefits, access to 
 appropriate school-based services, transitional and 
 independent living services, mentoring programs, home-
 based services, and provision of appropriate after 
 school and summer programing;
 ``(B) to establish a network of boundary spanners 
 to conduct regular meetings with judges, provide 
 liaison with mental health and substance abuse workers, 
 share and distribute information, and coordinate with 
 mental health and substance abuse treatment providers, 
 and probation or parole officers concerning provision 
 of appropriate mental health and drug and alcohol 
 addiction services for individuals on probation or 
 parole;
 ``(C) to provide cross-system training among 
 police, corrections, and mental health and substance 
 abuse providers with the purpose of enhancing 
 collaboration and the effectiveness of all systems;
 ``(D) to provide coordinated and effective 
 aftercare programs for juveniles with emotional or 
 mental disorders who are discharged from jail, prison, 
 or juvenile facilities;
 ``(E) to purchase technical assistance to achieve 
 the grant project's goals; and
 ``(F) to furnish services, to train personnel in 
 collaborative approaches, and to enhance intersystem 
 collaboration.
 ``(3) Definition.--In paragraph (2)(B), the term `boundary 
 spanners' means professionals who act as case managers for 
 juveniles with mental disorders and substance abuse addictions, 
 within both justice agency facilities and community mental 
 health programs and who have full authority from both systems 
 to act as problem-solvers and advocates on behalf of 
 individuals targeted for service under this program.
 ``(d) Area Served by the Project.--An entity receiving a grant 
under this section shall conduct activities under the grant to serve at 
least a single political jurisdiction.
 ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There shall be made 
available to carry out the section, not less than 10 percent of the 
amount appropriated under section 1935(a) for each of the fiscal years 
2002 through 2006.''.

SEC. 10105. FEDERAL COORDINATING COUNCIL ON THE CRIMINALIZATION OF 
 JUVENILES WITH MENTAL DISORDERS.

 (a) Establishment.--There is established a Federal Coordinating 
Council on Criminalization of Juveniles With Mental Disorders as an 
interdepartmental council to study and coordinate the criminal and 
juvenile justice and mental health and substance abuse activities of 
the Federal Government and to report to Congress on proposed new 
legislation to improve the treatment of mentally ill juveniles who come 
in contact with the juvenile justice system.
 (b) Membership.--The Council shall include representatives from--
 (1) the appropriate Federal agencies, as determined by the 
 President, including, at a minimum--
 (A) the Office of the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services;
 (B) the Office for Juvenile Justice and Delinquency 
 Prevention;
 (C) the National Institute of Mental Health;
 (D) the Social Security Administration;
 (E) the Department of Education; and
 (F) the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
 Administration; and
 (2) children's mental health advocacy groups.
 (c) Duties.--The Council shall--
 (1) review Federal policies that hinder or facilitate 
 coordination at the State and local level between the mental 
 health and substance abuse systems on the one hand and the 
 juvenile justice and corrections system on the other;
 (2) study the possibilities for improving collaboration at 
 the Federal, State, and local level among these systems; and
 (3) recommend to Congress any appropriate new initiatives 
 which require legislative action.
 (d) Final Report.--The Council shall submit--
 (1) an interim report on current coordination and 
 collaboration, or lack thereof, 18 months after the Council is 
 established; and
 (2) recommendations for new initiatives in improving 
 coordination and collaboration in a final report to Congress 2 
 years after the Council is established.
 (e) Expiration.--The Council shall expire 2 years after the Council 
is established.

SEC. 10106. MENTAL HEALTH SCREENING AND TREATMENT FOR PRISONERS.

 (a) Additional Requirements for the Use of Funds Under the Violent 
Offender Incarceration and Truth-in-Sentencing Grants Program.--Section 
20105(b) of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 
is amended to read as follows:
 ``(b) Additional Requirements.--
 ``(1) Eligibility for grant.--To be eligible to receive a 
 grant under section 20103 or 20104, a State shall, not later 
 than January 1, 2001, have a program of mental health screening 
 and treatment for appropriate categories of juvenile and other 
 offenders during periods of incarceration and juvenile and 
 criminal justice supervision, that is consistent with 
 guidelines issued by the Attorney General.
 ``(2) Use of funds.--
 ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of this subtitle, amounts made available to a 
 State under section 20103 or 20104, may be applied to 
 the costs of programs described in paragraph (1), 
 consistent with guidelines issued by the Attorney 
 General.
 ``(B) Additional use.--In addition to being used as 
 specified in subparagraph (A), the funds referred to in 
 that subparagraph may be used by a State to pay the 
 costs of providing to the Attorney General a baseline 
 study on the mental health problems of juvenile 
 offenders and prisoners in the State, which study shall 
 be consistent with guidelines issued by the Attorney 
 General.''.

SEC. 10107. INAPPLICABILITY OF AMENDMENTS.

 Section 3626 of title 18 is amended by adding at the end the 
following:
 ``(h) Inapplicability of Amendments.--A civil action brought 
pursuant to section 1983 of title 42, United States Code, that seeks to 
remedy conditions of confinement for individuals who are under the age 
of 18 shall be governed by the terms of this section, as in effect on 
the day before the date of enactment of the Prison Litigation Reform 
Act of 1995 and the amendments made by that Act (18 U.S.C. 3601 
note).''.

 Subtitle C--Juvenile Justice and Accountability

SEC. 10201. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Juvenile Justice and 
Accountability Act''.

SEC. 10202. GRANT PROGRAM.

 Title II of the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 
1974 (42 U.S.C. 5611 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:

 ``PART L--JUVENILE ACCOUNTABILITY BLOCK GRANTS

``SEC. 299AAA. PROGRAM AUTHORIZED.

 ``(a) In General.--The Administrator is authorized to provide 
grants to States, for use by States and units of local government, and 
in certain cases directly to specially qualified units.
 ``(b) Authorized Activities.--Amounts paid to a State or a unit of 
local government under this part shall be used by the State or unit of 
local government for the purpose of strengthening the juvenile justice 
system, which includes--
 ``(1) developing, implementing, and administering graduated 
 sanctions for juvenile offenders;
 ``(2) building, expanding, renovating, or operating 
 temporary or permanent juvenile correction, detention, or 
 community corrections facilities;
 ``(3) hiring juvenile court judges, probation officers, and 
 court-appointed defenders and special advocates, and funding 
 pretrial services for juvenile offenders, to promote the 
 effective and expeditious administration of the juvenile 
 justice system;
 ``(4) hiring additional prosecutors, so that more cases 
 involving violent juvenile offenders can be prosecuted and case 
 backlogs reduced;
 ``(5) providing funding to enable prosecutors to address 
 drug, gang, and youth violence problems more effectively and 
 for technology, equipment, and training to assist prosecutors 
 in identifying and expediting the prosecution of violent 
 juvenile offenders;
 ``(6) establishing and maintaining training programs for 
 law enforcement and other court personnel with respect to 
 preventing and controlling juvenile crime;
 ``(7) establishing juvenile gun courts for the prosecution 
 and adjudication of juvenile firearms offenders;
 ``(8) establishing drug court programs for juvenile 
 offenders that provide continuing judicial supervision over 
 juvenile offenders with substance abuse problems and the 
 integrated administration of other sanctions and services for 
 such offenders;
 ``(9) establishing and maintaining a system of juvenile 
 records designed to promote public safety;
 ``(10) establishing and maintaining interagency 
 information-sharing programs that enable the juvenile and 
 criminal justice system, schools, and social services agencies 
 to make more informed decisions regarding the early 
 identification, control, supervision, and treatment of 
 juveniles who repeatedly commit serious delinquent or criminal 
 acts;
 ``(11) establishing and maintaining accountability-based 
 programs designed to reduce recidivism among juveniles who are 
 referred by law enforcement personnel or agencies, including 
 development of a plan for administering after care services and 
 treatment for juvenile offenders when they are released.
 ``(12) establishing and maintaining programs to conduct 
 risk and need assessments of juvenile offenders that facilitate 
 the effective early intervention and the provision of 
 comprehensive services, including mental health screening and 
 treatment and substance abuse testing and treatment to such 
 offenders;
 ``(13) establishing and maintaining accountability-based 
 programs that are designed to enhance school safety;
 ``(14) enacting Child Access Prevention (CAP) laws;
 ``(15) establishing and maintaining programs to enable 
 juvenile courts and juvenile probation officers to be more 
 effective and efficient in holding juvenile offenders 
 accountable and reducing recidivism;
 ``(16) building and maintaining smaller juvenile 
 facilities, including separate units for juveniles tried as 
 adults;
 ``(17) requiring all correctional staff who are responsible 
 for supervising juvenile offenders be provided with orientation 
 and on-going training regarding the unique needs of juveniles; 
 and
 ``(18) developing and utilizing accountable community-based 
 alternatives to incarceration.

``SEC. 299BBB. GRANT ELIGIBILITY.

 ``(a) State Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
this section, a State shall submit to the Administrator an application 
at such time, in such form, and containing such assurances and 
information as the Administrator may require by rule, including 
assurances that the State and any unit of local government to which the 
State provides funding under section 1803(b), has in effect (or shall 
have in effect, not later than 1 year after the date that the State 
submits such application) laws, or has implemented (or shall implement, 
not later than 1 year after the date that the State submits such 
application) policies and programs that--
 ``(1) provide for a system of graduated sanctions described 
 in subsection (c); and
 ``(2) prohibit the application of the death penalty for 
 juveniles.
 ``(b) Local Eligibility.--
 ``(1) Subgrant eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a 
 subgrant, a unit of local government, other than a specially 
 qualified unit, shall provide such assurances to the State as 
 the State shall require, that, to the maximum extent 
 applicable, the unit of local government has in effect (or 
 shall have in effect, not later than 1 year after the date that 
 the unit submits such application) laws, or has implemented (or 
 shall implement, not later than 1 year after the date that the 
 unit submits such application) policies and programs, that 
 provide for a system of graduated sanctions described in 
 subsection (c).
 ``(2) Special rule.--The requirements of paragraph (1) 
 shall apply to a specially qualified unit that receives funds 
 from the Administrator under section 1803(e), except that 
 information that is otherwise required to be submitted to the 
 State shall be submitted to the Administrator.
 ``(c) Graduated Sanctions.--A system of graduated sanctions, which 
may be discretionary as provided in subsection (d), shall ensure, at a 
minimum, that--
 ``(1) sanctions are imposed on juvenile offenders for every 
 offense;
 ``(2) sanctions escalate in intensity with each subsequent, 
 more serious delinquent or criminal offense;
 ``(3) there is sufficient flexibility to allow for 
 individualized sanctions and services suited to the individual 
 juvenile offender; and
 ``(4) appropriate consideration is given to public safety 
 and victims of crime.
 ``(d) Discretionary Use of Sanctions.--
 ``(1) Voluntary participation.--A State or unit of local 
 government may be eligible to receive a grant under this part 
 if--
 ``(A) its system of graduated sanctions is 
 discretionary; and
 ``(B) it demonstrates that it has promoted the use 
 of a system of graduated sanctions by taking steps to 
 encourage implementation of such a system by juvenile 
 courts.
 ``(2) Reporting requirement if graduated sanctions not 
 used.--
 ``(A) Juvenile courts.--A State or unit of local 
 government in which the imposition of graduated 
 sanctions is discretionary shall require each juvenile 
 court within its jurisdiction--
 ``(i) which has not implemented a system of 
 graduated sanctions, to submit an annual report 
 that explains why such court did not implement 
 graduated sanctions; and
 ``(ii) which has implemented a system of 
 graduated sanctions but has not imposed 
 graduated sanctions in 1 or more specific 
 cases, to submit an annual report that explains 
 why such court did not impose graduated 
 sanctions.
 ``(B) Units of local government.--Each unit of 
 local government, other than a specially qualified 
 unit, that has 1 or more juvenile courts that use a 
 discretionary system of graduated sanctions shall 
 collect the information reported under subparagraph (A) 
 for submission to the State each year.
 ``(C) States.--Each State and specially qualified 
 unit that has 1 or more juvenile courts that use a 
 discretionary system of graduated sanctions shall 
 collect the information reported under subparagraph (A) 
 for submission to the Administrator each year. A State 
 shall also collect and submit to the Administrator the 
 information collected under subparagraph (B).
 ``(e) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
 ``(1) The term `discretionary' means that a system of 
 graduated sanctions is not required to be imposed by each and 
 every juvenile court in a State or unit of local government.
 ``(2) The term `sanctions' means tangible, proportional 
 consequences that hold the juvenile offender accountable for 
 the offense committed. A sanction may include counseling, 
 restitution, community service, a fine, supervised probation, 
 or confinement.

``SEC. 299CCC. ALLOCATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS.

 ``(a) State Allocation.--
 ``(1) In general.--In accordance with regulations 
 promulgated pursuant to this part and except as provided in 
 paragraph (3), the Administrator shall allocate--
 ``(A) 0.5 percent for each State; and
 ``(B) of the total funds remaining after the 
 allocation under subparagraph (A), to each State, an 
 amount which bears the same ratio to the amount of 
 remaining funds described in this subparagraph as the 
 population of people under the age of 18 living in such 
 State for the most recent calendar year in which such 
 data is available bears to the population of people 
 under the age of 18 of all the States for such fiscal 
 year.
 ``(2) Prohibition.--No funds allocated to a State under 
 this subsection or received by a State for distribution under 
 subsection (b) may be distributed by the Administrator or by 
 the State involved for any program other than a program 
 contained in an approved application.
 ``(3) Increase for state reserve.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), if 
 a State demonstrates and certifies to the Administrator 
 that the State's law enforcement expenditures in the 
 fiscal year preceding the date in which an application 
 is submitted under this part is more than 25 percent of 
 the aggregate amount of law enforcement expenditures by 
 the State and its eligible units of local government, 
 the percentage referred to in paragraph (1)(A) shall 
 equal the percentage determined by dividing the State's 
 law enforcement expenditures by such aggregate.
 ``(B) Law enforcement expenditures over 50 
 percent.--If the law enforcement expenditures of a 
 State exceed 50 percent of the aggregate amount 
 described in subparagraph (A), the Administrator shall 
 consult with as many units of local government in such 
 State as practicable regarding the State's proposed 
 uses of funds.
 ``(b) Local Distribution.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in subsection (a)(3), 
 each State which receives funds under subsection (a)(1) in a 
 fiscal year shall distribute not less than 75 percent of such 
 amounts received among units of local government, for the 
 purposes specified in section 1801. In making such distribution 
 the State shall allocate to such units of local government an 
 amount which bears the same ratio to the aggregate amount of 
 such funds as--
 ``(A) the sum of--
 ``(i) the product of--
 ``(I) three-quarters; multiplied by
 ``(II) the average law enforcement 
 expenditure for such unit of local 
 government for the 3 most recent 
 calendar years for which such data is 
 available; plus
 ``(ii) the product of--
 ``(I) one-quarter; multiplied by
 ``(II) the average annual number of 
 part 1 violent crimes in such unit of 
 local government for the 3 most recent 
 calendar years for which such data is 
 available, bears to--
 ``(B) the sum of the products determined under 
 subparagraph (A) for all such units of local government 
 in the State.
 ``(2) Expenditures.--The allocation any unit of local 
 government shall receive under paragraph (1) for a payment 
 period shall not exceed 100 percent of law enforcement 
 expenditures of the unit for such payment period.
 ``(3) Reallocation.--The amount of any unit of local 
 government's allocation that is not available to such unit by 
 operation of paragraph (2) shall be available to other units of 
 local government that are not affected by such operation in 
 accordance with this subsection.
 ``(c) Unavailability of Data for Units of Local Government.--If the 
State has reason to believe that the reported rate of part 1 violent 
crimes or law enforcement expenditures for a unit of local government 
is insufficient or inaccurate, the State shall--
 ``(1) investigate the methodology used by the unit to 
 determine the accuracy of the submitted data; and
 ``(2) if necessary, use the best available comparable data 
 regarding the number of violent crimes or law enforcement 
 expenditures for the relevant years for the unit of local 
 government.
 ``(d) Local Government With Allocations Less Than $5,000.--If under 
this section a unit of local government is allocated less than $5,000 
for a payment period, the amount allotted shall be expended by the 
State on services to units of local government whose allotment is less 
than such amount in a manner consistent with this part.
 ``(e) Direct Grants to Specially Qualified Units.--
 ``(1) In general.--If a State does not qualify or apply for 
 funds reserved for allocation under subsection (a) by the 
 application deadline established by the Administrator, the 
 Administrator shall reserve not more than 75 percent of the 
 allocation that the State would have received under subsection 
 (a) for such fiscal year to provide grants to specially 
 qualified units which meet the requirements for funding under 
 section 1802.
 ``(2) Award basis.--In addition to the qualification 
 requirements for direct grants for specially qualified units 
 the Administrator may use the average amount allocated by the 
 States to units of local government as a basis for awarding 
 grants under this section.

``SEC. 299DDD. GUIDELINES.

 ``(a) In General.--The Attorney General shall issue guidelines 
establishing procedures under which a State or unit of local government 
that receives funds under section 1803 is required to provide notice to 
the Administrator regarding the proposed use of funds made available 
under this part.
 ``(b) Advisory Board.--The guidelines referred to in subsection (a) 
shall include a requirement that such eligible State or unit of local 
government establish and convene an advisory board to review the 
proposed uses of such funds. The board shall include representation 
from, if appropriate--
 ``(1) the State or local police department;
 ``(2) the local sheriff's department;
 ``(3) the State or local prosecutor's office;
 ``(4) the State or local juvenile court;
 ``(5) the State or local probation officer;
 ``(6) the State or local educational agency;
 ``(7) a State or local social service agency; and
 ``(8) a nonprofit, religious, or community group.

``SEC. 299EEE. PAYMENT REQUIREMENTS.

 ``(a) Timing of Payments.--The Administrator shall pay to each 
State or unit of local government that receives funds under section 
1803 that has submitted an application under this part not later than--
 ``(1) 90 days after the date that the amount is available, 
 or
 ``(2) the first day of the payment period if the State has 
 provided the Administrator with the assurances required by 
 subsection (c),
whichever is later.
 ``(b) Repayment of Unexpended Amounts.--
 ``(1) Repayment required.--From amounts awarded under this 
 part, a State or specially qualified unit shall repay to the 
 Administrator, or a unit of local government shall repay to the 
 State by not later than 39 months after receipt of funds from 
 the Administrator, any amount that is not expended by the State 
 within 3 years after receipt of such funds from the 
 Administrator.
 ``(2) Penalty for failure to repay.--If the amount required 
 to be repaid is not repaid, the Administrator shall reduce 
 payment in future payment periods accordingly.
 ``(3) Deposit of amounts repaid.--Amounts received by the 
 Administrator as repayments under this subsection shall be 
 deposited in a designated fund for future payments to States 
 and specially qualified units.
 ``(c) Administrative Costs.--A State or unit of local government 
that receives funds under this part may use not more than 5 percent of 
such funds to pay for administrative costs.
 ``(d) Nonsupplanting Requirement.--Funds made available under this 
part to States and units of local government shall not be used to 
supplant State or local funds as the case may be, but shall be used to 
increase the amount of funds that would, in the absence of funds made 
available under this part, be made available from State or local 
sources, as the case may be.
 ``(e) Matching Funds.--The Federal share of a grant received under 
this part may not exceed 90 percent of the costs of a program or 
proposal funded under this part.

``SEC. 299FFF. UTILIZATION OF PRIVATE SECTOR.

 ``Funds or a portion of funds allocated under this part may be 
utilized to contract with private, nonprofit entities, or community-
based organizations to carry out the purposes specified under section 
1801(a)(2).

``SEC. 299GGG. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--A State or specially qualified unit that 
receives funds under this part shall--
 ``(1) establish a trust fund in which the government will 
 deposit all payments received under this part;
 ``(2) use amounts in the trust fund (including interest) 
 during a period not to exceed 3 years from the date the grant 
 award is made to the State or specially qualified unit;
 ``(3) designate an official of the State or specially 
 qualified unit to submit reports as the Attorney General 
 reasonably requires, in addition to the annual reports required 
 under this part; and
 ``(4) spend the funds only for the purposes under section 
 1801(b).
 ``(b) Title I Provisions.--Except as otherwise provided, the 
administrative provisions of part H shall apply to this part and for 
purposes of this section any reference in such provisions to title I 
shall be deemed to include a reference to this part.

``SEC. 299HHH. DEFINITIONS.

 ``For purposes of this part:
 ``(1) The term `unit of local government' means--
 ``(A) a county, township, city, or political 
 subdivision of a county, township, or city, that is a 
 unit of local government as determined by the Secretary 
 of Commerce for general statistical purposes; and
 ``(B) the District of Columbia and the recognized 
 governing body of an Indian tribe or Alaskan Native 
 village that carries out substantial governmental 
 duties and powers.
 ``(2) The term `specially qualified unit' means a unit of 
 local government which may receive funds under this part only 
 in accordance with section 1803(e).
 ``(3) The term `State' means any State of the United 
 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto 
 Rico, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Guam, and the 
 Northern Mariana Islands, except that American Samoa, Guam, and 
 the Northern Mariana Islands shall be considered as 1 State and 
 that, for purposes of section 1803(a), 33 percent of the 
 amounts allocated shall be allocated to American Samoa, 50 
 percent to Guam, and 17 percent to the Northern Mariana 
 Islands.
 ``(4) The term `juvenile' means an individual who is 17 
 years of age or younger.
 ``(5) The term `law enforcement expenditures' means the 
 expenditures associated with prosecutorial, legal, and judicial 
 services, and corrections as reported to the Bureau of the 
 Census for the fiscal year preceding the fiscal year for which 
 a determination is made under this part.
 ``(6) The term `part 1 violent crimes' means murder and 
 nonnegligent manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery, and 
 aggravated assault as reported to the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation for purposes of the Uniform Crime Reports.

``SEC. 299III. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``(a) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this part--
 ``(1) $500,000,000 for fiscal year 2002;
 ``(2) $500,000,000 for fiscal year 2003; and
 ``(3) $500,000,000 for fiscal year 2004.
 ``(b) Oversight Accountability and Administration.--Not more than 3 
percent of the amount authorized to be appropriated under subsection 
(a), with such amounts to remain available until expended, for each of 
the fiscal years 2002 through 2004 shall be available to the 
Administrator for evaluation and research regarding the overall 
effectiveness and efficiency of the provisions of this part, assuring 
compliance with the provisions of this part, and for administrative 
costs to carry out the purposes of this part. The Administrator shall 
establish and execute an oversight plan for monitoring the activities 
of grant recipients.
 ``(c) Funding Source.--Appropriations for activities authorized in 
this part may be made from the Violent Crime Reduction Trust Fund.''.

SEC. 10203. INCREASE IN FUNDING FOR TITLE III OF THE JJDPA.

 There are authorized to be appropriated $120,000,000 for fiscal 
year 2002 to carry out the Runaway and Homeless Youth Act (42 U.S.C. 
5701 et seq.) of which $100,000,000 shall be for the Basic Centers and 
Transitional Living Program and $20,000,000 shall be for the Sexual 
Abuse Prevention Program.

SEC. 10204. FUNDING FOR THE SERVICES FOR YOUTHFUL OFFENDERS.

 There is authorized to be appropriated $40,000,000 for fiscal year 
2002 to carry out section 520D of title V of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 290bb-35).

SEC. 10205. AUTHORIZATION FOR THE JUVENILE JUSTICE AND DELINQUENCY 
 PREVENTION ACT OF 1974.

 Title I of the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 
1974 (42 U.S.C. 5601 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:

``SEC. 104. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act 
such sums as necessary for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006.''.

 TITLE XI--SAFE START--GUN SAFETY

 Subtitle A--Closing the Gun Show Loophole

SEC. 11001. EXTENSION OF BRADY BACKGROUND CHECKS TO GUN SHOWS.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds that--
 (1) more than 4,400 traditional gun shows are held annually 
 across the United States, attracting thousands of attendees per 
 show and hundreds of Federal firearms licensees and nonlicensed 
 firearms sellers;
 (2) traditional gun shows, as well as flea markets and 
 other organized events, at which a large number of firearms are 
 offered for sale by Federal firearms licensees and nonlicensed 
 firearms sellers, form a significant part of the national 
 firearms market;
 (3) firearms and ammunition that are exhibited or offered 
 for sale or exchange at gun shows, flea markets, and other 
 organized events move easily in and substantially affect 
 interstate commerce;
 (4) even before a firearm is exhibited or offered for sale 
 or exchange at a gun show, flea market, or other organized 
 event, the gun, its component parts, ammunition, and the raw 
 materials from which it is manufactured have moved in 
 interstate commerce;
 (5) gun shows, flea markets, and other organized events at 
 which firearms are exhibited or offered for sale or exchange, 
 provide a convenient and centralized commercial location at 
 which firearms may be bought and sold anonymously, often 
 without background checks and without records that enable gun 
 tracing;
 (6) at gun shows, flea markets, and other organized events 
 at which guns are exhibited or offered for sale or exchange, 
 criminals and other prohibited persons obtain guns without 
 background checks and frequently use guns that cannot be traced 
 to later commit crimes;
 (7) many persons who buy and sell firearms at gun shows, 
 flea markets, and other organized events cross State lines to 
 attend these events and engage in the interstate transportation 
 of firearms obtained at these events;
 (8) gun violence is a pervasive, national problem that is 
 exacerbated by the availability of guns at gun shows, flea 
 markets, and other organized events;
 (9) firearms associated with gun shows have been 
 transferred illegally to residents of other States by Federal 
 firearms licensees and nonlicensed firearms sellers, and have 
 been involved in subsequent crimes including drug offenses, 
 crimes of violence, property crimes, and illegal possession of 
 firearms by felons and other prohibited persons; and
 (10) Congress has the power, under the interstate commerce 
 clause and other provisions of the Constitution of the United 
 States, to ensure that criminals and other prohibited persons 
 do not obtain firearms at gun shows, flea markets, and other 
 organized events.
 (b) Definitions.--Section 921(a) of title 18, United States Code, 
is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(35) Gun show.--The term `gun show' means any event at which 50 
or more firearms are offered or exhibited for sale, transfer, or 
exchange, if 1 or more of the firearms has been shipped or transported 
in, or otherwise affects, interstate or foreign commerce.
 ``(36) Gun show promoter.--The term `gun show promoter' means any 
person who organizes, plans, promotes, or operates a gun show.
 ``(37) Gun show vendor.--The term `gun show vendor' means any 
person who exhibits, sells, offers for sale, transfers, or exchanges 1 
or more firearms at a gun show, regardless of whether or not the person 
arranges with the gun show promoter for a fixed location from which to 
exhibit, sell, offer for sale, transfer, or exchange 1 or more 
firearms.''.
 (c) Regulation of Firearms Transfers at Gun Shows.--
 (1) In general.--Chapter 44 of title 18, United States 
 Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 931. Regulation of firearms transfers at gun shows
 ``(a) Registration of Gun Show Promoters.--It shall be unlawful for 
any person to organize, plan, promote, or operate a gun show unless 
that person--
 ``(1) registers with the Secretary in accordance with 
 regulations promulgated by the Secretary; and
 ``(2) pays a registration fee, in an amount determined by 
 the Secretary.
 ``(b) Responsibilities of Gun Show Promoters.--It shall be unlawful 
for any person to organize, plan, promote, or operate a gun show unless 
that person--
 ``(1) before commencement of the gun show, verifies the 
 identity of each gun show vendor participating in the gun show 
 by examining a valid identification document (as defined in 
 section 1028(d)(2)) of the vendor containing a photograph of 
 the vendor;
 ``(2) before commencement of the gun show, requires each 
 gun show vendor to sign--
 ``(A) a ledger with identifying information 
 concerning the vendor; and
 ``(B) a notice advising the vendor of the 
 obligations of the vendor under this chapter;
 ``(3) notifies each person who attends the gun show of the 
 requirements of this chapter, in accordance with such 
 regulations as the Secretary shall prescribe; and
 ``(4) maintains a copy of the records described in 
 paragraphs (1) and (2) at the permanent place of business of 
 the gun show promoter for such period of time and in such form 
 as the Secretary shall require by regulation.
 ``(c) Responsibilities of Transferors Other Than Licensees.--
 ``(1) In general.--If any part of a firearm transaction 
 takes place at a gun show, it shall be unlawful for any person 
 who is not licensed under this chapter to transfer a firearm to 
 another person who is not licensed under this chapter, unless 
 the firearm is transferred through a licensed importer, 
 licensed manufacturer, or licensed dealer in accordance with 
 subsection (e).
 ``(2) Criminal background checks.--A person who is subject 
 to the requirement of paragraph (1)--
 ``(A) shall not transfer the firearm to the 
 transferee until the licensed importer, licensed 
 manufacturer, or licensed dealer through which the 
 transfer is made under subsection (e) makes the 
 notification described in subsection (e)(3)(A); and
 ``(B) notwithstanding subparagraph (A), shall not 
 transfer the firearm to the transferee if the licensed 
 importer, licensed manufacturer, or licensed dealer 
 through which the transfer is made under subsection (e) 
 makes the notification described in subsection 
 (e)(3)(B).
 ``(3) Absence of recordkeeping requirements.--Nothing in 
 this section shall permit or authorize the Secretary to impose 
 recordkeeping requirements on any nonlicensed vendor.
 ``(d) Responsibilities of Transferees Other Than Licensees.--
 ``(1) In general.--If any part of a firearm transaction 
 takes place at a gun show, it shall be unlawful for any person 
 who is not licensed under this chapter to receive a firearm 
 from another person who is not licensed under this chapter, 
 unless the firearm is transferred through a licensed importer, 
 licensed manufacturer, or licensed dealer in accordance with 
 subsection (e).
 ``(2) Criminal background checks.--A person who is subject 
 to the requirement of paragraph (1)--
 ``(A) shall not receive the firearm from the 
 transferor until the licensed importer, licensed 
 manufacturer, or licensed dealer through which the 
 transfer is made under subsection (e) makes the 
 notification described in subsection (e)(3)(A); and
 ``(B) notwithstanding subparagraph (A), shall not 
 receive the firearm from the transferor if the licensed 
 importer, licensed manufacturer, or licensed dealer 
 through which the transfer is made under subsection (e) 
 makes the notification described in subsection 
 (e)(3)(B).
 ``(e) Responsibilities of Licensees.--A licensed importer, licensed 
manufacturer, or licensed dealer who agrees to assist a person who is 
not licensed under this chapter in carrying out the responsibilities of 
that person under subsection (c) or (d) with respect to the transfer of 
a firearm shall--
 ``(1) enter such information about the firearm as the 
 Secretary may require by regulation into a separate bound 
 record;
 ``(2) record the transfer on a form specified by the 
 Secretary;
 ``(3) comply with section 922(t) as if transferring the 
 firearm from the inventory of the licensed importer, licensed 
 manufacturer, or licensed dealer to the designated transferee 
 (although a licensed importer, licensed manufacturer, or 
 licensed dealer complying with this subsection shall not be 
 required to comply again with the requirements of section 
 922(t) in delivering the firearm to the nonlicensed 
 transferor), and notify the nonlicensed transferor and the 
 nonlicensed transferee--
 ``(A) of such compliance; and
 ``(B) if the transfer is subject to the 
 requirements of section 922(t)(1), of any receipt by 
 the licensed importer, licensed manufacturer, or 
 licensed dealer of a notification from the national 
 instant criminal background check system that the 
 transfer would violate section 922 or would violate 
 State law;
 ``(4) not later than 10 days after the date on which the 
 transfer occurs, submit to the Secretary a report of the 
 transfer, which report--
 ``(A) shall be on a form specified by the Secretary 
 by regulation; and
 ``(B) shall not include the name of or other 
 identifying information relating to any person involved 
 in the transfer who is not licensed under this chapter;
 ``(5) if the licensed importer, licensed manufacturer, or 
 licensed dealer assists a person other than a licensee in 
 transferring, at 1 time or during any 5 consecutive business 
 days, 2 or more pistols or revolvers, or any combination of 
 pistols and revolvers totaling 2 or more, to the same 
 nonlicensed person, in addition to the reports required under 
 paragraph (4), prepare a report of the multiple transfers, 
 which report shall be--
 ``(A) prepared on a form specified by the 
 Secretary; and
 ``(B) not later than the close of business on the 
 date on which the transfer occurs, forwarded to--
 ``(i) the office specified on the form 
 described in subparagraph (A); and
 ``(ii) the appropriate State law 
 enforcement agency of the jurisdiction in which 
 the transfer occurs; and
 ``(6) retain a record of the transfer as part of the 
 permanent business records of the licensed importer, licensed 
 manufacturer, or licensed dealer.
 ``(f) Records of Licensee Transfers.--If any part of a firearm 
transaction takes place at a gun show, each licensed importer, licensed 
manufacturer, and licensed dealer who transfers 1 or more firearms to a 
person who is not licensed under this chapter shall, not later than 10 
days after the date on which the transfer occurs, submit to the 
Secretary a report of the transfer, which report--
 ``(1) shall be in a form specified by the Secretary by 
 regulation;
 ``(2) shall not include the name of or other identifying 
 information relating to the transferee; and
 ``(3) shall not duplicate information provided in any 
 report required under subsection (e)(4).
 ``(g) Firearm Transaction Defined.--In this section, the term 
`firearm transaction'--
 ``(1) includes the offer for sale, sale, transfer, or 
 exchange of a firearm; and
 ``(2) does not include the mere exhibition of a firearm.''.
 (2) Penalties.--Section 924(a) of title 18, United States 
 Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(7)(A) Whoever knowingly violates section 931(a) shall be fined 
under this title, imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both.
 ``(B) Whoever knowingly violates subsection (b) or (c) of section 
931, shall be--
 ``(i) fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 2 
 years, or both; and
 ``(ii) in the case of a second or subsequent conviction, 
 fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 5 years, or 
 both.
 ``(C) Whoever willfully violates section 931(d), shall be--
 ``(i) fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 2 
 years, or both; and
 ``(ii) in the case of a second or subsequent conviction, 
 fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 5 years, or 
 both.
 ``(D) Whoever knowingly violates subsection (e) or (f) of section 
931 shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 5 years, 
or both.
 ``(E) In addition to any other penalties imposed under this 
paragraph, the Secretary may, with respect to any person who knowingly 
violates any provision of section 931--
 ``(i) if the person is registered pursuant to section 
 931(a), after notice and opportunity for a hearing, suspend for 
 not more than 6 months or revoke the registration of that 
 person under section 931(a); and
 ``(ii) impose a civil fine in an amount equal to not more 
 than $10,000.''.
 (3) Technical and conforming amendments.--Chapter 44 of 
 title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (A) in the chapter analysis, by adding at the end 
 the following:

``931. Regulation of firearms transfers at gun shows.'';
 and
 (B) in the first sentence of section 923(j), by 
 striking ``a gun show or event'' and inserting ``an 
 event''.
 (d) Inspection Authority.--Section 923(g)(1) is amended by adding 
at the end the following:
 ``(E) Notwithstanding subparagraph (B), the Secretary may enter 
during business hours the place of business of any gun show promoter 
and any place where a gun show is held for the purposes of examining 
the records required by sections 923 and 931 and the inventory of 
licensees conducting business at the gun show. Such entry and 
examination shall be conducted for the purposes of determining 
compliance with this chapter by gun show promoters and licensees 
conducting business at the gun show and shall not require a showing of 
reasonable cause or a warrant.''.
 (e) Increased Penalties for Serious Recordkeeping Violations by 
Licensees.--Section 924(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended 
by striking paragraph (3) and inserting the following:
 ``(3)(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), any licensed 
dealer, licensed importer, licensed manufacturer, or licensed collector 
who knowingly makes any false statement or representation with respect 
to the information required by this chapter to be kept in the records 
of a person licensed under this chapter, or violates section 922(m) 
shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 5 years, or 
both.
 ``(B) If the violation described in subparagraph (A) is in relation 
to an offense--
 ``(i) under paragraph (1) or (3) of section 922(b), such 
 person shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more 
 than 5 years, or both; or
 ``(ii) under subsection (a)(6) or (d) of section 922, such 
 person shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more 
 than 10 years, or both.''.
 (f) Increased Penalties for Violations of Criminal Background Check 
Requirements.--
 (1) Penalties.--Section 924(a) of title 18, United States 
 Code (as amended by subsection (c)), is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (5), by striking ``subsection (s) 
 or (t) of section 922'' and inserting ``section 
 922(s)''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(8) Whoever knowingly violates section 922(t) shall be fined 
under this title, imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both.''.
 (2) Elimination of certain elements of offense.--Section 
 922(t)(5) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by 
 striking ``and, at the time'' and all that follows through 
 ``State law''.
 (g) Gun Owner Privacy and Prevention of Fraud and Abuse of System 
Information.--Section 922(t)(2)(C) of title 18, United States Code, is 
amended by inserting before the period at the end ``, as soon as 
possible, consistent with the responsibility of the Attorney General 
under section 103(h) of the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act (18 
U.S.C. 922 note) to ensure the privacy and security of the system and 
to prevent system fraud and abuse, but in no event later than 90 days 
after the date on which the licensee first contacts the system with 
respect to the transfer''.
 (h) Effective Date.--This section and the amendments made by this 
section shall take effect 180 days after the date of enactment of this 
Act.

 Subtitle B--Child Safety Locks

SEC. 11101. REQUIREMENT OF CHILD HANDGUN SAFETY LOCKS.

 (a) Definitions.--Section 921(a) of title 18, United States Code 
(as amended by section 11001), is amended by adding at the end the 
following:
 ``(38) Locking device.--The term `locking device' means a 
 device or locking mechanism that is approved by a licensed 
 firearms manufacturer for use on the handgun with which the 
 device or locking mechanism is sold, delivered, or transferred 
 and that--
 ``(A) if installed on a firearm and secured by 
 means of a key or a mechanically, electronically, or 
 electromechanically operated combination lock, is 
 designed to prevent the firearm from being discharged 
 without first deactivating or removing the device by 
 means of a key or mechanically, electronically, or 
 electromechanically operated combination lock;
 ``(B) if incorporated into the design of a firearm, 
 is designed to prevent discharge of the firearm by any 
 person who does not have access to the key or other 
 device designed to unlock the mechanism and thereby 
 allow discharge of the firearm; or
 ``(C) is a safe, gun safe, gun case, lockbox, or 
 other device that is designed to store a firearm and 
 that is designed to be unlocked only by means of a key, 
 a combination, or other similar means.''.
 (b) Unlawful Acts.--
 (1) In general.--Section 922 of title 18, United States 
 Code, is amended by inserting after subsection (y) the 
 following:
 ``(z) Locking Devices.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), it 
 shall be unlawful for any licensed manufacturer, licensed 
 importer, or licensed dealer to sell, deliver, or transfer any 
 handgun to any person other than a licensed manufacturer, 
 licensed importer, or licensed dealer, unless the transferee is 
 provided with a locking device for that handgun.
 ``(2) Exceptions.--Paragraph (1) does not apply to the--
 ``(A) manufacture for, transfer to, or possession 
 by, the United States or a State or a department or 
 agency of the United States, or a State or a 
 department, agency, or political subdivision of a 
 State, of a firearm;
 ``(B) transfer to, or possession by, a law 
 enforcement officer employed by an entity referred to 
 in clause (i) of a firearm for law enforcement purposes 
 (whether on or off duty); or
 ``(C) transfer to, or possession by, a rail police 
 officer employed by a rail carrier and certified or 
 commissioned as a police officer under the laws of a 
 State of a firearm for purposes of law enforcement 
 (whether on or off duty).''.
 (2) Effective date.--Section 922(z) of title 18, United 
 States Code, as added by this subsection, shall take effect 180 
 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (c) Liability; Evidence.--
 (1) Liability.--Nothing in this section shall be construed 
 to--
 (A) create a cause of action against any dealer of 
 firearms or any other person for any civil liability; 
 or
 (B) establish any standard of care.
 (2) Evidence.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 
 evidence regarding compliance or noncompliance with the 
 amendments made by this section shall not be admissible as 
 evidence in any proceeding of any court, agency, board, or 
 other entity, except with respect to an action to enforce this 
 section.
 (3) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this subsection shall 
 be construed to bar a governmental action to impose a penalty 
 under section 924(p) of title 18, United States Code (as added 
 by subsection (d)), for a failure to comply with section 922(z) 
 of that title.
 (d) Civil Penalties.--Section 924 of title 18, United States Code, 
is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ``or (f)'' and 
 inserting ``(f), or (p)''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(p) Penalties Relating to Locking Devices.--
 ``(1) In general.--
 ``(A) Suspension or revocation of license; civil 
 penalties.--With respect to each violation of section 
 922(z)(1) by a licensee, the Secretary may, after 
 notice and opportunity for hearing--
 ``(i) suspend or revoke any license issued 
 to the licensee under this chapter; or
 ``(ii) subject the licensee to a civil 
 penalty in an amount equal to not more than 
 $10,000.
 ``(B) Review.--An action of the Secretary under 
 this paragraph may be reviewed only as provided in 
 section 923(f).
 ``(2) Administrative remedies.--The suspension or 
 revocation of a license or the imposition of a civil penalty 
 under paragraph (1) does not preclude any administrative remedy 
 that is otherwise available to the Secretary.''.
 (e) Consumer Product Safety Act.--The Consumer Product Safety Act 
(15 U.S.C. 2051 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 38. CHILD HANDGUN SAFETY LOCKS.

 ``(a) Establishment of Standard.--
 ``(1) In general.--
 ``(A) Rulemaking required.--
 ``(i) Initiation of rulemaking.--
 ``(I) In general.--Notwithstanding 
 section 3(a)(1)(E) of this Act, the 
 Commission shall initiate a rulemaking 
 proceeding under section 553 of title 
 5, United States Code, within 90 days 
 after the date of enactment of this 
 section to establish a consumer product 
 safety standard for locking devices.
 ``(II) Extension of time period.--
 The Commission may extend the 90-day 
 period under subclause (I) for good 
 cause.
 ``(ii) Final standard.--
 ``(I) In general.--Notwithstanding 
 any other provision of law, including 
 chapter 5 of title 5, United States 
 Code, the Commission shall promulgate a 
 final consumer product safety standard 
 under this paragraph within 12 months 
 after the date on which it initiated 
 the rulemaking.
 ``(II) Extension of time period.--
 The Commission may extend that 12-month 
 period under subclause (I) for good 
 cause.
 ``(iii) Effective date.--The consumer 
 product safety standard promulgated under this 
 paragraph shall take effect 6 months after the 
 date on which the final standard is 
 promulgated.
 ``(B) Standard requirements.--The standard 
 promulgated under subparagraph (A)(ii) shall require 
 locking devices that--
 ``(i) are sufficiently difficult for 
 children to deactivate or remove; and
 ``(ii) prevent the discharge of the handgun 
 unless the locking device has been deactivated 
 or removed.
 ``(2) Certain provisions not to apply.--
 ``(A) Provisions of this act.--Sections 7, 9, and 
 30(d) of this Act do not apply to the rulemaking 
 proceeding under paragraph (1). Section 11 of this Act 
 does not apply to any consumer product safety standard 
 promulgated under paragraph (1).
 ``(B) Chapter 5 of title 5.--Except for section 
 553, chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, does not 
 apply to this section.
 ``(C) Chapter 6 of title 5.--Chapter 6 of title 5, 
 United States Code, does not apply to this section.
 ``(D) National environmental policy act.--The 
 National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 
 4321) does not apply to this section.
 ``(b) No Effect on State Law.--Notwithstanding section 26 of this 
Act, this section does not annul, alter, impair, affect, or exempt any 
person subject to the provisions of this section from complying with 
any provision of the law of any State or any political subdivision 
thereof, except to the extent that such provisions of State law are 
inconsistent with any provision of this section, and then only to the 
extent of the inconsistency. A provision of State law is not 
inconsistent with this section if such provision affords greater 
protection to children in respect of handguns than is afforded by this 
section.
 ``(c) Enforcement.--Notwithstanding subsection (a)(2)(A), the 
consumer product safety standard promulgated by the Commission under 
subsection (a) shall be enforced under this Act as if it were a 
consumer product safety standard described in section 7(a).
 ``(d) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Child.--The term `child' means an individual who is 
 less than 13 years of age.
 ``(2) Locking device.--The term `locking device' has the 
 meaning given that term in clauses (i) and (iii) of section 
 921(a)(35)(A) of title 18, United States Code.''.
 (f) Conforming Amendment for Consumer Product Safety Act.--Section 
1 of the Consumer Product Safety Act is amended by adding at the end of 
the table of contents the following:

 ``Sec. 38. Child handgun safety locks.

 (g) Authorization of Appropriations for Consumer Product Safety 
Commission.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Consumer 
Product Safety Commission $2,000,000 to carry out the provisions of 
section 38 of the Consumer Product Safety Act, such sums to remain 
available until expended.

 Subtitle C--Unlawful Weapons Transfers

SEC. 11201. UNLAWFUL WEAPONS TRANSFERS TO JUVENILES.

 (a) In General.--Section 922 of title 18, United States Code, is 
amended by striking subsection (x) and inserting the following:
 ``(x)(1) It shall be unlawful for a person to sell, deliver, or 
otherwise transfer to a person who the transferor knows or has 
reasonable cause to believe is a juvenile--
 ``(A) a handgun;
 ``(B) ammunition that is suitable for use only in a handgun 
 (in this section referred to as ``ammunition'');
 ``(C) a semiautomatic assault weapon; or
 ``(D) a large capacity ammunition feeding device.
 ``(2) It shall be unlawful for any person who is a juvenile to 
knowingly possess--
 ``(A) a handgun;
 ``(B) ammunition;
 ``(C) a semiautomatic assault weapon; or
 ``(D) a large capacity ammunition feeding device.
 ``(3) This subsection does not apply to--
 ``(A) a temporary transfer of a handgun, ammunition, large 
 capacity ammunition feeding device, or a semiautomatic assault 
 weapon to a juvenile or the possession or use of a handgun, 
 ammunition, large capacity ammunition feeding device, or a 
 semiautomatic assault weapon by a juvenile--
 ``(i) if the handgun, ammunition, large capacity 
 ammunition feeding device, or semiautomatic assault 
 weapon are possessed and used by the juvenile--
 ``(I) in the course of employment;
 ``(II) in the course of ranching or farming 
 related to activities at the residence of the 
 juvenile (or on property used for ranching or 
 farming at which the juvenile, with the 
 permission of the property owner or lessee, is 
 performing activities related to the operation 
 of the farm or ranch);
 ``(III) for target practice;
 ``(IV) for hunting; or
 ``(V) for a course of instruction in the 
 safe and lawful use of a firearm; and
 ``(ii) if the juvenile's possession and use of a 
 handgun, ammunition, large capacity ammunition feeding 
 device, or a semiautomatic assault weapon under this 
 subparagraph are in accordance with State and local 
 law, and the following conditions are met--
 ``(I) except when a parent or guardian of 
 the juvenile is in the immediate and 
 supervisory presence of the juvenile, the 
 juvenile shall have in the juvenile's 
 possession at all times when a handgun, 
 ammunition, large capacity ammunition feeding 
 device, or semiautomatic assault weapon is in 
 the possession of the juvenile, the prior 
 written consent of the juvenile's parent or 
 guardian who is not prohibited by Federal, 
 State, or local law from possessing a firearm 
 or ammunition; and
 ``(II) during transportation by the 
 juvenile directly from the place of transfer to 
 a place at which an activity described in 
 clause (i) is to take place, the firearm shall 
 be unloaded and in a locked container or case, 
 and during the transportation by the juvenile 
 of that firearm, directly from the place at 
 which such an activity took place to the 
 transferor, the firearm shall also be unloaded 
 and in a locked container or case; or
 ``(III) with respect to employment, 
 ranching or farming activities as described in 
 clause (i), a juvenile may possess and use a 
 handgun, ammunition, large capacity ammunition 
 feeding device or a semiautomatic assault rifle 
 with the prior written approval of the 
 juvenile's parent or legal guardian, if such 
 approval is on file with the adult who is not 
 prohibited by Federal, State, or local law from 
 possessing a firearm or ammunition and that 
 person is directing the ranching or farming 
 activities of the juvenile;
 ``(B) a juvenile who is a member of the Armed Forces of the 
 United States or the National Guard who possesses or is armed 
 with a handgun, ammunition, large capacity ammunition feeding 
 device, or semiautomatic assault weapon in the line of duty;
 ``(C) a transfer by inheritance of title (but not 
 possession) of a handgun, ammunition, large capacity ammunition 
 feeding device, or a semiautomatic assault weapon to a 
 juvenile; or
 ``(D) the possession of a handgun, ammunition, large 
 capacity ammunition feeding device, or a semiautomatic assault 
 weapon taken in lawful defense of the juvenile or other persons 
 in the residence of the juvenile or a residence in which the 
 juvenile is an invited guest.
 ``(4) A handgun, ammunition, large capacity ammunition feeding 
device, or a semiautomatic assault weapon, the possession of which is 
transferred to a juvenile in circumstances in which the transferor is 
not in violation of this subsection, shall not be subject to permanent 
confiscation by the Government if its possession by the juvenile 
subsequently becomes unlawful because of the conduct of the juvenile, 
but shall be returned to the lawful owner when such handgun, 
ammunition, large capacity ammunition feeding device, or semiautomatic 
assault weapon is no longer required by the Government for the purposes 
of investigation or prosecution.
 ``(5) For purposes of this subsection, the term `juvenile' means an 
individual who is less than 21 years of age.
 ``(6)(A) In a prosecution of a violation of this subsection, the 
court shall require the presence of a parent or legal guardian of the 
juvenile defendant at all proceedings.
 ``(B) The court may use the contempt power to enforce subparagraph 
(A).
 ``(C) The court may excuse attendance of a parent or legal guardian 
of a juvenile defendant at a proceeding in a prosecution of a violation 
of this subsection for good cause shown.
 ``(7) In this subsection, the term `large capacity ammunition 
feeding device' has the same meaning as in section 921(a)(31).''.
 (b) Effective Date.--This section and the amendment made by this 
section shall take effect 180 days after the date of enactment of this 
Act.

 Subtitle D--Large Capacity Ammunition Feeding Devices

SEC. 11301. BAN ON IMPORTING LARGE CAPACITY AMMUNITION FEEDING DEVICES.

 (a) In General.--Section 922(w) of title 18, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``(1) Except as provided 
 in paragraph (2)'' and inserting ``(1)(A) Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B)'';
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking ``(2) Paragraph (1)'' and 
 inserting ``(B) Subparagraph (A)'';
 (3) by inserting before paragraph (3) the following:
 ``(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to import a large 
capacity ammunition feeding device.''; and
 (4) in paragraph (4)--
 (A) by striking ``(1)'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``(1)(A)''; and
 (B) by striking ``(2)'' and inserting ``(1)(B)''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 921(a)(31) of title 18, United 
States Code, is amended by striking ``manufactured after the date of 
enactment of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 
1994''.

 Subtitle E--Enforcement of Gun Laws

SEC. 11401. ENHANCE ENFORCEMENT OF GUN VIOLENCE LAWS.

 (a) Criminal Gun Trafficker Apprehension.--
 (1) Commonsense definition of licensed dealer.--Section 
 921(a)(22) of title 18, United States Code, is amended in the 
 first sentence by inserting before the period the following: 
 ``: Provided further, That it shall be presumed that the intent 
 underlying the sale or disposition of a firearm is 
 predominantly one of obtaining livelihood and pecuniary gain if 
 a person transfers more than 50 firearms during any 12-month 
 period, or more than 30 firearms during any 30-day period, 
 excluding any infrequent transfer of a firearm by gift, 
 bequest, intestate succession, or other means by an individual 
 to a parent, child, grandparent, or grandchild of the 
 individual''.
 (2) Requirement that licensee operate from fixed 
 premises.--Section 923(d)(1)(E)(i) of title 18, United States 
 Code, is amended by striking ``premises'' and inserting ``fixed 
 premises (other than a private residence) primarily devoted to 
the sale of firearms and conspicuously designated to the public as 
such''.
 (3) Secure storage of firearms inventories.--
 (A) Storage requirements.--Section 923 of title 18, 
 United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(m) Secure Storage of Firearms Inventories.--
 ``(1) In general.--Beginning on the date on which the 
 Secretary issues final regulations under paragraph (2), it 
 shall be unlawful for any licensed importer, licensed 
 manufacturer, or licensed dealer (other than a dealer described 
 in section 921(a)(11)(B)) to store any firearm on a premises 
 described in subsection (d)(1)(E)(i), other than in accordance 
 with those regulations.
 ``(2) Regulations.--
 ``(A) In general.--Not later than 180 days after 
 the date of enactment of this subsection, the Secretary 
 shall issue final regulations governing the secure 
 storage of firearms on premises described in subsection 
 (d)(1)(E)(i) by licensed importers, licensed 
 manufacturers, and licensed dealers.
 ``(B) Factors for consideration.--In promulgating 
 regulations issued under this paragraph, the Secretary 
 shall consider--
 ``(i) the type and quantity of the firearm 
 or firearms to be stored; and
 ``(ii) the standards of safety and security 
 recognized in the firearms industry.''.
 (B) Penalties.--Section 924 of title 18, United 
 States Code (as amended by section 11101), is amended--
 (i) in subsection (a)(1), by striking 
 ``(f), or (p)'' and inserting ``(f), (p), or 
 (q)''; and
 (ii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(q) Failure To Securely Store Firearms Inventory.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may, after notice and 
 opportunity for hearing, suspend or revoke any license issued 
 under this chapter, may subject the licensee to a civil penalty 
 of not more than $10,000, or both, if the holder of such 
 license has knowingly violated section 923(m).
 ``(2) Review.--An action of the Secretary under this 
 subsection may be reviewed only as provided in section 
 923(f).''.
 (C) Condition of licensing.--
 (i) In general.--Section 923(d)(1)(F) of 
 title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (I) in clause (ii)(II), by striking 
 ``and'' at the end; and
 (II) by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(iv) not later than 30 days after the date on which the 
 application is approved, the firearms inventory of the business 
 will be stored in accordance with the regulations issued under 
 section 923(m)(2); and''.
 (ii) Effective date.--The amendments made 
 by this subparagraph shall apply to any 
 application submitted under section 923 of 
 title 18, United States Code, on or after the 
 date on which final regulations are issued by 
 the Secretary of the Treasury under section 
 923(m)(2) of title 18, United States Code, as 
 added by this section.
 (4) Requiring thefts from common carriers to be reported.
 (A) In general.--Section 922(f) of title 18, United 
 States Code, is amended by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(3)(A) It shall be unlawful for any common or contract carrier to 
fail to report the theft or loss of a firearm to the Secretary and to 
the appropriate local authorities within 48 hours after the theft or 
loss is discovered.
 ``(B) The Secretary may impose a civil fine of not more than 
$10,000 on any person who knowingly violates subparagraph (A).''.
 (B) Penalties.--Section 924(a)(1)(B) of title 18, 
 United States Code, is amended by striking ``(f),'' and 
 inserting ``(f)(1), (f)(2),''.
 (b) Criminal Gun Dealer Detection.--
 (1) Recordkeeping inspections.--Section 923(g)(1)(B)(ii)(I) 
 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking 
 ``once'' and inserting ``4 times''.
 (2) Disposal of personal firearms collection by certain 
 licensees made subject to regulations..--Section 923(c) of 
 title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking the second 
 sentence and inserting the following: ``A personal collection 
 of firearms of a licensed manufacturer, licensed importer, or 
 licensed dealer shall be considered to be part of the business 
 inventory of the licensee for purposes of this chapter, except 
 that the provisions of this chapter applicable to the 
 disposition of a firearm from the business inventory of a 
 licensee shall not apply to the infrequent transfer of a 
 firearm by gift, bequest, intestate succession, or other means 
 from the personal collection of firearms of a licensee to a 
 parent, child, grandparent, or grandchild of the licensee.''.
 (3) Suspension or revocation of firearms dealer license and 
 civil penalties.--
 (A) In general.--Section 923 of title 18, United 
 States Code, is amended by striking subsection (e) and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(e) Suspension or Revocation of Dealer License; Civil 
Penalties.--
 ``(1) Willful violations.--The Secretary may, after notice 
 and opportunity for hearing, suspend or revoke any license 
 issued under this section, and may subject the licensee to a 
 civil penalty of not more than $10,000 per violation, or both, 
 if the holder of such license has willfully violated any 
 provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation prescribed 
 by the Secretary under this chapter.
 ``(2) Transfer of armor piercing ammunition.--The Secretary 
 may, after notice and opportunity for hearing, with respect to 
 a dealer who willfully transfers armor piercing ammunition--
 ``(A) suspend or revoke the license of that dealer;
 ``(B) assess a civil penalty of not more than 
 $10,000 on that dealer; or
 ``(C) both.
 ``(3) Compromise, mitigation, or remittance of liability.--
 The Secretary may at any time compromise, mitigate, or remit 
 the liability with respect to any willful violation of this 
 chapter or any rule or regulation prescribed by the Secretary 
 under this chapter.
 ``(4) Review.--An action of the Secretary under this 
 subsection may be reviewed only as provided in subsection 
 (f).''.
 (B) Notice of license revocation or denial.--
 Section 923 of title 18, United States Code, is amended 
 by striking subsection (f) and inserting the following:
 ``(f) Rights of Applicants and Licensees.--
 ``(1) Notice requirements.--
 ``(A) In general.--If the Secretary denies an 
 application for, or revokes or suspends a license, or 
 assesses a civil penalty under this section, the 
 Secretary shall provide written notice of such denial, 
 revocation, suspension, or assessment to the affected 
 party.
 ``(B) Notice to be given before effective date of 
 revocation or suspension.--Any notice of a revocation 
 or suspension of a license under this paragraph shall 
 be given to the holder of such license before the 
 effective date of the revocation or suspension, as 
 applicable.
 ``(2) Appeals process.--
 ``(A) Hearing.--If the Secretary denies an 
 application for, or revokes or suspends a license, or 
 assesses a civil penalty under this section, the 
 Secretary, shall--
 ``(i) upon request of the aggrieved party, 
 promptly hold a hearing at a location 
 convenient to the aggrieved party to review the 
denial, revocation, suspension, or assessment; and
 ``(ii) in the case of a suspension or 
 revocation of a license, upon the request of 
 the holder of the license, stay the effective 
 date of the suspension or revocation.
 ``(B) Notice of decision.--If, after a hearing held 
 under subparagraph (A), the Secretary decides not to 
 reverse the decision of the Secretary to deny the 
 application, revoke or suspend the license, or assess 
 the civil penalty, as applicable, the Secretary shall 
 provide notice of the decision of the Secretary to the 
 aggrieved party.
 ``(C) Petition for de novo review.--
 ``(i) In general.--During the 60-day period 
 beginning on the date on which an aggrieved 
 party receives a notice under subparagraph (B), 
 the aggrieved party may file a petition with 
 the district court of the United States for the 
 judicial district in which the aggrieved party 
 resides or has a principal place of business 
 for a de novo judicial review of such denial, 
 revocation, suspension, or assessment.
 ``(ii) Judicial proceeding.--In any 
 judicial proceeding pursuant to a petition 
 under clause (i)--
 ``(I) the court may consider any 
 evidence submitted by the parties to 
 the proceeding, regardless of whether 
 or not such evidence was considered at 
 the hearing held under subparagraph 
 (A); and
 ``(II) if the court decides that 
 the Secretary was not authorized to 
 make such denial, revocation, 
 suspension, or assessment, the court 
 shall order the Secretary to take such 
 actions as may be necessary to comply 
 with the judgment of the court.''.
 (c) Violent Felon Gun Ban Enforcement.--
 (1) Administrative relief from certain firearms and 
 explosives prohibitions.--
 (A) In general.--
 (i) Firearms.--Section 925(c) of title 18, 
 United States Code, is amended--
 (I) by inserting ``(1)'' after 
 ``(c)'';
 (II) in the first sentence, by 
 inserting ``(other than a natural 
 person)'' before ``who is prohibited'';
 (III) in the fourth sentence--
 (aa) by inserting ``person 
 (other than a natural person) 
 who is a'' before ``licensed 
 importer''; and
 (bb) by striking ``his 
 license'' and inserting ``the 
 license of that person''; and
 (IV) by striking the last sentence 
 and inserting the following:
 ``(2) Whenever the Secretary grants relief under this section to 
any person, the Secretary shall promptly publish notice of such action 
in the Federal Register, which shall include--
 ``(A) the name of the person;
 ``(B) the disability with respect to which the relief is 
 granted;
 ``(C) if the disability was imposed by reason of a criminal 
 conviction of the person, the crime for which and the court in 
 which the person was convicted; and
 ``(D) the reasons for the decision of the Secretary.''.
 (ii) Explosive materials.--Section 845(b) 
 of title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (I) in the first sentence, by 
 inserting ``(other than a natural 
 person)'' before ``may make application 
 to the Secretary''; and
 (II) in the second sentence, by 
 inserting ``(other than a natural 
 person)'' before ``who makes 
 application for relief''.
 (B) Applicability.--The amendments made by 
 subparagraph (A) shall apply to any application for 
 administrative relief and any action for judicial 
 review that--
 (i) is pending on the date of enactment of 
 this section; and
 (ii) is brought or filed on or after the 
 date of enactment of this section.
 (2) Permanent firearm prohibition for convicted violent 
 felons and serious drug offenders.--Section 921(a)(20) of title 
 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (A) in the first sentence--
 (i) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) and 
 (B) as clauses (i) and (ii), respectively; and
 (ii) by inserting ``(A)'' after ``(20)'';
 (B) in the second sentence, by striking ``What'' 
 and inserting the following:
 ``(B) What''; and
 (C) by striking the third sentence and inserting 
 the following:
 ``(C) A State conviction shall not be considered to be a conviction 
for purposes of this chapter, if--
 ``(i) the conviction is for an offense other than a serious 
 drug offense (as defined in section 924(e)(2)(A)) or violent 
 felony (as defined in section 924(e)(2)(B));
 ``(ii) the person is pardoned or has restored any civil 
 right taken away by virtue of the conviction, or the conviction 
 is expunged; and
 ``(iii) the authority that grants the pardon, the 
 restoration of civil rights, or the expungement--
 ``(I) expressly authorizes the person to ship, 
 transport, receive, and possess firearms; and
 ``(II) expressly determines that the circumstances 
 regarding the conviction and the record and reputation 
 of the person are such that the person is not likely to 
 act in a manner that is dangerous to public safety, and 
 that the granting of the relief is not contrary to the 
 public interest.''.
 (d) Intensive Gun Violence Reduction Strategy and Project Exile 
Implementation.--
 (1) Authorization of funding for federal domestic violence 
 offender recordkeeping improvements.--
 (A) In general.--In addition to any other amounts 
 authorized to be appropriated that may be used for such 
 purpose, there is authorized to be appropriated 
 $70,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 for the improvement of 
 the national instant criminal background check system 
 established under section 103 of the Brady Handgun 
 Violence Prevention Act (18 U.S.C. 922 note), including 
 improvements with respect to the records described in 
 subparagraph (B) of this paragraph, and especially 
 records of domestic violence incidents, including 
 felony and misdemeanor convictions for crimes of 
 domestic violence and restraining orders with respect 
 to incidents of domestic violence.
 (B) Records included.--The records described in 
 this subsection are--
 (i) the records described in paragraphs 
 (1), (2), and (3) of section 509(b) of the 
 Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 
 1968 (42 U.S.C. 3759(b)); and
 (ii) the records required by the Attorney 
 General under section 103 of the Brady Handgun 
 Violence Prevention Act (18 U.S.C. 922 note) 
 for the purpose of implementing that Act.
 (2) Authorization of funding for state and local domestic 
 violence offender recordkeeping improvements.--
 (A) Grants for state and local domestic violence 
 offender recordkeeping improvements.--Title III of the 
 Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 
 is amended by adding at the end the following:

 ``Subtitle Y--Grants for State and Local Domestic Violence Offender 
 Recordkeeping Improvements

``SEC. 32501. GRANT AUTHORIZATION.

 ``The Attorney General may award grants to State or local law 
enforcement agencies for the purpose of improving--
 ``(1) the organization of criminal records including 
 records relating to convictions for crimes of domestic violence 
 and restraining orders with respect to domestic violence; and
 ``(2) the reporting of such records to the national instant 
 criminal background check system established under section 103 
 of the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act (18 U.S.C. 922 
 note).

``SEC. 32502. USE OF FUNDS.

 ``Grants awarded by the Attorney General under this subtitle shall 
be used to fund programs for the purpose specified in section 32501.

``SEC. 32503. APPLICATIONS.

 ``(a) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant award under 
this subtitle for a fiscal year, a State or local law enforcement 
agency shall submit to the Attorney General an application, in such 
form and containing such information as the Attorney General may 
reasonably require.
 ``(b) Requirements.--Each application submitted under this section 
shall include--
 ``(1) a request for funds for the purpose specified in 
 section 32501;
 ``(2) a description of the improvements the applicant 
 intends to make in its organization of criminal records, 
 including records relating to convictions for crimes of 
 domestic violence and to restraining orders with respect to 
 domestic violence, and its reporting of such records to the 
 national instant criminal background check system; and
 ``(3) assurances that Federal funds received under this 
 subtitle shall be used to supplement, not supplant, non-Federal 
 funds that would otherwise be available for activities funded 
 under this section.

``SEC. 32504. MATCHING REQUIREMENT.

 ``The Federal share of a grant awarded under this subtitle may not 
exceed 50 percent of the total costs of the programs described in the 
applications submitted under section 32503 for the fiscal year for 
which the programs receive assistance under this subtitle.

``SEC. 32505. AWARD OF GRANTS.

 ``(a) In General.--In awarding grants under this subtitle, the 
Attorney General shall consider the demonstrated need for, and the 
evidence of the ability of the applicant to make, the improvements 
described in section 32503(b)(2), as described in the application 
submitted under section 32503.
 ``(b) Research and Evaluation.--The Attorney General shall use not 
more than 3 percent of the funds available under this subtitle, and not 
less than 1 percent of such funds, for the purposes of research and 
evaluation of the activities carried out under this subtitle.

``SEC. 32506. REPORTS.

 ``(a) Report to Attorney General.--Not later than March 1 of each 
fiscal year, each law enforcement agency that received funds from a 
grant awarded under this subtitle for that fiscal year shall submit to 
the Attorney General a report describing the progress achieved in 
carrying out the program for which the grant was awarded.
 ``(b) Report to Congress.--Beginning not later than October 1 of 
the first fiscal year following the initial fiscal year during which 
grants are awarded under this subtitle, and not later than October 1 of 
each fiscal year thereafter, the Attorney General shall submit to 
Congress a report, which shall contain a detailed statement regarding 
grant awards, activities of grant recipients, a compilation of 
statistical information submitted by applicants, and an evaluation of 
programs established with amounts from grants awarded under this 
subtitle during the preceding fiscal year.

``SEC. 32507. DEFINITION OF STATE.

 ``In this subtitle, the term `State' means each of the several 
States of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth 
of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, 
American Samoa, Guam, and the United States Virgin Islands.

``SEC. 32508. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subtitle 
$20,000,000 for fiscal year 2002.''.
 (B) Technical and conforming amendment.--The table 
 of contents in section 2 of the Violent Crime Control 
 and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 is amended by inserting 
 after the item relating to subtitle X the following:

 ``Subtitle Y--Grants for State and Local Domestic Violence Offender 
 Recordkeeping Improvements

 ``Sec. 32501. Grant authorization.
 ``Sec. 32502. Use of funds.
 ``Sec. 32503. Applications.
 ``Sec. 32504. Matching requirement.
 ``Sec. 32505. Award of grants.
 ``Sec. 32506. Reports.
 ``Sec. 32507. Definition of State.
 ``Sec. 32508. Authorization of appropriations.''.
 (3) Authorization of funding for additional bureau of 
 alcohol, tobacco and firearms officers.--In addition to any 
 other amounts authorized to be appropriated that may be used 
 for such purpose, there is authorized to be appropriated 
 $53,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 for the hiring of 600 
 firearms' agents and inspectors for the Bureau of Alcohol, 
 Tobacco and Firearms.
 (4) Authorization of funding for additional state and local 
 gun prosecutors.--
 (A) Grants for state and local gun prosecutors.--
 Title III of the Violent Crime Control and Law 
 Enforcement Act of 1994 (as amended by paragraph (2)), 
 is amended by adding at the end the following:

 ``Subtitle Z--Grants for State and Local Gun Prosecutors

``SEC. 32601. GRANT AUTHORIZATION.

 ``The Attorney General may award grants to State, Indian tribal, or 
local prosecutors for the purpose of supporting the creation or 
expansion of community-based justice programs for the prosecution of 
firearm-related crimes.

``SEC. 32602. USE OF FUNDS.

 ``Grants awarded by the Attorney General under this subtitle shall 
be used to fund programs for the hiring of prosecutors and related 
personnel under which those prosecutors and personnel shall utilize an 
interdisciplinary team approach to prevent, reduce, and respond to 
firearm-related crimes in partnership with communities.

``SEC. 32603. APPLICATIONS.

 ``(a) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant award under 
this subtitle for a fiscal year, a State, Indian tribal, or local 
prosecutor, in conjunction with the chief executive officer of the 
jurisdiction in which the program will be placed, shall submit to the 
Attorney General an application, in such form and containing such 
information as the Attorney General may reasonably require.
 ``(b) Requirements.--Each application submitted under this section 
shall include--
 ``(1) a request for funds for the purposes described in 
 section 32602;
 ``(2) a description of the communities to be served by the 
 grant, including the nature of the firearm-related crime in 
 such communities; and
 ``(3) assurances that Federal funds received under this 
 subtitle shall be used to supplement, not supplant, non-Federal 
 funds that would otherwise be available for activities funded 
 under this section.

``SEC. 32604. MATCHING REQUIREMENT.

 ``The Federal share of a grant awarded under this subtitle may not 
exceed 50 percent of the total cost of the program described in the 
application submitted under section 32603 for the fiscal year for which 
the program receives assistance under this subtitle.

``SEC. 32605. AWARD OF GRANTS.

 ``(a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), in 
awarding grants under this subtitle, the Attorney General shall 
consider--
 ``(1) the demonstrated need for, and the evidence of the 
 ability of the applicant to provide, the services described in 
 section 32603(b)(2), as described in the application submitted 
 under section 32603;
 ``(2) the extent to which, as reflected in the 1998 Uniform 
 Crime Report of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, there is a 
 high rate of firearm-related crime in the jurisdiction of the 
 applicant, measured either in total or per capita;
 ``(3) the extent to which the jurisdiction of the applicant 
 has experienced an increase in the total or per capita rate of 
 firearm-related crime, as reported in the 3 most recent annual 
 Uniform Crime Reports of the Federal Bureau of Investigation;
 ``(4) the extent to which State and local law enforcement 
 agencies in the jurisdiction of the applicant have pledged to 
 cooperate with Federal officials in responding to the illegal 
 acquisition distribution, possession, and use of firearms 
 within the jurisdiction; and
 ``(5) the extent to which the jurisdiction of the applicant 
 participates in comprehensive firearm law enforcement 
 strategies, including programs such as the Youth Crime Gun 
 Interdiction Initiative, Project Achilles, Project Disarm, 
 Project Triggerlock, Project Exile, Project Surefire, and 
 Operation Ceasefire.
 ``(b) Indian Tribes.--
 ``(1) Federal grants.--Not less than 5 percent of the 
 amount made available for grants under this subtitle for each 
 fiscal year shall be awarded as grants to Indian tribes.
 ``(2) Grant criteria.--In awarding grants to Indian tribes 
 in accordance with this subsection, the Attorney General shall 
 consider, to the extent practicable, the factors for 
 consideration set forth in subsection (a).
 ``(c) Research and Evaluation.--Of the amount made available for 
grants under this subtitle for each fiscal year, the Attorney General 
shall use not less than 1 percent and not more than 3 percent for 
research and evaluation of the activities carried out with grants 
awarded under this subtitle.

``SEC. 32606. REPORTS.

 ``(a) Report to Attorney General.--Not later than March 1 of each 
fiscal year, each law enforcement agency that receives funds from a 
grant awarded under this subtitle for that fiscal year shall submit to 
the Attorney General a report describing the progress achieved in 
carrying out the grant program for which those funds were received.
 ``(b) Report to Congress.--Beginning not later than October 1 of 
the first fiscal year following the initial fiscal year during which 
grants are awarded under this subtitle, and not later than October 1 of 
each fiscal year thereafter, the Attorney General shall submit to 
Congress a report, which shall contain a detailed statement regarding 
grant awards, activities of grant recipients, a compilation of 
statistical information submitted by applicants, and an evaluation of 
programs established with amounts from grants awarded under this 
subtitle during the preceding fiscal year.

``SEC. 32607. DEFINITIONS.

 ``In this subtitle--
 ``(1) the term `firearm' has the meaning given the term in 
 section 921(a) of title 18, United States Code;
 ``(2) the term `Indian tribe' means a tribe, band, pueblo, 
 nation, or other organized group or community of Indians, 
 including an Alaska Native village (as defined in or 
 established under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 
 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.)), that is recognized as eligible for the 
 special programs and services provided by the United States to 
 Indians because of their status as Indians; and
 ``(3) the term `State' means each of the several States of 
 the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth 
 of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
 Islands, American Samoa, Guam, and the United States Virgin 
 Islands.

``SEC. 32608. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subtitle 
$150,000,000 for fiscal year 2002.''.
 (B) Technical and conforming amendment.--The table 
 of contents in section 2 of the Violent Crime Control 
 and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (as amended by 
 paragraph (2)(B)) is amended by inserting after the 
 item relating to subtitle Y the following:

 ``Subtitle Z--Grants for State and Local Gun Prosecutors

 ``Sec. 32601. Grant authorization.
 ``Sec. 32602. Use of funds.
 ``Sec. 32603. Applications.
 ``Sec. 32604. Matching requirement.
 ``Sec. 32605. Award of grants.
 ``Sec. 32606. Reports.
 ``Sec. 32607. Definitions.
 ``Sec. 32608. Authorization of appropriations.''.
 (5) Authorization of funding for additional federal 
 firearms prosecutors and gun enforcement teams.--
 (A) Additional federal firearms prosecutors.--The 
 Attorney General shall hire 114 additional Federal 
 prosecutors to prosecute violations of Federal firearms 
 laws.
 (B) Gun enforcement teams.--
 (i) Establishment.--The Attorney General 
 shall establish in each of the jurisdictions 
 specified in clause (iii) a gun enforcement 
 team.
 (ii) Gun enforcement team requirements.--
 Each gun enforcement team established under 
 this subparagraph shall be composed of--
 (I) 1 coordinator, who shall be 
 responsible, with respect to the 
 jurisdiction concerned, 
for coordinating among Federal, State, and local law enforcement--
 (aa) the appropriate forum 
 for the prosecution of crimes 
 relating to firearms; and
 (bb) efforts for the 
 prevention of such crimes; and
 (II) 1 analyst, who shall be 
 responsible, with respect to the 
 jurisdiction concerned, for analyzing 
 data relating to such crimes and 
 recommending law enforcement strategies 
 to reduce such crimes.
 (iii) Covered jurisdictions.--The 
 jurisdictions specified in this subparagraph 
 are not more than 20 jurisdictions designated 
 by the Attorney General for purposes of this 
 subparagraph as areas having high rates of 
 crimes relating to firearms.
 (C) Authorization of appropriations.--In addition 
 to any other amounts authorized to be appropriated that 
 may be used for such purpose, there is authorized to be 
 appropriated to carry out this paragraph $15,000,000 
 for fiscal year 2002.
 (6) Youth crime gun interdiction initiative.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury 
 shall expand--
 (i) to 50, the number of city and county 
 law enforcement agencies that through the Youth 
 Crime Gun Interdiction Initiative submit 
 identifying information relating to all 
 firearms recovered during law enforcement 
 investigations, including from individuals 
 under age 25, to the Secretary of the Treasury 
 to identify the types and origins of such 
 firearms; and
 (ii) the resources devoted to law 
 enforcement investigations of illegal youth 
 possessors and users of illegal firearms 
 traffickers identified through the Youth Crime 
 Gun Interdiction Initiative, including through 
 the hiring of additional agents, inspectors, 
 intelligence analysts, and support personnel.
 (B) Selection of participants.--The Secretary of 
 the Treasury, in consultation with Federal, State, and 
 local law enforcement officials, shall select cities 
 and counties for participation in the program 
 established under this paragraph.
 (C) Establishment of system.--
 (i) In general.--The Secretary of the 
 Treasury shall establish a system through which 
 State and local law enforcement agencies, 
 through online computer technology, can 
 promptly provide firearms-related information 
 to the Secretary of the Treasury and access 
 information derived through the Youth Crime Gun 
 Interdiction Initiative as soon as such 
 capability is available.
 (ii) Report.--Not later than 6 months after 
 the date of enactment of this section, the 
 Secretary of the Treasury shall submit to the 
 Chairman and Ranking Member of the Committee on 
 Appropriations of the House of Representatives, 
 and the Chairman and Ranking Member of the 
 Committee on Appropriations of the Senate, a 
 report explaining the capacity to provide such 
 online access and the future technical and, if 
 necessary, legal changes required to make such 
 capability available, including cost estimates.
 (D) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date 
 of enactment of this paragraph, and annually 
 thereafter, the Secretary of the Treasury shall submit 
 to the Chairman and Ranking Member of the Committee on 
 Appropriations of the House of Representatives, and the 
 Chairman and Ranking Member of the Committee on 
 Appropriations of the Senate, a report regarding--
 (i) the types and sources of firearms 
 recovered from individuals, including those 
 under the age of 25;
 (ii) regional, State, and national firearms 
 trafficking trends; and
 (iii) the number of investigations and 
 arrests resulting from the Youth Crime Gun 
 Interdiction Initiative.
 (E) Authorization of appropriations.--There is 
 authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section 
 $20,000,000 for fiscal year 2002.
 (7) Local antigun violence media campaigns.--
 (A) Grants for local antigun violence media 
 campaigns.--Title III of the Violent Crime Control and 
 Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (as amended by paragraphs 
 (2) and (4)) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following:

 ``Subtitle AA--Grants for Local Antigun Violence Media Campaigns

``SEC. 32701. GRANT AUTHORIZATION.

 ``The Attorney General may award grants to public entities or 
private nonprofit entities for the purpose of supporting the creation 
or expansion of local antigun violence media campaigns.

``SEC. 32702. USE OF FUNDS.

 ``Grants awarded by the Attorney General under this subtitle shall 
be used to fund programs for media campaigns on gun violence and gun 
safety, including campaigns that--
 ``(1) highlight coordination among Federal, State, and 
 local law enforcement agencies;
 ``(2) publicize penalties for violations of firearms laws; 
 and
 ``(3) emphasize the safe storage of firearms and the 
 prevention of access to firearms by children.

``SEC. 32703. APPLICATIONS.

 ``To be eligible to receive a grant award under this subtitle for a 
fiscal year, a public entity or private nonprofit entity shall submit 
to the Attorney General an application, in such form and containing 
such information as the Attorney General may reasonably require.

``SEC. 32704. MATCHING REQUIREMENT.

 ``The Federal share of a grant awarded under this subtitle may not 
exceed 50 percent of the total cost of the program described in the 
application submitted under section 32703 for the fiscal year for which 
the program receives assistance under this subtitle.

``SEC. 32705. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subtitle 
$10,000,000 for fiscal year 2002.''.
 (B) Technical and conforming amendment.--The table 
 of contents in section 2 of the Violent Crime Control 
 and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (as amended by 
 paragraphs (2)(B) and (4)(B)), is amended by inserting 
 after the item relating to subtitle Z the following:

 ``Subtitle AA--Grants for Local Antigun Violence Media Campaigns

 ``Sec. 32701. Grant authorization.
 ``Sec. 32702. Use of funds.
 ``Sec. 32703. Applications.
 ``Sec. 32704. Matching requirement.
 ``Sec. 32705. Authorization of appropriations.''.
 (8) Smart gun technology.--
 (A) In general.--The Attorney General, acting 
 through the Director of the National Institute of 
 Justice, shall carry out a program for the research and 
 development of smart gun technology.
 (B) Definition of smart gun technology.--In this 
 paragraph, the term ``smart gun technology'' means a 
 device--
 (i) incorporated by manufacture and design 
 into a handgun in such a manner that the device 
 cannot be readily removed or deactivated;
 (ii) that allows the handgun to be fired 
 only by a particular individual; and
 (iii) that may allow the handgun to be 
 personalized to an additional individual.
 (C) Authorization of appropriations.--In addition 
 to any other amounts authorized to be appropriated that 
 may be used for such purpose, there is authorized to be 
 appropriated to carry out this paragraph $10,000,000 
 for fiscal year 2002.
 (9) Definition of foreign ballistics.--Section 921(a) of 
 title 18, United States Code (as amended by sections 11001 and 
 11101), is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(39) The term `forensic ballistics' means a comparative analysis 
of fired bullets and cartridge casings to identify the firearm from 
which the bullets or cartridge casings were discharged through the 
identification of the unique characteristics that each firearm imprints 
on bullets and cartridge casings.''.
 (10) Test firing and automated storage of forensic 
 ballistics records.--
 (A) Amendments to title 18, united states code.--
 (i) In general.--Chapter 44 of title 18, 
 United States Code (as amended by section 
 11001), is amended by adding at the end the 
 following:
``Sec. 932. Test firing and automated storage of forensic ballistics 
 records
 ``(a) In General.--A licensed manufacturer or licensed importer 
shall not transfer a firearm to any person before--
 ``(1) test firing the firearm;
 ``(2) preparing forensic ballistics records of the fired 
 bullet and cartridge casings from the test fire; and
 ``(3) making the ballistics records available to the 
 Secretary for entry in a computerized database.
 ``(b) Penalties.--
 ``(1) In general.--With respect to each violation of 
 subsection (a) by a licensed manufacturer or licensed importer, 
 the Secretary may, after notice and opportunity for hearing, 
 suspend the license for not more than 1 year or revoke the 
 license, impose on the licensee a civil fine of not more than 
 $10,000, or both.
 ``(2) Review.--An action of the Secretary under subsection 
 (b)(1) may be reviewed only as provided in section 923(f).
 ``(3) Other administrative remedies.--The suspension or 
 revocation of a license or the imposition of a civil fine under 
 paragraph (1) shall not preclude any administrative remedy that 
 is available to the Secretary under any other provision of law.
 ``(c) Mandatory Forensic Ballistics Testing of Firearms in Federal 
Custody.--The Secretary and the Attorney General shall conduct 
mandatory forensic ballistics testing of all firearms that are or have 
been taken into the custody of, or procured or utilized by, their 
respective agencies.''.
 (ii) Technical and conforming amendment.--
 The analysis for chapter 44 of title 18, United 
 States Code, is amended by adding at the end 
 the following:

``932. Test firing and automated storage of forensic ballistics 
 records.''.
 (iii) Authorization of appropriations.--
 There is authorized to be appropriated to carry 
 out section 932(c) of title 18, United States 
 Code, $38,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 
 through 2005.
 (iv) Effective date.--The amendment made by 
 this subparagraph shall take effect on the date 
 on which the Attorney General and the Secretary 
 of the Treasury certify that the Department of 
 Justice and the Department of the Treasury have 
 established a National Integrated Ballistics 
 Network.
 (B) Compliance assistance.--
 (i) In general.--The Attorney General and 
 the Secretary shall assist licensed 
 manufacturers and licensed importers in 
 complying with section 932(a) of title 18, 
 United States Code, through--
 (I) the acquisition, disposition, 
 and upgrade of computerized forensic 
 ballistics equipment and bullet 
 recovery equipment to be placed at the 
 sites of licensed manufacturers and 
 licensed importers or at regional 
 firearm centers established by the 
 Secretary;
 (II) the hiring or designation of 
 personnel necessary to develop and 
 maintain a database of forensic 
 ballistics records, research, and 
 evaluation; and
 (III) any other steps necessary to 
 implement effective forensic ballistics 
 testing.
 (ii) Online access to forensic ballistics 
 records.--The Attorney General and the 
 Secretary shall establish a system through 
 which State and local law enforcement agencies, 
 through online computer technology, can 
 promptly access forensic ballistics records 
 stored under section 932 of title 18, United 
 States Code, as soon as the capability to do so 
 is available.
 (C) Annual reports.--Not later than 1 year after 
 the effective date of section 932 of title 18, United 
 States Code, and annually thereafter, the Attorney 
 General and the Secretary shall submit to the 
 Committees on the Judiciary of the House of 
 Representatives and the Senate a report regarding the 
 effects of section 932 of title 18, United States Code, 
 including the number of Federal and State criminal 
 investigations, arrests, indictments, and prosecutions 
 of all cases in which access to forensic ballistics 
 records provided under section 932 of title 18, United 
 States Code, served as a valuable investigative tool.
 (D) Education and outreach.--
 (i) In general.--The Attorney General and 
 the Secretary shall work cooperatively with 
 representatives of the firearm industry 
 (including firearm manufacturers and importers) 
 to provide--
 (I) education about the role of 
 forensic ballistics as part of a 
 comprehensive firearm crime reduction 
 strategy; and
 (II) for coordination among 
 Federal, State, and local law 
 enforcement and regulatory agencies and 
 the firearm industry to curb firearm-
 related crime and illegal firearm 
 trafficking.
 (ii) Outreach.--In implementing clause (i), 
 the Attorney General and the Secretary shall 
 concentrate on outreach with--
 (I) firearm manufacturers and 
 importers that have agreed to 
 participate as a pilot site for the 
 National Integrated Ballistics 
 Information Network;
 (II) firearm manufacturers and 
 importers that manufacture or import 
 more than 1,000 firearms per year, as 
 reported in the Bureau of Alcohol, 
 Tobacco and Firearms Annual Firearms 
 Manufacturing and Export Report, or as 
 determined from information obtained in 
 annual regulatory inspection audits 
 conducted by the Secretary; and
 (III) firearm manufacturers and 
 importers that have a policy that 
 requires the test firing of all 
 firearms prior to transfer.
 (iii) Annual reports.--Not later than 1 
 year after the effective date of this section 
 and annually thereafter, the Secretary and the 
 Attorney General shall submit to the Committees 
 on the Judiciary of the House of 
 Representatives and the Senate a report 
 containing--
 (I) a statement of the number of 
 firearm manufacturers and importers and 
 other representatives of the firearm 
 industry participating in the outreach 
 effort under this subparagraph;
 (II) the number and type of 
 personnel of the Bureau of Alcohol, 
 Tobacco and Firearms and the Department 
 of Justice hired or assigned to carry 
 out this subparagraph;
 (III) a summary of the activities 
 established by firearm manufacturers 
 and importers as a result of their 
 participation in the outreach effort 
 under this subparagraph;
 (IV) an evaluation of any changes 
 in firearm-related crime pertaining to 
 particular types of firearms 
 manufactured by a firearm manufacturer 
 or importer that is an active 
 participant in the outreach effort 
 under this subparagraph;
 (V) the volume of forensic 
 ballistics records compiled as a result 
 of the mandatory forensic ballistics 
 testing by participating firearm 
 manufacturers and importers;
 (VI) for each firearm manufacturer 
 and firearm importer, the number of 
 times a tracing request based on 
 forensic ballistics analysis resulted 
 in the identification of a firearm 
 manufactured or imported by the firearm 
 manufacturer or firearm importer; and
 (VII) an evaluation of the manner 
 in which the implementation of forensic 
 ballistics testing affected the volume 
 of production or importation of 
 firearms by participating firearm 
 manufacturers and firearm importers.
 (iv) Authorization of appropriations.--There is 
 authorized to be appropriated to carry out this 
 subparagraph, $38,306,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 
 through 2005, including funding for--
 (I) installation of forensic 
 ballistics equipment and bullet 
 recovery equipment;
 (II) establishment of regional 
 centers for firearm testing;
 (III) salaries and expenses of 
 necessary personnel; and
 (IV) research and evaluation.
 (E) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date 
 of enactment of this paragraph, the Attorney General 
 and the Secretary of the Treasury shall submit to the 
 Committees on Appropriations of the House of 
 Representatives and the Senate a report, which shall 
 include an analysis of--
 (i) the capacity to provide the online 
 access required under subparagraph (B)(ii), and 
 the process by which the online access will be 
 implemented; and
 (ii) any future technical or legal changes 
 that may be required to make online access 
 available, including estimates of the costs of 
 making those changes.

 Subtitle F--Miscellaneous

SEC. 11501. STUDY OF MARKETING PRACTICES OF THE FIREARMS INDUSTRY.

 (a) In General.--The Federal Trade Commission and the Attorney 
General shall jointly conduct a study of the marketing practices of the 
firearms industry, with respect to minors.
 (b) Issues Examined.--In conducting the study under subsection (a), 
the Commission and the Attorney General shall examine the extent to 
which the firearms industry advertises and promotes its products to 
minors, including in media outlets in which minors comprise a 
substantial percentage of the audience.
 (c) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Commission and the Attorney General shall submit to 
Congress a report on the study conducted under subsection (a).

SEC. 11502. REGULATION OF INTERNET FIREARMS TRANSFERS.

 (a) Prohibitions.--Section 922 of title 18, United States Code (as 
amended by section 11101), is amended by inserting after subsection (z) 
the following:
 ``(aa) Regulation of Internet Firearms Transfers.--
 ``(1) In general.--It shall be unlawful for any person to 
 operate an Internet website, if a purpose of the website is to 
 offer 1 or more firearms for sale or exchange, or is to 
 otherwise facilitate the sale or exchange of 1 or more firearms 
 posted or listed on the website, unless--
 ``(A) the person is licensed as a manufacturer, 
 importer, or dealer under section 923;
 ``(B) the person notifies the Secretary of the 
 Internet address of the website, and any other 
 information concerning the website as the Secretary may 
 require by regulation; and
 ``(C) if any firearm posted or listed for sale or 
 exchange on the website is not from the business 
 inventory or personal collection of that person--
 ``(i) the person, as a term or condition 
 for posting or listing the firearm for sale or 
 exchange on the website on behalf of a 
 prospective transferor, requires that, in the 
 event of any agreement to sell or exchange the 
 firearm pursuant to that posting or listing, 
 the firearm be transferred to that person for 
 disposition in accordance with clause (iii);
 ``(ii) the person prohibits the posting or 
 listing on the website of any information 
 (including any name, nickname, telephone 
 number, address, or electronic mail address) 
 that is reasonably likely to enable the 
 prospective transferor and prospective 
 transferee to contact one another directly 
 prior to the shipment of the firearm to that 
 person under clause (i), except that this 
 clause does not include any information 
 relating solely to the manufacturer, importer, 
 model, caliber, gauge, physical attributes, 
 operation, performance, or price of the 
 firearm; and
 ``(iii) with respect to each firearm 
 received from a prospective transferor under 
 clause (i), the person--
 ``(I) enters such information about 
 the firearm as the Secretary may 
 require by regulation into a separate 
 bound record;
 ``(II) in transferring the firearm 
 to any transferee, complies with the 
 requirements of this chapter as if the 
 firearm were being transferred from the 
 business inventory of that person; and
 ``(III) if the prospective 
 transferor does not provide the person 
 with a certified copy of a valid 
 firearms license issued to the 
 prospective transferor under this 
 chapter, submits to the Secretary a 
 report of the transfer or other 
 disposition of the firearm on a form 
 specified by the Secretary, which 
 report shall not include the name of, 
 or any other identifying information 
 relating to, the transferor.
 ``(2) Transfers by persons other than licensees.--It shall 
 be unlawful for any person who is not licensed under section 
 923 to transfer a firearm pursuant to a posting or listing of 
 the firearm for sale or exchange on an Internet website 
 described in paragraph (1) to any person other than the 
 operator of the website.''.
 (b) Penalties.--Section 924(a) of title 18, United States Code (as 
amended by section 11001), is amended by adding at the end the 
following:
 ``(9) Whoever willfully violates section 922(aa)(2) shall 
 be fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 2 years, or 
 both.''.

SEC. 11503. REDUCTION OF GUN TRAFFICKING.

 (a) Prohibition Against Multiple Handgun Sales or Purchases.--
Section 922 of title 18, United States Code (as amended by sections 
11101 and 11502), is amended by inserting after subsection (aa) the 
following:
 ``(bb) Prohibition Against Multiple Handgun Sales or Purchases.--
 ``(1) In general.--It shall be unlawful for any licensed 
 dealer--
 ``(A) during any 30-day period, to sell 2 or more 
 handguns to an individual who is not licensed under 
 section 923; or
 ``(B) to sell a handgun to an individual who is not 
 licensed under section 923 and who purchased a handgun 
 during the 30-day period ending on the date of the 
 sale.
 ``(2) Time limitation.--It shall be unlawful for any 
 individual who is not licensed under section 923 to purchase 2 
 or more handguns during any 30-day period.
 ``(3) Exchanges.--Paragraph (1) does not apply to an 
 exchange of 1 handgun for 1 handgun.''.
 (b) Penalties.--Section 924(a)(2) of title 18, United States Code, 
is amended by striking ``or (o)'' and inserting ``(o), or (bb)''.
 (c) Deadlines for Destruction of Records Related to Certain 
Firearms Transfers.--
 (1) Handgun transfers subject to the waiting period.--
 Section 922(s)(6)(B)(i) of title 18, United States Code, is 
 amended by striking ``20 business days'' and inserting ``35 
 calendar days''.
 (2) Firearms transfers subject to instant check.--Section 
 922(t)(2)(C) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by 
 inserting ``not later than 35 calendar days after the date the 
 system provides the licensee with the number,'' before 
 ``destroy''.
 (d) Revised Definition.--Section 921(a)(21)(C) of title 18, United 
States Code, is amended by inserting ``, except that such term shall 
include any person who transfers more than 1 handgun in any 30-day 
period to a person who is not a licensed dealer'' before the semicolon.

 TITLE XII--MISCELLANEOUS

SEC. 12001. ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON PRIVATE SECTOR SUPPORT FOR CHILDREN 
 AND FAMILIES.

 (a) Establishment.--Not later than 6 months after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services (in 
this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall establish an 
advisory committee to be known as the ``Advisory Committee on Private 
Sector Support for Children and Families'' (in this section referred to 
as the ``Committee'') that shall review, highlight and promote the 
private sector policies and practices that will best create family-
friendly workplaces and allow parents to succeed at work and at home.
 (b) Duties.--The Committee shall--
 (1) solicit advice and recommendations concerning employer 
 and community efforts that are designed to assist parents 
 caring for their children and ensure that every child residing 
 in the United States has a healthy start, a head start, a fair 
 start, and a safe start in life and successful passage to 
 adulthood;
 (2) review and consider the full range of private sector 
 family-centered efforts, including flexibility in the 
 workplace, family and medical leave policies, employer 
 sponsored health care and child care services, parent support 
 centers, and literacy training; and
 (3) prepare and submit the report required under subsection 
 (d).
 (c) Membership.--The Committee shall--
 (1) be appointed by the Secretary in consultation with the 
 Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of Labor, and the 
 Secretary of Education; and
 (2) consist of representatives of children and family 
 advocates, business groups, labor organizations, faith-based 
 institutions, and charitable foundations.
 (d) Report.--
 (1) Secretary.--Not later than 18 months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Committee shall submit to the 
 Secretary a report that contains the Committee's findings and 
 recommendations resulting from carrying out the duties required 
 under subsection (b), together with recommendations for such 
 legislation and administrative actions as the Committee 
 considers appropriate.
 (2) Congress.--The Secretary shall transmit copies of the 
 report to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and 
 Pensions and the Committee on Finance of the Senate and the 
 Committee on Education and the Workforce, the Committee on 
 Energy and Commerce, and the Committee on Ways and Means of the 
 House of Representatives.

SEC. 12002. IMPROVEMENT OF DATA COLLECTION AND REPORTING REGARDING 
 CHILDREN AND FAMILIES.

 (a) Report on Economic Well-Being of Current and Former TANF 
Families.--
 (1) Annual report to congress.--Section 411(b) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 611(b)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (3), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in paragraph (4), by striking the period and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(5) the economic well-being of children and families 
 receiving assistance under the State programs funded under this 
 part and of children and families that have ceased to receive 
 such assistance, using longitudinal matched data gathered from 
 federally supported programs, and including State-by-State data 
 that details the distribution of earnings and stability of 
 employment of such families and (to the extent feasible) 
 describes, with respect to such families, the distribution of 
 income from known sources (including employer-reported wages, 
 assistance under the State program funded under this part, and 
 benefits under the food stamp program), the ratio of such 
 families' income to the poverty line, and the extent to which 
 such families receive or received noncash benefits and child 
 care assistance.''.
 (2) Conforming amendments.--Section 411(a) of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 611(a)) is amended--
 (A) by redesignating paragraph (7) as paragraph 
 (8); and
 (B) by inserting after paragraph (6), the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(7) Report on economic well-being of current and former 
 recipients.--The report required by paragraph (1) for a fiscal 
 quarter shall include for that quarter such information as the 
 Secretary may specify in order for the Secretary to include in 
 the annual reports to Congress required under subsection (b) 
 the information described in paragraph (5) of that 
 subsection.''.
 (b) Report on Data From State Studies Regarding Former TANF and 
Food Stamp Recipients.--Section 413 of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 613) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection:
 ``(k) Report on Status of Former Recipients of Assistance and Food 
Stamp Benefits.--Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of 
the Leave No Child Behind Act of 2001, the Secretary shall compile and 
report to Congress data from existing State-level studies funded (in 
whole or in part) by the Secretary on the extent of employment, receipt 
of non-cash benefits, occurrence of extreme poverty, and hardship among 
previous recipients of assistance under the State program funded under 
this part and benefits under the food stamp program.''.
 <all>