S 1156 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1156
To provide for the protection and management of certain areas on public
domain lands managed by the Bureau of Land Management and lands withdrawn from
the public domain managed by the Forest Service in the States of California,
Oregon, and Washington; to ensure proper conservation of the natural resources
of such lands, including enhancement of habitat; to provide assistance to
communities and individuals affected by management decisions on such lands;
to facilitate the implementation of land management plans for such public
domain lands and Federal lands elsewhere; and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
May 23 (legislative day, MAY 25), 1991
Mr. PACKWOOD (for himself, Mr. HATFIELD, Mr. GORTON, Mr. MURKOWSKI, Mr. BREAUX,
Mr. HEFLIN, and Mr. SHELBY) introduced the following bill; which was read
twice and referred to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
A BILL
To provide for the protection and management of certain areas on public
domain lands managed by the Bureau of Land Management and lands withdrawn from
the public domain managed by the Forest Service in the States of California,
Oregon, and Washington; to ensure proper conservation of the natural resources
of such lands, including enhancement of habitat; to provide assistance to
communities and individuals affected by management decisions on such lands;
to facilitate the implementation of land management plans for such public
domain lands and Federal lands elsewhere; and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be cited as the
 `Federal Lands and Families Protection Act'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds as follows:
 (1) public domain lands managed by the Bureau of Land Management and lands
 withdrawn from the public domain managed by the Forest Service in California,
 Oregon, and Washington contain the most significant remaining stands of
 old growth forests which were once abundant in many regions of the Nation;
 (2) a significant but unquantified portion of this remnant old growth
 forest has been preserved by the Congress through statutory designation
 as, and withdrawn from the public domain for, units of the National Park,
 Wildlife Refuge, Wilderness Preservation, Wild and Scenic Rivers, Trails,
 and other conservation Systems;
 (3) the old growth forest on the Bureau of land Management and Forest
 Service public domain lands which remains outside of the conservation
 system units designated by the Congress is subject to the sustained-yield
 and multiple-use planning and management mandates of the Federal Land
 Policy and Management Act of 1976 and other land management statutes;
 (4) portions of this remaining old growth forest which occupy productive
 forest sites and are suitable for timber production contain extraordinary
 economic value for communities dependent on a stable and predictable
 supply of timber for employment, revenues, and public services, and for
 the manufacture of wood products critical for housing construction and
 other sectors of the national economy;
 (5) portions of this remaining old growth forest, termed
 `ecologically-significant old growth forest', also contain rare and
 irreplaceable ecological and species preservation values which have recently
 gained heightened recognition from scientific research and widespread
 public interest;
 (6) portions of the old growth forest serve as habitat for the Northern
 Spotted Owl;
 (7) the intense, competing pressures to preserve or make economic use of the
 remaining old growth forest have severely disrupted the ability of the Bureau
 of Land Management and the Forest Service to plan and manage the existing
 or previously withdrawn public domain lands within their jurisdiction;
 (8) most of the plans for public domain lands managed by the Bureau of
 Land Management and lands withdrawn from the public domain managed by the
 Forest Service in California, Oregon, and Washington have been completed,
 but, notwithstanding administrative set-asides of old growth forest,
 may not provide fully for the protection and attendant management of
 ecologically-significant old growth forest and species associated with old
 growth forest, and remain, in any event, subject to continued controversy;
 (9) further congressional direction, including establishment of a Reserve
 system, is required to ensure the effective planning and management of
 such existing and previously withdrawn public domain lands which contain
 old growth forest to secure the protection and attendant management of
 those areas of old growth forest that are ecologically-significant and
 the species that are associated with old growth forest;
 (10) further congressional direction and an economic adjustment program
 are required to avoid or minimize any reduction in timber supply and
 any social or economic disruption in timber-dependent communities that
 might otherwise result from the protection and attendant management of
 ecologically-significant old growth forest and species associated with old
 growth forest on such existing and previously withdrawn public domain lands;
 (11) areas of ecologically-significant old growth forest in the National
 Park and Wildlife Refuge systems should be added to the Reserve by the
 Secretary of the Interior;
 (12) the Federal Land Policy and Management Act and the National Forest
 Management Act were enacted in 1976 in order to assure orderly and
 environmentally sensitive planning, with substantial public involvement,
 for the multiple-use of the resources of Federal lands in a stable and
 predictable manner;
 (13) numerous plans were not completed until after statutory and regulatory
 deadlines for plan completion and most completed plans in controversial
 areas have not been successfully implemented;
 (14) changes in policy made outside the planning process have resulted
 in the constructive amendment of completed plans without adherence to
 statutory procedures for plan amendment;
 (15) administrative appeals and litigation have been filed extensively, have
 substantially delayed plan preparation, have frustrated plan implementation
 and Federal land management actions, and have on several occasions,
 compelled the Congress to enact emergency provisions to alleviate Federal
 land management problems resulting therefrom;
 (16) neither the Federal Land Policy and Management Act nor the National
 Forest Management Act contains any meaningful direction to the Bureau of Land
 Management or the Forest Service on how to effectively implement plans; and
 (17) additional congressional guidance on the implementation, amendment,
 and revision of plans is necessary to ensure that the stability and
 predictability in Federal land management intended by the 1976 Acts are
 achieved, that the congressional direction herein to protect and manage
 areas of ecologically-significant old growth forest and species associated
 with old growth forest is implemented, and that the environment impacts
 and community social and economic dislocation which result from instability
 and uncertainty in Federal land management are avoided.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 (a) As used in titles I, III, IV, and V and sections 2 and 201 of this Act,
 the term--
 (1) `Commission' means the Timber Economic Adjustment Commission established
 pursuant to section 403 of this Act;
 (2) `Committees of Congress' means the Committee on Interior and Insular
 Affairs and the Committee on Agriculture of the House of Representatives,
 and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources and the Committee on
 Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the United States Senate;
 (3) `Federal lands' means those lands managed by the Bureau of Land
 Management and defined in section 103(e) of the Federal Land Policy and
 Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1702(e)) and those lands in the National
 Forest System managed by the Forest Service and defined in section 11(a)
 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974
 (16 U.S.C. 1609(a));
 (4) `Land Management Plans' means land use plans prepared by the Bureau
 of Land Management for units of the Public Lands, as defined in clause (7)
 of this subsection, pursuant to section 202 of the Federal Land Policy and
 Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1712) and land and resource management
 plans prepared by the Forest Service for units of the National Forest
 Lands, as defined in clause (5) of this subsection, pursuant to section
 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974,
 as amended by the National Forest Management Act of 1976 (16 U.S.C. 1604);
 (5) `National Forest Lands' means those Federal lands, as defined in clause
 (3) of this subsection, withdrawn from the public domain and managed
 by the Forest Service that are included within the following seventeen
 national forests in Oregon, Washington and California: the Deschutes,
 Gifford Pinchot, Klamath, Mendocino, Mount Baker-Snoqualmie, Mount Hood,
 Okanogan, Olympic, Rogue River, Shasta-Trinity, Siskiyou, Siuslaw, Six
 Rivers, Umpqua, Wenatchee, Willamette, and Winema;
 (6) `Panel' means the Timber Economic Adjustment Advisory Panel established
 pursuant to section 405 of this Act;
 (7) `Public Lands' means public domain lands on the Federal lands, as
 defined in clause (3) of this subsection, managed by the Bureau of Land
 Management that are included within the following eight Bureau of Land
 Management administrative districts in Oregon and California: Coos Bay,
 Eugene, Lakeview, Medford, Roseburg, Salem, Susanville, and Ukiah;
 (8) `Reserve' means the Old Growth Forest Reserve established pursuant to
 title I of this Act; and
 (9) `Secretaries' or `Secretary' means the Secretary of the Interior with
 respect to Public Lands and the Secretary of Agriculture with respect to
 National Forest Lands.
 (b) Terms used in section 202 through 217 of this Act have the same meaning
 they are accorded in the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976
 (43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) or the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources
 Planning Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1600 et seq.), whichever is applicable.
TITLE I--ESTABLISHING LONG TERM PROGRAM
SEC. 101 PURPOSES.
 The purposes of this title are to establish an Old Growth Forest Reserve
 on certain public domain lands managed by the Bureau of Land Management
 and lands withdrawn from the public domain managed by the Forest Service
 in Oregon, Washington, and northern California; to designate areas of
 ecologically-significant old growth forest to the Reserve; to ensure the
 proper management of such areas in order to conserve the Northern Spotted
 Owl and protect other species associated with the old growth forest; to
 avoid or minimize any effects on other resources and the uses thereof, and
 the communities economically dependent on such resources, on those lands;
 and to provide for a period of stability in managing those lands.
SEC. 102. PLAN REVISIONS.
 Not later than three full fiscal years from the date of enactment of
 this Act, the Secretaries shall adopt final revisions of Land Management
 Plans, or, where no Land Management Plans exist, final new Land Management
 Plans, in accordance with the procedures and requirements of this title
 and the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1701 et
 seq.) or the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974
 (16 U.S.C. 1600 et seq.), as both are amended by title II of this Act:
 Provided however, That, for the purpose of this title, the `five fiscal
 years' referred to in section 207 of this Act shall be the three full
 fiscal years of the interim program established pursuant to title III of
 this Act and two years each of which is deemed to have the average annual
 commodity output for the decade of 1980 through 1989.
SEC. 103. REGULATIONS; ESTABLISHMENT OF THE OLD GROWTH RESERVE.
 Not later than fifteen months from the date of enactment of this Act, the
 Secretaries shall promulgate regulations to govern the preparation of the
 revised or new Land Management Plans and otherwise implement this title,
 which regulations, at a minimum, shall--
 (1) define `ecologically-significant old growth forest' as used in this Act;
 (2) establish the Old Growth Forest Reserve to be comprised of areas of
 ecologically-significant old growth forest on Public Lands and National
 Forest Lands that are designated pursuant to section 105 of this Act and
 on National Park and Wildlife Refuge System lands, and, upon petition of
 the relevant governor, lands owned by the States of California, Oregon
 and Washington that are designated pursuant to section 104 of this Act; and
 (3) establish procedures and criteria for the identification and selection
 of areas of ecologically-significant old growth forest to be included in
 the Reserve pursuant to section 105 of this Act.
SEC. 104. INITIAL DESIGNATIONS TO THE OLD GROWTH RESERVE BY THE SECRETARY
OF THE INTERIOR.
 (a) Not later than eighteen months from the date of enactment of this Act,
 the Secretary of the Interior shall designate to the Reserve all areas
 of ecologically-significant old growth forest in units of the National
 Park System and National Wildlife Refuge System in Oregon, Washington,
 and northern California.
 (b) The Secretary of the Interior shall designate to the Reserve any area
 of ecologically-significant old growth forest on State lands in Oregon,
 Washington, or northern California if such area is nominated for designation
 by the Governor of the State and is managed under State law in a manner
 consistent with the requirements of section 111 of this Act.
SEC. 105. DESIGNATION OF AREAS TO THE OLD GROWTH RESERVE.
 (a) The final revised or new Land Management Plans adopted pursuant to
 section 102 of this Act shall designate areas of ecologically-significant
 old growth on Public Lands and National Forest Lands to the Old Growth Forest
 Reserve established by regulation pursuant to section 103(2) of this Act.
 (b) The number, size, and types of areas of ecologically-significant old
 growth forest designated to the Reserve shall be those necessary to achieve
 the purposes of this title as provided in section 101 of this Act.
 (c) Areas of ecologically-significant old growth forest shall be selected
 from the Public Lands and National Forest Lands for designation to the
 Reserve in the following order of priority--
 (1) first, areas of ecologically-significant old growth forest which are
 included within the National Wilderness Preservation System, National
 Wild and Scenic Rivers System, National Trails System, or are otherwise
 designated by Congress in a manner that excludes timber harvesting;
 (2) second, areas of ecologically-significant old growth forest in
 which timber harvesting remains proscribed by previous planning or other
 administrative decision after completion of the review required in section
 107 of this Act;
 (3) third, any areas of ecologically-significant old growth forest which
 may be identified, or may meet criteria provided, in the recovery plan
 for the Northern Spotted Owl prepared pursuant to section 4(f) of the
 Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1533(f)) for management in a manner
 similar to that required in section 111 of this Act; and
 (4) fourth, other areas of ecologically-significant old growth forest which
 are necessary to achieve the purposes of this title as provided in section
 101 of this Act, require management in accordance with section 111 of this
 Act, and otherwise meet criteria established by rule pursuant to section
 103(3) of this Act.
 (d) Preference in selecting areas of ecologically-significant old growth
 forest shall be accorded to--
 (1) those areas which contain multiple non-commodity resource values
 associated with ecologically-significant old growth forest over those
 areas in which the number of such values is limited;
 (2) those areas which contain non-commodity resource values associated
 with ecologically-significant old growth forest that have demonstrated
 significance over areas in which such values have limited or no significance;
 (3) those areas which contain non-commodity resource values associated
 with ecologically-significant old growth forest that are not redundant to
 non-commodity values contained in areas which are outside of Public Lands
 and National Forest Lands are accorded protection under Federal or State
 law comparable to that provided by section 111 of this Act, including units
 of the National Park and Wildlife Refuge Systems and State park systems;
 (4) those areas which have the least adverse impact on communities or
 economic enterprises economically dependent upon the Public Lands or
 National Forest Lands, in accordance with section 202 of this Act; and
 (5) those areas which have the least impact on, and permit maintenance
 of the balance most similar to that which has existed historically among,
 all uses of each affected unit of Public Lands or National Forest Lands.
SEC. 106. PROTECTION OF THE NORTHERN SPOTTED OWL AND OTHER SPECIES.
 (a) The final revised or new Land Management Plans adopted pursuant to
 section 102 of this Act shall provide protection for the Northern Spotted
 Owl and other species associated with old growth forest in accordance with
 this section.
 (b) In preparing each revised or new Land Management Plan, the Secretary
 shall consider fully the recovery plan, and any economic analysis related
 thereto, prepared for the Northern Spotted Owl pursuant to section 4(f) of
 the Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1533(f)), and incorporate in the final
 revised or new Land Management Plan such portions of, or alternatives to,
 the recovery plan as the Secretary deems necessary to meet the obligations
 of the Bureau of Land Management or the Forest Service under the Endangered
 Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.) in the unit to which the Land Management
 Plan applies.
 (c) In preparing each revised or new Land Management Plan, the Secretary
 shall consider any other species associated with old growth forest in
 the unit to which the Land Management Plan applies which the Secretary
 believes warrants special protection. Such consideration shall include a
 determination of the extent to which the designation of areas to the Reserve
 pursuant to section 105 of this Act, and the incorporation of portions
 of or alternatives to the Northern Spotted Owl recovery plan pursuant to
 this section, in such Land Management Plan provides such protection. The
 Secretary shall provide in writing in the decision to adopt the final
 revised or New Land Management Plan the basis of his determination and,
 if any other direction providing additional protection to such species is
 included in such Land Management Plan, an explanation of the necessity
 thereof and the effect thereof on other resources and their uses in the
 unit to which the Land Management Plan applies.
SEC. 107. REVIEWS OF ADMINISTRATIVE SET-ASIDES.
 In preparing each revised or new Land Management Plan pursuant to section
 102 of this Act, the Secretaries shall review and, where appropriate,
 revise all land allocations and other resource constraints previously
 applied to the unit to which the Land Management Plan applies to minimize,
 to the maximum extent feasible, the impact on pre-existing uses and levels
 of use of the unit resulting from establishment of the Reserve and the
 designation thereto of areas of ecologically-significant old growth forest.
SEC. 108. ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT COMPLIANCE.
 (a) Prior to the adoption of each final revised or new Land Management
 Plan pursuant to section 102 of this Act, the Secretary shall submit the
 Land Management Plan for consultation pursuant to section 7(a)(2) of the
 Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1536(a)(2)). Consultation shall include
 the Land Management Plan and all actions, including timber sales, which may
 be undertaken under and consistent with the Land Management Plan during
 the term of the Land Management Plan. Thereafter, consultation shall be
 reinitiated only when the Land Management Plan is revised or significantly
 amended and shall include the revision or amendment and all actions which
 may be undertaken under and consistent with such revision or amendment
 during the term of such Land Management Plan, as revised or amended.
 (b) If, during consultation on a Land Management Plan required by subsection
 (a) of this section, jeopardy of any listed species or adverse modification
 of any designated critical habitat is found under section 7(b) of the
 Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1536(b)), the Secretary responsible for the
 Land Management Plan shall consider any reasonable and prudent alternatives
 suggested during consultation that are consistent with and comply with the
 provisions of this title; the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of
 1976 or the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974,
 as both are amended by title II of this Act; and other applicable law. If the
 Secretary determines that no such reasonable and prudent alternative exists,
 the Secretary shall apply for review of the Land Management Plan pursuant
 to section 7(e)-(1) of the Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1536(e)-(1)).
SEC. 109. MAPS AND LEGAL DESCRIPTIONS.
 The Secretaries shall prepare a map or set of maps of the areas of
 ecologically significant old growth forest designated to the Reserve
 under section 105 of this Act. Such map or maps shall be on file for
 public inspection in the offices of the Director of the Bureau of Land
 Management and the Chief of the Forest Service and each office of the
 Bureau of Land Management and Forest Service responsible for administering
 any such area. Such maps shall be revised as made necessary by subsequent
 revisions of or significant amendments to the Land Management Plans.
SEC. 110. RELEASE.
 (a) After adoption of the final revised or new Land Management Plans
 pursuant to section 102 of this Act, each Secretary shall not be required
 to review the designation of ecologically-significant old growth forest
 areas to the Reserve prior to the revision of such Land Management Plans,
 but shall conduct such review when such Land Management Plans are revised,
 which revision will ordinarily occur on a ten-year cycle, or at least
 every fifteen years, unless prior to that time the Secretary finds that
 conditions in the unit to which a Land Management Plan applies have
 significantly changed.
 (b) Those areas of ecologically-significant old growth forest or other
 old growth forest areas not designated to the Reserve shall be managed for
 multiple use in accordance with the Land Management Plans pursuant to section
 202 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1712),
 or section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of
 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604), and those areas need not be managed for the purpose
 of protecting their suitability for designation to the Reserve prior to
 or during subsequent revision of the final revised or new Land Management
 Plans following their adoption pursuant to section 102 of this Act.
 (c) If Land Management Plans revised pursuant to subsection (b) of this
 section are implemented pursuant to the Federal Land Policy and Management
 Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.), or the Forest and Rangeland Renewable
 Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1600 et seq.), and other applicable
 law, areas of ecologically-significant old growth forest or other old
 growth forest areas not designated to the Reserve need not be managed for
 the purpose of protecting their suitability for designation to the Reserve
 prior to or during subsequent revision of those Land Management Plans.
SEC. 111. MANAGEMENT OF THE OLD GROWTH RESERVE.
 (a) Each area of ecologically-significant old growth forest designated
 to the Reserve shall be managed in accordance with direction provided in
 the applicable final revised or new Land Management Plan. Such direction
 shall ensure protection of those non-commodity resource values identified
 in the Land Management Plan as the values for which the area is designated
 to the Reserve, and shall comply with the requirements of the Federal Land
 Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) or the Forest
 and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1600 et
 seq.), as both are amended by title II of this Act; other applicable law;
 and this section.
 (b) Effective upon adoption of the final revised or new Land Management
 Plan, any area of ecologically-significant old growth forest designated
 to the Reserve in such Land Management Plan is, subject to valid existing
 rights, withdrawn from disposition under the public land laws and location,
 entry, and patent under the mining laws of the United States, and closed
 to the operation of the mineral leasing laws of the United States and the
 Geothermal Steam Act of 1970.
 (c) Except as prohibited or restricted by applicable law, roads, structures,
 and motorized and nonmotorized recreation and access may be permitted
 within areas of ecologically-significant old growth forest designated to
 the Reserve where consistent with the purposes of this title as provided
 in section 101 of this Act.
 (d) Except as prohibited or restricted by applicable law, the Secretary
 may permit hunting, trapping, and fishing on lands and waters within
 areas of ecologically-significant old growth forest designated to
 the Reserve in accordance with applicable Federal and State law. The
 Secretary may designate zones where, and establish periods when, such
 activities will not be permitted for reasons of public safety, fish
 and wildlife management, public use and enjoyment, or protection of the
 Reserve. Except in emergencies, any regulations issued by the Secretary
 under this subsection shall be put into effect only after consultation with
 the appropriate State agencies responsible for hunting and fishing activites.
 (e) Timber harvesting on any area of ecologically-significant old growth
 forest designated to the Reserve shall be permitted--
 (1) if it is necessary to protect such area or adjacent lands from insects
 or disease and life or property from imminent fire danger; or
 (2) if it complies with the prescriptions and guidelines developed in
 the Old Growth Forest Research Program pursuant to section 308(b) of this
 Act and is not proscribed for such area in the final revised or new Land
 Management Plan applicable thereto.
SEC. 112. SUFFICIENCY.
 Upon completion of the Endangered Species Act processes pursuant to
 section 108 of this Act and the adoption of a final revised or new Land
 Management Plan pursuant to section 102 of this Act, on the unit to which
 the Land Management Plan applies the responsibilities for the management,
 protection, and recovery of the Northern Spotted Owl and other species
 associated with old growth forest of the Federal Government and any person
 authorized by the Federal Government to conduct activities on such unit
 under the Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.), the Act of
 July 3, 1918 (16 U.S.C. 703 et seq.) (commonly known as the `Migratory
 Bird Treaty Act'), and the applicable wildlife-related provisions of the
 Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.),
 and the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16
 U.S.C. 1600 et seq.), and are fully discharged until such Land Management
 Plan is revised or significantly amended. Upon completion of the Endangered
 Species Act processes pursuant to section 108 of this Act pertaining to
 any such revision or significant amendment and to each revision to or
 significant amendment of the Land Management Plan thereafter, the same
 responsibilities are fully discharged for the term of the Land Management
 Plan, as amended or revised.
SEC. 113. ACCESS TO NON-FEDERAL LAND
 The granting of any easement or other form of access across Federal land
 to private or other nonfederal land by the Forest Service, United States
 Department of Agriculture, or the Bureau of Land Management, United States
 Department of the Interior, and the construction and maintenance of such
 easement or access, shall not constitute an `agency action' under section 7,
 nor otherwise subject the agency or the recipient of the easement or access
 to section 7(a) or 9(a)(1), of the Endangered Species Act concerning any
 species listed pursuant to section 4 of that Act which is associated with
 old growth forest in Washington, Oregon, or North Carolina.
TITLE II--ENSURING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF FEDERAL LAND PLANNING
SEC. 201. PURPOSES.
 The purposes of this title are to provide additional Congressional guidance
 on the implementation, amendment, and revision of plans for Federal lands
 necessary to ensure that the final new or revised Land Management Plans,
 and the protection provided therein to the Old Growth Forest Reserve,
 Northern Spotted Owl, and other old growth associated species in title I of
 this Act are implemented effectively; that the stability and predictability
 in the management of Federal lands intended by the Federal Land Policy
 and Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.), and the Forest and
 Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974, as amended by the
 National Forest Management Act of 1976 (16 U.S.C. 1600 et seq.), are
 achieved; and that the environmental impacts and community social and
 economic dislocation which result from instability and uncertainty in
 management of the Federal lands are avoided.
PART A--AMENDING, REVISING, AND MONITORING PLANS
SEC. 202. ECONOMIC STABILITY.
 (a) Section 202 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976
 (43 U.S.C. 1712) is amended by inserting at the end thereof the following
 new subsection (g):
 `(g) In developing, maintaining, amending and revising land use plans
 pursuant to this section, the Secretary shall assure that such plans--
 `(1) maintain to the maximum extent feasible the stability of any community
 or economic enterprise economically dependent upon public lands to which the
 plans apply, and shall conduct in the course of preparation of any plan,
 plan amendment, or plan revision undertaken after the date of enactment
 of this subsection an analysis for each such community or enterprise that:
`(i) examines the impacts of planning alternatives on the community, including
its revenues and budget, the level of and quality of its public services,
the employment and income of its residents, and its social conditions,
and on the enterprise and its employees;
 `(ii) explains how resource allocations for the planning alternatives
 would comport with or differ from historic community expectations; and
 `(iii) describes how those impacts were considered in selecting a preferred
 alternative. The Secretary, in consultation, with the Secretaries of
 Commerce and Labor, shall define by regulation the term `community or
 economic enterprise economically dependent upon public lands' as used in
 this subsection; and'.
 (b) Section 6(e) of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning
 Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604(e)) is amended by striking `wilderness; and'
 and inserting `wilderness;' in paragraph (1), striking -`management.' and
 inserting in lieu thereof `management; and' in paragraph (2), and adding
 a new paragraph (3) as follows:
 `(3) maintain to the maximum extent feasible the stability of any community
 or economic enterprise economically dependent upon a unit of the National
 Forest System, and shall prepare in the course of any plan amendment
 or revision undertaken after the date of enactment of this paragraph an
 analysis for each such community or enterprise that:
 `(i) examines the impacts of planning alternatives on the community,
 including its revenues and budget, the level and quality of its public
 services, the employment and income of its residents, and its social
 conditions, and on the enterprise and its employees;
 `(ii) explains how resource allocations for the planning alternatives
 would comport with or differ from historic community expectations; and
 `(iii) describes how those impacts were considered in selecting a preferred
 alternative. The Secretary, in consultation with the Secretaries of
 Commerce and Labor, shall define by regulation the term `community or
 economic enterprise economically dependent upon a unit of the National
 Forest System' as used in this paragraph; and'.
SEC. 203. CONSIDERATION OF COMMODITY RESOURCES.
 (a) Section 202 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976
 (43 U.S.C. 1712) is amended by adding at the end of the new subsection
 (g) provided by section 202(b) of this Act the following clause (2):
 `(2) consider fully global demand for commodity resources located on the
 public lands to which such plans apply and the environmental implications
 or effects of satisfying such demand by supply of such resources from other
 domestic or foreign sources or substitution of other resources or products.'.
 (b) Section 6(e) of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning
 Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604(e)) is amended by adding at the end thereof
 a new paragraph (4) as follows:
 `(4) consider fully global demand for commodity resources located in the
 units of the National Forest System to which such plans apply and the
 environmental implications or effects of satisfying such demand by supply
 of such resources from other domestic or foreign sources or substitution
 of other resources or products.'
SEC. 204. PLAN BALANCE AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) Section 202 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976
 (43 U.S.C. 1712) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new subsection (h):
 `(h)(1) Whenever a land use plan is amended or revised, the Secretary shall
 consider and discuss in decision and environmental analysis documentation
 accompanying the plan amendment or revision other land use or management
 changes that, in combination with the change for which the amendment or
 revision was initiated, would be appropriate to maintain overall plan
 balance and meet other plan goals and outputs.
 `(2) Any change in management of the public lands that is required by a
 court order or designation of a threatened or endangered species or other
 action under the Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1315 et seq.), or that
 is justified on the basis of new information, which would not be consistent
 with an existing land use plan shall require amendment or revision of the
 plan and, except where the Secretary determines the court order or statute
 requires otherwise and publishes the determination in the Federal Register,
 shall not be taken until the plan amendment or revision is final.'.
 (b) Section 6(f) of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning
 Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604(f)) is amended by striking `section; and'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `section;' in paragraph (4), striking
 `section.' and inserting in lieu thereof `section; and' in paragraph
 (5), and adding a new paragraph (6) as follows:
 `(6) be subject to the following additional provisions concerning amendment
 and revision:
 `(A) When a plan amendment or revision process is initiated pursuant to
 paragraph (4) or (5) of this subsection, the Secretary shall consider and
 discuss in decision and environmental analysis documentation accompanying
 the plan amendment or revision other land use or management changes that,
 in combination with the change for which the amendment or revision was
 initiated, would be appropriate to maintain overall plan balance and meet
 other plan goals and outputs.
 `(B) Any change in management of a unit of the National Forest System that
 is required by a court order or designation of a threatened or endangered
 species or other action under the Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1351
 et seq.), or that is justified on the basis of new information, which
 would not be consistent with an existing plan shall require amendment or
 revision of the plan pursuant to paragraph (4) or (5) of this subsection and,
 except where the Secretary determines the court order or statute requires
 otherwise and publishes the determination in the Federal Register, shall
 not be taken until the plan amendment or revision is final.'.
SEC. 205. FULLY ALLOCATED COSTS ANALYSIS.
 Section 6(g) of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning
 Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604(g)) is amended by striking `resource.' and
 inserting in lieu thereof `resource;' in paragraph (3)(F)(v), and adding
 a new paragraph (4) as follows:
 `(4) specifying that, in the presentation of alternative land management
 plans, plan amendments, or plan revisions, the Secretary shall analyze
 the fully allocated cost including foregone revenues, expressed as a user
 fee or cost-per-beneficiary, of each non-commodity output proposed by each
 alernative; and'.
SEC. 206. MINIMUM MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) Section 202 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976
 (43 U.S.C. 1712) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new subsection (i):
 `(i) A minimum decadal level of timber sale volume based on the requirements
 of subsection (g) of this section shall be established in each land use plan
 for the area of the public lands to which the plan applies. The Secretary
 shall offer, on a decadal basis, the full decadal minimum level of timber
 sale volume specified in the land use plan. Not less than 25 per centum
 of the decadal minimum level of timber sale volume shall be awarded in
 any three consecutive years during the term of the land use plan.'.
 (b) Section 6(g) of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning
 Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604(g)) is amended by adding a new paragraph (5)
 as follows:
 `(5) specifying the role, if any, of minimum management requirements in
 the planning process and providing procedures for the adoption thereof,
 including the following requirements:
 `(A) A `minimum management requirement' is any directive adopted at the
 regional or forest level that guides the development, analysis, approval,
 implementation, monitoring or evaluation of land management plans. The
 issuance of minimum management requirements is discretionary except where
 required by this Act.
 `(B) The Secretary shall provide for public participation comparable to
 that required by subsection (d) of this section in the development of any
 minimum management requirement.
 `(C) A minimum management requirement to achieve a level of timber sales
 based on goals developed pursuant to section 4, and the requirements of
 section (6)(e) (3) and (4), of this Act shall be established for each
 unit of the National Forest System in the applicable land and resource
 management plan.
 `(D)(i) Where a particular land area is identified in a land and resource
 management plan as contributing to the minimum management requirement
 for timber sales, no management action shall preclude the achievement,
 on a decadal basis, of the minimum management requirement designated for
 that particular area.
 `(ii) The Secretary shall offer, on a decadal basis, the full minimum
 management requirement for timber sales specified in each land and
 resource management plan. Not less that 25 per centum of the decadal
 minimum management requirement shall be awarded in any three consecutive
 years during the term of the plan.'.
SEC. 207. PHASE-IN OF OUTPUT CHANGES.
 (a) Section 202 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976
 (43 U.S.C. 1712) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new subsection (j):
 `(j) To maintain the stability of any community or economic enterprise
 economically dependent upon public lands, as defined by regulation
 pursuant to subsection (g) of this section, and to avoid the dislocation
 resulting from abrupt changes in the management of such public lands in the
 transition to a new land use plan, amendment thereto, or revision thereof,
 the Secretary shall, upon adoption of a new plan, amendment, or revision,
 phase in through four equal annual increments any decrease or increase
 in any commodity output under the plan, amendment, or revision greater
 than 10 per centum per year in comparison to the average output of the
 commodity from the area to which the plan applies for the five consecutive
 fiscal years preceding the year in which the plan, amendment or revision
 is adopted (as measured by volume offered for lease or sale).'.
 (b) Section 6(j) of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning
 Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604(j)) is amended by changing the period at the end
 thereof to a colon and adding the following: `Provided, That, to maintain the
 stability of any community or economic enterprise economically dependent upon
 a unit of the National Forest System, as defined by regulation pursuant to
 subsection (e)(3) of this section, and to avoid the dislocation resulting
 from abrupt changes in management of any such unit in the transition to
 a new land management plan, amendment thereto, or revision thereof, the
 Secretary shall, upon adoption of a new plan, amendment, or revision,
 phase in through four equal annual increments any decrease or increase
 in any commodity output under the plan, amendment, or revision greater
 than ten per centum per year in comparison to the average output of the
 commodity from the unit to which the plan applies for the five consecutive
 fiscal years preceding the year in which the plan, amendment, or revision
 is adopted (as measured by volume offered for lease or sale).'.
SEC. 208. PLAN MONITORING AND MAINTENANCE.
 (a) Section 202 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976
 (43 U.S.C. 1712) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new subsection (k):
 `(k) The Secretary shall certify in writing as part of each management
 decision to implement a land use plan developed, amended, or revised
 under this section that such decision contributes to or, at a minimum,
 does not preclude achievement of the goals and outputs in such plan. The
 Secretary shall monitor regularly management of and outputs from the
 area to which each land use plan applies to ensure that each such plan
 is not constructively changed through a pattern of implementing actions
 or failures to take implementing actions that is inconsistent with the
 plan. If the Secretary finds the plan has been so changed, the Secretary
 shall direct that corrective implementing actions be undertaken to restore
 plan consistency or that the plan be amended.'.
 (b) Section 6(i) of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning
 Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604(i)) is amended by inserting `(1)' between
 `(i)' and `Resources' and adding a new paragraph (2) as follows:
 `(2) The Secretary shall certify in writing as a part of the decision on
 each implementing action that such decision contributes to or, at a minimum,
 does not preclude achievement of the goals and outputs in the applicable land
 management plan. The Secretary shall monitor regularly forest management
 and forest goals and outputs to ensure that a land management plan is
 not constructively changed through a pattern of implementing actions
 or failures to take implementing actions that is inconsistent with the
 plan. If the Secretary finds the plan has been so changed, the Secretary
 shall direct that corrective implementing actions be undertaken to restore
 plan consistency or that the plan be amended.'.
SEC. 209. CITIZEN PETITIONS FOR AMENDMENT OR REVISION.
 (a) Section 202 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976
 (43 U.S.C. 1712) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new subsection (l):
 `(l) A person may petition the Secretary for an amendment or revision of any
 land use plan if the person alleges and relies on new information law, or
 regulation as defined in this subsection. A person who wishes to challenge
 a plan or an action implementing a plan alleging new information, law,
 or regulation must petition the Secretary for an amendment or revision
 of the plan in lieu of filing an administrative appeal of such plan
 or action. The petition shall be filed in accordance with regulations
 adopted by the Secretary, which shall require the Secretary to seek and
 consider the advice of the Secretary, as defined in section 3(15) of the
 Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1532 (15)) if the petition concerns a
 species listed, or critical habitat designated, pursuant to section 4 of
 the Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1533). The Secretary shall accept
 or deny the petition in writing within sixty days of receipt. If the
 Secretary accepts the petition, the amendment or revision process shall
 begin on the date of the acceptance. If the Secretary rejects the petition,
 the petitioner may seek immediate judicial review unless the Secretary
 provides for further administrative review of decisions on petitions. For
 purposes of this subsection, `new information' means information related to
 the plan or action that was not known to and considered by the Secretary
 in the preparation of the plan and `law, or regulation' means any law or
 regulation not in effect when the plan was adopted.'.
 (b) Section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning
 Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604) is amended by adding at the end thereof a
 new subsection (n) as follows:
 `(n)(1) A person may petition the Secretary for an amendment or revision of
 any land and resource management plan or of any document that establishes
 a minimum management requirement either in units of the National Forest
 System within a Forest Service region or for a particular unit if he or
 she alleges and relies on new information, law, or regulation as defined
 in this subsection to support the amendment or revision. A person who
 wishes to challenge a plan or an action implementing a plan alleging new
 information law, or regulation must petition the Secretary for an amendment
 or revision of the plan in lieu of filing an administrative appeal on such
 plan or action. A person who wishes to challenge a minimum management
 requirement document alleging new information, law, or regulation must
 first petition the Secretary for an amendment or revision of the document.
 (2) The petition shall be filed in accordance with regulations adopted
 by the Secretary, which shall require the Secretary to seek and consider
 the advise of the Secretary, as defined in section 3(15) of the Endangered
 Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1532(15)), if the petition concerns a species listed,
 or a critical habitat designated, pursuant to section 4 of the Endangered
 Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1533). The Secretary shall accept or deny the
 petition in writing within 60 days of receipt. If the Secretary accepts
 the petition, the amendment or revision process shall begin on the date of
 the acceptance. If the Secretary rejects the petition, the petitioner may
 seek immediate judicial review in accordance with subsections (p) and (q)
 of this section unless the Secretary provides for further administrative
 review of the decisions on petitions.
 (3) For purposes of this section, `new information' means information related
 to the plan, action, or document that was not known to and considered
 by the Secretary in the preparation of the plan or document and `law,
 or regulation' means any law or regulation not in effect when the plan or
 document was adopted.'.
PART B--IMPLEMENTING PLANS
SEC. 210. ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS AND PETITIONS.
 Section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act
 of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604) is amended by adding at the end thereof a new
 subsection (o) as follows:
 `(o) Administrative appeal of a land and resource management plan, an
 implementing action under a land and resource management plan, or document
 adopted by the Secretary pursuant to this section shall be in accordance
 with rules promulgated by the Secretary, including the following additional
 provisions:
 `(1) Standing to bring an administrative appeal shall be available only to
 persons who have submitted written or oral comment during the preparation
 of the plan, amendment, revision, document or action on the issue or issues
 for which administrative review is sought.
 `(2) A person who wishes to challenge a land and resource management plan,
 implementing action, or document that establishes a minimum management
 requirement either in a unit of the National Forest System or within a
 Forest Service region alleging or relying on new information, law, or
 regulation must first petition the Secretary for an amendment or revision
 of the plan or document in accordance with subsection (n) of this section.
 `(3) No administrative stay pending appeal or petition filed under this
 subsection shall extend beyond, or be imposed after, the conclusion of
 the applicable period for filing suit in subsections (p)(2), (q)(2), or
 (r)(2) of this section.
 `(4) Failure by the Secretary to issue a final decision on appeal or petition
 by the prescribed regulatory deadline, not including any extensions thereto
 that may be granted by the Secretary, shall be deemed to be a denial of
 the appeal or petition for purposes of this section.'.
SEC. 211. JUDICIAL REVIEW OF PLANS.
 Section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning of 1974
 (16 U.S.C. 1604) is amended by adding at the end thereof a new subsection
 (p) as follows:
 `(p) Suits to challenge a land and resource management plan, amendment
 thereof, or revision thereto, adopted by the Secretary pursuant to this
 section, or a decision by the Secretary not to amend or revise such a plan
 pursuant to subsection (n) of this section, shall be filed in the United
 States court of appeals for the circuit in which the unit of the National
 Forest System to which the plan applies is located. Such court shall have
 jurisdiction to hear and determine any suit brought as provided in this
 subsection, subject to the terms and restrictions of this subsection.
 `(1) Standing to obtain review shall be available only to persons who have--
 `(A) participated in the preparation of the plan, amendment, or revision,
 or petition for plan amendment or revision, through written or oral comment
 on the issue or issues for which judicial review is sought; and
 `(B) exhausted their adminsitrative remedies.
 `(2) Any suit under this subsection must be filed not more than 90 days
 after the final decision of the Secretary on the relevant administrative
 appeal of the plan, amendment, revision, or petition. The plan or any
 portion thereof, as finally adopted, shall not thereafter be reviewable
 as a part of any other action under this Act or any other provision of
 law or regulation in existence at the conclusion of such 90-day period.
 `(3) A suit under this subsection shall not allege or rely upon new
 information, law, or regulation as defined in subsection (n) of this section
 unless the party has petitioned the Secretary pursuant to subsection (n)
 of this section, the Secretary has denied the petition, and the party has
 exhausted any administrative appeal rights concerning that denial.
 `(4) The record upon review shall be limited to the administrative record
 compiled in accordance with this Act and such additional written evidence
 as the court shall permit.'.
SEC. 212. JUDICIAL REVIEW OF MINIMUM MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
 Section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act
 of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604) is amended by adding at the end thereof a new
 subsection (q) as follows:
 `(q)(1) Issuance of any document that establishes a minimum management
 requirement either in units of the National Forest System within a Forest
 Service region or for a particular unit (other than a land and resource
 management plan) shall be considered a final agency action. Suits to
 challenge such document, or a decision by the Secretary not to amend
 or revise such document pursuant to subsection (n) of this section,
 shall be filed in the United States court of appeals for the circuit in
 which the units or unit to which the document applies is located. Such
 court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine any suit brought as
 provided in this subsection, subject to the terms and restrictions of this
 subsection. Standing to obtain review shall be available only to persons
 who have--
 `(A) participated in the preparation of such document through written or
 oral comment on the issue or issues for which judicial review is sought,
 if notice and opportunity for public comment was provided; and
 `(B) exhausted their administrative remedies.
 `(2) Any suit under this subsection must be filed not more than 60 days
 after the final decision of the Secretary on any administrative appeal of
 the document. The document, or any portion thereof, as finally adopted
 shall not thereafter be reviewable as part of any other action under
 this Act or any other provision of law or regulation in existence at the
 conclusion of such 60-day period.
 `(3) A suit under this subsection shall not allege or rely upon new
 information, law, or regulation as defined in subsection (n) of this section
 unless the party has petitioned the Secretary pursuant to subsection (n)
 of this section, the Secretary has denied the petition, and the party has
 exhausted any administrative appeal rights concerning that denial.
 `(4) The record upon review shall be limited to the administrative record
 compiled in accordance with this Act and such additional written evidence
 as the court shall permit.'.
SEC. 213. JUDICIAL REVIEW OF PLAN IMPLEMENTING ACTIONS.
 Section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act
 of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604) is amended by adding at the end thereof a new
 subsection (r) as follows:
 `(r)(1) Suits to challenge an action implementing a land and resource
 management plan adopted, amended, or revised by the Secretary pursuant to
 this section shall be filed in the United States district court for the
 district in which the implementing action will occur. Such court shall
 have jurisdiction to hear and determine any suit brought as provided
 in this subsection, subject to the terms and restrictions of this
 subsection. Standing to obtain review shall be available only to persons
 who have--
 `(A) participated in the preparation of such implementing action through
 written or oral comment on the issue or issues for which judicial review
 is sought, if notice and opportunity for public comment was provided; and
 `(B) exhausted their administrative remedies.
 `(2) Any suit under this subsection must be filed not more than 30 days
 after the final decision of the Secretary on any administrative appeal of
 the action.
 `(3) A suit to challenge an implementing action which alleges or relies
 upon new information, law, or regulation as defined in subsection (n)
 of this section shall be brought under subsection (p) of this section
 after the party has petitioned the Secretary pursuant to subsection (n)
 of this section, the Secretary has denied the petition, and the party has
 exhausted any administrative appeal rights concerning the denial.
 `(4) The record upon review shall be limited to the administrative record
 compiled in accordance with this Act and such additional written evidence
 as the court shall permit.
 `(5) Any action found to be not inconsistent with the plan it implements
 is valid, unless it is found to violate a nondiscretionary provision of
 law other than this Act and the National Environmental Policy Act (42
 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.).'.
SEC. 214. DEADLINES AND PROCEDURES.
 Section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act
 of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604) is amended by adding at the end thereof a new
 subsection (s) as follows:
 `(s)(1) A suit governed by this section or any appeal of the decision on
 such suit shall be assigned for hearing at the earliest possible date and
 shall take precedence over all other matters pending on the docket of the
 court at that time except for criminal cases.
 `(2) The court shall render its final decision and dissolve any restraining
 order or preliminary injunction relative to any suit governed by this section
 or appeal of decision on such suit within the number of days specified
 in clauses (A) through (C) of this paragraph from the date such suit or
 appeal is filed, unless the court determines that a longer period of time
 is required to satisfy the requirements of the United States Constitution:
 `(A) A land and resource management plan that is the subject of subsection
 (p), one hundred and eighty days.
 `(B) A document that is the subject of subsection (q), 120 days.
 `(C) An implementing action that is the subject of subsection (r), sixty
 days: Provided, however, That the period shall be thirty days in the
 case of an action to offer or award salvage timber or such other action
 that is determined by the Secretary to be an emergency action.'.
SEC. 215. STATUS OF PLANS.
 Section 6(c) of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act
 of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604(c)) is amended by inserting `(1)' between `(c)'
 and `The' and adding a new paragraph (2) as follows:
 `(2) When a unit of the National Forest System is subject to a plan
 developed in accordance with this Act, such unit shall be managed under
 the most recent initial, amended, or revised version of that plan that has
 been adopted as final. If at any time a final version of a plan or portion
 thereof is enjoined by court order from operation, the management of the
 unit shall continue under the immediately previous final version of that
 plan or relevant portion thereof, which shall not be subject to challenge
 or injunction except as provided in this section.'.
SEC. 216. TIERING OF ENVIRONMENTAL DOCUMENTATION.
 Section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act
 of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604) is amended by adding at the end thereof a new
 subsection (t) as follows:
 `(t)(1) Where documentation pursuant to section 102(2)(C) of the National
 Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4332(2)(C)) is required on an
 action implementing a land and resource management plan, such documentation
 shall be tiered to the final environmental impact statement, as amended
 or supplemented, on the plan. The documentation on the action shall
 incorporate by reference the relevant analysis of the final environmental
 impact statement, including cumulative impact analysis, and shall focus
 on any site-specific or project-specific environmental consequences which
 are required to be analyzed and have not been analyzed, or which are
 substantially different from or greater than the general environmental
 consequences which have been analyzed, in the final environmental impact
 statement.
 `(2) An environmental assessment, as defined by the Council on Environmental
 Quality, shall be the most comprehensive level of environmental documentation
 required for an action implementing a plan except when the Secretary, in
 his discretion in accordance with regulation, determines that the nature
 or scope of potential environmental consequences of an implementing action
 is substantially different from or greater than the nature or scope of
 the consequences considered in the final environmental impact statement
 for the plan.'.
SEC. 217. BUDGET DISCLOSURES.
 Section 8(b) of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act
 of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1060(b)) is amended by inserting the following after
 the first sentence: `Commencing with the fiscal budget for the first full
 fiscal year following enactment of this sentence, such requests shall
 include as an appendix to the budget a statement of what funds would
 be required to achieve 100 per centum of annual outputs specified in,
 or otherwise implement fully, the land and resource management plan for
 each unit of the National Forest System.'.
SEC. 218. REGULATIONS.
 Not later than twelve months from the date of enactment of this Act, the
 Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture shall promulgate
 regulations to carry out the purposes and provisions of this title.
TITLE III--PROVIDING AN INTERIM PROGRAM
SEC. 301. PURPOSES.
 The purposes of this title are to provide for a five-year basic and
 applied research program on old growth forest on certain public domain
 lands managed by the Bureau of Land Management and lands withdrawn from
 the public domain managed by the Forest Service in Oregon, Washington,
 and Northern California to better understand the values and processes of
 the old growth forest and to permit its active management to maintain
 and enhance those values and processes, and to ensure the protection
 of any areas of ecologically-significant old growth forest that might be
 considered for designation to the Old Growth Forest Reserve, the protection
 of the Northern Spotted Owl and adherence to the Endangered Species Act (16
 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.), and the provision of an adequate supply of timber,
 on those public domain lands during the interim period from the date of
 enactment of this Act until the Reserve is designated and the final new
 or revised Land Management Plans are adopted pursuant to title I of this Act.
SEC. 302. DURATION OF THE INTERIM PROGRAM
 The interim program established pursuant to this title shall be effective
 upon the date of enactment of this Act and shall terminate three full
 fiscal years from such date for all units of Public Lands and National
 Forest Lands to which apply final revised or new Land Management Plans
 adopted pursuant to section 102. The interim program shall continue to
 apply thereafter to any unit for which no applicable final revised or new
 Land Management Plan has been adopted until the end of the fiscal year in
 which such adoption occurs. If any final revised or new Land Management
 Plan is challenged by administrative appeal or litigation, the unit to
 which such Land Management Plan applies shall revert to management under
 the interim program until the end of the fiscal year in which any and all
 such appeals and litigation are exhausted.
SEC. 303. SUSPENSION OF CERTAIN PLAN ELEMENTS.
 In order to provide the protection for the areas of old growth forest
 required by section 305 of this Act and ensure the offering of timber
 sales required by section 304 of this Act, all elements of any plans for
 the management of Public Lands and National Forest Lands (i) proscribing
 timber harvesting outside such areas, or (ii) permitting timber harvesting,
 road construction, or mineral or geothermal leasing inside such areas,
 shall be suspended during the duration of the interim program established
 pursuant to this title.
SEC. 304. INTERIM TIMBER SALES PROGRAMS.
 (a) Subject only to the provisions of this title and notwithstanding any
 provision of law or order of a court to the contrary, for each full fiscal
 year in which the interim program established pursuant to this title is
 in effect:
 (1) the Secretary of the Interior shall offer for sale at least
 board feet from Federal lands managed by the Bureau of Land Management in
 Oregon, Washington and California, of which at least board feet
 shall be offered from the Public Lands;
 (2) the Secretary of Agriculture shall offer for sale at least board
 feet per year from Federal lands managed by the Forest Service in Regions 5
 and 6 (Oregon, Washington and California), of which at least board
 feet per year shall be offered from the National Forest Lands;
 (3) the Secretaries shall allocate the sales volumes for each fiscal year
 established in clauses (1) and (2) of this section among each national
 forest and Bureau of Land Management administrative district at least
 seven months prior to the beginning of such fiscal year;
 (4) for any portion of a fiscal year prior to the first full fiscal year
 after enactment of this Act, the sales volume required to be offered by
 this section shall be the product of the relevant volume in clause (1)
 or (2) of this section times the fraction of the fiscal year represented
 by the portion thereof during which the interim program is in effect; and
 (5) for any Bureau of Land Management administrative district or national
 forest which remains subject to the interim program after three full fiscal
 years from the date of enactment of this Act, the annual sales volume
 thereafter until the interim program is no longer applicable shall be the
 volume allocated to that forest or district in the third full fiscal year.
 (b) For purpose of subsection (a) of this section, the timber sale level for
 any annual interim timber sale program which may undergo review pursuant to
 section 7(e)-(1) of the Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1536(e)-(1)) in
 accordance with section 306(b) of this Act shall be the level established
 by or resulting from that review in lieu of the level provided for that
 program in subsection (a).
SEC. 305. INTERIM OLD GROWTH FOREST PROTECTION.
 (a) No timber sale may be offered, road constructed, or mineral or geothermal
 lease sold by either Secretary on any Public Lands and National Forest
 Lands subject to the interim program established pursuant to this title III--
 (1) which are located within unfragmented areas of old growth forest
 containing more than acres each of Public Lands or National Forest
 Lands within the habitat conservation areas identified in appendix Q of the
 May 1990 report of the Scientific Committee to Address the Conservation
 of the Northern Spotted Owl specified in section 318(b)(6)(B) of Public
 Law 101-121 (103 Stat. 747); or
 (2) which are located within a radius of any active nest site of
 the Northern Spotted Owl.
 (b) The lands subject to this section shall be identified by the Secretaries,
 after an opportunity for public comment, on a map or maps on file for public
 inspection in the offices of the Director of the Bureau of Land Management
 and the Chief of the Forest Service and each office of the Bureau of Land
 Management and Forest Service responsible for administering the Public
 Lands and National Forest Lands.
SEC. 306. NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT AND ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT
COMPLIANCE.
 (a) For each of the first three full fiscal years after enactment of
 this Act, each Secretary shall prepare an environmental impact statement
 pursuant to section 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act
 (42 U.S.C. 4322(2)(C)) on the annual interim timber sales program under
 the Secretary's jurisdiction established by section 304(1) and (2) of
 this Act, and shall submit such program for consultation with the Fish and
 Wildlife Service pursuant to section 7 of the Endangered Species Act (16
 U.S.C. 1536), no later than six months prior to the beginning of the fiscal
 year. Not later than six months prior to the beginning of each fiscal year
 thereafter, each Secretary shall prepare an environmental impact statement
 on, and submit for consultation, any annual interim timber sales program
 under the Secretary's jurisdiction required by section 304(5) of this Act.
 (b) If, during consultation on an annual interim timber sales program
 required by subsection (a) of this section, jeopardy of any listed species
 or adverse modification of any designated critical habitat is found
 under section 7(b) of the Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1536(b)), the
 Secretary responsible for the program shall consider any reasonable and
 prudent alternatives suggested in the consultation that are consistent with
 the provisions of this title and that offer the sales volume required for
 the program in section 304 of this Act. If the Secretary determines that no
 such reasonable and prudent alternative exists, the Secretary shall apply
 for review of the program pursuant to section 7(e)-(l) of the Endangered
 Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1536(e)-(l)).
SEC. 307. JUDICIAL REVIEW.
 Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary:
 (1) Any action taken or decision made by a Federal agency pursuant to
 this title (other than an action or decision defined as or considered
 to be proposed or draft under the Administrative Procedure Act, Federal
 Land Policy and Management Act of 1976, Forest and Rangeland Renewable
 Resources Planning Act of 1974, National Environmental Policy Act, or other
 applicable law) shall be deemed to be a final agency action or decision
 and shall not be subject to any administrative appeal or administrative stay.
 (2) A suit challenging any such action or decision must be filed in
 the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit not later than
 thirty days after the date of such action or decision. Such court shall
 have jurisdiction to hear and determine any suit brought in accordance
 with this section.
 (3) No temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction may be issued
 in a suit governed by this section after sixty days from the date such suit
 is filed. If a temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction
 is issued within such sixty-day period, the court shall render its final
 decision and dissolve any remaining preliminary injunction on or before
 the final day of such period.
 (4) The grounds for any litigation challenging an annual interim timber
 sales program or any portion thereof pursuant to this title shall be
 limited solely to compliance with the provisions of this title.
SEC. 308. OLD GROWTH FOREST RESEARCH PROGRAM.
 (a) Not later than six months from the date of enactment of this Act, the
 Secretaries shall establish an Old Growth Forest Research Program, which
 shall include (but need not be limited to) each of the following components:
 (1) basic research on ecosystems of, processes in, and species associated
 with old growth forest on Public Lands and National Forest Lands;
 (2) the development and testing of ecologically-sensitive forest management
 practices at the stand and landscape levels on Public Lands and National
 Forest Lands;
 (3) the development and testing of particular timber harvesting methods which
 may be employed in, and be consonant with maintenance of the non-commodity
 values of, the ecologically-significant old growth forest areas to be
 designated to the Old Growth Forest Reserve;
 (4) determination of methods of supplying the economy, and particularly
 communities dependent on resources of the Public Lands and National Forest
 Lands, with such resources on a sustained basis; and
 (5) development of techniques for regenerating old growth forest on Public
 Lands and National Forest Lands.
 (b) Not later than thirty months from the date of enactment of this
 Act, the Secretaries shall, taking into account work performed in
 the Old Growth Forest Research Program, prepare and publish in the
 Federal Register prescriptions and guidelines for timber harvesting in
 ecologically-significant old growth forest areas to be designated to the
 Reserve, including techniques associated with New Forestry, which maintain
 or enhance the non-commodity resource values associated with such areas.
 (c) The Old Growth Forest Research Program shall terminate at the end of
 five full fiscal years from the date of enactment of this Act.
TITLE IV--ECONOMIC ADJUSTMENT
SEC. 401. PURPOSES.
 The purposes of this title are to develop an organizational structure and
 a program to provide grants and benefit payments to, and promote economic
 diversification and stability for, communities which and workers who are
 economically dependent on the Public Lands and National Forest Lands are
 adversely impacted by timber supply which is declining as set forth in the
 findings of this Act and may decline further in response to the interim
 and long term programs established by this Act.
SEC. 402. SPECIAL ECONOMIC ADJUSTMENT FUND.
 (a) Effective for six full fiscal years after the date of enactment of
 this Act, per centum of the Federal portion of all moneys received
 each fiscal year from the sale of timber and other forest products from the
 Federal lands shall be deposited into the Treasury of the United States and
 shall constitute a special fund which shall be made available without further
 appropriation to the Timber Readjustment Commission established pursuant to
 section 403 of this Act for grants and benefit payments pursuant to section
 407 of this Act and for the operations of the Commission and the Timber
 Readjustment Advisory Panel established pursuant to section 405 of this Act.
 (b) For the purposes of subsection (a) of this section the term `moneys
 received'--
 (1) has the same meaning given such term under the Act of May 23, 1908 (16
 U.S.C. 500), and section 13 of the Act of March 1, 1911 (16 U.S.C. 500); and
 (2) means--
 (A) moneys deposited into the Oregon and California land-grant fund pursuant
 to the Act of August 28, 1937 (Chapter 876, 50 Stat. 874; 43 U.S.C. 1181a
 et seq.);
 (B) moneys deposited into the Coos Bay Wagon Road grant fund pursuant to
 the Act of May 24, 1939 (Chapter 144, 53 Stat. 753; 43 Stat. 1181f-1 et
 seq.); and
 (C) moneys received from the disposal of timber and other forest products
 pursuant to the Act of July 31, 1947 (30 U.S.C. 601 et seq.).
 (c) Nothing in this section shall be construed as modifying or altering
 payments to States under the Act of May 23, 1908, and section 13 of the Act
 of March 1, 1911 (16 U.S.C. 500), the Act of August 28, 1937 (43 U.S.C. 1181f
 et seq.), and the Act of May 24, 1939 (43 U.S.C. 1181f-1 et seq.).
SEC. 403. TIMBER ECONOMIC ADJUSTMENT COMMISSION.
 There is hereby established the three-member Timber Economic Adjustment
 Commission to perform the functions prescribed in section 407 of this
 Act. Within sixty days of the date of enactment of this Act, the governors
 of California, Oregon, and Washington shall each appoint a commissioner
 to serve on the Commission. Any vacancy on the Commission shall be filled
 in the same manner as the original appointment was made. The chair of
 the Commission shall be elected annually from among the commissioners by
 majority vote thereof.
SEC. 404. ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY.
 (a) The Commission shall have the authority to appoint, fix compensation
 for, and assign and delegate duties to an Executive Director and such other
 employees, and procure such temporary and intermittent services, as the
 Commission deems necessary to fulfill its functions pursuant to this title.
 (b) The Commission shall adopt such internal rules of procedure as it
 deems necessary. All Commission meetings shall be open to the public,
 but may be closed temporarily for discussion of personnel and budgetary
 matters. Notice of Commission meetings shall be published in newspapers
 of general circulation in California, Oregon, and Washington.
 (c) Upon the request of the Commission, Federal agencies are authorized to
 provide technical assistance on a nonreimbursable basis to the Commission
 to assist it in fulfilling its functions pursuant to this section. The
 Commission is authorized to use, with their consent, the services, equipment,
 personnel, and facilities of Federal, State, and other agencies with or
 without reimbursement. Each Federal agency is authorized and directed to
 cooperate fully in making its services, equipment, personnel, and facilities
 available to the Commission.
SEC. 405. TIMBER ECONOMIC ADJUSTMENT ADVISORY PANEL.
 In performing its functions pursuant to section 407 of this Act, the
 Commission shall consult with and consider the recommendations of the
 nine-member Timber Economic Adjustment Advisory Panel. Each Governor shall
 appoint three members to the Panel: one from the forest products industry,
 one from organized labor, and one from the general public. The term of each
 member of the Panel shall be one year, subject to reappointment. The chair of
 the Panel shall be elected from among its members by majority vote thereof.
SEC. 406. COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES.
 (a) Commissioners who are not otherwise employed may be compensated at a
 rate fixed by the President but not in excess of the maximum rate of pay
 for grade level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title
 5 of the United States Code.
 (b) The members of the Commission and the Panel while away from their homes
 or regular places of business in performance of services for the Commission
 or Panel, shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of
 subsistence, in the same manner as persons employed intermittently in the
 Government Service are allowed expenses under section 5703(b) of title 5
 of the United States Code.
SEC. 407. PURPOSE OF ECONOMIC ADJUSTMENT GRANTS AND BENEFIT PAYMENTS.
 The Commission shall distribute from the special fund established in
 section 402 of this Act monies in the form of grants or benefit payments
 to communities which or workers who meet the eligibility requirements of
 section 408 of this Act. The grants and benefit payments shall be provided
 for, but not be limited to, the following purposes:
 (1) to assist any eligible community to achieve economic diversity and
 diminish dependency on forest products from old growth forest on Public
 Lands and National Forest Lands;
 (2) to provide short-term and longer term retraining and adjustment
 assistance to any eligible worker;
 (3) to supplement unemployment insurance benefits and extend income
 maintenance payments for any eligible worker whose eligibility for
 unemployment insurance benefits is exhausted and who is enrolled in
 a training or education program which the Commission determines to be
 bona fide;
 (4) to provide base level health care insurance coverage for an eligible
 worker, and his or her family members, who is enrolled in a training or
 education program which the Commission determines to be bona fide; and
 (5) to defray job search expenses and relocation expenses for any eligible
 worker who the Commission determines cannot reasonable be expected to
 secure employment comparable to his or her previous employment in the
 commuting area in which the worker resides.
SEC. 408. ELIGIBILITY FOR ECONOMIC ADJUSTMENT GRANTS OR BENEFITS PAYMENTS.
 To be eligible for a grant or benefit payment pursuant to section 405 of
 this Act--
 (1) a community must--
 (A) be a `community economically dependent on public lands,' as defined
 pursuant to section 202(a) of this Act, which unit must be a unit of the
 Public Lands, as defined in section 3(a)(7) of this Act, or a `community
 economically dependent on a unit of the National Forest System,' as defined
 pursuant to section 202(b) of this Act, which unit must be a unit of the
 National Forest Lands, as defined in section 3(a)(5) of this Act; and
 (B) have associated with it a wood products plant which closed or reduced its
 work force by percent within two years before, and remains closed
 or continues with such reduction in force upon, the date of enactment of
 this Act, or closes or reduces its work force by percent after
 the date of enactment of this Act and remains in such condition for
 months after the date of closure or reduction in work force; and
 (2) a worker must--
 (A) have been in employment related to wood products or timber harvesting
 and have been terminated or laid off from such employment within two years
 before, and be unemployed on, the date of enactment of this Act, or be
 terminated or laid off from such employment after the date of enactment of
 this Act and be unlikely to return to such employment within months
 thereafter; or
 (B) have been employed or self-employed in an occupation not directly
 related to wood products or timber harvesting in a community as defined
 in clause (1) of this section, have been terminated from such employment
 after the date of enactment of this Act, and be unlikely to return to such
 employment within months thereafter.
SEC. 409. NOTICE OF SECRETARIES.
 The Secretaries shall--
 (1) provide timely information to the Commission on any Federal action
 with respect to managing the Public Lands and National Forest Lands which
 may have a substantial local or regional impact on employment;
 (2) where feasible, identify the location of the employment which will be
 affected by such Federal action, and
 (3) provide the Commission such other information concerning such Federal
 action as is available to the Secretaries and as the Commission may require.
SEC. 410. TERMINATION OF COMMISSION AND PANEL; COMMISSION REPORT.
 The Commission and Panel shall terminate six full fiscal years from the date
 of enactment of this Act. No later than six months prior to termination
 of the Commission, the Commission shall submit in writing to the Congress
 and the governors of California, Oregon, and Washington a report on the
 accomplishments of the Commission, the economic conditions of communities
 and employment in the region in which Public Lands and National Forest Lands
 are located, and any recommendations the Commission may have concerning
 such conditions.
TITLE V--MISCELLANEOUS
SEC. 501. O&C LANDS.
 Notwithstanding any provision of this Act except section 402, in the
 event of conflict with or inconsistency between this Act and the Acts of
 August 28, 1937 (50 Stat. 874; 43 U.S.C. 1181a-1181j), and May 24, 1939
 (53 Stat. 753), insofar as they relate to management of timber resources,
 the latter Acts shall prevail.
SEC. 502. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 These are hereby authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary
 to carry out the purposes and provisions of this Act.