S 3300 IS
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 3300
To provide universal access to health care and contain health care costs
through accountable health plans and managed competition, and for other
purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
OCTOBER 1 (legislative day, SEPTEMBER 30), 1992
Mr. BINGAMAN introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources
A BILL
To provide universal access to health care and contain health care costs
through accountable health plans and managed competition, and for other
purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `21st Century Health Care Act'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings; purposes.
TITLE I--ELIGIBILITY AND ENROLLMENT
Sec. 101. Eligibility and entitlement.
Sec. 102. Enrollment.
Sec. 103. Portability.
Sec. 104. Treatment of Federal employees health benefit program.
TITLE II--MANAGED COMPETITION IN HEALTH PLANS
Subtitle A--National Health Care Board
Sec. 201. Establishment of National Health Care Board.
Sec. 202. Health outcomes management Standards Board.
Sec. 203. Health benefits Standards Board.
Sec. 204. Health insurance Standards Board.
Sec. 205. Medicare Transition Board.
Sec. 206. Registration of accountable health plans.
Sec. 207. Specification of risk-adjustment factors.
Sec. 208. National health data system.
Sec. 209. Rules governing congressional consideration of National Health
Care Board actions.
Subtitle B--Health Insurance Purchasing Cooperatives (HIPCs)
Sec. 210. Establishment and organization; HIPC areas.
Sec. 211. Agreements with accountable health plans.
Sec. 212. Enrolling individuals under accountable health plans through HIPC.
Sec. 213. Receipt of premiums; forwarding of adjusted premiums.
Sec. 214. Coordination among HIPCs.
Subtitle C--Accountable Health Plans (AHPs)
Part 1--Requirements for Accountable Health Plans
Sec. 215. Registration process; qualifications.
Sec. 216. Specified uniform set of effective benefits.
Sec. 217. Collection and provision of standardized information.
Sec. 218. Prohibition of discrimination based on health status for certain
conditions; limitation on preexisting condition exclusion.
Sec. 219. Use of standard premiums.
Sec. 220. Financial solvency requirements.
Sec. 221. Grievance mechanisms; enrollee protections.
Sec. 222. Coordination of benefits with low-income and small business
assistance.
Part 2--Preemption From State Laws for Accountable Health Plans
Sec. 223. Preemption from State benefit mandates.
Sec. 224. Preemption of State law restriction on network plans.
Sec. 225. Preemption of State laws restricting utilization review programs.
Subtitle D--Treatment of Areas of Ineffective Competition
Sec. 226. Regulation in areas of ineffective competition.
Subtitle E--Definitions
Sec. 227. Definitions.
TITLE III--UNIFORM EFFECTIVE HEALTH BENEFITS
Sec. 301. Specification of uniform effective benefits.
Sec. 302. Covered health care services.
TITLE IV--APPLICATION OF ANTITRUST LAWS
Sec. 401. Purpose.
Sec. 402. Exemptions from the operation of the antitrust laws.
Sec. 403. Definitions.
TITLE V--COST CONTROL AND FINANCING
Subtitle A--Health Budgets
Sec. 501. National health budget.
Sec. 502. Payments to States.
Sec. 503. State program budgets.
Subtitle B--Funding
Sec. 504. Federal sources of funding.
Sec. 505. Treatment of employer health plan expenses in excess of accountable
health plan costs.
Sec. 506. Employer obligations.
Sec. 507. National Health Care Trust Fund.
Sec. 508. State sources of funding.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS; PURPOSES.
 (a) FINDINGS- Congress finds the following:
 (1) NEED FOR COST CONTAINMENT INCENTIVES AND FAIR ACCESS- The current
 health insurance marketplace is unable to provide efficient and effective
 health care to all Americans because--
 (A) there is a lack of standardization of health plans;
 (B) health plans appear increasingly likely to seek to manage costs
 more through underwriting practices and favorable selection than through
 increased efficiencies in the provision of health care;
 (C) underwriting practices discriminate unfairly against individuals in
 need of health care;
 (D) there is no method by which health plans are held accountable for
 their performance in effectively and efficiently improving the health and
 well-being of their enrollees;
 (E) there is no organized method for price based competition among similar
 health plans; and
 (F) the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 not only provides no incentives for
 employees to select carefully among competing health plans on the basis of
 costs, but also provides incentives for employers and employees to select
 plans with greater expenses.
 (2) NEED FOR MANAGED CARE COMPETITION-
 (A) The economy of the United States has been based on a model of competitive
 free markets and the United States has successfully relied on this model
 in order to promote efficiencies and innovation in nearly every economic
 area, including areas such as transportation and telecommunications which
 previously were highly regulated.
 (B) In order to provide for such a market in health care, there is a need
 to reform the tax code and the market with respect to health care.
 (C) Only through such a reform will the country achieve the dual goals of
 maintaining innovation and consumer choice and of providing real incentives
 towards cost containment.
 (b) PURPOSE-
 (1) GENERAL OBJECTIVE- It is the general objective of this Act to reform
 the health care market place to provide full access to quality care through
 an emphasis on cost and quality.
 (2) COST CONTAINMENT OBJECTIVE- It is also a specific objective of this
 Act to bring the rate of increase in health care costs by the year 2000
 down to the rate of increase in costs in the economy as a whole.
 (3) SPECIFIC MEASURES TO ACHIEVE OBJECTIVES- To achieve the objectives
 described in paragraphs (1) and (2), in order--
 (A) to control costs this Act establishes Federal contributions to national
 health expenditures and limits the favorable treatment of health plan
 contributions to the lowest level of a cost effective plan in the area
 and requires level contributions for all plans;
 (B) to eliminate competition through favorable selection this Act
 standardizes benefits and adjusts premium payments to plans by reflecting
 the risk characteristics of individuals enrolled in the plan;
 (C) to provide access to all individuals this Act provides access to
 competitively priced accountable health plans that are marketed in a
 coordinated manner;
 (D) to assist low-income individuals in the question of health plans,
 this Act offers financial assistance to those individuals in obtaining
 plans in the mainstream; and
 (E) to promote competition based on quality, this Act provides for
 the systematic reporting and public dissemination of information on
 the performance of plans in meeting the clinical health requirements,
 functional needs, well-being, and personal satisfaction of its enrollees.
TITLE I--ELIGIBILITY AND ENROLLMENT
SEC. 101. ELIGIBILITY AND ENTITLEMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Every individual who is a resident of the United States
 and is a citizen or national of the United States or lawful resident alien
 (as defined in subsection (d)) is entitled to health care coverage purchased
 through a HIPC under this Act in the State in which the individual maintains
 a primary residence.
 (b) TREATMENT OF CERTAIN NONIMMIGRANTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board may make eligible for health care services covered
 under this Act such classes of aliens admitted to the United States as
 nonimmigrants as the Board may provide.
 (2) CONSIDERATION- In providing for eligibility under paragraph (1),
 the Board shall consider reciprocity in health care services offered to
 United States citizens who are nonimmigrants in other foreign states,
 and such other factors as the Board determines to be appropriate.
 (c) TREATMENT OF OTHER INDIVIDUALS- The Board may make eligible for health
 care services covered under this Act other individuals not described in
 subsection (a) or (b), and regulate the nature of the eligibility of such
 individuals for the purposes of fulfilling the following criteria:
 (1) Preserving the public health of communities.
 (2) Compensating States for the additional health care financing burdens
 created by such individuals.
 (3) Preventing adverse financial and medical consequences of uncompensated
 care.
 (4) Inhibiting travel and immigration to the United States for the sole
 purpose of obtaining health care services or long-term care services
 covered under this Act.
 (d) LAWFUL RESIDENT ALIEN DEFINED- For purposes of this section, the term
 `lawful resident alien' means an alien lawfully admitted for permanent
 residence and any other alien lawfully residing permanently in the United
 States under color of law, including an alien with lawful temporary resident
 status under section 210, 210A, or 245A of the Immigration and Nationality
 Act (8 U.S.C. 1160, 1161, or 1255a).
SEC. 102. ENROLLMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State shall provide a mechanism for the enrollment of
 individuals entitled to health benefits purchased through a HIPC and, in
 conjunction with such enrollment, the issuance of a State health insurance
 card which may be used for purposes of identification and processing of
 claims for benefits under this Act.
 (b) ENROLLMENT AT BIRTH OR IMMIGRATION- The mechanism under subsection
 (a) shall include a process for the automatic enrollment of individuals
 at the time of birth in the State, including at the time of immigration
 into the United States, other acquisition of lawful resident status in
 the United States, or eligibility for other individuals established under
 section 101(c).
 (c) OBLIGATION TO ENROLL- To be eligible for any benefits under any Federal
 program, an individual seeking benefits under such program shall certify to
 the administrator of such program that such individual and the dependents
 of such individual are enrolled in a health benefit plan that meets the
 applicable minimum standards under this Act.
SEC. 103. PORTABILITY.
 To ensure continuous access to health care services covered under this Act,
 each State HIPC program--
 (1) shall not impose any minimum period of residence in the State, or
 waiting period, in excess of 3 months before residents of the State are
 entitled to such services;
 (2) shall provide continuation of payment for such services to individuals
 who have terminated their residence in the State and established their
 residence in another State, for the duration of any waiting period imposed in
 the State of new residency for establishing entitlement to such services; and
 (3) shall provide for the payment for health care services covered under
 this Act provided to individuals temporarily absent from the State based
 on the following:
 (A) Payment for such health care services shall be at the rate that is
 approved by the State HIPC program in the State in which the services are
 provided, unless the States concerned agree to apportion the cost between
 them in a different manner.
 (B)(i) Except as provided in clause (ii), payment for such health care
 services provided outside the United States shall be made on the basis
 of the amount that would have been paid by the State HIPC program for
 similar services rendered in the State, with due regard, in the case of
 hospital services, to the size of the hospital, standards of service,
 and other relevant factors.
 (ii) Payment for services described under clause (i) which are elective
 services may be subject to prior consent of the agency that administers
 and operates the State HIPC program if such elective services are available
 on a substantially similar basis in the State.
 (iii) For purposes of this subparagraph, the term `elective services'
 means health care services covered under this Act other than services that
 are provided in an emergency or in any other circumstance in which medical
 care is required without delay.
SEC. 104. TREATMENT OF FEDERAL EMPLOYEES HEALTH BENEFIT PROGRAM.
 Chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, is repealed. The Board shall
 issue such regulations as are necessary to provide for the transition
 of the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program to the health benefits
 program established under this Act.
TITLE II--MANAGED COMPETITION IN HEALTH PLANS
Subtitle A--National Health Care Board
SEC. 201. ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL HEALTH CARE BOARD.
 (a) IN GENERAL- There is hereby established a National Health Care Board.
 (b) COMPOSITION AND TERMS-
 (1) APPOINTMENT- The Board shall be composed of 11 members to be appointed
 by the President by and with the advice and consent of the Senate. The
 membership of the Board shall include individuals with national recognition
 for their expertise in health insurance, health economics, health care
 provider reimbursement, and related fields. In appointing such individuals,
 the President shall ensure the representation of consumers of health
 services, large and small employers, State and local governments, labor
 organizations, and health care providers and carriers.
 (2) CHAIRPERSON- The members of the Board shall elect a Chairperson.
 (3) TERMS- Members of the Board shall be appointed to serve for terms
 of 5 years, except that the terms of the members first appointed shall
 be staggered so that the terms of no more than 4 members expire in any
 year. The term of the Chairperson shall be coincident with the term of the
 President. Individuals appointed to fill a vacancy created in the Board
 shall be appointed for the remainder of the term.
 (c) DUTIES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall establish and oversee the various
 responsibilities set forth in this subtitle for the Health Outcomes
 Management Standards Board, Health Benefits Standards Board, Health Insurance
 Standards Board, Medicare Transition Board, and National Health Data System.
 (2) PROGRAM PRECEPTS- The Board shall establish Coordinated Buying Program
 Precepts, that shall set forth criteria for--
 (A) establishing a uniform data system that will assist in designating
 qualified HIPC's and carriers;
 (B) determining and implementing a system for the collection of relevant
 health outcomes data, including quality monitors, functional status, expense
 reporting methods (including the costs associated with providing services
 within State coordinated buying program), demographic and behavioral
 measures, and changes in clinical conditions as a result of therapeutic
 interventions expressed in Quality Life Years in a manner that assumes
 confidentiality of patient information; and
 (C) determining and revising, if necessary, appropriate minimum benefit
 requirements of a qualified health benefit plan, consistent with this
 Act and developing additional benefit plans as necessary to provide more
 extensive benefits;
except that, to the extent practicable, the precepts of the Board shall be
derived from an evaluation of the extant scientific literature and outcome
data collected under this Act.
 (3) LOW-INCOME ASSISTANCE- The Board shall establish a program for low-income
 assistance that includes requirements for eligibility and specific programs
 with respect to premium assistance, cost-sharing assistance, and assistance
 for items and services, all on an income-related basis. The Board shall
 establish uniform requirements, penalties, and procedures for applications
 for such assistance through State HIPC programs. The Board shall establish
 procedures for verifying eligibility for such assistance. For purposes
 of implementing this paragraph the Board shall establish, for each State,
 an adjusted Federal poverty level that is based upon an adjustment factor
 that reflects the relative cost-of-living in the continental United States
 (including Alaska) and Hawaii with such factors being updated annually.
 (4) SMALL BUSINESS ASSISTANCE- The Board shall establish an assistance
 program for individuals employed by small business that includes requirements
 for eligibility and specific programs with respect to premium assistance,
 cost-sharing assistance, and assistance for items and services, all on
 an income-related basis. The Board shall establish uniform requirements,
 penalties, and procedures for verifying eligibility for such assistance
 through State HIPC programs. The Board shall establish procedures for
 verifying eligibility for such assistance.
 (5) ASSISTANCE TO SECRETARY- The Board shall make written recommendations,
 on not less than an annual basis, to the Secretary and the States with
 respect to the planning, development, and implementation of all components
 of the National Health Insurance Data System established under this Act,
 including the determination of health outcomes data to be collected through
 the standardized universal electronic card, and shall provide such other
 assistance as the Secretary or the States may request.
 (d) MISCELLANEOUS-
 (1) AUTHORITY- The Board may--
 (A) employ and fix the compensation of an Executive Director and solicit
 other personnel (not to exceed 15) as may be necessary to carry out its
 duties (without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code,
 governing appointments in the competitive service);
 (B) seek such assistance and support as may be required in the performance
 of its duties from appropriate Federal departments and agencies;
 (C) enter into contracts or make other arrangements, as may be necessary
 for the conduct of the work of the Board (without regard to section 3709
 of the Revised Statutes (41 U.S.C. 5)); and
 (D) make advance, progress, and other payments which relate to the work
 of the Board.
 (2) COMPENSATION- While serving on the business of the Board (including
 traveltime), a member of the Board shall be entitled to compensation at
 the per diem equivalent of the rate provided for level IV of the Executive
 Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, and while
 so serving away from the member's home and regular place of business,
 a member may be allowed travel expenses, as authorized by the Chairperson
 of the Board.
 (3) ACCESS TO INFORMATION, ETC- The Board shall have access to such relevant
 information and data as may be available from appropriate Federal agencies
 and shall assure that its activities, especially the conduct of original
 research and medical studies, are coordinated with the activities of
 Federal agencies. The Board shall be subject to periodic audit by the
 General Accounting Office.
 (e) PERSONNEL-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall appoint an Executive Director and such
 additional officers and employees as it considers necessary to carry out
 its functions under this Act. Except as otherwise provided in any other
 provision of law, such officers and employees shall be appointed, and their
 compensation shall be fixed, in accordance with title 5, United State Code.
 (2) EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS- The Board may procure the services of experts
 and consultants in accordance with the provisions of section 3109 of title
 5, United States Code.
 (f) MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS-
 (1) GIFTS, BEQUESTS, AND DEVISES- The Board may accept, use, and dispose
 of gifts, bequests, or devises of services or property for the purpose of
 aiding or facilitating its work.
 (2) MAILS- The Board may use the United States mails in the same manner
 and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the
 Federal government.
SEC. 202. HEALTH OUTCOMES MANAGEMENT STANDARDS BOARD.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Board shall provide for the initial organization, as
 a nonprofit corporation in the District of Columbia, of a Health Outcomes
 Management Standards Board (hereafter referred to in this section as the
 `Outcomes Management Board'), under the direction of a board of directors
 consisting of 5 directors.
 (b) APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTORS-
 (1) SOLICITATION- The Board shall solicit nominations for the initial
 board of directors of the Outcomes Management Board from organizations
 that represent the various groups with an interest in the health care
 system and the functions of the Board.
 (2) CONTINUATION- The by-laws of the Outcomes Management Board shall
 provide for the board of directors subsequently to be appointed by the
 board in a manner that ensures a broad range of representation of through
 groups with an interest in providing and purchasing health care.
 (3) TERMS AND CONDITIONS- The term of each member of the board of directors
 of the Outcomes Management Board shall be for 7 years, except that in
 order to provide for staggered terms, the terms of the members initially
 appointed shall be for 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 years, respectively. In the case
 of a vacancy by death or resignation, a replacement shall be appointed to
 serve for the remainder of the term. No individual may serve as a director
 of the board for more than 12 years.
 (c) FUNCTIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Outcomes Management Board shall make recommendations
 to the Board concerning--
 (A) the establishment of a national data system for patient outcomes and
 other quality measures;
 (B) the standards for information collection and reporting from AHPs; and
 (C) oversight of data centers and data evaluation.
 (2) NATIONAL HEALTH DATA SYSTEM- The Outcomes Management Board shall provide
 the Board with its assistance in the development of the standards for the
 national data reporting system under section 208.
 (d) FUNDING- In order to provide funding for the Outcomes Management Board,
 the National Health Care Board shall establish an annual registration fee
 for AHPs which shall be imposed on a per-covered-individual-basis and which
 shall be sufficient, in the aggregate, to provide each year for not more
 than $25,000,000 for the operation of the Outcomes Management Board.
SEC. 203. HEALTH BENEFITS STANDARDS BOARD.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Board shall provide for initial organization, as a
 nonprofit corporation in the District of Columbia, of a Health Benefits
 Standards Board (hereafter referred to in this section as the `Benefits
 Standards Board') under the direction of a board of directors consisting
 of 5 directors.
 (b) APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTORS-
 (1) SOLICITATION- The Board shall solicit nominations for the initial
 board of directors of the Benefits Standards Board from organizations that
 represent the various groups with an interest in the health care system
 and the functions of the Board.
 (2) CONTINUATION- The by-laws of the Benefits Standards Board shall provide
 for the board of directors subsequently to be appointed by the board in
 a manner that ensures a broad range of representation of through groups
 with an interest in providing and purchasing health care.
 (3) TERMS AND CONDITIONS- The term of each member of the board of directors
 of the Benefits Standards Board shall be for 7 years, except that in
 order to provide for staggered terms, the terms of the members initially
 appointed shall be for 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 years, respectively. In the case
 of a vacancy by death or resignation, a replacement shall be appointed to
 serve for the remainder of the term. No individual may serve as a director
 of the board for more than 12 years.
 (c) FUNCTIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Health Benefits Standards Board shall make
 recommendations to the Board concerning--
 (A) the uniform set of effective benefits;
 (B) effective services to be used for uniform effective benefits; and
 (C) auditing standards to ensure the accuracy of information collected
 from AHPs.
 (2) ASSESSMENTS- The Benefits Standards Board shall provide the Board with
 its assessment of--
 (A) medical technology;
 (B) practice variations;
 (C) the effectiveness of medical practices and drug therapies based on
 research performed by the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research;
 (D) information from clinical and epidemiologic studies; and
 (E) information provided by AHPs, including AHP-specific information on
 clinical health, functional status, well-being, and plan satisfaction of
 enrolled individuals.
 (d) FUNDING- In order to provide funding for the Benefits Standards Board,
 the National Health Care Board shall establish an annual registration fee
 for AHPs which shall be imposed on a per-covered-individual-basis and which
 shall be sufficient, in the aggregate, to provide each year for not more
 than $25,000,000 for the operation of the Benefits and Data Board.
SEC. 204. HEALTH INSURANCE STANDARDS BOARD.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Board shall provide for the initial organization,
 a nonprofit corporation in the District of Columbia, of a Health Insurance
 Standards Board (Hereafter referred to in this section as the `Insurance
 Standards Board'), under the direction of a board of directors consisting
 of 5 directors.
 (b) APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTORS-
 (1) SOLICITATION- The Board shall solicit nominations for the initial
 board of directors of the Insurance Standards Board from organizations
 that represent the various groups with an interest in the health care
 system and the functions of the Board.
 (2) CONTINUATION- The by-laws of the Insurance Standards Board shall
 provide for the board of directors subsequently to be appointed by the
 board in a manner that ensures a broad range of representation of through
 groups with an interest in providing and purchasing health care.
 (3) TERMS OF DIRECTORS- The term of each member of the board of directors
 shall be for 7 years, except that in order to provide for staggered terms,
 the terms of the members initially appointed shall be for 3, 4, 5, 6, and
 7 years, respectively. In the case of a vacancy by death or resignation,
 the replacement shall be appointed for the remainder of the term. No
 individual may serve as a director of the board for more than 12 years.
 (c) FUNCTIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Insurance Standards Board shall make recommendations to
 the Board concerning the standards for AHPs (other than standards relating to
 the uniform set of effective benefits and the national health data system)
 and for HIPCs (including financial reporting requirements for HIPCs),
 and the treatment of uniform effective health benefits and expenses in
 excess of accountable health plan costs.
 (2) ASSESSMENTS- The Insurance Standards Board shall provide the Board
 with its assessment of--
 (A) the appropriateness of the premiums charged by AHPs;
 (B) the appropriateness of the Board's low-income and small business
 assistance program;
 (C) the appropriateness and need for risk-adjustment factors; and
 (D) the effectiveness of competition among AHPS and HIPCS.
 (3) MODEL LAWS AND REGULATIONS- The Insurance Standards Board, in close
 consultation with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners,
 shall develop model State laws and regulations--
 (A) to ensure the financial viability of AHPs; and
 (B) to resolve conflicts between AHPs and consumers in the delivery of
 the uniform set of effective benefits.
 (d) FUNDING- In order to provide funding for the Insurance Standards Board,
 the National Health Care Board shall establish an annual registration fee
 for AHPs which shall be imposed on a per-covered-individual-basis and which
 shall be sufficient, in the aggregate, to provide each year for not more
 than $15,000,000 for the operation of the Insurance Standards Board.
SEC. 205. MEDICARE TRANSITION BOARD.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- The Board shall provide for the initial organization, as a
 nonprofit corporation in the District of Columbia, of a Medicare Transition
 Board (hereafter referred to in this section as the `Transition Board'),
 under the direction of a board of directors consisting of 25 directors.
 (b) APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTORS-
 (1) NATIONAL HEALTH CARE BOARD- To ensure consistency with this Act,
 each of the 11 members of the National Health Care Board shall serve as
 members of the Transition Board.
 (2) APPOINTED MEMBERS- The Transition Board shall consist of 12 additional
 directors to be appointed as follows:
 (A) Two members shall be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.
 (B) Two members shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of
 Representatives.
 (C) Two members shall be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
 (D) Two members shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House
 of Representatives.
 (E) Four members shall be appointed by the President.
 (3) OTHER MEMBERS- The Transition Board shall also consist of the chairman of
 the Physician Payment Review Commission and the chairman of the Prospective
 Payment Assessment Commission.
 (4) TERMS AND CONDITIONS- The term of each member of the board of directors
 appointed under paragraph (2) shall be for 5 years. In the case of a
 vacancy by death or resignation, a replacement shall be appointed for
 the remainder of the term. Members appointed under paragraph (2) shall
 be representative of persons with an interest in the Medicare program
 and with appropriate backgrounds in providing, purchasing, or utilizing
 Medicare health care services.
 (c) FUNCTIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Transition Board shall study and, not later than 5
 years after the date of enactment of this Act, make recommendations to
 the Congress concerning--
 (A) the integration of the Medicare program with the health program
 established under this Act;
 (B) the integration of the Health Care Financing Administration and other
 existing Federal agencies with the health program established under this
 Act; and
 (C) other related matters with respect to the integration of Medicare with
 the health program established under this Act.
 (2) ASSESSMENTS- The Transition Board shall provide the Congress with
 its assessment of the appropriateness of integrating other existing,
 federally-sponsored health programs such as those provided to veterans and
 their dependents, military personnel and their dependents, Native Americans,
 and other similar programs.
 (d) FUNDING- In order to provide funding for the Transition Board, the
 National Health Care Board shall establish an annual registration fee for
 AHPs which shall be imposed on a per-covered individual-basis and which
 shall be sufficient, in the aggregate, to provide each year for not more
 than $15,000,000 for the operation of the Transition Board.
 (e) EFFECT OF TRANSITION BOARD RECOMMENDATIONS- Any recommendations made
 by the Transition Board pursuant to subsection (c) shall be considered
 an action by the National Health Care Board, shall be submitted to the
 Congress not later than 5 years after the date of the first meeting of the
 Transition Board, and shall have the force of law beginning 1 year after
 such submission, unless within 6 months of such submission, the Congress
 enacts a disapproval resolution pursuant to the provisions of section 209.
SEC. 206. REGISTRATION OF ACCOUNTABLE HEALTH PLANS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Board shall register those health plans that meet the
 standards under subtitle C.
 (b) DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY- If the Board determines that a State
 superintendent of insurance, State insurance commissioner, or other State
 official provides for the imposition of standards that are consistent with
 the standards established under subtitle C for registration of a health
 benefit plan as an AHP, the Board shall provide for registration as AHPs
 of health plans that such official certifies as meeting the standards
 for registration.
SEC. 207. SPECIFICATION OF RISK-ADJUSTMENT FACTORS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Board shall establish rules for the process of
 risk-adjustment of premiums among AHPs by HIPCs.
 (b) PROCESS-
 (1) IDENTIFICATION OF RELATIVE RISK- The Board shall determine factors
 that are prospectively correlated with increased or diminished risk for
 consumption of the type of health services included in the uniform set of
 effective benefits. To the maximum extent practicable, such factors shall
 be determined without regard to the methodology used by individual AHPs
 in the provision of such benefits.
 (2) ADJUSTMENT- Based the factors described in paragraph (1), the Board
 may provide for--
 (A) a reduction in payment for AHPs which are identified as having a
 relatively lower risk for consumption of services; and
 (B) an increase in payment for AHPs which are identified as having a
 relatively higher risk for consumption of services.
SEC. 208. NATIONAL HEALTH DATA SYSTEM.
 (a) STANDARDIZATION OF INFORMATION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall establish standards for the periodic
 reporting by AHPs of information on clinical health outcomes, functional
 status, well-being, plan satisfaction of enrolled individuals, health care
 expenditures, and volume and prices of procedures. Such information may
 include measures of the flexibility permitted by plans to enrollees in their
 selection of providers and means of providing satisfactory health services.
 (2) PATIENT CONFIDENTIALITY- The system shall be established in a manner that
 protects the confidentiality of individual enrollees, but may provide for the
 disclosure of information which discloses particular providers within an AHP.
 (b) ANALYSIS OF INFORMATION- The Board shall analyze the information reported
 under this section in order to distribute it in a form, consistent with
 subsection (a)(2), that--
 (1) reports, on a national, State, and community basis, the levels and
 trends of health care expenditures, the rates and trends in the provision
 of individual procedures, and the price level and rates of price change
 for such procedures; and
 (2) permits the direct comparison of different AHPs on the basis of the
 ability of the AHPs to maintain and improve clinical health, functional
 status, and well-being and to satisfy enrolled individuals.
The reports required under paragraph (1) shall include both aggregate and per
capita measures for areas and shall include comparative data of different
areas. The comparison under paragraph (2) may also be made to show changes
in the performance of AHPs over time.
 (c) DISTRIBUTION OF INFORMATION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall provide, through the HIPCs and directly
 to AHPs, for the distribution of its analysis on individual AHPs. Such
 distribution shall occur not less than annually prior to the general
 enrollment period.
 (2) PERIODIC REPORTS ON EXPENDITURES- The Board shall publish, not less
 often than annually, a report on expenditures on, and volumes and prices
 of, procedures. Such report shall be distributed to each AHP, each HIPC
 each Governor, each State legislature, and each chief executive elected
 official of each major urbanized area.
 (3) ANNUAL REPORTS- The Board shall also publish an annual report, based
 on analyses under this section, that identifies--
 (A) procedures for which, as reflected in variations in use or rates of
 increase, there appear to be the greatest need to develop valid clinical
 protocols for clinical decisionmaking and review;
 (B) procedures for which, as reflected in price variations and price
 inflation, there appear to be the greatest need for strengthening competitive
 purchasing; and
 (C) States and localities for which, as reflected in expenditure levels
 and rates of increase, there appear to be the greatest need for additional
 cost control measures.
 (4) SPECIAL DISTRIBUTIONS- The Board may, when it deems appropriate,
 provide for the distribution--
 (A) to an AHP of such information relating to the plan as may be appropriate
 in order to encourage the plan to improve its delivery of care; and
 (B) to business, consumer, and other groups and individuals of such
 information as may improve their ability to effect improvements in the
 outcomes, quality, and efficiency of health services.
SEC. 209. RULES GOVERNING CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION OF NATIONAL HEALTH
CARE BOARD ACTIONS.
 (a) EFFECT ON RULES OF HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES AND SENATE- This section
 is enacted by the Congress--
 (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the House of Representatives
 and the Senate, respectively, but applicable only with respect to
 the procedure to be followed in that House in the case of disapproval
 resolutions described in subsection (b), and supersedes other rules only
 to the extent that such rules are inconsistent therewith; and
 (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House
 to change the rules (so far as relating to the procedure of that House)
 at any time, in the same manner and to the same extent as in the case of
 any other rule of that House.
 (b) TERMS OF THE RESOLUTION- For purposes of this Act, the term `disapproval
 resolution' means only a joint resolution of the two Houses of the Congress,
 providing in--
 (1) the matter after the resolving clause of which is as follows: `That
 the Congress disapproves the action of the National Health Care Board as
 submitted by the Board on ------------', the blank space being filled in
 with the appropriate date; and
 (2) the title of which is as follows: `Joint Resolution disapproving the
 action of the National Health Care Board'.
 (c) INTRODUCTION AND REFERRAL- On the day on which the action of the Board
 is transmitted to the House of Representatives and the Senate, a disapproval
 resolution with respect to such action shall be introduced (by request)--
 (1) in the House of Representatives by the Majority Leader of the House,
 for himself and the Minority Leader of the House, or by Members of the
 House designated by the Majority Leader of the House, for himself and the
 Minority Leader of the House, or by Members of the House designated by
 the Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the House; and
 (2) in the Senate by the Majority Leader of the Senate, for himself and
 the Minority Leader of the Senate, or by Members of the Senate designated
 by the Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the Senate.
If either House is not in session on the day on which such an action is
transmitted, the disapproval resolution with respect to such action shall be
introduced in the House, as provided in the preceding sentence, on the first
day thereafter on which the House is in session. The disapproval resolution
introduced in the House of Representatives and the Senate shall be referred
to the appropriate committees of each House.
 (d) AMENDMENTS PROHIBITED- No amendment to a disapproval resolution
 shall be in order in either the House of Representatives or the Senate,
 and no motion to suspend the application of this subsection shall be in
 order in either House, nor shall it be in order in either House for the
 Presiding Officer to entertain a request to suspend the application of
 this subsection by unanimous consent.
 (e) PERIOD FOR COMMITTEE AND FLOOR CONSIDERATION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), if the committee
 or committees of either House to which a disapproval resolution has
 been referred have not reported it at the close of the 45th day after
 its introduction, such committee or committees shall be automatically
 discharged from further consideration of the disapproval resolution and
 it shall be placed on the appropriation calendar. A vote on final passage
 of the disapproval resolution shall be taken in each House on or before
 the close of the 45th day after the disapproval resolution is reported
 by the committees or committee of that House to which it was referred,
 or after such committee or committees have been discharged from further
 consideration of the disapproval resolution. If prior to the passage by
 one House of a disapproval resolution of that House, that House receives
 the same disapproval resolution from the other House then--
 (A) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if no disapproval
 resolution had been received from the other House; but
 (B) the vote on final passage shall be on the disapproval resolution of
 the other House.
 (2) COMPUTATION OF DAYS- For purposes of paragraph (1), in computing a
 number of days in either House, there shall be excluded any day on which
 the House is not in session.
 (f) FLOOR CONSIDERATION IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES-
 (1) MOTION TO PROCEED- A motion in the House of Representatives to proceed
 to the consideration of a disapproval resolution shall be highly privileged
 and not debatable. An amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor
 shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion
 is agreed to or disagreed to.
 (2) DEBATE- Debate in the House of Representatives on a disapproval
 resolution shall be limited to not more than 20 hours, which shall be
 divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the disapproval
 resolution. A motion further to limit debate shall not be debatable. It
 shall not be in order to move to recommit a disapproval resolution or to
 move to reconsider the vote by which a disapproval resolution is agreed
 to or disagreed to.
 (3) MOTION TO POSTPONE- Motions to postpone, made in the House of
 Representatives with respect to the consideration of a disapproval
 resolution, and motions to proceed to the consideration of other business,
 shall be decided without debate.
 (4) APPEALS- All appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the
 application of the Rules of the House of Representatives to the procedure
 relating to a disapproval resolution shall be decided without debate.
 (5) GENERAL RULES APPLY- Except to the extent specifically provided in the
 preceding provisions of this subsection, consideration of a disapproval
 resolution shall be governed by the Rules of the House of Representatives
 applicable to other bills and resolutions in similar circumstances.
 (g) FLOOR CONSIDERATION IN THE SENATE-
 (1) MOTION TO PROCEED- A motion in the Senate to proceed to the consideration
 of a disapproval resolution shall be privileged and not debatable. An
 amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor shall it be in order to
 move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
 (2) GENERAL DEBATE- Debate in the Senate on a disapproval resolution,
 and all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall
 be limited to not more than 20 hours. The time shall be equally divided
 between, and controlled by, the Majority Leader and the Minority Leader
 or their designees.
 (3) DEBATE OF MOTIONS AND APPEALS- Debate in the Senate on any debatable
 motion or appeal in connection with a disapproval resolution shall be limited
 to not more than 1 hour, to be equally divided between, and controlled by,
 the mover and the manager of the disapproval resolution, except that in the
 event the manager of the disapproval resolution is in favor of any such
 motion or appeal, the time in opposition thereto, shall be controlled by
 the Minority Leader or the designee of the Minority Leader. Such leaders,
 or either of them, may, from time under their control on the passage of
 a disapproval resolution, allot additional time to any Senator during the
 consideration of any debatable motion or appeal.
 (4) OTHER MOTIONS- A motion in the Senate to further limit debate is not
 debatable. A motion to recommit a disapproval resolution is not in order.
 (h) POINT OF ORDER REQUIRING SUPERMAJORITY FOR MODIFICATIONS TO ACTIONS
 ONCE APPROVED-
 (1) IN GENERAL- It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives
 or the Senate to consider any amendment to the actions of the National
 Health Care Board except as provided in paragraph (2).
 (2) WAIVER- The point of order described in paragraph (1) may be waived
 or suspended in the House of Representatives or the Senate only, by the
 affirmative vote of three-fifths of the Members duly chosen and sworn.
Subtitle B--Health Insurance Purchasing Cooperatives (HIPCs)
SEC. 210. ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION; HIPC AREAS.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of
 this Act, each State shall provide, by legislation or otherwise, for the
 establishment, as a not-for-profit corporation, of a health insurance
 purchasing cooperative, to implement a State coordinated buying program
 which shall--
 (1) be authorized and enforced under State law, executive order, or
 regulation as the sole mechanism through which an accountable health plan
 for all eligible individuals shall be purchased or provided in such State;
 (2) provide each eligible individual in the State with access to health
 insurance through one or more HIPC's qualified under this Act;
 (3) require that each HIPC participating in the State coordinated buying
 program meet the requirements of this Act with respect to reporting data
 to a Regional Data Collection Center and participating in the National
 Health Insurance Data System; and
 (4) meet such other criteria as reasonably required by the Secretary,
 the Board, the State Health Insurance Purchasing Cooperative Board, or
 mandated under this Act.
 (b) HEALTH INSURANCE PURCHASING COOPERATIVE-
 (1) REQUIREMENTS- To be a qualified HIPC an entity shall--
 (A) be a nonprofit entity established and regulated in accordance with
 State law in a manner that will ensure an economy of scale based on the
 State's geographic and demographic characteristics;
 (B) be designated by the State as the exclusive agent for purchasing,
 coordinating, and administering services among accountable health plans on
 behalf of eligible individuals within a defined geographic area (hereafter
 referred to in this section as a `district');
 (C) except as provided under paragraph (3), certify that it will not
 contract with any accountable health plans that do not meet the rules
 established under section 218 regarding the prohibition of discrimination
 based on health status for certain conditions and limitations on preexisting
 condition exclusions;
 (D) after the date that is 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act,
 certify that it will not contract with any accountable health plans that
 do not meet the uniform effective health benefits requirements established
 by the Board under title III;
 (E) biennially, hold an open enrollment period for all eligible persons
 covered by the HIPC health benefit plans;
 (F) require accountable health plans to use adjusted community ratings
 (as defined in section 219) to determine the standard premium for a covered
 individual; and
 (G) meet such other criteria as reasonably required by the State or the
 Secretary, or mandated under this Act.
 (c) BOARD OF DIRECTORS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Each HIPC shall be governed by a Board of Directors.
 (2) GOVERNING BOARD- A State shall establish a State Health Insurance
 Purchasing Cooperative governing board comprised of seven members, three
 of which shall be appointed by the Governor of the State and four of which
 shall be elected by participants of the HIPC within the State. The Governor
 of the State will serve as an ex officio member of the board.
 (3) TERMS- In establishing the board under paragraph (2), a State shall
 ensure that the terms of the members of the board are staggered.
 (4) RESPONSIBILITY- The board referred to under paragraph (2) shall be
 responsible for providing oversight over the functioning of all HIPC's
 within the State, including monitoring compliance of HIPC with State law,
 providing expertise to HIPC's, coordinating activities among districts,
 and resolving disputes arising in the implementation of this Act.
 (d) HIPC AREAS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of carrying out title, subject to paragraphs
 (2) and (3), each State shall be considered a HIPC area.
 (2) ALTERNATIVE INTRASTATE AREAS- Each State may provide for the division
 of the State into HIPC areas so long as all portions of each metropolitan
 statistical areas in a State are within the same HIPC area.
 (3) ALTERNATIVE INTERSTATE AREAS- One or more contiguous States may provide
 for the establishment of a HIPC area that includes adjoining portions of the
 States, provided that such area, if it includes any part of a metropolitan
 statistical area, includes all of such area, and the Congress has (by
 resolution) provided its consent to establishing such interstate HIPC area.
 (e) DUTIES OF HIPCS- Each HIPC shall--
 (1) enter into agreements with accountable health plans;
 (2) enter into agreements with employers (as provided for in section 506);
 (3) enroll individuals under accountable health plans;
 (4) receive and forward adjusted premiums, including payment of part of
 premiums for low-income individuals and individuals employed by small
 businesses and other assistance programs established by the Board;
 (5) provide for coordination with other HIPCs;
 (6) engage in education and outreach efforts to inform the public about
 the coordinated buying program;
 (7) solicit bids and negotiate with AHPs to make available health benefit
 plans through the coordinated buying program and one or more HIPC;
 (8) prepare and disseminate the documentation required by Federal agencies
 to certify participation in the coordinated buying program and one or more
 HIPCs; and
 (9) carry out other functions provided for under this title.
 (f) ACTIVITIES OF HIPCS- Within its district, each HIPC shall--
 (1) provide for the comprehensive purchasing of health insurance and
 services for all eligible individuals;
 (2) act as an agent for the eligible individuals and based on the
 recommendations of the Board in determining appropriate health benefit plans;
 (3) solicit bids from and contract with AHPs for specific health benefit
 plans, which shall include those uniform effective health benefits determined
 by the Board under title III, and, notwithstanding any other provision of
 Federal or State law--
 (A) hold confidential proprietary information upon which estimates on bids
 are derived; and
 (B) issue contracts only to those AHPs providing both cost effective and
 quality health benefits, plans, and services;
 (4) administer all aspects of health insurance coverage for eligible
 individuals, including routine health benefits, transitional continuation
 coverage benefits, relevant Federal health insurance earned income tax
 credits, and the collection of premiums paid under section 1906 of the
 Social Security Act;
 (5) inform eligible individuals about their benefits, rights, and
 responsibilities and eligible individuals to select benefits based on
 standardized plans that compete in cost and quality; and
 (6) in a timely fashion, report, as required by this Act, all relevant
 data, including health outcomes data, to the appropriate Regional Health
 Insurance Data Collection Center and the State Health Insurance Purchasing
 Cooperative Governing Board.
SEC. 211. AGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTABLE HEALTH PLANS.
 (a) AGREEMENTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Each HIPC for a State shall enter into an agreement under
 this section with each accountable health plan registered with the Board
 under subtitle C, that serves residents of the State. Each such agreement
 under this section, between an AHP and a HIPC shall include provisions
 consistent with the requirements of the succeeding subsections of this
 section (as specified by the Board). Except as provided in paragraph
 (2)(A), a HIPC may not refuse to enter into such an agreement with an AHP
 which is registered with the Board under subtitle C.
 (2) TERMINATION OF AGREEMENT- In accordance with regulations of the Board--
 (A) the HIPC may terminate an agreement referred to in paragraph (1) only
 if the AHP's registration under subtitle C is terminated or for other good
 cause shown; and
 (B) the AHP may terminate such an agreement only upon sufficient notice in
 order to provide for the orderly enrollment of enrollees under other AHPs.
The Board shall establish a process for the termination of agreements under
this paragraph.
 (b) OFFER OF ENROLLMENT OF INDIVIDUALS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Under an agreement under this section between an AHP and
 a HIPC, the HIPC shall offer, on behalf of the AHP, enrollment in the AHP
 to eligible individuals at the applicable monthly premium rates.
 (2) TIMING OF OFFER- The offer of enrollment shall be available--
 (A) to eligible individuals who are employees of small employers, during
 the 30-day period beginning on the date of commencement of employment; and
 (B) to other eligible individuals, at such time (including a biennial
 open enrollment period specified by the Board) as the HIPC shall specify,
 consistent with section.
 (3) PAYMENT OF PREMIUMS- The HIPC shall provide for payment of premiums on
 a monthly basis (or, at the option of an eligible individual described in
 paragraph (2)(B), on a quarterly basis). The HIPC may provide for penalties
 and grace periods for late payment.
 (c) RECEIPT OF GROSS PREMIUMS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Under an agreement under this section between a HIPC and
 an AHP, payment of premiums shall be made, by individuals or employers on
 their behalf, directly to the HIPC for the benefit of the AHP (or under
 such other arrangements as the HIPC may provide).
 (2) AHP RETAINS RISK OF NONPAYMENT- Nothing in this subsection shall
 be construed as placing upon a HIPC any risk associated with failure to
 make prompt payment of premiums (other than the portion of the premium
 representing the HIPC overhead amount). Each eligible individual enrolls
 with an AHP through the HIPC is liable to the AHP for premiums.
SEC. 212. ENROLLING INDIVIDUALS UNDER ACCOUNTABLE HEALTH PLANS THROUGH HIPC.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each HIPC shall offer in accordance with this section
 eligible individuals the opportunity to enroll in an AHP for the HIPC area
 in which the individual resides.
 (b) ENROLLMENT PROCESS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Each HIPC shall establish an enrollment process in accordance
 with rules established by the Board consistent with this subsection.
 (2) INITIAL ENROLLMENT PERIOD- Each eligible individual, at the time the
 individual first becomes an eligible individual in a HIPC area of a HIPC,
 shall have an initial enrollment period (of not less than 30 days) in
 which to enroll in an AHP.
 (3) GENERAL ENROLLMENT PERIOD- Each HIPC shall establish an annual period,
 of not less than 30 days, during which eligible individuals may enroll in
 an AHP or change the AHP in which the individual is enrolled.
 (4) SPECIAL ENROLLMENT PERIODS- In the case of individuals who--
 (A) through marriage, divorce, birth or adoption of a child, or similar
 circumstances, experience a change in family composition; or
 (B) experience a change in employment status (including a significant
 change in the terms and conditions of employment);
each HIPC shall provide for a special enrollment period in which the individual
is permitted to change the individual or family basis of coverage or the
AHP in which the individual is enrolled. The circumstances under which such
special enrollment periods are required and the duration of such periods
shall be specified by the Board.
 (5) TRANSITIONAL ENROLLMENT PERIOD- Each HIPC shall provide for a special
 transitional enrollment period (during a period specified by the Board)
 during which eligible individuals may first enroll.
 (c) DISTRIBUTION OF COMPARATIVE INFORMATION- Each HIPC shall distribute,
 to eligible individuals and employers, information, in comparative form,
 on the prices and outcomes of the different AHPs for which it is offering
 enrollment.
 (d) PERIOD OF COVERAGE-
 (1) INITIAL ENROLLMENT PERIOD- In the case of an eligible individual who
 enrolls with an AHP through a HIPC during an initial enrollment period,
 coverage under the plan shall begin on such date (not later than the
 first day of the first month that begins at least 15 days after the date
 of enrollment) as the Board shall specify.
 (2) GENERAL ENROLLMENT PERIODS- In the case of an eligible individual who
 enrolls with an AHP through a HIPC during a general enrollment period,
 coverage under the plan shall begin on the 1st day of the 1st month
 beginning at least 15 days after the end of such period.
 (3) SPECIAL ENROLLMENT PERIODS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- In the case of an eligible individual who enrolls with an
 AHP during a special enrollment period described in subsection (b)(4),
 coverage under the plan shall begin on such date (not later than the
 first day of the first month that begins at least 15 days after the date
 of enrollment) as the Board shall specify, except that coverage of family
 members shall begin as soon as possible on or after the date of the event
 that gives rise to the special enrollment period.
 (B) TRANSITIONAL SPECIAL ENROLLMENT PERIOD- In the case of an eligible
 individual who enrolls with an AHP during the transitional special enrollment
 period described in subsection (b)(5), coverage under the plan shall begin
 on such date as the Board shall specify.
 (3) CONTINUOUS COVERAGE- In specifying when coverage becomes effective
 under this subsection, the Board shall, consistent with the need to avoid
 significant adverse selection, seek to provide the greatest continuity of
 coverage under an AHP possible.
 (4) MINIMUM PERIOD OF ENROLLMENT- In order to avoid adverse selection, each
 HIPC may require, consistent with rules of the Board, that enrollments
 with AHPs be for not less than a specified minimum enrollment period
 (with exceptions permitted for such exceptional circumstances as the Board
 may recognize).
SEC. 213. RECEIPT OF PREMIUMS; FORWARDING OF ADJUSTED PREMIUMS.
 (a) ENROLLMENT CHARGE- The amount charged by a HIPC for coverage under an
 AHP in a HIPC area shall be equal to the sum of--
 (1) the standard premium rate established by the AHP under section 219
 for such coverage; and
 (2) the HIPC overhead amount established under subsection (b)(3) for
 enrollment of individuals in the HIPC area.
 (b) HIPC OVERHEAD AMOUNT-
 (1) HIPC BUDGET- Each HIPC shall establish a budget for each year for each
 HIPC area in accordance with regulations established by the Board.
 (2) HIPC OVERHEAD PERCENTAGE- The HIPC shall compute for each HIPC area
 an overhead percentage which, when applied to the standard premium amount
 for individual coverage for each enrollee unit, will provide for revenues
 equal to the budget for the HIPC area for the year. Such percentage may
 not exceed 5 percent.
 (3) HIPC OVERHEAD AMOUNT- The HIPC overhead amount for enrollment, whether
 on an individual or family basis, in an AHP for a HIPC area for a month is
 equal to the applicable HIPC overhead percentage (computed under paragraph
 (2)) multiplied by the standard premium amount for individual coverage
 under the AHP for the month.
 (4) ENROLLEE UNIT- As used in this subsection, the term `enrollee unit'
 means one unit in the case of coverage on an individual basis or in the
 case of coverage on a family basis.
 (c) FORWARDING OF ADJUSTED PREMIUMS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Under an agreement pursuant to section 211 between an
 AHP and a HIPC, the HIPC shall forward to each AHP in which an eligible
 individual family has been enrolled an amount equal to the product of--
 (A) the standard premium rate received for coverage of the individual or
 family; and
 (B) a risk-adjustment factor established by the Board under section 207
 that reflects the relative health risk of the individuals or family members
 enrolled through the HIPC with the AHP compared to the average risk assumed
 (under rules of the HIPC and Board) in quoting the standard premium rate
 in the HIPC area.
 (2) PAYMENTS- Payments shall be made by the HIPC under this subsection
 within a period (as specified by the Board and not to exceed 7 days)
 after receipt of the premium from the employer of the eligible individual
 or eligible individual, as the case may be.
 (d) FORWARDING PREMIUM INFORMATION TO BOARD- Each HIPC shall transmit to the
 Board quarterly and annual financial reports that include an accounting of
 premium receipts and other information as required pursuant to specifications
 established by the Board.
SEC. 214. COORDINATION AMONG HIPCS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Board shall establish rules consistent with this
 section for coordination among HIPCs in cases where under an agreement
 with a HIPC (pursuant to section 506) eligible individuals are enrolled
 by their employer and such employers are located in one State and their
 employees reside in a different State (and are eligible for enrollment
 with AHPs located in the other State).
 (b) COORDINATION RULES- Under the rules established under this section:
 (1) HIPC FOR EMPLOYER- The HIPC for the principal place of business of an
 employer shall be responsible--
 (A) for providing information to the employer's employees on AHPs for
 areas in which such employees reside;
 (B) for enrolling employees under the AHP selected (even if the AHP selected
 is not in the same State as the HIPC) and, if the AHP chosen is not in
 the same State as the HIPC, for forwarding the enrollment information to
 the HIPC for the State in which the AHP selected is located; and
 (C) for premiums paid through payroll deduction, to receive such premiums
 and forward them to the HIPC for the State which the AHP selected is located.
 (2) HIPC FOR EMPLOYEE RESIDENCE- The HIPC for the State in which an employee
 resides shall be responsible for providing other HIPCs with information
 concerning AHPs being offered in HIPC areas within the State.
Subtitle C--Accountable Health Plans (AHPs)
PART 1--REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCOUNTABLE HEALTH PLANS
SEC. 215. REGISTRATION PROCESS; QUALIFICATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Board shall provide a process whereby a health plan
 (as defined in section 227(c)(1)) may be registered with the Board by its
 sponsor as an accountable health plan.
 (b) QUALIFICATIONS- In order to be eligible to be registered under subsection
 (a), a plan must--
 (1) provide for coverage of the uniform set of effective benefits specified
 by the Board;
 (2) provide for the collection and reporting to the Board of certain
 information regarding its enrollees and provision of services;
 (3) not discriminate in enrollment or benefits;
 (4) establish standard premiums for the uniform set of effective benefits;
 (5) meet financial solvency requirements; and
 (6) provide for effective grievance procedures and restrict certain
 physician incentive plans.
SEC. 216. SPECIFIED UNIFORM SET OF EFFECTIVE BENEFITS.
 (a) BENEFITS- The Board shall not accept the registration of a health plan
 as an AHP unless, subject to subsection (b), the plan--
 (1) offers at least the uniform set of effective benefits, specified by
 Board under title III; and
 (2) provides for the imposition of uniform cost-sharing (such as deductibles
 and coinsurance), specified under such section as part of such set of
 benefits.
 (b) TREATMENT OF ADDITIONAL BENEFITS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (2), subsection (a) shall not be
 construed as preventing an AHP from offering benefits in addition to
 the uniform set of effective benefits or for reducing the cost-sharing
 below the uniform cost-sharing, if such additional benefits or reductions
 in cost-sharing are offered, and priced, separately from the benefits
 described in subsection (a).
 (2) NO DUPLICATIVE BENEFITS- An AHP may not offer under paragraph (1)
 any additional benefits that have the effect of providing benefits that
 are identical to those required under subsection (a)(1).
SEC. 217. COLLECTION AND PROVISION OF STANDARDIZED INFORMATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each AHP must provide the HIPC (at a time, not less
 frequently than annually, and in an electronic, standardized form and
 manner specified by the Board) such information as the Board determines
 to be necessary to evaluate the cost of the AHP and the performance of
 the AHP in meeting the clinical health requirements, functional needs,
 well-being, and personal satisfaction of its enrollees. Such information
 shall be supplied in a manner that does not identify individual enrollees,
 but may identify individuals providing particular health services.
 (b) INFORMATION TO BE INCLUDED- Information to be reported under subsection
 (a) shall include information on--
 (1) the clinical health and functional status of enrollees;
 (2) the characteristics of enrollees that may affect their need for or
 use of health services;
 (3) enrollee satisfaction, based on standard surveys prescribed by the
 Board; and
 (4) outcomes management systems and other continuous quality improvement
 mechanisms being used by the plan.
 (c) CONDITIONING CERTAIN PROVIDER PAYMENTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- In order to assure the collection of all information
 required from the direct providers of services for which benefits are
 available through an AHP, an AHP may not provide payment for services
 (other than emergency services) furnished by a provider to meet the uniform
 set of effective benefits unless the provider has given the AHP (or has
 directly to the Board) standard information (specified by the Board)
 respecting the services.
 (2) FORWARDING INFORMATION- If information under paragraph (1) is given to
 the AHP, the AHP is responsible for forwarding the information to the Board.
SEC. 218. PROHIBITION OF DISCRIMINATION BASED ON HEALTH STATUS FOR CERTAIN
CONDITIONS; LIMITATION ON PREEXISTING CONDITION EXCLUSION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided under subsection (b), an AHP may not
 deny, limit, or condition the coverage under (or benefits of) the plan
 based on the health status, claims experience, receipt of health care,
 medical history, or lack of evidence of insurability, of an individual.
 (b) TREATMENT OF PREEXISTING CONDITION EXCLUSIONS FOR SERVICES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this subsection,
 an AHP may exclude coverage with respect to services related to treatment
 of a preexisting condition, but the period of such exclusion may not exceed
 6 months. The exclusion of coverage shall not apply to services furnished
 to newborns and to pregnant women.
 (2) CREDITING OF PREVIOUS COVERAGE-
 (A) IN GENERAL- An AHP shall provide that if an enrollee is in a period of
 continuous coverage (as defined in subparagraph (B)(i)) as of the date of
 initial coverage under such plan, any period of exclusion of coverage with
 respect to a preexisting condition for such services or type of services
 shall be reduced by 1 month for each month in the period of continuous
 coverage.
 (B) DEFINITIONS- As used in this paragraph:
 (i) PERIOD OF CONTINUOUS COVERAGE- The term `period of continuous coverage'
 means the period beginning on the date an individual is enrolled under an
 AHP which provides benefits with respect to such services and ends on the
 date the individual is not so enrolled for a continuous period of more
 than 3 months.
 (ii) PREEXISTING CONDITION- The term `preexisting condition' means, with
 respect to coverage under an AHP, a condition which has been diagnosed or
 treated during the 3-month period ending on the day before the first date
 of such coverage (without regard to any waiting period).
 (3) LIMITATION- This subsection shall not apply to a treatment which is
 not within the uniform set of effective benefits.
SEC. 219. USE OF STANDARD PREMIUMS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each AHP shall establish standard premiums, for coverage on
 an individual basis and for coverage on a family basis, for the uniform
 set of effective benefits within each HIPC area in which the plan is
 offered. Within a HIPC area, the standard premium for such coverage on
 an individual basis and such coverage on a family basis shall be the same
 for all individuals and families who may be enrolled through the HIPC for
 the area.
 (b) METHODOLOGY- Each AHP shall, in determining its standard premium amount,
 use adjusted community ratings under which the only factors that may be
 applied are age, gender, and geography within a HIPC district. Risk factors
 established by the Board pursuant to section 207 shall not be applied in
 the determination of the standard premium amount. Standard premiums are
 subject to a risk adjustment factor in accordance with section 213(c).
SEC. 220. FINANCIAL SOLVENCY REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) SOLVENCY PROTECTION-
 (1) FOR INSURED PLANS- In the case of an AHP that is an insured plan (as
 defined by the Board) and is issued in a State, in order for the plan to
 be registered under this subtitle the Board must find that the State has
 established satisfactory protection of enrollees with respect to potential
 insolvency.
 (2) FOR OTHER PLANS- In the case of an AHP that is not an insured plan,
 the Board may require the plan to provide for such bond or provide other
 satisfactory assurances that enrollees under the plan are protected with
 respect to potential insolvency of the plan.
 (b) PROTECTION AGAINST PROVIDER CLAIMS- In the case of a failure of an
 AHP to make payments with respect to the uniform set of basic benefits,
 under standards established by the Board, an individual who is enrolled
 under the plan is not liable to any health care provider or practitioner
 with respect to the provision of health services within such uniform set
 for payments in excess of the amount for which the enrollee would have
 been liable if the plan were to have made payments in a timely manner.
SEC. 221. GRIEVANCE MECHANISMS; ENROLLEE PROTECTIONS.
 (a) EFFECTIVE GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES- Each AHP shall provide for effective
 procedures for hearing and resolving grievances between the plan and
 individuals enrolled under the plan.
 (b) RESTRICTION ON CERTAIN PHYSICIAN INCENTIVE PLANS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- A health plan may not be registered as an AHP if
 it operates a physician incentive plan (as defined in paragraph (2))
 unless the requirements specified in clauses (i) through (iii) of section
 1876(i)(8)(A) of the Social Security Act are met (in the same manner as
 they apply to eligible organizations under section 1876 of such Act).
 (2) PHYSICIAN INCENTIVE PLAN DEFINED- As used in this subsection, the
 term `physician incentive plan' means any compensation or other financial
 arrangement between the AHP and a physician or physician group that may
 directly or indirectly have the effect of reducing or limiting services
 provided with respect to individuals enrolled under the plan.
 (c) LIMITATION ON TERMINATION- Subject to subparagraph (d), coverage
 of eligible individuals under an AHP may not be refused nor terminated
 except for--
 (A) nonpayment of premiums;
 (B) fraud or misrepresentation; and
 (C) termination of the plan at the end of a year (after notice and in
 accordance with standards established by the Board).
 (d) TREATMENT OF HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS-
 (1) GEOGRAPHIC LIMITATIONS- Subject to paragraph (3), an AHP which is
 a health maintenance organization (as defined in paragraph (4)) may
 deny coverage under the plan to an eligible individual who is located
 outside the service areas of the organization, but only if such denial
 is applied uniformly, without regard to health status or insurability of
 the individuals.
 (2) SIZE LIMITS- Subject to paragraph (3), a health maintenance organization
 may apply to the Board to cease enrolling eligible individuals under an AHP
 (or in a geographic area served by the organization) if--
 (A) it ceases to enroll any new eligible individuals; and
 (B) it can demonstrate that its financial or administrative capacity to
 serve previously covered groups or individuals (and additional individuals
 who will be expected to enroll because of affiliation with such previously
 covered groups or individuals) will be impaired if it is required to enroll
 other eligible individuals.
 (3) FIRST-COME-FIRST-SERVED- A health maintenance organization is only
 eligible for the benefits of paragraphs (1) and (2) if it provides for
 enrollment of eligible individuals on a first-come-first-served basis.
 (4) HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION- As used in this paragraph, the term
 `health maintenance organization' means an eligible organization (as
 defined in section 1876(b) of the Social Security Act) and includes a
 similar organization, specified in regulations of the Board, as requiring
 a limitation on enrollment of employer groups or individuals due to the
 manner in which the organization provides health care services.
SEC. 222. COORDINATION OF BENEFITS WITH LOW-INCOME AND SMALL BUSINESS
ASSISTANCE.
 Each AHP shall provide for--
 (1) the acceptance of information, electronically, from the Board on the
 eligibility of individuals (and family members) for low-income and small
 business assistance; and
 (2) a reduction in the premium or cost-sharing amounts otherwise imposed
 to reflect the premium and cost-sharing or other assistance provided under
 section 201 of this Act.
PART 2--PREEMPTION FROM STATE LAWS FOR ACCOUNTABLE HEALTH PLANS
SEC. 223. PREEMPTION FROM STATE BENEFIT MANDATES.
 Effective 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, no State shall
 establish or enforce any law or regulation that--
 (1) requires the offering as part of an AHP of any services, category or
 care, or services of any class or type of provider that is different from
 the uniform set of effective benefits;
 (2) specifies the individuals to be covered under an AHP or the duration
 of such coverage; or
 (3) requires a right of conversion from an AHP to an individual health plan.
SEC. 224. PREEMPTION OF STATE LAW RESTRICTION ON NETWORK PLANS.
 (a) LIMITATION ON RESTRICTIONS ON NETWORK PLANS- Effective 1 year after
 the date of enactment of this Act, no State shall establish or enforce any
 law or regulation that prohibits or unreasonably limits any of the following:
 (1) A State may not by law or regulation prohibit or unreasonably limit a
 network plan from including incentives for enrollees to use the services
 of participating providers.
 (2) A State may not prohibit or unreasonably limit a network plan from
 limiting coverage of services to those provided by a participating provider.
 (3)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), a State may not prohibit or unreasonably
 limit the negotiation of rates and forms of payments for providers under
 a network plan.
 (B) Subparagraph (A) shall not apply where the amount of payments with
 respect to a category of services or providers is established under a
 state-wide system applicable to all non-Federal payors with respect to
 such services or providers.
 (4) A State may not prohibit or unreasonably limit a network plan from
 limiting the number of participating providers.
 (5) A State may not prohibit or unreasonably limit a network plan from
 requiring that services be provided (or authorized) by a primary care
 physician selected by the enrollee from a list of available participating
 providers.
 (b) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section:
 (1) NETWORK PLAN- The term `network plan' means an AHP--
 (A) which--
 (i) limits coverage of the uniform set of basic benefits to those provided
 by participating providers; or
 (ii) permits deductibles and coinsurance with respect to such services
 provided by persons who are not participating providers which are in excess
 of those permitted under the uniform set of basic benefits;
 (B) which a sufficient number and distribution of participating providers
 to assure that the uniform set of basic benefits is--
 (i) available and accessible to each enrollee, within the area served
 by the plan, with reasonable promptness and in a manner which assures
 continuity; and
 (ii) when medically necessary, available and accessible 24 hours a day
 and seven days a week; and
 (C) which provides benefits for the uniform set of basic benefits not
 furnished by participating providers if the services are medically
 necessary and immediately required because of an unforeseen illness,
 injury, or condition.
 (2) PARTICIPATING PROVIDER- The term `participating provider' means an
 entity or individual which provides, sells, or leases health care services
 under a contract with a network plan, which contract does not permit--
 (A) cost-sharing in excess of the cost-sharing permitted under the uniform
 set of basic benefits with respect to basic benefits; and
 (B) any enrollee charges (for such services covered under such set) in
 excess of such cost-sharing.
SEC. 225. PREEMPTION OF STATE LAWS RESTRICTING UTILIZATION REVIEW PROGRAMS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- No State law or regulation shall prohibit or regulate
 activities under a utilization review program (as defined in subsection (b)).
 (b) UTILIZATION REVIEW PROGRAM DEFINED- As used in this section, the term
 `utilization review program' means a system of reviewing the medical
 necessity and appropriateness of patient services (which may include
 inpatient and outpatient services) using specified guidelines. Such a
 system may include preadmission certification, the application of practice
 guidelines, continued stay review, discharge planning, preauthorization
 of ambulatory procedures, and retrospective review.
Subtitle D--Treatment of Areas of Ineffective Competition
SEC. 226. REGULATION IN AREAS OF INEFFECTIVE COMPETITION.
 If the Board determines that there ineffective price competition in the
 provision of health services included within the uniform set of effective
 benefits in an area of the State, the Board shall authorize the State HIPC
 to establish reimbursement benchmarks derived from appropriate measures
 in competitive areas to be used in the determination of capitation rates
 allowed to be charged by providers of such services in the area until the
 Board finds that effective price competition with respect to such services
 is likely.
Subtitle E--Definitions
SEC. 227. DEFINITIONS.
 (a) ELIGIBILITY- As used in this Act and unless specifically provided
 otherwise:
 (1) ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEE- The term `eligible employee' means, with respect
 to a HIPC area, an individual residing in the area who is the employee of
 an employer with an agreement under section 506 to enroll individuals or
 to pay premiums.
 (2) ELIGIBLE FAMILY MEMBER- The term `eligible family member' means,
 with respect to an eligible employee or other principal enrollee, an
 individual who--
 (A)(i) is the spouse of the employee or principal enrollee; or
 (ii) is an unmarried dependent child under 22 years of age, including--
 (I) an adopted child or recognized natural child; and
 (II) a stepchild or foster child but only if the child lives with the
 employee or principal enrollee in a regular parent-child relationship,
 or such an unmarried dependent child regardless of age who is incapable
 of self-support because of mental or physical disability which existed
 before age 22;
 (B) is a citizen or national of the United States, an alien lawfully admitted
 to the United States for permanent residence, or an alien otherwise lawfully
 residing permanently in the United States under color of law;
 (C) is not a medicare beneficiary; and
 (D) is not a full-time employee of a large employer.
 (3) ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL- The term `eligible individual means, with respect
 to a HIPC area, an individual, who--
 (A) is an eligible employee;
 (B) is an eligible resident; or
 (C) an eligible family member or an eligible employee or eligible resident.
 (4) ELIGIBLE RESIDENT- The term `eligible resident' means, with respect to
 an HIPC area, an individual who is residing in the area and is a citizen,
 or national of the United States, an alien lawfully admitted for permanent
 residence, and an alien otherwise permanently residing in the United States
 under color of law.
 (b) ABBREVIATIONS- As used in this Act and unless specifically provided
 otherwise:
 (1) AHP; ACCOUNTABLE HEALTH PLAN- The terms `accountable health plan' and
 `AHP' mean an accountable health plan meet the standards established under
 subtitle C.
 (2) BOARD- The term `Board' means the National Health Care Board established
 under subtitle A.
 (3) HIPC; HEALTH INSURANCE PURCHASING COOPERATIVE- The terms `health
 insurance purchasing cooperative' and `HIPC' mean a health insurance
 purchasing cooperative established under subtitle B.
 (c) OTHER TERMS- As used in this Act and unless specifically provided
 otherwise:
 (1) HEALTH PLAN- The term `health plan' means a plan that provides health
 benefits, whether directly, through insurance, or otherwise (including
 self-insurance), and includes a policy of health insurance, a contract of
 a service benefit organization, or a membership agreement with a health
 maintenance organization or other prepaid health plan, and also includes an
 employee welfare benefit plan or a multiple employer welfare plan (as such
 terms are defined in section 3 of the Employee Retirement Income Security
 Act of 1974).
 (2) HIPC STANDARD PREMIUM AMOUNT- The term `HIPC standard premium amount'
 means, with respect to an AHP offered by a HIPC, the sum of--
 (A) the standard premium amount established by the AHP; and
 (B) the HIPC overhead amount.
 (3) SMALL EMPLOYER- The term `small employer' means an employer that
 normally employs fewer than 25 employees during a typical business day in
 the previous year.
 (4) STATE- The term `State' means the 50 States and includes the District
 of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and
 the Northern Mariana Islands.
 (5) TYPE OF ENROLLMENT- The term `type of enrollment' means enrollment in
 an AHP under which--
 (A) coverage extends only to an individual (referred to in this title as
 enrollment `on an individual basis'); and
 (B) coverage extends to an individual and the eligible family members
 (referred to in this title as enrollment `on a family basis').
 (6) UNIFORM SET OF EFFECTIVE BENEFITS- The term `uniform set of effective
 benefits' means, with respect to a year, such set of benefits as specified
 by the Board under title III.
TITLE III--UNIFORM EFFECTIVE HEALTH BENEFITS
SEC. 301. SPECIFICATION OF UNIFORM EFFECTIVE BENEFITS.
 (a) SPECIFICATIONS OF UNIFORM SET OF EFFECTIVE BENEFITS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Not later than March 31 of each fiscal year, the Board
 shall specify the uniform set of effective benefits for the next fiscal
 year to apply in all States under this title for such year.
 (2) SPECIFICATIONS BY HEALTH CARE CONDITION- The uniform set of effective
 benefits shall include the full range of legally authorized treatments
 for conditions, but may exclude benefits for services and items that
 the Board determines, based on clinical information, have not been shown
 reasonably to improve health condition or significantly ameliorate a health
 condition. Except as specifically excluded, the actual specific treatments,
 procedures, and care (such as the use of particular providers or services)
 which may be used under a plan or be used with respect to health conditions
 shall be left up to the plan.
 (3) DEDUCTIBLES AND COINSURANCE- The uniform set of effective benefits
 shall include deductibles and cost-sharing associated with such benefits.
 (b) BASIS FOR BENEFITS- In establishing the uniform set of effective
 benefits, the Board shall judge medical treatments, procedures, and related
 health services based on--
 (1) their effectiveness in improving the health status of individuals; and
 (2) their long-term impact on maintaining and improving health and
 productivity and on reducing the consumption of health care services.
 (c) BASIS FOR COST-SHARING- In establishing cost-sharing that is part of
 the uniform set of effective benefits, the Board shall--
 (1) include only such cost-sharing as will restrain consumers from seeking
 unnecessary services and as will not inhibit consumers from seeking
 appropriate preventive services; and
 (2) balance the effect of the cost-sharing in reducing premiums and in
 affecting utilization of appropriate services.
SEC. 302. COVERED HEALTH CARE SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- In specifying uniform effective benefits, the Board shall
 provide that every eligible individual is entitled to have payment made
 for the uniform set of effective health care services covered under this Act.
 (b) SPECIFIC SERVICES- Subject to limitations described in section 301,
 in specifying the health care services covered under such uniform effective
 health care services the Board shall provide the most comprehensive level
 of services feasible (as can be provided under the budget determined under
 section 501(a)(1)) and may include--
 (1) inpatient and outpatient hospital care, except that treatment for a
 mental disorder is subject to the special limitations described in paragraph
 (6)(A);
 (2) inpatient and outpatient physician services; except that psychotherapy
 or counseling for a mental disorder is subject to the special limitations
 described in paragraph (6)(B);
 (3) diagnostic tests;
 (4) prenatal care and well-baby care provided to children who are 1 year
 of age or younger;
 (5) preventive and early intervention services, including--
 (A) well child care;
 (B) pap smears; and
 (C) mammograms; and
 (6)(A) inpatient hospital care for a mental disorder for not less than 45
 days per year, except that days of partial hospitalization, residential
 care, or outpatient treatment may be substituted for days of inpatient
 care according to a ratio established by the Board; and
 (B) outpatient psychotherapy and counseling for a mental disorder for not
 less than 20 visits per year provided by a provider who is acting within
 the scope of State law and who--
 (i) is a physician; or
 (ii) meets the standards of subsection (e)(2)(B) and is a duly licensed or
 certified clinical psychologist or a duly licensed or certified clinical
 social worker, a duly licensed or certified equivalent mental health
 professional, or a clinic or center providing duly licensed or certified
 mental health services.
 (c) EXCEPTIONS- Subsection (b) shall not be construed as requiring the
 Board to specify that a plan include payment for--
 (1) items and services that are not medically necessary; or
 (2) experimental services and procedures, except that the Board may include
 coverage of routine medical costs associated with peer-reviewed and approved
 protocols conducted in connection with peer-reviewed and approved research
 programs, pursuant to standards established by the Board.
 (d) AMOUNT, SCOPE, AND DURATION OF CERTAIN BENEFITS- Except as provided
 in section 301 and 302, a health benefit plan shall place no limits on
 the amount, scope, or duration of benefits described in this section.
 (e) LIMITATIONS-
 (1) PANELS AND MANAGED CARE SYSTEMS- Nothing in this section, State law,
 or this Act shall prohibit a health benefit plan from providing benefits
 for the items and services described in this section through a managed
 care system, and from selecting particular health care providers or types,
 classes, or categories of health care providers to participate in such
 managed care system. Such managed care system shall provide reasonable
 access, as defined by the Board, to care by plan enrollees.
 (2) DIFFERENT LEVELS OF PAYMENTS- Nothing in this section, State law, or
 this Act shall prohibit a health benefit plan from establishing a different
 level of payments for reimbursement for different health care providers
 furnishing the benefits for the items and services described in this section.
 (3) DENIAL OF PAYMENT TO EXCLUDE PROVIDERS- Nothing in this section, State
 law, or this Act shall require a health benefit plan to make payment to
 any health care provider that is excluded from participation in any Federal
 health care program.
 (f) MENTAL HEALTH CARE-
 (1) INPATIENT CARE- Subject to the provisions of subsection (d), inpatient
 hospital care described in subsection (b)(6)(A) shall include reimbursement
 for professional care provided to the individual while the individual is
 receiving such inpatient care, by a physician or duly licensed or certified
 clinical psychologist operating within the scope of practice of the physician
 or psychologist, as determined appropriate under State law. Nothing in this
 subsection shall be construed to modify hospital practices with regard to
 scope of practice, admitting privileges, or billing arrangements.
 (2) OUTPATIENT CARE-
 (A) USE OF PROVIDERS- Subject to the provisions of subsection (d), a
 health benefit plan that provided benefits with respect to outpatient
 psychotherapy described in subsection (b)(6)(B) prior to the date of
 enactment of this Act, shall not be required under such subsection to
 provide benefits for outpatient psychotherapy provided by any health care
 provider (or type, class, or category of health care provider) described in
 subsection (b)(6)(B)(ii), other than duly licensed or certified clinical
 psychologists and health care providers being used by the plan prior to
 the date of enactment of this Act.
 (B) STANDARDS FOR CERTAIN PROVIDERS- The Board shall establish standards
 that providers referred to in subsection (b)(6)(B)(ii) must meet to be
 eligible for payment under a health benefit plan and such standards shall
 require that such providers have training and education equivalent to a
 licensed clinical social worker (as defined in title XVIII of the Social
 Security Act).
 (g) EXEMPTION FROM HMO REQUIREMENTS- Section 1301 of the Public Health
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300e) is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new subsection:
 `(d) The provisions of this title relating to health services offered by
 a health maintenance organization shall not apply with respect to those
 health maintenance organizations that provide services that meet the
 requirements for health insurance plans offered through Health Insurance
 Purchasing Cooperatives.'.
TITLE IV--APPLICATION OF ANTITRUST LAWS
SEC. 401. PURPOSE.
 The purpose of this title is to encourage cooperation among hospitals in
 order to contain costs and achieve a more efficient health care delivery
 system through the elimination of unnecessary duplication and proliferation
 of expensive medical services or expensive high technology equipment.
SEC. 402. EXEMPTIONS FROM THE OPERATION OF THE ANTITRUST LAWS.
 (a) GENERAL EXEMPTION- It shall not be unlawful under the antitrust laws
 for two or more hospitals to engage in conduct solely for the purpose of
 negotiating a proposed agreement, to be submitted under subsection (b),
 to share expensive medical services or expensive high technology equipment.
 (b) SPECIFIC EXEMPTIONS-
 (1) AUTHORITY TO GRANT WAIVER- The Board shall issue waivers in accordance
 with paragraph (4) to exempt from the operation of antitrust laws conduct
 engaged in by hospitals to carry out agreements contained in applications
 approved under paragraph (3).
 (2) ELIGIBILITY- To be eligible to receive a waiver under paragraph
 (1), two or more hospitals shall submit to the Board an application (in
 accordance with guidelines established by the Board) that contains--
 (A) a proposed agreement that only--
 (i) provides that such hospitals shall share the expensive medical services
 or expensive high technology equipment identified in such agreement;
 (ii) specifies the period of time during which such agreement shall be
 in effect;
 (iii) describes the particular medical services or high technology equipment
 to be shared under such agreement; and
 (iv) contains such other terms and conditions as the Board may reasonably
 require; and
 (B) such information and assurances as the Board may reasonably require.
 (3) APPROVAL- For purposes of determining whether to approve an application
 submitted under paragraph (2), the Board shall consider whether--
 (A) the proposed agreement contained in such application satisfies the
 guidelines issued under paragraph (6); and
 (B) implementation of such agreement will result in--
 (i) enhancement of the quality of hospital care or hospital-related care;
 (ii) the preservation of hospital services in geographical proximity to
 the communities traditionally served by the applicants;
 (iii) improvement in the cost-effectiveness of high-technology services
 provided by the applicants;
 (iv) improvement in the efficient utilization of hospital resources and
 capital equipment;
 (v) the provision of services that would not otherwise be available; or
 (vi) the avoidance of duplication of hospital resources.
 (4) ISSUANCE AND EFFECT OF WAIVER- If--
 (A) the Board approves under paragraph (3) an application submitted under
 paragraph (2); and
 (B) the applicants enter into the proposed agreement contained in such
 application, modified as the Board may require as a condition for approval;
then the Board shall issue a waiver with respect to the agreement entered
into. Except as provided in paragraph (5), such waiver shall exempt
the applicants from the operation of the antitrust laws for conduct the
applicants engage in during the period specified in such waiver and solely
to carry out the agreement with respect to which such waiver is issued.
 (5) REVOCATION OF WAIVER-
 (A) IN GENERAL- If the Board determines that a hospital with respect to
 which a waiver is in effect under paragraph (4) is not carrying out, or
 has not carried out, fully the terms of the agreement with respect to which
 a waiver is issued under paragraph (4), the Board may revoke such waiver.
 (B) PROCEDURE- If the Board revokes a waiver issued under paragraph (4)--
 (i) the Board shall specify the period during which such hospital did not
 carry out fully the terms of such agreement; and
 (ii) such waiver shall have no legal effect with respect to such period.
 (6) ISSUANCE OF GUIDELINES- Not later than 6 months after the date of
 the enactment of this Act, the Board shall establish the guidelines for
 applications under paragraph (2).
SEC. 403. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this title:
 (1) ANTITRUST LAWS- The term `antitrust laws' has the meaning given such term
 in subsection (a) of the first section of the Clayton Act (15 U.S.C. 12(a)),
 except that such term includes--
 (A) section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45) to the
 extent such section applies to unfair methods of competition; and
 (B) any State law similar to the antitrust laws.
 (2) HIGH TECHNOLOGY EQUIPMENT- The term `high technology equipment' includes
 drugs, devices, equipment, and medical and surgical procedures utilized
 in medical care, and the organizational and support systems within which
 such care is provided, that--
 (A) have high capital costs or extremely high annual operating costs; and
 (B) use technologies with respect to which there is a reasonable expectation
 that shared ownership will avoid a significant degree of the potential
 excess capacity of service in the geographical area to be served.
 (3) HOSPITAL- The term `hospital' means a hospital that--
 (A) has entered into, and has in effect, a participation agreement under
 section 1866(a) of the Social Security Act; or
 (B) which has in effect a participation agreement under title XIX of such
 Act with the State in which the hospital is located.
 (4) MEDICAL SERVICES- The term `medical services' includes services that--
 (A) either have high capital costs or extremely high annual operating
 costs; and
 (B) with respect to which there is a reasonable expectation that shared
 ownership will avoid a significant degree of the potential excess capacity
 of such services in the geographical area to be served, and may include
 mobile services.
TITLE V--COST CONTROL AND FINANCING
Subtitle A--Health Budgets
SEC. 501. NATIONAL HEALTH BUDGET.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) ANNUAL BUDGETS- Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Board shall
 establish an annual fiscal year budget of expenditures not later than March
 31. The Board shall estimate the total expenditures to be made in such fiscal
 year by HIPCs in each of the States for health care services covered under
 this Act (as provided in section 503), including the administrative costs
 associated with such services. The Board shall also estimate available
 funding as provided in section 504.
 (2) BIENNIAL BUDGETS- The Board may establish biennial fiscal year budgets
 in lieu of annual budgets.
 (b) NATIONAL AVERAGE PER CAPITA COSTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall compute the national average per capita cost
 for each of the health care services included in estimating expenditures
 in subsection (a) using data the Board deems to be appropriate. In making
 these determinations, the Board shall rely (to the extent feasible) upon
 the standardized information provided by AHPs under section 217.
 (2) ADJUSTMENTS FOR RISK GROUPS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- As provided under section 207 the Board shall develop and may
 apply an adjustment factor to the national average per capita costs computed
 under paragraph (1) for each risk group (as designated under subparagraph
 (B)) to reflect the national average per capita costs for that risk group.
 (B) RISK GROUPS- The Board shall designate a series of risk groups,
 determined by age, sex, and other factors that represent distinct patterns
 of health care services prospective utilization and costs.
 (3) STATE ADJUSTMENTS TO NATIONAL AVERAGE PER CAPITA COSTS- The Board
 shall develop for each State HIPC a factor to adjust the national average
 per capita costs for each risk group to reflect--
 (A) average labor and nonlabor costs that are necessary to produce the
 services described in subsection (a);
 (B) any special social, environmental, epidemiological, or other condition
 affecting health status or the need for health care services and long-term
 care services;
 (C) the geographic distribution of the State's population, particularly
 the proportion of the population residing in rural or medically underserved
 areas;
 (D) the quality and availability of the State's existing health care
 resources needed for delivering health care services; and
 (E) any other economic, geographic, and sociologic factors that the Board
 determines are appropriate.
 (c) STATE TOTAL EXPENDITURES- The Board shall compute for each State HIPC
 total projected expenditures (based upon data provided by each State under
 section 503) in the next fiscal year for each of the services described
 in subsection (a). If the Board elects to employ risk adjustment factors
 this computation shall be made by multiplying--
 (1) the national average per capita costs of each risk group designated
 in subsection (b)(2)(B); by
 (2) the product of the State adjustment factors described in subsection
 (b)(3) and the number of persons in the State estimated by the Bureau of
 the Census or the Board to be resident members of each risk group at the
 beginning of the next fiscal year.
 (d) FEDERAL CONTRIBUTIONS- The Board shall determine the appropriate Federal
 contribution for each State, constituting the Federal percentage share of
 each State's total projected expenditures for the services described in
 subsection (a). Federal contributions will vary as a function of the ability
 of the State to finance total expenditures for health care services. The
 Board shall determine an average Federal contribution amount equal to 70
 percent of State expenditures, except that in no case shall the Federal
 contribution for a State be less than 50 percent of the total budget cost
 for State expenditures, nor exceed 85 percent of that amount.
 (e) SUBSEQUENT CALCULATIONS- For each subsequent fiscal year, the Board
 shall make recomputations under subsections (a), (b), (c), and (d). In
 making such a recomputation, the Board shall take into account--
 (1) changes in medical technology, outcomes research evidence concerning
 the efficacy and safety of health care services, needs for health personnel,
 professional practice guidelines, and changing health care priorities; and
 (2) changes in the services described in subsection (a) under regulations
 promulgated by the Board and accepted by the Congress.
 (f) EFFECT OF BOARD ACTIONS- Any determination made by the Board under this
 section with respect to any fiscal year shall be submitted to the Congress
 not later than March 31, and shall have the force of law, unless within
 60 days of the submission of such determination, the Congress enacts a
 disapproval resolution pursuant to the provisions of section 209 of this Act.
 (g) ANNUAL REPORT OF THE BOARD- The Board shall issue a report annually
 to the Congress with respect to its duties and responsibilities under
 this title.
SEC. 502. PAYMENTS TO STATES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- For each fiscal year, each State with a State HIPC program
 approved under this Act, is entitled to receive from amounts in the National
 Health Care Trust Fund, a Federal contribution in an amount equal to the
 product of--
 (1) the Federal share for such State; and
 (2) such State's total projected expenditures.
 (b) USE OF DEDICATED FUNDS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- All revenues, including the Federal contribution and State
 funds provided to finance a State HIPC program under this Act shall be
 allocated to a dedicated fund specified by the State. Payments for health
 care services of accountable health plans covered under this Act shall be
 made from such fund.
 (2) SPECIAL ACCOUNTS- Each State may establish within its designated fund
 such special accounts as determined to be necessary by the State HIPC Board,
 the amount of funding deposited in each to be determined by the State.
SEC. 503. STATE PROGRAM BUDGETS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State shall establish an annual fiscal year State
 HIPC program budget which provides for--
 (1) the total expenditures to be made under the State HIPC program in such
 fiscal year for health care services covered under this Act (including
 administrative and associated costs); and
 (2) the funding to meet such expenditures.
 (b) COORDINATION- Each State HIPC program budget shall be coordinated, in a
 manner specified by the Board, with the national health budget established
 under section 501(a).
 (c) STATE SHARE-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Each State HIPC program shall cover the State share of
 program costs through the use of premiums specified under title II, and
 other financing methods permitted under section 508.
 (2) ADDITIONS TO STATE SHARE- Each State shall raise the revenues necessary
 to cover at least the State share specified in the national health budget
 established by the Board (as computed under section 501). Each State
 is permitted to raise additional funding and to increase such State's
 health program expenditures beyond the amount specified in the State share
 specified for the national health budget--
 (A) to cover the costs of benefits for health care services the State
 program authorizes in addition to the services covered in this Act or as
 amended by the Board and the Congress;
 (B) to provide for increased global operating, capital, or health training
 budgets for hospitals and other health care institutions;
 (C) to provide for any unexpected increase in health care costs identified
 by the State program; and
 (D) for any other purposes that may be identified by the Board.
 (d) BARRIERS TO ACCESS PROHIBITED- No State, either by intention or as
 an unstated consequence of budget allocations, may restrict or cause to
 be restricted timely access to the medically necessary and appropriate
 health care services covered under this Act, or permit queues for services
 to form that have the potential of being life threatening.
 (e) ANNUAL PUBLICATION- The State HIPC program shall provide for the
 publication annually of the most recent State program budget established
 under this section.
Subtitle B--Funding
SEC. 504. FEDERAL SOURCES OF FUNDING.
 The Board shall develop a mechanism for determining and collecting revenues
 to fund Federal contributions, which shall be approved or disapproved by
 the two Houses of Congress pursuant to section 209 of this Act.
SEC. 505. TREATMENT OF EMPLOYER HEALTH PLAN EXPENSES IN EXCESS OF ACCOUNTABLE
HEALTH PLAN COSTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act (42
 U.S.C. 300aaa et seq.) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new section:
`SEC. 2715. PENALTY ON EMPLOYER HEALTH PLAN EXPENSES IN EXCESS OF ACCOUNTABLE
HEALTH PLAN COSTS.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- There is hereby imposed on any employer a civil penalty
 equal to 34 percent of the excess health plan expenses of certain employers.
 `(b) EXCESS HEALTH PLAN EXPENSES-
 `(1) DEFINITION- For purposes of this section, the term `excess health plan
 expenses' means the health plan expenses paid or incurred by an employer
 for any month with respect to any covered individual to the extent such
 expenses do not meet the requirements of paragraphs (2), (3), and (4).
 `(2) LIMIT TO ACCOUNTABLE HEALTH PLANS- Health plan expenses meet the
 requirements of this paragraph only if the expenses are attributable to--
 `(A) coverage of the covered individual under an accountable health plan; or
 `(B) payment to a health insurance purchasing cooperative for coverage
 under an accountable health plan.
 `(3) LIMIT ON PER EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTION-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Health plan expenses with respect to any employee meet
 the requirements of this paragraph for any month only to the extent that
 the amount of such expenses does not exceed the lowest premium established
 by an accountable health plan offered in the Health Insurance Purchasing
 Cooperative area in which the employee resides for such month for the type
 of enrollment and applicable to such employee.
 `(B) TREATMENT OF HEALTH PLANS OUTSIDE THE UNITED STATES- In the case of an
 employee residing outside the United States, there shall be substituted for
 the lowest premium such reasonable amounts as the National Health Care Board
 determines to be comparable to the limit imposed under subparagraph (A).
 `(4) REQUIREMENT OF LEVEL CONTRIBUTION- Health plan expenses meet the
 requirements of this paragraph for any month only if the amount of the
 employer contribution (for a type of enrollment) does not vary based on
 the accountable health plan selected.
 `(5) DEFINITION OF HEALTH PLAN EXPENSES- For purposes of this section:
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `health plan expenses' means employer expenses for
 any expenses for any health plan, including expenses for premiums as well
 as payment of deductibles and coinsurance that would otherwise be applicable.
 `(B) EXCLUSION OF CERTAIN DIRECT EXPENSES- Such term does not include
 expenses for direct services which are determined by the National Health
 Care Board to be primarily aimed at work-place health care and health
 promotion or related population-based preventive health activities.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the
 amendment made by this section shall apply to expenses incurred for the
 provision of health services for periods 1-year after the date of enactment
 of this Act.
 (2) TRANSITION FOR COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS- The amendments made by
 this section shall not apply to employers with respect to their employees,
 earlier than the date of the termination of a collective bargaining agreement
 (determined without regard to any extension thereof agreed to after the
 date of the enactment of this Act), insofar as such employees are covered
 under such agreement ratified before the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 506. EMPLOYER OBLIGATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- To assist States with respect to obligations under section
 102 to enroll individuals entitled to health benefits through a HIPC as
 provided under this Act, a HIPC may establish enrollment through employers
 and each employer shall (under an agreement with a State HIPC) arrange
 through the State HIPC to--
 (1) offer to each employee (in a time and manner specified by the Board)
 enrollment in an qualifying AHP both on an individual basis, and, if
 applicable and at the employee's option on a family basis; and
 (2) provide, at the option of the employee, for deduction from wages or other
 compensation of amount of premiums for such enrollment not otherwise covered.
 (b) OPEN ENROLLMENT PERIODS- For purposes of subsection (a)(1), the Board
 shall provide for--
 (1) initial enrollment periods (of not less than 30 days) during which
 newly employed individuals are offered enrollment under a qualifying AHP;
 (2) biennial open enrollment periods (of not less than 30 days) in which
 employees are offered enrollment under a qualifying AHP (and, if there
 is a choice among such plans, the opportunity to change the plan in which
 the employee is enrolled); and
 (3) special enrollment periods during which because of a change in family
 situation (such as marriage, birth or adoption of a child, divorce,
 separation, or death), the employee is offered the opportunity to change
 the type of enrollment provided.
 (c) QUALIFYING ACCOUNTABLE HEALTH PLAN- For purposes of this subsection,
 the term `qualifying AHP' means, with respect to an employee, an AHP for
 which the premium charged to the employee for a type of enrollment does
 not exceed the premium of the least expensive AHP offered to individuals
 by a HIPC in the HIPC area in which the employee resides for that type
 of enrollment.
 (d) ENFORCEMENT-
 (1) CIVIL MONEY PENALTIES- Failure to offer coverage required under an
 agreement with a HIPC is subject to a civil monetary penalty (not to exceed
 $500) for each day in which the violation continues.
 (2) DIRECT ENFORCEMENT- The obligation to offer coverage under an agreement
 with a HIPC with respect to an employee is directly enforceable by civil
 action by the employee. In any such action, if the employee substantially
 prevails, the employee is entitled to reasonable attorneys' fees.
SEC. 507. NATIONAL HEALTH CARE TRUST FUND.
 (a) TRUST FUND ESTABLISHED- There is hereby created a trust fund to be
 known as the `National Health Care Trust Fund' (hereafter referred to in
 this section as the `Trust Fund'). The Trust Fund shall be administered by
 the Board or another agency designated by the Board, and shall consist of
 such gifts and bequests as may be made and such amounts as may be deposited
 in, or appropriated to, such Trust Fund as provided in this Act.
 (b) TRANSFER OF PREMIUM AND PENALTY AMOUNTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- There are hereby appropriated to the Trust Fund amounts
 equivalent to 100 percent of the premiums received by the Board as the
 result of the Federal premium mechanism described in section 504.
 (2) ADDITIONAL FUNDS- There are appropriated to the Trust Fund amounts
 equivalent to the additional penalties received as the result of the
 amendment made by section 505.
 (3) TRANSFERS BASED ON ESTIMATES- The amounts appropriated by paragraphs
 (1) and (2) shall be transferred from time to time (not less frequently
 than monthly) from the general Treasury fund to the Trust Fund, such
 amounts to be determined on the basis of estimates by the Board of the
 penalties and premiums, specified in such paragraphs, paid to or deposited,
 and proper adjustments shall be made in amounts subsequently transferred
 to the extent prior estimates were in excess of or were less than the
 penalties and premiums specified in such subparagraphs.
SEC. 508. STATE SOURCES OF FUNDING.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each State shall establish a funding program for the
 implementation of the State HIPC program in the State. Such funding program
 shall include the enrollment and standard premium financing as specified
 under section 213 of this Act.
 (b) ADDITIONAL SOURCES- State financing programs may include--
 (1) funds used to finance the State share of medicaid under title XIX
 of the Social Security Act as in effect on the day before the date of
 enactment of this Act;
 (2) State and local funding for public hospitals and other indigent care
 programs; and
 (3) State funding from general revenues, earmarked taxes, payroll taxes,
 sales taxes, and such other measures consistent with this Act as the State
 may provide.
 (c) ON-GOING ENTITLEMENT- Each State with a State HIPC program approved
 by the Board is entitled to funding from the Board in the amounts provided
 under section 502.