HR 4282 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 4282
To amend the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, and the Communications Act of 1934 to provide for House of
Representatives campaign finance reform, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
March 15, 1990
Mr. DYSON introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the
Committees on House Administration, Ways and Means, and Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, and the Communications Act of 1934 to provide for House of
Representatives campaign finance reform, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SPECIAL LIMITATIONS ON MULTICANDIDATE POLITICAL COMMITTEE
CONTRIBUTIONS IN HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ELECTIONS.
 Section 315 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 441a)
 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(i) Notwithstanding subsection (a)(2)(A), a multicandidate political
 committee may make contributions to a candidate and the authorized political
 committees of such candidate with respect to a general election (and a
 primary election relating to such general election) for the office of
 Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress
 that, in the aggregate, do not exceed $5,000.'.
SEC. 2 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR INDEPENDENT EXPENDITURES IN HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES ELECTIONS.
 Section 304 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 434)
 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(d) Any person who make independent expenditures aggregating $5,000 or more
 with respect to a candidate in a general election (and a primary election
 relating to such general election) for the office of Representative in,
 or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress, shall report to the
 Commission each expenditure at or above that aggregate amount not later than
 24 hours after the expenditure is made. Not later than 24 hours after receipt
 of a report under the preceding sentence, the Commission shall provide
 the information in the report to the clearly identified candidate involved.'.
SEC. 3. INTERMEDIARY OR CONDUIT.
 (a) Section 315(a)(8) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2
 U.S.C. 441a(a)(8)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(8) For purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) contributions made by a person, either directly or indirectly, to or
 on behalf of a particular candidate, including contributions which are in
 any way earmarked or otherwise directed through an intermediary or conduit
 to such candidate, shall be treated as contributions from such person to
 such candidate;
 `(B) contributions made by a person either directly or indirectly, to or
 on behalf of a particular candidate, through an intermediary or conduit,
 including all contributions delivered or arranged to be delivered by such
 intermediary or conduit, shall also be treated as contributions from the
 intermediary or conduit, if--
 `(i) the contributions made through the intermediary or conduit are in
 the form of a check or other negotiable instrument made payable to the
 conduit or intermediary rather than the intended recipient; or
 `(ii) the conduit or intermediary is a political committee, other than an
 authorized committee of a candidate, within the meaning of section 301(4),
 or an officer, employee or other agent of such a political committee,
 or an officer, employer, or other agent of a connected organization,
 within the meaning of section 301(7), acting in its behalf; and
 `(C) the limitations imposed by this paragraph shall not apply to--
 `(i) bona fide joint fundraising efforts conducted solely for the purpose
 of sponsorship of a fundraising reception, dinner, or other event in
 accordance with rules and regulations prescribed by the Commission by
 (I) two or more candidates, (II) two or more national, State, or local
 committees of a political party within the meaning of section 301(4) acting
 on their own behalf, or (III) a special committee formed by (aa) two or
 more candidates or (bb) one or more candidates and one or more national,
 State, or local committees of a political party acting on their own behalf;
 `(ii) fundraising efforts for the benefit of a candidate which are conducted
 by another candidate within the meaning of section 301(2).
In all cases where contributions are made by a person either directly or
indirectly to or on behalf of a particular candidate through an intermediary
or conduit, the intermediary or conduit shall report the original source
and the intended recipient of such contribution to the Commission and to
the intended recipient.'.
SEC. 4. VOLUNTARY EXPENDITURE LIMITATIONS FOR HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ELECTIONS.
 The Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 431 et seq.) is amended
 by adding at the end the following new title:
`TITLE V--VOLUNTARY EXPENDITURE LIMITATIONS FOR HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ELECTIONS
`VOLUNTARY AGREEMENT TO BE SUBJECT TO EXPENDITURE LIMITATIONS
 `SEC 501. (a) A candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate
 or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress, may, not later than 10 days
 after filing for such office under State law, submit to the Commission
 an affidavit of agreement to limit the expenditures of such candidate to
 $500,000 in a contested election.
 `(b) The Commission shall make such affidavit available for public
 inspection and shall file a copy of such affidavit with the appropriate
 State election office.'.
SEC. 5. INCOME TAX CREDIT FOR CONTRIBUTIONS TO CANDIDATES IN HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES ELECTIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits)
 is amended by inserting after section 23 the following new section:
`SEC. 24. CONTRIBUTIONS TO CANDIDATES IN HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ELECTIONS.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed,
 subject to the limitations in subsection (b), as a credit against the
 tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year, an amount equal to the
 amount of contributions in elections for the office of Representative in,
 or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress, payment of which
 is made by the taxpayer within the taxable year, if the taxpayer is a
 resident of the congressional district involved.
 `(b) LIMITATIONS-
 `(1) MAXIMUM CREDIT- The credit allowed by subsection (a) for a taxable
 year shall not exceed $200 ($400 in the case of a joint return under
 section 6013).
 `(2) VERIFICATION- A credit shall be allowed by subsection (a) with respect
 to any political contribution only if the contribution is verified in the
 manner prescribed by the Secretary in regulations.
 `(c) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section, the terms `contribution'
 and `election' have the meanings given those terms in section 301 of the
 Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971.
 `(d) CROSS REFERENCE-
 `For disallowance of credits to estates and trusts, see section 642(j).'
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT-
 (1) Section 642 of such Code (relating to special rules for credits and
 deductions) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(j) HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION CREDIT- An estate or
 trust shall not be allowed the credit against tax for contributions to
 candidates in House of Representatives elections provided by section 24.'
 (2) The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of
 chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to
 section 23 the following new item:
`Sec. 24. Contributions to candidates in House of Representatives elections.'
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1990.
SEC. 6. SPECIAL LIMITATIONS ON INDIVIDUAL RESIDENT CONTRIBUTIONS IN HOUSE
OF REPRESENTATIVES ELECTIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 315 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971
 (2 U.S.C. 441a), as amended by section 1, is further amended by adding at
 the end the following new subsection:
 `(j) Notwithstanding subsection (a)(1)(A), an individual who is a resident
 of the congressional district involved may make contributions to a candidate
 and the authorized political committees of such candidate with respect to a
 general election (and a primary election relating to such general election)
 for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner
 to, the Congress that, in the aggregate, do not exceed $3,000.'.
SEC. 7. REPORTING AND RETURN REQUIREMENTS FOR HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
CANDIDATES WHO VIOLATE VOLUNTARY EXPENDITURE LIMITS.
 Section 304 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 434),
 as amended by section 2, is further amended by adding at the end the
 following new subsection:
 `(e) Any candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or
 Resident Commissioner to, the Congress who violates a voluntary expenditure
 limitation under section 501 shall--
 `(1) not later than 24 hours after the violation, notify any individual
 who has made a contribution that is eligible for an income tax credit
 under section 24 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 that, as a result
 of the violation, such individual is no longer eligible for such credit; and
 `(2) return individual resident contributions aggregating in excess of
 $2,000 to the individual residents involved.'.
SEC. 8. MONETARY PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF VOLUNTARY EXPENDITURE LIMITATIONS.
 Section 315 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 U.S.C. 441a),
 as amended by sections 1 and 6, is further amended by adding at the end
 the following new subsection:
 `(k)(1) Any candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate
 or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress who makes expenditures that
 exceed a limitation under section 501 by 5 percent or less shall pay to
 the Commission, for deposit in the Treasury as miscellaneous receipts,
 an amount equal to the amount of the excess expenditures.
 `(2) Any candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate
 or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress who makes expenditures that
 exceed a limitation under section 501 by more than 5 percent and less
 than 10 percent shall pay to the Commission, for deposit in the Treasury
 as miscellaneous receipts, an amount equal to three times the amount of
 the excess expenditures.
 `(3) Any candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate
 or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress who makes expenditures that
 exceed a limitation under section 501 by 10 percent or more shall pay to
 the Commission, for deposit in the Treasury as miscellaneous receipts,
 an amount equal to three times the amount of the excess expenditures plus
 a civil penalty in an amount determined by the Commission.'.
SEC. 9. AMENDMENTS TO SECTION 315 OF THE COMMUNICATIONS ACT OF 1934, RELATING
TO BROADCAST MEDIA RATES.
 Section 315(b) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 315(b))
 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking out `lowest unit charge' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `normal and usual unit charge, as determined by the
 Commission,';
 (2) in paragraph (1), as amended by paragraph (1) of this subsection,
 by striking out `and' after the semicolon at the end;
 (3) in paragraph (2), by striking out the period at the end and inserting
 in lieu thereof the following: `; and'; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following:
 `(3) except that, in the case of a candidate for the office of Representative
 in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress who submits an
 affidavit under section 501 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971,
 the charges under paragraph (1), with respect to any segment that is one
 minute or more in length, shall not exceed 70 percent of the normal and
 usual unit charge, as determined by the Commission.'.