HR 3689 SC
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 3689
To amend the Social Security Act to provide for universal access to health
benefits through a Federally financed insurance program administered by
States, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
October 31, 1991
Mr. JOHNSTON of Florida (for himself and Mrs. BOXER) introduced the following
bill; which was referred jointly to the Committees on Energy and Commerce
and Ways and Means
March 4, 1992
Additional sponsors: Ms. PELOSI and Ms. NORTON
A BILL
To amend the Social Security Act to provide for universal access to health
benefits through a Federally financed insurance program administered by
States, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Community Health Care Act
 of 1991'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents of this Act is as follows:
Table of Contents
TITLE I--ESTABLISHMENT OF FEDERAL-STATE PARTNERSHIP FOR THE PROVISION OF
UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE
Sec. 101. Establishment of National Health Insurance Program.
`TITLE XXI--STATE-ADMINISTERED NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM
`Part A--Establishment of Program
`Sec. 2101. Establishment of National Health Insurance Program.
`Sec. 2102. Administration of program through local health care districts.
`Sec. 2103. Enrollment requirements.
`Sec. 2104. Options for administration of plan.
`Sec. 2105. Establishment of national health care board for Federal
adminstration of program.
`Part B--Benefits Provided Under State Plans
`Subpart 1--National Priority Services
`Sec. 2111. Benefits for children and pregnant women.
`Sec. 2112. Preventive health services.
`Sec. 2113. Long-term care services.
`Subpart 2--Other Required Benefits and Services
`Sec. 2117. Benefits and services required under plan.
`Subpart 3--Limitations on Benefits
`Sec. 2121. Amount, duration, and scope.
`Sec. 2122. Requirements for provider certification.
`Part C--Establishment of Budgets and Payment Amounts
`Sec. 2131. Establishment of budgets.
`Sec. 2132. Establishment of payment rates for services under plan.
`Sec. 2133. Payments to providers of services under state plans.
`Sec. 2134. Restrictions on out-of-pocket expenses.
`Sec. 2135. Federal payments to States.
`Part D--Requirements for Quality Assurance Programs
`Sec. 2141. National commission on quality assurance.
`Sec. 2142. State commissions on quality assurance.
`Sec. 2143. Local health care district quality assurance review boards.
`Part E--Requirements for State Laws Relating to Medical Malpractice Liability
`Sec. 2151. Eligibility requirements for Federal payments for state plans.
`Sec. 2152. Hospital assumption of responsibility for malpractice insurance
coverage and payment of damages.
`Sec. 2153. Prohibition against punitive damages.
`Sec. 2154. Medical malpractice claim defined.
`Part F--Miscellaneous Provisions
`Sec. 2161. Federal health care trust fund.
`Sec. 2162. Development of practice profiles.
`Sec. 2163. Grants for medical malpractice liability reform programs.
`Sec. 2164. Assumption of State responsibilities by national board in case
of nonparticipating States.
`Sec. 2165. Definitions.
Sec. 102. Termination of other programs.
Sec. 103. Effective date.
TITLE II--FINANCING PROVISIONS
Sec. 201. Increase in individual income tax rates.
Sec. 202. Increase in top corporate income tax rate.
Sec. 203. Changes in social security taxes.
Sec. 204. Increase in excise taxes on cigarettes and distilled spirits.
TITLE I--ESTABLISHMENT OF FEDERAL-STATE PARTNERSHIP FOR THE PROVISION OF
UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE
SECTION 101. ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM.
 The Social Security Act is amended by adding at the end the following
 new title:
`TITLE XXI--STATE-ADMINISTERED NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM
`Part A--Establishment of Program
`SEC. 2101. ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM.
 `There is hereby established a program under which each eligible individual
 (as defined in section 2165(3)) residing in a State shall be entitled to
 enroll in a State plan providing benefits and services in accordance with
 this title.
`SEC. 2102. ADMINISTRATION OF PROGRAM THROUGH LOCAL HEALTH CARE DISTRICTS.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT OF STATE HEALTH CARE BOARDS- Each State shall establish
 a State Health Care Board consisting of 7 members appointed by the chief
 executive officer, of whom at least 3 shall represent providers of health
 care services.
 `(b) DESIGNATION OF LOCAL HEALTH CARE DISTRICTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (c), the State Health
 Care Board of each State shall designate geographic regions of the State
 to serve as local health care districts.
 `(2) CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATING LOCAL HEALTH CARE DISTRICTS- The State
 Health Care Board shall designate a geographic region of the State as a
 local health care district under paragraph (1) if it determines that the
 region is an appropriate area for the effective planning, development,
 and delivery of benefits and services under the State plan on the basis
 of such factors as the State Health Care Board considers appropriate,
 including the population and demographic characteristics of the region.
 `(3) ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICT HEALTH CARE BOARDS-
 `(A) ESTABLISHMENT- With respect to each local health care district
 designated by the State Health Care Board under paragraph (1), there shall
 be established a district health care board (hereafter referred to as a
 `district board') consisting of 7 members appointed by the Governor,
 of whom at least 3 shall represent providers of health care services.
 `(B) DUTIES- The district board shall be responsible for administering the
 State plan with respect to individuals residing in the local health care
 district, including establishing payment rates for benefits and services
 provided under the plan and carrying out other responsibilities under
 this title.
 `(c) WAIVER OF REQUIREMENT THAT STATE ESTABLISH LOCAL HEALTH CARE DISTRICTS
 TO ADMINISTER STATE PLAN-
 `(1) APPLICATION TO NATIONAL BOARD- The National Board may waive the
 requirement that a State establish local health care districts to administer
 the State plan if the State files an application for a waiver (at such
 time and containing such information as the National Board may require)
 demonstrating that the establishment of local health care districts in
 the State is unnecessary because of the State's size or population.
 `(2) EFFECT ON REQUIREMENTS UNDER THIS TITLE- If the National Board waives
 requirements with respect to a State under paragraph (1), this title shall
 be applied with respect to the State as if any reference to a `local health
 care district' or a `district board' was a reference to the State or the
 State Health Care Board (except as provided in section 2113(f)).
`SEC. 2103. ENROLLMENT REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) ENROLLMENT PROCEDURES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each district board shall establish a mechanism for
 enrolling all eligible individuals residing in the local health care
 district in the State plan.
 `(2) PLAN CARDS- In conjunction with the enrollment of individuals under its
 health insurance plan, the district board shall provide for the issuance of
 a card which may be used for purposes of identification of such enrollment
 and the processing of claims for benefits and services under the plan.
 `(b) CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING RESIDENCY- The National Health Care Board
 (established under section 2105) shall establish criteria for district
 boards to use to determine whether an individual is a resident of a State
 or a local health care district for purposes of enrollment in the State plan.
`SEC. 2104. OPTIONS FOR ADMINISTRATION OF PLAN.
 `(a) THROUGH SINGLE COMMUNITY INSURER-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT OF SYSTEM- Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c),
 each State shall establish a system for the administration of its State
 plan under which each district board in the State shall make payments to
 individuals and entities providing benefits and services under the plan
 to all residents of the district who are enrolled in the State plan.
 `(2) EXCLUSIVE SOURCE OF PAYMENT- No health benefit plan or other entity
 (other than the district board) may reimburse an individual or entity for
 any services provided under the State plan to any individual if the district
 board makes payment with respect to such services pursuant to paragraph
 (1), except that an individual receiving services under the plan may be
 required (in accordance with this title) to pay a coinsurance for such
 services to the individual or entity providing the services.
 `(b) THROUGH AGREEMENTS WITH PRIVATE PLANS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A State may administer its State plan through a system
 under which--
 `(A) each district board shall enter into agreements with eligible
 private health benefit plans or other eligible entities under which,
 during the period in which such an agreement is in effect, the eligible
 plan or entity shall make payments to individuals and entities providing
 benefits and services under the State plan to residents of the district
 who are enrolled with such eligible plan or entity during the month in
 which the benefits and services are provided; and
 `(B) the district board shall make payments to individuals and entities
 providing benefits and services under the plan to all residents of the
 district who are enrolled in the State plan who are not enrolled with
 such an eligible plan or entity during the month in which the benefits
 and services are provided.
 `(2) ELIGIBILITY OF PLANS- For purposes of paragraph (1), a health benefit
 plan or other entity is eligible if the plan or entity--
 `(A) provides an annual open enrollment period (of at least 30 days) during
 which an eligible individual may enroll or disenroll with the plan or entity;
 `(B) does not impose any coinsurance or deductible with respect to
 services covered under the State plan except to the extent permitted by
 the district board;
 `(C) does not discriminate in the enrollment of or provision of services to
 an individual on the basis of the individual's health or medical condition
 or on any other basis determined to be improper by the National Board; and
 `(D) meets any other requirements the district board may impose.
 `(c) WAIVER OF REQUIREMENT THAT LOCAL HEALTH CARE DISTRICTS SERVE AS SINGLE
 COMMUNITY INSURERS OR ENTER INTO AGREEMENTS WITH PRIVATE PLANS-
 `(1) APPLICATION TO NATIONAL BOARD- The National Board may waive the
 requirement that a local health care district serve as a single community
 insurer under subsection (a) or enter into agreements with private plans
 under subsection (b) if the State files an application for a waiver (at such
 time and containing such information as the National Board may require)
 demonstrating that benefits and services would be more efficiently and
 effectively provided under the State plan if the State and not the district
 boards served as such an insurer or entered into such agreements.
 `(2) EFFECT ON REQUIREMENTS UNDER THIS SECTION- If the National Board waives
 requirements with respect to a State under paragraph (1), this section shall
 be applied with respect to the State as if any reference to a `district' or a
 `district board' was a reference to the State or the State Health Care Board.
`SEC. 2105. ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL HEALTH CARE BOARD FOR FEDERAL
ADMINISTRATION OF PROGRAM.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- There is hereby established within the Department of
 Health and Human Services the National Health Care Board.
 `(b) MEMBERSHIP- The National Board shall consist of the Surgeon General
 of the Public Health Service, together with 4 other individuals appointed
 by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate not later than
 1 year after the date of the enactment of this title.
 `(c) TERMS OF SERVICE- Each member of the National Board shall serve
 for a term of 5 years, except that the members initially appointed to
 the National Board shall serve for such shorter terms as the President
 determines is necessary to ensure that the terms of service for members
 subsequently appointed to the National Board shall not expire during the
 same year. Members may be reappointed for a subsequent term in the same
 manner as the original appointment.
 `(d) VACANCIES- The President shall fill any vacancy in the membership
 of the National Board in the same manner as the original appointment,
 and any member appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the remainder
 of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed. No vacancy
 on the National Board shall affect the power of the remaining members to
 carry out the National Board's duties.
 `(e) CHAIRMAN- The National Board shall select a Chairman from among
 its members.
 `(f) COMPENSATION- Members of the National Board (except the Surgeon General)
 shall be compensated for service on the National Board at a level comparable
 to level II of the Executive Schedule, in accordance with section 5313 of
 title 5, United States Code.
 `(g) DUTIES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The National Board shall be responsible for the general
 administration of the program under this title.
 `(2) DEVELOPMENT OF INNOVATIVE APPROACHES TO ADMINISTRATION OF STATE PLANS-
 The National Board shall encourage States to develop and experiment with
 innovative ways to improve the efficiency, effectiveness, and quality of
 State plans under this title.
 `(3) RECOMMENDATIONS TO ASSIST IN TRANSITION- During the period beginning
 1 year after the date of the enactment of this title and ending on the
 date benefits and services are required to be provided under this title,
 the National Board shall develop and submit to Congress recommendations
 for proposals to assist in the transition from other programs providing
 benefits and services as of the date of the enactment of this title to
 the program established under this title.
`Part B--Benefits Provided Under State Plans
`Subpart 1--National priority services
`SEC. 2111. BENEFITS FOR CHILDREN AND PREGNANT WOMEN.
 `(a) PREGNANCY-RELATED SERVICES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each pregnant woman (as defined in section 2165(7))
 enrolled in the State plan shall be entitled to have payment made for the
 following services, subject to the periodicity schedule established with
 respect to the services under paragraph (2):
 `(A) Prenatal care, including care for all complications of pregnancy.
 `(B) Inpatient labor and delivery services.
 `(C) Postnatal care.
 `(D) Postnatal family planning services.
 `(2) PERIODICITY SCHEDULE- The National Board, in consultation with the
 American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology, shall establish a schedule
 of periodicity which reflects the general, appropriate frequency with
 which services listed in paragraph (1) should be provided to pregnant
 women without complications of pregnancy.
 `(b) WELL-CHILD CARE SERVICES FOR CHILDREN-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A child (as defined in section 2165(1)) enrolled in
 the State plan shall be entitled to have payment made under the plan
 for well-child care services, including routine office visits, routine
 immunizations (including the vaccine itself), routine laboratory tests,
 and preventive dental care, provided in accordance with the periodicity
 schedule established with respect to the services under paragraph (2).
 `(2) PERIODICITY SCHEDULE- The National Board, in consultation with the
 American Academy of Pediatrics, the Advisory Committee on Immunization
 Practices, and other appropriate entities, shall establish a schedule
 of periodicity which reflects the appropriate frequency with which the
 services referred to in paragraph (1) should be provided to healthy children.
`SEC. 2112. PREVENTIVE HEALTH SERVICES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Each individual enrolled in the State plan shall be
 entitled to have payment made under the plan for the following services,
 subject to the periodicity schedules established with respect to the
 services under subsection (b):
 `(1) Routine physical examinations.
 `(2) Screening mammography (as defined in subsection (c)(1)).
 `(3) Screening pap smear (as defined in subsection (c)(2)).
 `(4) Colorectal screening examinations (as defined in subsection (c)(3)).
 `(5) Other health promotion services that are found by the National Board
 to be generally effective in preventing or minimizing the onset or effect
 of an illness, disease, or condition, taking into consideration the costs
 of providing such services under State plans.
 `(b) PERIODICITY SCHEDULES-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT- The National Board shall establish a schedule of
 periodicity for each of the services referred to in subsection (a) which
 reflects the appropriate frequency with which the services should be
 provided to healthy individuals.
 `(2) CONSULTATION- In establishing periodicity schedules under paragraph
 (1), the National Board shall consult with recognized medical organizations
 involved in the respective field (or fields) of health.
 `(c) DEFINITIONS- In this section--
 `(1) the term `colorectal screening examination' means a screening
 fecal-occult blood test or a screening flexible sigmoidoscopy provided for
 the purpose of early detection of colon cancer and includes a physician's
 interpretation of the results of the procedure;
 `(2) the term `screening mammography' means a radiologic procedure provided
 to a woman for the purpose of early detection of breast cancer and includes
 a physician's interpretation of the results of the procedure; and
 `(3) the term `screening pap smear' means a diagnostic laboratory test
 consisting of a routine exfoliative cytology test (Papanicolau test)
 provided to a woman for the purpose of early detection of cervical cancer
 and includes a physician's interpretation of the results of the test.
`SEC. 2113. LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL-
 `(1) ENTITLEMENT- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this section,
 an individual enrolled in the State plan shall be entitled to have payment
 made under the plan for long-term care services.
 `(2) DEFINITION- In this title, the term `long-term care services' means--
 `(A) institutional services (as defined in subsection (c));
 `(B) home and community-based services (as defined in subsection (d)); and
 `(C) in-home respite care services (as defined in subsection (e)).
 `(b) ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- No payment may be made under a State plan for any long-term
 care services provided to an individual unless a care manager--
 `(A) determines (on the basis of medical evaluations and evaluations of
 an individual's social needs and physical environment) that the individual--
 `(i) due to a cognitive or mental impairment, requires supervision because
 the individual's behavior poses a risk to the health or safety of the
 individual or others, or
 `(ii) is unable to perform, without the assistance of another, at least
 2 of the following 5 activities of daily living (or has a similar level
 of disability due to a cognitive or mental impairment): bathing, eating,
 dressing, toileting, and transferring in and out of a bed or chair; and
 `(B) determines (and redetermines on an ongoing basis) that the services
 are appropriate given the individual's needs and condition.
 `(2) CARE MANAGER DEFINED- In paragraph (1), a `care manager' is an entity
 designated by a district board--
 `(A) to conduct evaluations to determine whether an individual residing
 in the district is entitled to long-term care services under the State
 plan and the type of services to be furnished to the individual; and
 `(B) to coordinate the provision of all services under the plan to
 individuals residing in the district who receive long-term care services.
 `(c) INSTITUTIONAL SERVICES-
 `(1) DEFINITION- In this section, the term `institutional services' means
 the following services furnished by an eligible facility:
 `(A) Nursing care provided by or under the supervision of a registered
 professional nurse.
 `(B) Bed and board furnished in connection with the furnishing of supervised
 residential services.
 `(C) Physical, occupational, and speech therapy.
 `(D) Medical social services.
 `(E) Drugs, biologicals, supplies, appliances, and equipment as are
 ordinarily furnished for the care and treatment of inpatients.
 `(F) Other services necessary for the health of patients that are generally
 furnished by chronic nursing facilities.
 `(2) ELIGIBILITY OF FACILITIES- For purposes of paragraph (1), a facility is
 an eligible facility if it is certified by the district board on the basis of
 criteria established by the National Board that are based on requirements in
 effect for skilled nursing facilities and nursing facilities under sections
 1819 and 1919 on the date before the date of the enactment of this title.
 `(d) HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES DEFINED- In this section, the term
 `home and community-based services' means the following services:
 `(1) Homemaker services (including meals).
 `(2) Home health aide services.
 `(3) Heavy chores.
 `(4) Adult day care, social day care, or psychiatric day care services.
 `(5) Home mobility aide services and minor changes to the home that promote
 the resident's independence.
 `(6) Medical social worker services.
 `(7) Community mental health services, therapy services, and nursing
 services.
 `(8) Physical, occupational, or rehabilitative services designed to preserve
 or restore functional capability or prevent further deterioration.
 `(9) Transportation services to enable an individual to travel to and from
 the site where medical, health, or social services are provided.
 `(10) Other services determined appropriate by the National Board.
 `(e) IN-HOME RESPITE CARE SERVICES-
 `(1) DEFINITION- In this section, the term `in-home respite care services'
 means the following items and services (subject to paragraphs (2) and (3)):
 `(A) Services of a homemaker or home health aide.
 `(B) Personal care services.
 `(C) Nursing care provided by a licensed professional nurse.
 `(2) DEPENDENCE ON A PRIMARY CAREGIVER REQUIRED- In order to be eligible to
 receive in-home respite care services under the State plan, an individual
 must be dependent on a daily basis on a primary caregiver who is living
 with the individual and is assisting the individual without monetary
 compensation in the performance of at least 2 of the activities of daily
 living described in subsection (b)(1)(A)(ii).
 `(3) LIMITATION ON SERVICES- An individual is not entitled to more than
 720 hours of in-home respite care services under a State plan during any
 calendar year. For purposes of the preceding sentence, in-home respite
 care services provided to an individual on any day for 3 hours or less on
 the day shall be counted as 3 hours of such services.
 `(f) USE OF AREA AGENCIES ON AGING TO ADMINISTER BENEFITS IN STATES WITHOUT
 LOCAL HEALTH CARE DISTRICTS- In the case of a State administering its State
 plan without the establishment of local health care districts as a result
 of receiving a waiver from the National Board under section 2164--
 `(1) any duties carried out with respect to an individual by a district
 board under this section shall be carried out by the area agency on aging
 designated by the State under section 305(a)(2)(A) of the Older Americans
 Act of 1965 for the planning and service area (as described in section
 305(a)(1)(E) of that Act) in which the individual resides; or
 `(2) in the case of individuals residing in a planning and service area
 for which an area agency on aging is not so designated, the State shall
 designate a nonprofit or public agency or organization to carry out such
 duties with respect to such individuals.
`Subpart 2--Standard Benefits and Services
`SEC. 2117. BENEFITS AND SERVICES REQUIRED UNDER STATE PLANS.
 `In addition to the services and benefits to which an individual is entitled
 under subpart 1, each individual enrolled in a State plan shall be entitled
 to the following benefits and services:
 `(1) Inpatient hospital services.
 `(2) Outpatient hospital services.
 `(3) Medical and other health services furnished by a provider of services
 licensed or certified to provide such services in the State, including
 prescription drugs and biologicals, services, and supplies furnished as
 incident to such services.
 `(4) Diagnostic tests and procedures, including diagnostic X-ray tests
 and diagnostic laboratory tests.
 `(5) Family planning services.
 `(6) Not less than 43 days of inpatient and not less than 25 days of
 outpatient services relating to the diagnosis, evaluation, and treatment
 of mental illness, including crisis intervention services.
 `(7) Hospice care for individuals certified as terminally ill.
 `(8) Home health services.
 `(9) Outpatient physical therapy services, outpatient speech pathology
 services, and outpatient occupational therapy services.
 `(10) Health clinic services, including rural and migrant health clinic
 services.
 `(11) Dialysis supplies and equipment for individuals who have been
 determined to have end stage renal disease.
 `(12) Durable medical equipment used in the patient's home.
 `(13) Ambulance service.
 `(14) Prosthetic devices (other than dental devices) which replace all or
 part of an internal body organ, including replacement of such devices.
 `(15) Leg, arm, back, and neck braces, and artificial legs, arms, and eyes,
 including necessary replacements.
 `(16) Eyeglasses and hearing aids (including examinations to determine
 the need for such items) for children.
 `(17) Hearing aids for other individuals who have been certified by an
 audiologist or physician as having a condition that may be corrected by
 the use of a hearing aid.
`SEC. 2118. OPTIONAL BENEFITS AND SERVICES PERMITTED.
 `A State may provide individuals enrolled in the State plan with benefits
 and services not described in section 2117 if the State Board determines that
 it would be appropriate for the plan to provide such benefits and services.
`Subpart 3--Limitations on Benefits
`SEC. 2121. AMOUNT, DURATION, AND SCOPE.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT BY STATE HEALTH CARE BOARDS- Each State Health Care
 Board shall establish such limitations on the amount, duration, and scope
 of benefits and services provided under the State plan as are necessary
 to ensure that the State plan does not provide for payment of services
 which are not reasonable and necessary for the diagnosis or treatment of
 illness or injury or to improve the functioning of a malformed body member
 (other than services described in subsection (b) or preventive and screening
 services required to be provided under the plan under this title).
 `(b) EXCEPTION FOR CERTAIN EXPERIMENTAL SERVICES- Notwithstanding any
 limitations established under paragraph (1), payment may be made under a
 State health plan for treatment services which do not meet the requirements
 of such limitations if an advisory committee on experimental treatments
 (or other appropriate entity of the State government) approves payment
 under the plan for such services.
`SEC. 2122. REQUIREMENTS FOR PROVIDER CERTIFICATION.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, no
 payment may be made under a State plan for any services furnished by an
 individual or entity that is not certified by the State to furnish such
 services and that does not meet standards established by the State Health
 Care Board to ensure the safety of individuals receiving services under
 the State plan.
 `(b) ESTABLISHMENT OF CRITERIA-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each State Health Care Board shall establish standards
 and criteria for the certification of individuals and entities furnishing
 services under the State plan and other safety requirements to be applicable
 to such individuals and entities under the State plan.
 `(2) APPLICATION OF MEDICARE STANDARDS- To the greatest extent possible,
 the standards and criteria established by State Health Care Boards under
 paragraph (1) shall be equivalent to requirements for suppliers and
 providers of services under title XVIII (as in effect on the date before
 the date of the enactment of this title).
`Part C--Establishment of Budgets and Payment Amounts
`SEC. 2131. ESTABLISHMENT OF BUDGETS.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT OF ANNUAL BUDGETS UNDER STATE PLANS-
 `(1) SUBMISSION OF ESTIMATED PLAN EXPENDITURES- Not later than 3 months
 before the beginning of each calendar year, each district board in each State
 shall submit to the State Health Care Board the estimated plan expenditures
 for the district for that year (as determined under subsection (b)).
 `(2) STATE PLAN BUDGET-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The State plan budget for a year shall be equal to the
 sum of the estimated plan expenditures for all district boards in the
 State submitted under paragraph (1).
 `(B) PERMITTING RETROACTIVE ADJUSTMENT- The State Health Care Board may
 make a retroactive adjustment to the State plan budget for a year under
 subparagraph (A) to take into account differences between the budget and
 total amount of expenditures under the State plan during the year.
 `(b) DETERMINATION OF ESTIMATED PLAN EXPENDITURES-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT OF CLASSES- The National Board shall establish and define
 appropriate classes of individuals, based on age, gender, disability and
 health status, geographic location, and such other factors as the National
 Board determines to be appropriate to ensure actuarial equivalence.
 `(2) DETERMINATION OF AVERAGE PER CAPITA EXPENDITURES- Each district board
 shall determine the average per capita expenditures with respect to each
 class of individuals described in paragraph (1), based on the district
 board's estimate (based on program experience or actuarial equivalence)
 of the average per capita expenditures to be made under the State plan
 during the year with respect to that class, taking into account payment
 amounts determined for the year under this title.
 `(3) IN GENERAL- The estimated plan expenditures for a district board
 for a year shall be equal to the sum of the products of the average per
 capita expenditures for each class of individuals described in paragraph
 (1) and the number of such individuals residing in the district.
 `(c) LIMITATION ON TOTAL PAYMENTS UNDER PLAN-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2)--
 `(A) the total amount of payments made under a State plan during a year
 may not exceed the amount provided for in the State plan budget for the
 year established under subsection (a)(2); and
 `(B) the total amount of payments made under a State plan in a local health
 district during a year may not exceed the estimated plan expenditures
 determined for the district under subsection (b)(1).
 `(2) EXCEPTION FOR EMERGENCY SERVICES- Payments may be made under a State
 plan for emergency services regardless of whether payment for such services
 would result in a violation of paragraph (1).
`SEC. 2132. ESTABLISHMENT OF PAYMENT RATES FOR SERVICES UNDER PLAN.
 `(a) PAYMENTS FOR INSTITUTIONAL SERVICES-
 `(1) PAYMENTS BASED ON NEGOTIATED RATES- Not later than 5 months before
 the beginning of each calendar year, each district board in a State shall
 establish payment rates for institutional services furnished under the
 State plan in the district during the year on the basis of negotiations
 between the district and each institution furnishing such services located
 in the district.
 `(2) INSTITUTIONAL SERVICES DEFINED- For purposes of paragraph (1), the term
 `institutional services' means the following services:
 `(A) Inpatient hospital services.
 `(B) Institutional services (as defined in section 2113(c)).
 `(C) Hospice services.
 `(D) Home health services.
 `(b) PAYMENTS FOR PHYSICIAN AND OTHER PRACTITIONER SERVICES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Not later than 5 months before the beginning of each
 fiscal year, each district board in a State shall establish a fee schedule
 providing the payment rates for physician services and other categories
 of practitioner services furnished under the State plan in the district
 during the year on the basis of negotiations between the district and
 organizations representing physicians and practitioners furnishing such
 services in the district.
 `(2) USE OF ADJUSTED NATIONAL RELATIVE VALUES- The fee schedules
 established by a district board under paragraph (1) shall be based upon
 nationally-determined relative values for the services described in paragraph
 (1) determined by the National Board in the same manner as the relative
 values established for determining payment amounts for physician's services
 under section 1848 (as in effect on the date before the date of the enactment
 of this title), except that in applying such section to such fee schedules,
 the National Board shall adjust the conversion factor provided in such
 section to take into account the costs and volume of such services under
 the State plan in the district.
`SEC. 2133. PAYMENTS TO PROVIDERS OF SERVICES UNDER STATE PLANS.
 `(a) INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY SINGLE COMMUNITY INSURER- In the case of
 benefits and services furnished under the State plan to an individual with
 respect to whom payments are made by a district board in accordance with
 section 2104(a), the district board shall make payments to or on behalf of
 the individual for such benefits and services on a fee-for-service basis
 on the basis of payment rates for such benefits and services established
 pursuant to section 2132.
 `(b) INDIVIDUALS ENROLLED WITH PRIVATE PLANS-
 `(1) PAYMENTS MADE IN ADVANCE ON BASIS OF AVERAGE PER CAPITA RATES- In
 the case of benefits and services furnished under the State plan during
 a month to an individual who is enrolled with an eligible plan or entity
 pursuant to section 2104(b) for a month, the district board in which the
 individual resides shall make monthly payments in advance to the plan or
 entity for each such individual enrolled with the plan or entity during
 the month in the amount described in paragraph (2).
 `(2) AMOUNT OF MONTHLY PAYMENT- The amount of the monthly payment made to a
 plan or entity under paragraph (1) with respect to an individual enrolled
 with the plan or entity shall be equal to one-twelfth of the average
 per capita expenditures established by the district board under section
 2131(b)(2) for the class of individuals described in section 2131(b)(1)
 to which the individual belongs.
 `(3) PERMITTING RETROACTIVE ADJUSTMENTS- The amount of the monthly payment
 made to a plan or entity under paragraph (1) may be retroactively adjusted to
 take into account any difference between the actual number of individuals
 enrolled with the plan or entity and the number of such individuals
 estimated to be so enrolled in determining the amount of the advance payment.
 `(c) MANDATORY ASSIGNMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to section 2134, payments for benefits and services
 under a State plan shall constitute payment in full for such benefits and
 services, and the individual or entity furnishing a benefit or service
 under the State plan shall accept such payment as payment in full for
 the benefit or service and may not accept any other payment or impose
 any charge with respect to any such benefit or service (except that the
 individual or entity may charge a coinsurance with respect to the benefit
 or service in accordance with this title).
 `(2) ENFORCEMENT- If an individual or entity knowingly and willfully bills
 for a benefit or service or accepts payment in violation of subsection (a),
 a State may apply sanctions against the entity in accordance with State law.
`SEC. 2134. RESTRICTIONS ON OUT-OF-POCKET EXPENSES.
 `(a) PROHIBITION AGAINST DEDUCTIBLES- No deductible may be imposed with
 respect to any benefits and services furnished under a State plan.
 `(b) LIMITATIONS ON COINSURANCE- A district board may impose a coinsurance
 with respect to benefits and services furnished under the State plan
 to individuals residing in the district in such amounts and under such
 conditions as the district board may determine, except that--
 `(1) no coinsurance may be imposed with respect to any national priority
 services described in subpart 1 of part B, except that (subject to subsection
 (c)) coinsurance may be imposed with respect to long-term care services
 consisting of institutional services (as described in section 2113(c));
 `(2) no coinsurance may be imposed with respect to any benefit or service
 furnished during a year to an individual if--
 `(A) the individual has incurred $1,000 of coinsurance with respect to
 benefits or services furnished to the individual during the year, or
 `(B) the total amount of coinsurance incurred by the individual and
 the individual's immediate family members with respect to benefits and
 services furnished to the individual and the family members during the
 year exceeds $1,500;
 `(3) the district board shall provide for allowances and adjustments
 to any coinsurance imposed under this section for any individual whose
 family adjusted total income (as defined in subsection (d)(2)) does not
 exceed 200 percent of the official poverty line (as defined in subsection
 (d)(4)), in accordance with guidelines developed by the National Board; and
 `(4) the total amount of all coinsurance imposed with respect to benefits
 and services furnished under the State plan to residents of the district
 during a year may not exceed 20 percent of the district's estimated plan
 expenditures for the year (as determined under section 2131(b)(2)).
 `(c) LIMITATIONS ON COINSURANCE FOR INSTITUTIONAL LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES-
 `(1) CAP ON MONTHLY COINSURANCE INCURRED- The total amount of coinsurance
 incurred by an individual during a month with respect to long-term care
 services consisting of institutional services (as described in section
 2113(c)) furnished to the individual during the month may not exceed 80
 percent of the amount of the individual's monthly benefits under section
 202 or 203, the individual's monthly annuity under the Railroad Retirement
 Act of 1974, or the individual's monthly annuity under subchapter III of
 chapter 83 of title 5, United States Code or any other law administered
 by the Director of the Office of Personnel Management providing retirement
 or survivorship protection (whichever is applicable) for the month.
 `(2) PROHIBITION AGAINST IMPOSITION OF COINSURANCE DURING FIRST 3 MONTHS OF
 CARE- No coinsurance may be imposed with respect to long-term care services
 consisting of institutional services furnished on a continuous basis during
 the first 3 months of a spell of care (as defined in paragraph (4)).
 `(3) EXCLUSION FROM DETERMINATION OF ANNUAL CAP- Subsection (b)(2) shall
 not apply to long-term care services consisting of institutional services
 (as described in section 2113(c)) or to coinsurance incurred with respect
 to such services.
 `(4) SPELL OF CARE DEFINED- In paragraph (2), the term `spell of care'
 means, with respect to any individual, a period of consecutive days--
 `(A) beginning with the first day (not included in a previous spell of care)
 on which the individual is furnished long-term care services consisting of
 institutional services (as described in section 2113(c)), and which occurs
 in a month during which the individual is enrolled in a State plan; and
 `(B) ending with the close of the first period of 60 consecutive days
 thereafter on each of which the individual is not furnished such services.
 `(d) DEFINITIONS- In this section--
 `(1) the term `adjusted total income' means--
 `(A) adjusted gross income (as defined in section 62(a) of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986), determined without the application of paragraphs
 (6) and (7) of such section and without the application of section 162(l)
 of such Code, plus
 `(B) the amount of social security benefits (described in section 86(d)
 of such Code) which is not includable in gross income under section 86 of
 such Code;
 `(2) the term `family adjusted total income' means, with respect to an
 individual, the sum of the adjusted total income for the individual and
 all the other family members;
 `(3) the term `immediate family members' means, with respect to an
 individual, any of the individual's children (as defined in section 2165(l))
 (whether by birth or by adoption) who reside with the individual, and the
 individual's spouse; and
 `(4) the term `official poverty line' means, for an individual in a family,
 the official poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget,
 and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget
 Reconciliation Act of 1981) applicable to a family of the size involved.
`SEC. 2135. FEDERAL PAYMENTS TO STATES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL-
 `(1) PAYMENTS MADE ON QUARTERLY BASIS- The National Board shall make
 payments to each eligible State (as defined in subsection (f)) from the
 Federal Health Care Trust Fund for each quarter beginning on or after
 January 1 of the first year beginning after the expiration of the 3-year
 period beginning on the date of the enactment of this title in an amount
 equal to 25 percent of the sum of--
 `(A) the Federal payment for general plan services for the year in which
 the quarter occurs (as determined under subsection (b)); and
 `(B) the Federal payment for long-term care services for the year in which
 the quarter occurs (as determined under subsection (c)).
 `(2) ADJUSTMENTS- The National Board shall adjust a payment made to a State
 for a quarter to the extent of any overpayment or underpayment which the
 National Board determines was made to the State for any previous quarter
 and with respect to which an adjustment has not already been made under
 this paragraph.
 `(3) REDUCED PAYMENT FOR STATES NOT ENACTING PLANS- In the case of a State
 for which the National Board has established and is administering the
 State plan for a month in accordance with section 2164(a), the amount of
 the payment made to the State under paragraph (1) for the month shall be
 equal to 50 percent of the amount that would otherwise be made to the State
 if the State had established a State plan for the year under this title.
 `(b) FEDERAL PAYMENT FOR GENERAL PLAN SERVICES-
 `(1) DETERMINATION OF PAYMENT AMOUNT- For purposes of subsection (a),
 the Federal payment for general plan services for a year in the case of a
 State shall be equal to the Federal share of the sum of the products of the
 average national per capita expenditures (as determined under subsection (d))
 for all benefits and services (except as provided in paragraph (2)) under
 all State plans for each class of individuals established by the National
 Board under section 2131(b)(1) and the number of such individuals residing
 in the State, adjusted by the National Board to take into account differences
 in wages and wage-related costs of such services among the States.
 `(2) EXCLUSION OF COSTS OF CERTAIN SERVICES- In determining the average
 national per capita expenditures for benefits and services under all State
 plans under paragraph (1), there shall be excluded any expenditures under
 State plans for--
 `(A) long-term care services (as described in section 2113); and
 `(B) optional benefits and services provided by a State under its State
 plan under section 2118.
 `(3) FEDERAL SHARE- For purposes of paragraph (1), the Federal share
 shall be equal to 40 percent, except that the National Board may reduce
 the Federal share in the case of a State plan that does not meet all of
 the requirements of this title (but in no event may the Federal share be
 less than 30 percent).
 `(c) FEDERAL PAYMENT FOR LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES- For purposes of subsection
 (a), the Federal payment for State plan services in the case of a State
 shall be equal to 100 percent of the sum of the products of the average
 national per capita expenditures (as determined under subsection (d))
 for long-term care services (as described in section 2113) under all State
 plans for each class of individuals established under section 2131(b)(1)
 and the number of such individuals residing in the State, adjusted by the
 National Board to take into account differences in wages and wage-related
 costs of such services among the States.
 `(d) DETERMINATION OF AVERAGE NATIONAL PER CAPITA EXPENDITURES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of subsections (b) and (c), average national
 per capita expenditures for a year with respect to a group of individuals
 described in such subsections shall be based on the National Board's estimate
 (using the estimated local health care expenditures submitted by district
 boards under paragraph (2)) of the average per capita expenditures to be
 made for benefits and services under all State plans during the year with
 respect to that group.
 `(2) SUBMISSION OF AVERAGE PER CAPITA EXPENDITURES BY DISTRICT BOARDS-
 Not later than 3 months before the beginning of each calendar year, each
 district board shall submit to the National Board its estimated average
 per capita expenditures (as determined under section 2131(b)(2)).
 `(e) USE OF PAYMENTS FOR DISTRICT BOARDS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A State shall use the payment made under subsection
 (a) to reimburse the district boards located in the State for the costs
 incurred by the districts in carrying out the State plan.
 `(2) EXCEPTION FOR STATES OPERATING UNDER WAIVER- Paragraph (1) shall
 not apply to a State that has received a waiver from the National Board
 under section 2102(c) or 2104(c) of the requirement that it administer its
 State plan during the quarter through the establishment of local health
 care districts.
 `(f) ELIGIBILITY OF STATES- For purposes of making a payment to a State for
 a quarter under subsection (a), a State is an `eligible State' if, prior
 to the first day of the year in which the quarter occurs, the National
 Board certifies that the State--
 `(1) has established a State plan that meets the requirements of this part;
 `(2) has established and is operating a statewide quality assurance
 mechanism that meets the requirements of part D; and
 `(3) has enacted and is enforcing laws, rules, or regulations relating to
 medical malpractice liability that meet the requirements of part F.
 `(g) PROPOSALS FOR OTHER ADJUSTMENTS- Not later than 8 months before
 the beginning of each calendar year, the National Board shall submit
 a report to Congress describing any additional adjustments to Federal
 payment amounts under subsections (b)(1) and (c)(1) that the National
 Board considers appropriate to reflect differences in the costs incurred
 by States under State plans that are attributable to factors beyond the
 control of State Health Care Boards, including adjustments necessary to
 take into account the number of individuals residing in the State for whom
 coinsurance allowances and adjustments are required under section 2134(b)(3).
`Part D--Requirements for Quality Assurance Programs
`SEC. 2141. NATIONAL COMMISSION ON QUALITY ASSURANCE.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is hereby established the National Commission
 on Quality Assurance (hereafter referred to as the `National Commission').
 `(b) PURPOSE- It is the purpose of the National Commission to enhance the
 quality, appropriateness, and effectiveness of health care services through--
 `(1) the establishment of a broad base of scientific research; and
 `(2) the promotion of improvements in clinical practice and in the delivery
 of health care services.
 `(c) MEMBERSHIP- Members of the National Commission shall be appointed by
 the President from among individuals nominated by the National Board to
 serve for fixed (and staggered) terms and in a manner as to provide for
 representation of the viewpoints of relevant health professions, health
 institutions and programs, and the general public (including representation
 of various population groups in the public).
 `(d) DUTIES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The National Commission shall--
 `(A) monitor the effectiveness of State and local health care district
 quality programs;
 `(B) establish, evaluate, and update national minimum standards and
 guidelines for institutional providers of services, physicians, and other
 health care personnel to assure the quality of medical services;
 `(C) provide technical, statistical, and medical information to State and
 local health care district quality programs to improve quality of care; and
 `(D) carry out the administration and oversee the functions of the Agency
 for Health Care Policy and Research established under title IX of the
 Public Health Service Act through activities and programs, including the
 institution and oversight of a grant program to increase the availability
 of training and education of professional and technical personnel in health
 care administration and quality assurance.
 `(2) NATIONAL MINIMUM STANDARDS- In establishing national minimum standards
 under paragraph (1)(B), the National Commission shall take into consideration
 the need to monitor--
 `(A) the adequacy and quality of facilities;
 `(B) the competence of personnel;
 `(C) the comprehensiveness and continuity of services provided by individuals
 and entities subject to the guidelines; and
 `(D) patient satisfaction.
 `(3) APPLICATION OF MODIFIED STANDARDS- The National Commission may waive
 the requirements of any of the national minimum standards established
 under paragraph (2) with respect to individuals and entities in a State
 if the State Commission on Quality Assurance (established under section
 2142(a)) demonstrates to the National Commission's satisfaction that a
 waiver of such requirements is appropriate due to special conditions or
 opportunities in that State.
`SEC. 2142. STATE COMMISSIONS ON QUALITY ASSURANCE.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP- Each State Health Care Board established
 under section 2102(a) shall provide for the appointment of a State Commission
 on Quality Assurance, consisting of members appointed by the State Board
 to serve for fixed (and staggered) terms and in a manner as to provide for
 representation of the viewpoints of relevant health professions, health
 institutions and programs, and the general public (including representation
 of various population groups in the public).
 `(b) DUTIES- The State Commission on Quality Assurance shall--
 `(1) facilitate the transfer of information to and from the National
 Commission;
 `(2) gather information on medical practices in the State;
 `(3) monitor the establishment of local health care district quality
 assurance boards in each health care district and develop rules and
 procedures for the operations of these district quality assurance review
 boards (including rules and procedures relating to the imposition of
 sanctions); and
 `(4) hear appeals from and perform periodic reviews of quality review
 procedures conducted by local health care district quality assurance
 review boards.
`SEC. 2143. LOCAL HEALTH CARE DISTRICT QUALITY ASSURANCE REVIEW BOARDS.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT- Each district board (established under section 2102(b))
 shall establish a local health care district quality assurance review board.
 `(b) DUTIES- Each Local Health Care District Quality Assurance Review
 Board shall--
 `(1) review the performance of individuals and entities providing services
 in the district in accordance with subsection (c);
 `(2) ensure the compliance of such individuals and entities with the minimum
 standards established by the National Commission under section 2141(d)(2)
 and with any other standards and guidelines established by the National
 Commission, the State Commission on Quality Assurance, or the district board;
 `(3) receive and hear complaints from individuals relating to the quality
 of the services provided by individuals and entities in the district;
 `(4) impose sanctions on individuals and entities that it finds to be out
 of compliance with such standards, in accordance with guidelines established
 by the State Commission on Quality Assurance; and
 `(5) provide direct technical assistance to such individuals and entities,
 including encouraging and assisting such individuals and entities in
 implementing internal quality assurance mechanisms.
`Part E--Requirements for State Laws Relating to Medical Malpractice Liability
`SEC. 2151. ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL PAYMENTS FOR STATE PLANS.
 `For purposes of section 2135(f), a State has enacted and is enforcing
 laws, rules, or regulations relating to physician medical malpractice
 liability that meet the requirements of this title if State law meets the
 requirements of sections 2151 through 2153.
`SEC. 2152. HOSPITAL ASSUMPTION OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR MALPRACTICE INSURANCE
COVERAGE AND PAYMENT OF DAMAGES.
 `(a) HOSPITALS RESPONSIBLE FOR OBTAINING INSURANCE- Each hospital in the
 State shall obtain medical malpractice insurance for each physician to
 whom the hospital grants admitting privileges, and shall pay any premiums
 assessed against the physician under such policy.
 `(b) HOSPITALS RESPONSIBLE FOR PAYING DAMAGES ARISING FROM MEDICAL
 MALPRACTICE CLAIMS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), any damages assessed
 with respect to any medical malpractice claim filed in the State against
 a physician to whom a hospital has granted admitting privileges shall be
 assessed against the hospital, and the individual or entity to whom the
 damages are awarded may not collect the damages from the physician.
 `(2) EXCEPTION IF CLAIM ARISES FROM SERVICES PROVIDED AT OTHER HOSPITAL-
 Damages may not be assessed against a hospital under paragraph (1) if the
 damages are assessed with respect to a medical malpractice claim arising
 from services performed by the physician at or on behalf of another hospital
 at which the physician has admitting privileges.
`SEC. 2153. PROHIBITION AGAINST PUNITIVE DAMAGES.
 `No punitive damages may be assessed with respect to any medical malpractice
 claim filed in the State against any provider of health care services.
`SEC. 2154. MEDICAL MALPRACTICE CLAIM DEFINED.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- In this part, the term `medical malpractice claim' means
 (subject to subsection (b)) any claim relating to the provision of (or the
 failure to provide) health care services without regard to the theory of
 liability asserted.
 `(b) MEDICAL PRODUCT LIABILITY CLAIMS NOT INCLUDED- The term `medical
 malpractice claim' does not include any claim in which the claimant alleges
 an injury arising from or relating to the use of a device (as defined
 in section 201(h) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act) or a drug
 (as defined in section 201(g)(1) of such Act) that is filed against any
 entity that is the designer, manufacturer, producer, or seller of the
 device or drug.
`Part F--Miscellaneous Provisions
`SEC. 2161. FEDERAL HEALTH CARE TRUST FUND.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- There is hereby created on the books of the Treasury of
 the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Federal Health Care
 Trust Fund'. The Trust Fund shall consist of such gifts and bequests as
 may be made in accordance with paragraph (2) and such amounts as may be
 deposited in, or appropriated to, the Trust Fund as provided in this part.
 `(2) AUTHORIZATION TO ACCEPT GIFTS- The Managing Trustee of the Trust
 Fund is authorized to accept on behalf of the United States money gifts
 and bequests made unconditionally to the Trust Fund, for the benefit of
 the Trust Fund, or any activity financed through the Trust Fund.
 `(3) AMOUNTS REMAINING IN OTHER TRUST FUNDS- Any amounts remaining in
 the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund or the Federal Supplementary
 Medical Insurance Trust Fund after the settlement of claims for payments
 under title XVIII (as in effect before the beginning of the first year
 in which payments are made under this title) have been completed shall be
 transferred into the National Health Trust Fund.
 `(b) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS TO COVER GOVERNMENT CONTRIBUTIONS-
 `(1) ANNUAL ESTIMATE OF EXPENDITURES- In April before the beginning of each
 fiscal year (beginning with the fiscal year that ends during the 3rd year
 that begins after the date of the enactment of this title), the National
 Board shall determine and report to Congress on--
 `(A) the total amount of expenditures projected under this title in the
 fiscal year involved; and
 `(B) the total amount of revenues (other than those attributable to this
 subsection) to be deposited into the Trust Fund in the fiscal year.
 `(2) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to the Trust Fund for each fiscal year, out of any moneys in the Treasury not
 otherwise appropriated, a Federal contribution equal to the amount by which
 the projected expenditures for the fiscal year reported under paragraph
 (1)(A) exceed the projected revenues for the fiscal year reported under
 paragraph (1)(B).
 `(c) INCORPORATION OF OTHER PROVISIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (2), the provisions of subsections (c)
 through (f) of section 201 (other than paragraph (4) and the 11th sentence
 of subsection (c) of such section) shall apply to the Trust Fund in the
 same manner as they apply to the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance
 Trust Fund and the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund (established
 under section 201).
 `(2) GENERAL REFERENCES- In applying paragraph (1), any reference in
 section 201 to--
 `(A) the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund or the Federal
 Disability Insurance Trust Fund is deemed a reference to the Trust Fund;
 `(B) the Commissioner of Social Security is deemed a reference to the
 Chairman of the National Board; and
 `(C) title II is deemed a reference to this title.
`SEC. 2162. DEVELOPMENT OF PRACTICE PROFILES.
 `Each State shall develop practice profiles with respect to each individual
 practitioner furnishing services under the State's health insurance plan to
 assist district boards and entities with establishing appropriate payment
 amounts for practitioner services under the State plan.
`SEC. 2163. GRANTS FOR MEDICAL MALPRACTICE LIABILITY REFORM PROGRAMS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The National Board shall make grants (in such amounts as the
 National Board considers reasonable and appropriate) to eligible States to
 establish and operate programs to reform State practices relating to medical
 malpractice liability, including programs to establish alternative dispute
 resolution programs, reform State tort law, and reform State insurance law.
 `(b) ELIGIBILITY-
 `(1) APPLICATION- A State is eligible to receive a grant under this section
 if the State submits an application (at such time and in such form as the
 National Board may require) containing such information as the National
 Board may require, including information sufficient to enable the National
 Board to determine that the State has established (or intends to establish)
 a program that meets the program goals described in paragraph (2).
 `(2) GOALS OF PROGRAM- A program meets the program goals described in
 this paragraph if the National Board determines that the program will be
 effective in--
 `(A) reducing excessive health care costs;
 `(B) reducing the provision of unnecessary or ineffective medical care;
 `(C) improving access to medical care;
 `(D) ensuring fair and adequate compensation for and review of injuries
 arising from provider negligence;
 `(E) ensuring reasonable insuring rating and premium setting policies; and
 `(F) improving patient protections, disciplinary standards for providers,
 and the effectiveness of State quality review and licensure boards.
 `(3) PROHIBITION AGAINST USE OF GRANT TO CARRY OUT LIABILITY REFORM REQUIRED
 UNDER STATE PLAN- Notwithstanding any other provision of this section,
 a State may not use any funds provided under a grant under this section
 to carry out any reforms of State tort or insurance law required under
 part E as a condition of eligibility under section 2135(f) for Federal
 payments for benefits and services under the State plan.
 `(c) REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE-
 `(1) SUBMISSION OF REPORTS- A State receiving a grant under this section
 shall submit periodic reports to the National Board (in such frequency as
 the National Board may require) to enable the National Board to determine
 whether the State continues to comply with the requirements of this section.
 `(2) TERMINATION OF GRANT UPON FINDING OF NONCOMPLIANCE- If the National
 Board determines that a State receiving a grant under this section is not
 in compliance with the requirements of this section, the National Board
 shall (after providing the State with notice and opportunity for a hearing)
 terminate the grant, and may require the State to refund any funds provided
 under the grant if the State fails to take necessary corrective measures
 to comply with the requirements of this section.
 `(d) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section, except that no
 funds contained in the Trust Fund may be used for grants under this section.
`SEC. 2164. ASSUMPTION OF STATE RESPONSIBILITIES BY NATIONAL BOARD IN CASE
OF NONPARTICIPATING STATES.
 `(a) STATE ROLE ASSUMED BY NATIONAL BOARD- In the case of a State that does
 not have a State plan in effect under this title for a month (beginning with
 the first month of the third year that begins after the date of the enactment
 of this title), the National Board shall establish and administer a State
 plan in accordance with this title that will provide benefits and services
 during the month to eligible individuals residing in the State under the
 same terms and conditions as a State plan that meets the requirements of this
 title, under such terms and conditions as the National Board may establish.
 `(b) STATE RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAKING PAYMENTS TO PROVIDERS- Notwithstanding
 subsection (a), a State whose plan is established and administered by
 the National Board under subsection (a) shall be responsible for making
 payments under section 2133 to providers of services under the plan, and a
 provider of services may recover amounts owed to the provider under such
 section in a civil action against the State brought in the United States
 district court for the district in which the individual to whom the service
 was furnished resides.
 `(c) STATE SUBJECT TO REDUCED FEDERAL PAYMENT- A State described in
 subsection (a) shall be subject to a reduced Federal payment under section
 2135(a)(3) for each month for which the State does not have in effect a
 State plan under this title.
 `(d) REFERENCES IN TITLE- Except as provided in subsection (b), in the
 case of a State described in subsection (a), this title shall be applied
 with respect to the State and to individuals residing in the State as if
 any reference to a `local health care district' and a `district board'
 was a reference to the State and to the National Board.
`SEC. 2165. DEFINITIONS.
 `In this title:
 `(1) CHILD- The term `child' means an individual under 18 years of age.
 `(2) DISTRICT BOARD- The term `district board' means, with respect to a
 local health care district, the District Health Care Board established
 for the district under section 2102(b)(3).
 `(3) ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL- The term `eligible individual' means an individual
 who is--
 `(A) a citizen or national of the United States, an alien lawfully admitted
 for permanent residence, or an alien otherwise residing permanently in
 the United States under color of law; and
 `(B) a resident of the United States.
 `(4) LOCAL HEALTH CARE DISTRICT- The term `local health care district'
 means a local health care district established by a State Health Care
 Board under section 2102(b).
 `(5) NATIONAL BOARD- The term `National Board' means the National Health
 Care Board established under section 2105.
 `(6) NATIONAL COMMISSION- The term `National Commission' means the National
 Commission on Quality Assurance established under section 2141.
 `(7) PREGNANT WOMAN- The term `pregnant woman' means a woman who has been
 certified by a physician (in a manner specified by the National Board) as
 being pregnant, until the last day of the month in which the 60-day period
 (beginning on the date of termination of the pregnancy) ends.
 `(8) STATE- The term `State' means each State, the District of Columbia,
 the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, the United States Virgin Islands,
 and American Samoa.
 `(9) STATE HEALTH CARE BOARD- The term `State Health Care Board' means,
 with respect to a State, the State Health Care Board established for the
 State under section 2102(a).
 `(10) STATE PLAN- The term `State plan' means, with respect to a State
 during a year, a State plan that the National Board certifies meets the
 requirements of this title for the year.
 `(11) TRUST FUND- The term `Trust Fund' means the Federal Health Care
 Trust Fund established under section 2161(a).'.
SEC. 102. TERMINATION OF OTHER PROGRAMS.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) MEDICARE-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no benefits
 shall be available under title XVIII of the Social Security Act for any
 item or service furnished after the date referred to in subsection (b).
 (B) TRANSITION- In the case of inpatient hospital services and extended
 care services during a continuous period of stay which began before the
 day after the date referred to in subsection (b), and which had not ended
 as of such date, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide
 for continuation of benefits under title XVIII of the Social Security Act
 until the end of the period of stay.
 (2) MEDICAID- No payments shall be made to a State under section 1903(a)
 of the Social Security Act with respect to medical assistance for items
 or services furnished after the date referred to in subsection (b).
 (3) FEDERAL EMPLOYEES HEALTH BENEFITS PROGRAM- No benefits shall be made
 available under chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, for any part
 of a coverage period occurring after the date referred to in subsection (b).
 (4) CHAMPUS- No benefits shall be made available under sections 1079 and
 1086 of title 10, United States Code, for items or services furnished
 after the date referred to in subsection (b).
 (5) VETERANS' BENEFITS- No benefits shall be available under chapter 17
 of title 38, United States Code, for items or services furnished after
 the date referred to in subsection (b) to the extent that benefits with
 respect to such items or services are available under a State health
 insurance plan under title XXI of the Social Security Act.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The date referred to in this subsection is the last day
 of the second year that begins after the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 103. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 Except as provided in section 2105, title XXI of the Social Security Act
 (as added by section 101) shall apply to benefits and services furnished
 on or after the first day of the third year that begins after the date of
 the enactment of this Act.
TITLE II--FINANCING PROVISIONS
SEC. 201. INCREASE IN INDIVIDUAL INCOME TAX RATES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating
 to tax imposed) is amended by striking subsections (a) through (e) and
 inserting the following:
 `(a) MARRIED INDIVIDUALS FILING JOINT RETURNS AND SURVIVING SPOUSES-
 There is hereby imposed on the taxable income of--
 `(1) every married individual (as defined in section 7703) who makes a
 single return jointly with his spouse under section 6013, and
 `(2) every surviving spouse (as defined in section 2(a)), a tax determined
 in accordance with the following table:
`If taxable income is:
The tax is:
Not over $32,450
16% of taxable income.
Over $32,450 but not over $78,400
$5,192, plus 30% of the excess over $32,450.
Over $78,400
$18,977, plus 34% of the excess over $78,400.
 `(b) HEADS OF HOUSEHOLDS- There is hereby imposed on the taxable income
 of every head of a household (as defined in section 2(b)) a tax determined
 in accordance with the following table:
`If taxable income is:
The tax is:
Not over $26,050
16% of taxable income.
Over $26,050 but not over $67,200
$4,168, plus 30% of the excess over $26,050.
Over $67,200
$16,513, plus 34% of the excess over $67,200.
 `(c) UNMARRIED INDIVIDUALS (OTHER THAN SURVIVING SPOUSES AND HEADS OF
 HOUSEHOLDS)- There is hereby imposed on the taxable income of every
 individual (other than a surviving spouse as defined in section 2(a) or
 the head of a household as defined in section 2(b)) who is not a married
 individual (as defined in section 7703) a tax determined in accordance
 with the following table:
`If taxable income is:
The tax is:
Not over $19,450
16% of taxable income.
Over $19,450 but not over $47,050
$3,112, plus 30% of the excess over $19,450.
Over $47,050
$11,392, plus 34% of the excess over $47,050.
 `(d) MARRIED INDIVIDUALS FILING SEPARATE RETURNS- There is hereby imposed
 on the taxable income of every married individual (as defined in section
 7703) who does not make a single return jointly with his spouse under
 section 6013, a tax determined in accordance with the following table:
`If taxable income is:
The tax is:
Not over $16,225
16% of taxable income.
Over $16,225 but not over $39,200
$2,596, plus 30% of the excess over $16,225.
Over $39,200
$9,488.50 plus 34% of the excess over $39,200.
 `(e) ESTATES AND TRUSTS- There is hereby imposed on the taxable income of--
 `(1) every estate, and
 `(2) every trust,
taxable under this subsection a tax determined in accordance with the
following table:
`If taxable income is:
The tax is:
Not over $3,300
16% of taxable income.
Over $3,300 but not over $9,900
$528, plus 30% of the excess over $3,300.
Over $9,900
$2,508, plus 34% of the excess over $9,900.'
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- Section 541 of such Code is amended by striking
 `28 percent' and inserting `34 percent'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992.
SEC. 202. INCREASE IN TOP CORPORATE INCOME TAX RATE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subsection (b) of section 11 of the Internal Revenue Code of
 1986 (relating to tax on corporations) is amended by striking `34 percent'
 each place it appears and inserting `44 percent'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Clause (iii) of section 852(b)(3)(D) of such Code is amended by striking
 `66 percent' and inserting `56 percent'.
 (2) The following provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 are each
 amended by striking `34 percent' and inserting `44 percent':
 (A) Section 1201(a)(2).
 (B) Paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 1445(e).
 (C) Section 7518(g)(6)(A).
 (3) Subparagraph (A) of section 607(h)(6) of the Merchant Marine Act,
 1936, is amended by striking `34 percent' and inserting `44 percent'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992.
SEC. 203. CHANGES IN SOCIAL SECURITY TAXES.
 (a) REDUCTION IN OASDI TAX RATES-
 (1) EMPLOYEES- Subsection (a) of section 3101 of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 (relating to tax on employees) is amended--
 (A) by striking `the following percentages' and inserting `5.7 percent', and
 (B) by striking `3121(b))--' and all that follows and inserting `3121(b)).'.
 (2) EMPLOYERS- Subsection (a) of section 3111 of such Code (relating to
 tax on employers) is amended--
 (A) by striking `the following percentages' and inserting `5.7 percent', and
 (B) by striking `3121(b))--' and all that follows and inserting `3121(b)).'.
 (b) INCREASE IN HOSPITAL INSURANCE TAX RATES-
 (1) EMPLOYEES- Subsection (b) of section 3101 of such Code (relating to
 tax on employees) is amended--
 (A) by striking `the following percentages' and inserting `1.95 percent', and
 (B) by striking `3121(b))--' and all that follows and inserting `3121(b)).'.
 (2) EMPLOYERS- Subsection (b) of section 3111 of such Code (relating to
 tax on employers) is amended--
 (A) by striking `the following percentages' and inserting `1.95 percent', and
 (B) by striking `3121(b))--' and all that follows and inserting `3121(b)).'.
 (c) INCREASE IN CONTRIBUTION AND BENEFIT BASE-
 (1) Section 230(c) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 430(c)) is amended--
 (A) in the first sentence, by striking `and' before `(2)', by striking the
 period at the end of subclause (D) of clause (2) and inserting a comma,
 and by adding at the end, after and below such subclause (D), the following:
`and (3) the `contribution and benefit base' with respect to remuneration paid
(and taxable years beginning) in 1993 shall be the contribution and benefit
base which would be determined under this section with respect to remuneration
paid (and taxable years beginning) in such year if such base were $125,000
with respect to remuneration paid (and taxable years beginning) in 1991.';
 (B) in the last sentence, by striking `in 1982 and subsequent years'
 and inserting `in years beginning after 1981 and before 1992'; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new sentence: `For purposes of
 determining under subsection (b) the `contribution and benefit base'
 with respect to remuneration paid (and taxable years beginning) in 1994
 and subsequent years, the contribution and benefit base determined under
 clause (3) of the first sentence of this subsection shall be considered
 to have resulted from the application of such subsection (b) and to be
 the contribution and benefit base determined under that subsection.'
 (2) Section 3121 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking
 subsection (x).
 (3) Paragraph (1) of section 3121(a) of such Code is amended--
 (A) by striking `applicable contribution base (as determined under subsection
 (x))' and inserting `contribution and benefit base (as determined under
 section 230 of the Social Security Act)', and
 (B) by striking `such applicable contribution base' and inserting `such
 contribution and benefit base'.
 (4) Subsection (b) of section 1402 of such Code is amended by striking
 `the applicable contribution base (as determined under subsection (k))'
 and inserting `the contribution and benefit base (as determined under
 section 230 of the Social Security Act)'.
 (5) Section 1402 of such Code is amended by striking subsection (k).
 (6) Clause (i) of section 3231(e)(2)(B) of such Code is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(i) TIER 1 TAXES- Except as provided in clause (ii), the term `applicable
 base' means for any calendar year the contribution and benefit base
 determined under section 230 of the Social Security Act for such calendar
 year.'
 (7) Paragraph (3) of section 6413(c) of such Code is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(3) APPLICABILITY WITH RESPECT TO COMPENSATION OF EMPLOYEES SUBJECT TO THE
 RAILROAD RETIREMENT TAX ACT- In the case of any individual who, during any
 calendar year, receives wages from one or more employers and also receives
 compensation which is subject to the tax imposed by section 3201 or 3211,
 such compensation shall, solely for purposes of applying paragraph (1)
 with respect to the tax imposed by section 3101(b), be treated as wages
 received from an employer with respect to which the tax imposed by section
 3101(b) was deducted.'
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 remuneration paid after December 31, 1992.
SEC. 204. INCREASE IN EXCISE TAXES ON CIGARETTES AND DISTILLED SPIRITS.
 (a) INCREASE IN TAX ON CIGARETTES-
 (1) RATE OF TAX- Subsection (b) of section 5701 of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (relating to rate of tax on cigarettes) is amended--
 (A) by striking `$12 per thousand ($10 per thousand on cigarettes removed
 during 1991 or 1992)' in paragraph (1) and inserting `$30.50 per thousand';
 and
 (B) by striking `$25.20 per thousand ($21 per thousand on cigarettes removed
 during 1991 or 1992)' in paragraph (2) and inserting `$64.05 per thousand'.
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall apply
 with respect to articles removed after December 31, 1992.
 (3) FLOOR STOCKS-
 (A) IMPOSITION OF TAX- On cigarettes manufactured in or imported into the
 United States which are removed before January 1, 1993, and held on such
 date for sale by any person, there shall be imposed the following taxes:
 (i) SMALL CIGARETTES- On cigarettes, weighing not more than 3 pounds per
 thousand, $20.50 per thousand;
 (ii) LARGE CIGARETTES- On cigarettes, weighing more than 3 pounds per
 thousand, $43.05 per thousand; except that, if more than 6 1/2 inches
 in length, they shall be taxable at the rate prescribed for cigarettes
 weighing not more than 3 pounds per thousand, counting each 2 3/4 inches,
 or fraction thereof, of the length of each as one cigarette.
 (B) LIABILITY FOR TAX AND METHOD OF PAYMENT-
 (i) LIABILITY FOR TAX- A person holding cigarettes on January 1, 1993,
 to which any tax imposed by subparagraph (A) applies shall be liable for
 such tax.
 (ii) METHOD OF PAYMENT- The tax imposed by subparagraph (A) shall be treated
 as a tax imposed under section 5701 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
 and shall be due and payable on February 15, 1993, in the same manner as
 the tax imposed under such section is payable with respect to cigarettes
 removed on January 1, 1993.
 (C) CIGARETTE- For purposes of this paragraph, the term `cigarette' shall
 have the meaning given to such term by subsection (b) of section 5702 of
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (D) EXCEPTION FOR RETAIL STOCKS- The taxes imposed by subparagraph (A)
 shall not apply to cigarettes in retail stocks held on January 1, 1993,
 at the place where intended to be sold at retail.
 (E) FOREIGN TRADE ZONES- Notwithstanding the Act of June 18, 1934 (19
 U.S.C. 81a et seq.) or any other provision of law--
 (i) cigarettes--
 (I) on which taxes imposed by Federal law are determined, or customs duties
 are liquidated, by a customs officer pursuant to a request made under the
 first proviso of section 3(a) of the Act of June 18, 1934 (19 U.S.C. 81c(a))
 before January 1, 1993, and
 (II) which are entered into the customs territory of the United States on
 or after January 1, 1993, from a foreign trade zone, and
 (ii) cigarettes which--
 (I) are placed under the supervision of a customs officer pursuant to the
 provisions of the second proviso of section 3(a) of the Act of June 18,
 1934 (19 U.S.C. 81c(a)) before January 1, 1993, and
 (II) are entered into the customs territory of the United States on or
 after January 1, 1993, from a foreign trade zone,
shall be subject to the tax imposed by subparagraph (A) and such cigarettes
shall, for purposes of subparagraph (A), be treated as being held on January
1, 1993, for sale.
 (b) INCREASE IN TAX ON DISTILLED SPIRITS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 5001(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
 (relating to rate of tax on distilled spirits) is amended by striking
 `$13.50' each place it appears in paragraphs (1) and (3) and inserting
 `$50.00'.
 (2) TECHNICAL AMENDMENT- Section 5010 of such Code (relating to credit
 for wine and flavors content) is amended by striking `$13.50' each place
 it appears in paragraphs (1)(A) and (2) and inserting `$50.00'.
 (3) FLOOR STOCKS-
 (A) IMPOSITION OF TAX- On any item subject to tax under section 5001 of
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 that is removed before January 1, 1993,
 and held after such date for sale by any person, there shall be imposed
 a tax equal to $36.50.
 (B) LIABILITY FOR TAX AND METHOD OF PAYMENT-
 (i) LIABILITY FOR TAX- A person holding an item to which any tax imposed
 by subparagraph (A) applies shall be liable for such tax.
 (ii) METHOD OF PAYMENT- The tax imposed on any item by subparagraph (A)
 shall be treated as a tax imposed under section 5001 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 and shall be due and payable on February 13, 1993,
 in the same manner as the tax imposed under such section is payable with
 respect to such items removed on January 1, 1993.
 (C) EXCEPTION FOR RETAILERS- To the extent provided in regulations prescribed
 by the Secretary of the Treasury or the Secretary's delegate, the tax
 imposed by subparagraph (A) shall not apply to items in retail stocks held
 after December 31, 1992, on the premises of a retail establishment where
 alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises only.
 (D) TREATMENT OF ITEMS IN FOREIGN TRADE ZONES- Notwithstanding the Act
 of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 998, 19 U.S.C. 81a), or any other provision
 of law, any item which is located in a foreign trade zone on January 1,
 1993, shall be subject to the tax imposed by subparagraph (A) and shall
 be treated for purposes of this paragraph as held on such date for sale if--
 (i) internal revenue taxes have been determined, or customs duties
 liquidated, with respect to such item before such date pursuant to a
 request made under the first proviso of section 3(a) of such Act, or
 (ii) such item is held on such date under the supervision of a customs
 officer pursuant to the second proviso of such section 3(a).
Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury or the
Secretary's delegate, provisions similar to sections 5062 and 5064 of such Code
shall apply to any item with respect to which tax is imposed by subparagraph
(A) by reason of this subparagraph.
 (E) OTHER LAWS APPLICABLE- All provisions of law, including penalties,
 applicable with respect to the excise taxes imposed under section 5001 of
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall, insofar as applicable and not
 inconsistent with the provisions of this paragraph, apply in respect of
 the taxes imposed by subparagraph (A).
 (4) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to
 items removed after December 31, 1992.
 (c) INCREASE IN OTHER EXCISE TAXES- The National Health Care Board
 established under section 2105 of the Social Security Act (as added by
 section 101) shall recommend to the Congress not later than January 1,
 1993, increases in other excise taxes under the Internal Revenue Code of
 1986 resulting in additional annual revenues of $5,000,000,000.