[Congressional Bills 106th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 798 Introduced in House (IH)]

106th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 798

To provide for the permanent protection of the resources of the United 
 States in the year 2000 and beyond.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 February 23, 1999

 Mr. George Miller of California (for himself, Ms. Pelosi, Mr. 
Blumenauer, Mr. McGovern, Mr. Maloney of Connecticut, Mr. DeFazio, Mr. 
 McDermott, Mr. Ackerman, Mr. Delahunt, Mr. Lantos, Mr. Markey, Mr. 
 Tierney, Mrs. Mink of Hawaii, Mr. Meehan, Mr. Stark, Mr. Waxman, Ms. 
 Lee, Ms. Woolsey, Mr. Sherman, Mr. Kildee, Mr. Bonior, Mr. Farr of 
 California, Ms. Eshoo, Mr. Pallone, Mrs. Christian-Christensen, Mrs. 
 Capps, Mr. Inslee, Mr. Gephardt, Mr. Kennedy of Rhode Island, Mrs. 
 Jones of Ohio, Mr. Rahall, Mr. Gejdenson, Mr. Rothman, Mr. Frank of 
 Massachusetts, and Mr. Sanders) introduced the following bill; which 
 was referred to the Committee on Resources, and in addition to the 
Committee on Agriculture, for a period to be subsequently determined by 
the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall 
 within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

To provide for the permanent protection of the resources of the United 
 States in the year 2000 and beyond.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Resources 2000 Act''.

SEC. 2. TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 The table of contents for this Act is as follows:

Sec. 1. Short title.
Sec. 2. Table of contents.
Sec. 3. Findings and purpose.
Sec. 4. Definitions.
Sec. 5. Reduction in deposits of qualified OCS revenues for any fiscal 
 year for which those revenues are reduced.
Sec. 6. Limitation on use of available amounts for administration.
Sec. 7. Budgetary treatment of receipts and disbursements.
 TITLE I--LAND AND WATER CONSERVATION FUND REVITALIZATION

Sec. 101. Amendment of Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965.
Sec. 102. Extension of period for covering amounts into fund.
Sec. 103. Availability of amounts.
Sec. 104. Allocation and use of fund.
Sec. 105. Expansion of State assistance purposes.
Sec. 106. Allocation of amounts available for State purposes.
Sec. 107. State planning.
Sec. 108. Assistance to States for other projects.
Sec. 109. Conversion of property to other use.
 TITLE II--URBAN PARK AND RECREATION RECOVERY PROGRAM AMENDMENTS

Sec. 201. Amendment of Urban Park and Recreation Recovery Act of 1978.
Sec. 202. Purposes.
Sec. 203. Authority to develop new areas and facilities.
Sec. 204. Definitions.
Sec. 205. Eligibility.
Sec. 206. Grants.
Sec. 207. Recovery action programs.
Sec. 208. State action incentives.
Sec. 209. Conversion of recreation property.
Sec. 210. Availability of amounts.
Sec. 211. Repeal.
 TITLE III--HISTORIC PRESERVATION FUND

Sec. 301. Availability of amounts.
 TITLE IV--FARMLAND, RANCHLAND, OPEN SPACE, AND FORESTLAND PROTECTION

Sec. 401. Purpose.
Sec. 402. Farmland, Ranchland, Open Space, and Forestland Protection 
 Fund; availability of amounts.
Sec. 403. Authorized uses of Farmland, Ranchland, Open Space, and 
 Forestland Protection Fund.
Sec. 404. Farmland Protection Program.
Sec. 405. Ranchland Protection Program.
 TITLE V--FEDERAL AND INDIAN LANDS RESTORATION FUND

Sec. 501. Purpose.
Sec. 502. Federal and Indian Lands Restoration Fund; availability of 
 amounts; allocation.
Sec. 503. Authorized uses of fund.
Sec. 504. Indian tribe defined.
 TITLE VI--LIVING MARINE RESOURCES CONSERVATION, RESTORATION, AND 
 MANAGEMENT ASSISTANCE

Sec. 601. Purpose.
Sec. 602. Financial assistance to coastal States.
Sec. 603. Ocean conservation partnerships.
Sec. 604. Living Marine Resources Conservation Fund; availability of 
 amounts.
Sec. 605. Definitions.
TITLE VII--FUNDING FOR STATE NATIVE FISH AND WILDLIFE CONSERVATION AND 
 RESTORATION

Sec. 701. Amendments to findings and purposes.
Sec. 702. Definitions.
Sec. 703. Conservation plans.
Sec. 704. Conservation actions in absence of conservation plan.
Sec. 705. Amendments relating to reimbursement process.
Sec. 706. Establishment of Native Fish and Wildlife Conservation and 
 Restoration Trust Fund; availability of 
 amounts.
 TITLE VIII--ENDANGERED AND THREATENED SPECIES RECOVERY

Sec. 801. Purposes.
Sec. 802. Endangered and threatened species recovery assistance.
Sec. 803. Endangered and threatened species recovery agreements.
Sec. 804. Endangered and Threatened Species Recovery Fund; availability 
 of amounts.
Sec. 805. Definitions.

SEC. 3. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.

 (a) Findings.--The Congress finds the following:
 (1) By establishing the Land and Water Conservation Fund in 
 1965, Congress determined that revenues generated by extraction 
 of nonrenewable oil and gas resources on the Outer Continental 
 Shelf should be dedicated to conservation and preservation 
 purposes.
 (2) The Land and Water Conservation Fund has been used for 
 over three decades to protect and enhance national parks, 
 national forests, national wildlife refuges, and other public 
 lands throughout the Nation. In past years, the Land and Water 
 Conservation Fund has also provided States with vital resources 
to assist with acquisition and development of local park and outdoor 
recreation projects.
 (3) In 1978, the Congress amended the Land and Water 
 Conservation Fund to authorize $900,000,000 of annual oil and 
 gas receipts to be used for Federal land acquisition and State 
 recreation projects. In recent years, however, the Congress has 
 failed to appropriate funds at the authorized levels to meet 
 Federal land acquisition needs, and has entirely eliminated 
 State recreation funding, leaving an unallocated surplus of 
 over $12,000,000,000 for fiscal year 1999.
 (4) To better meet land acquisition needs and address 
 growing public demands for outdoor recreation, the Congress 
 should assure that the Land and Water Conservation Fund is used 
 as it was intended to acquire conservation lands and, in 
 partnership with State and local governments, to provide for 
 improved parks and outdoor recreational opportunities.
 (5) The premise of using oil and gas receipts to meet 
 conservation and preservation objectives also underlies the 
 National Historic Preservation Act (16 U.S.C. 470 et seq.). 
 Revenues to the Historic Preservation Fund accumulate at a rate 
 of $150,000,000 annually, but because the Congress has failed 
 in recent years to appropriate the authorized amounts, the fund 
 has an unallocated surplus of over $2,000,000,000 for fiscal 
 year 1999. To reduce the growing backlog of preservation needs, 
 the Congress should assure that the Historic Preservation Fund 
 is used as was intended.
 (6) Building upon the commitment to devote revenues from 
 existing offshore leases to resource protection through the 
 Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16 U.S.C. 460l-4) 
 and the National Historic Preservation Act (16 U.S.C. 470 et 
 seq.), the Congress should also dedicate revenues from existing 
 oil and gas leases to meet critical national, State, and local 
 preservation and conservation needs.
 (7) Suburban sprawl presents a growing threat to open space 
 and farmland in many areas of the Nation, with an estimated 
 loss of 7,000 acres of farmland and open space every day. 
 Financial resources and incentives are needed to promote the 
 protection of open space, farmland, ranchland, and forests.
 (8) National parks, national forests, national wildlife 
 refuges, and other public lands have significant unmet repair 
 and maintenance needs for trails, campgrounds, and other 
 existing recreational infrastructure, even as outdoor 
 recreation and user demands on these resources are increasing.
 (9) Urban park and recreation needs have been neglected, 
 with resulting increases in crime and other inappropriate 
 activity, in part because the Congress has failed in recent 
 years to provide appropriations as authorized by the Urban Park 
 and Recreation Recovery Act of 1978 (16 U.S.C. 2501 et seq.).
 (10) Although the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 
 1531 et seq.) has prevented the extinction of many plants and 
 animals, the recovery of most species listed under that Act has 
 been hampered by a lack of financial resources and incentives 
 to encourage States and private landowners to contribute to the 
 recovery of protected species.
 (11) Native fish and wildlife populations have declined in 
 many parts of the Nation, and face growing threats from habitat 
 loss and invasive species. Financial resources and incentives 
 are needed for States to improve conservation and management of 
 native species.
 (12) Ocean and coastal ecosystems are increasingly degraded 
 by loss of habitat, pollution, over-fishing, and other threats 
 to the health and productivity of the marine environment. 
 Coastal States should be provided with financial resources and 
 incentives to better conserve, restore, and manage living 
 marine resources.
 (13) The findings of the 1995 National Biological Survey 
 study entitled ``Endangered Ecosystems of the United States: A 
 Preliminary Assessment of Loss and Degradation'', demonstrate 
 the need to escalate conservation measures that protect our 
 Nation's wildlands and habitats.
 (b) Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to expand upon the 
promises of the Land and Water Conservation Act of 1965 (16 U.S.C. 
460l-4 et seq.) and the National Historic Preservation Act (16 U.S.C. 
470 et seq.) by providing permanent funding for the protection and 
enhancement of the Nations natural, historic, and cultural resources by 
a variety of means, including--
 (1) the acquisition of conservation lands;
 (2) improvement of State and urban parks;
 (3) preservation of open space, farmland, ranchland, and 
 forests;
 (4) conservation of native fish and wildlife;
 (5) recovery of endangered species; and
 (6) restoration of coastal and marine resources.

SEC. 4. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) Coastline.--The term ``coastline'' has the same meaning 
 that term has in the Submerged Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1301 et 
 seq.).
 (2) Coastal state.--The term ``coastal State'' has the 
 meaning given the term ``coastal state'' in the Coastal Zone 
 Management Act of 1972 (16 U.S.C. 1451 et seq.).
 (3) Leased tract.--The term ``leased tract'' means a tract, 
 leased under section 8 of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act 
 (43 U.S.C. 1337) for the purpose of drilling for, developing 
 and producing oil and natural gas resources, which is a unit 
 consisting of either a block, a portion of a block, a 
 combination of blocks or portions of blocks (or both), as 
 specified in the lease, and as depicted on an Outer Continental 
 Shelf Official Protraction Diagram.
 (4) Qualified outer continental shelf revenues.--The term 
 ``qualified Outer Continental Shelf revenues''--
 (A) except as provided in subparagraph (B)--
 (i) means all moneys received by the United 
 States from each leased tract or portion of a 
 leased tract located in the Western or Central 
 Gulf of Mexico, less such sums as may be 
 credited to States under section 8(g) of the 
 Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 
 1337(g)) and amounts needed for adjustments and 
 refunds as overpayments for rents, royalties, 
 or other purposes; and
 (ii) includes royalties (including payments 
 for royalty taken in-kind and sold), net profit 
 share payments, and related late-payment 
 interest from natural gas and oil leases issued 
 pursuant to the Outer Continental Shelf Lands 
 Act (43 U.S.C. 1331) for such a lease tract or 
 portion; and
 (B) does not include any moneys received by the 
 United States under--
 (i) any lease issued on or after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act; or
 (ii) any lease under which no oil or gas 
 production has occurred before January 1, 1999.

SEC. 5. REDUCTION IN DEPOSITS OF QUALIFIED OCS REVENUES FOR ANY FISCAL 
 YEAR FOR WHICH THOSE REVENUES ARE REDUCED.

 (a) Reduction in Deposits.--The amount of qualified Outer 
Continental Shelf revenues that is otherwise required to be deposited 
for a limited fiscal year into the Land and Water Conservation Fund, 
the Historic Preservation Fund, or any other fund or account 
established by this Act (including the amendments made by this Act) is 
hereby reduced, so that--
 (1) the ratio that the amount deposited (after the 
 reduction) bears to the amount that would otherwise be 
 deposited, is equal to
 (2) the ratio that the amount of qualified Outer 
 Continental Shelf Revenues for the fiscal year bears to--
 (A) $2,050,000 for fiscal years 2000 and 2001;
 (B) $2,150,000 for fiscal years 2002, 2003, and 
 2004; and
 (C) $2,300,000 for fiscal year 2005 and each fiscal 
 year thereafter.
 (b) No Reduction in Deposits of Interest.--Subsection (a) shall not 
apply to deposits of interest earned from investment of amounts in a 
fund or other account.
 (c) Limited Fiscal Year Defined.--In this section, the term 
``limited fiscal year'' means a fiscal year in which the total amount 
received by the United States as qualified Outer Continental Shelf 
revenues is less than--
 (1) $2,050,000, for fiscal years 2000 and 2001;
 (2) $2,150,000, for fiscal years 2002, 2003, and 2004; and
 (3) $2,300,000, for fiscal year 2005 and each fiscal year 
 thereafter.

SEC. 6. LIMITATION ON USE OF AVAILABLE AMOUNTS FOR ADMINISTRATION.

 Notwithstanding any other provision of law, of amounts made 
available by this Act (including the amendments made by this Act) for a 
particular activity, not more than 2 percent may be used for 
administrative expenses of that activity.

SEC. 7. BUDGETARY TREATMENT OF RECEIPTS AND DISBURSEMENTS.

 Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the receipts and 
disbursements of funds under this Act and the amendments made by this 
Act--
 (1) shall not be counted as new budget authority, outlays, 
 receipts, or deficit or surplus for purposes of--
 (A) the budget of the United States Government as 
 submitted by the President;
 (B) the congressional budget (including allocations 
 of budget authority and outlays provided therein); or
 (C) the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit 
 Control Act of 1985; and
 (2) shall be exempt from any general budget limitation 
 imposed by statute on expenditures and net lending (budget 
 outlays) of the United States Government.

 TITLE I--LAND AND WATER CONSERVATION FUND REVITALIZATION

SEC. 101. AMENDMENT OF LAND AND WATER CONSERVATION FUND ACT OF 1965.

 Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this title an 
amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal 
of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to 
be made to a section or other provision of the Land and Water 
Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16 U.S.C. 460l-4 et seq.)

SEC. 102. EXTENSION OF PERIOD FOR DEPOSITING AMOUNTS INTO FUND.

 Section 2 (16 U.S.C. 460l-5) is amended--
 (1) in the matter preceding subsection (a) by striking 
 ``During the period ending September 30, 2015, there shall be 
 covered into'' and inserting ``There shall be deposited into'';
 (2) in paragraph (c)(1) by striking ``through September 30, 
 2015''; and
 (3) in paragraph (c)(2)--
 (A) by striking ``shall be credited to the fund'' 
 and all that follows through ``as amended (43 U.S.C. 
 1331 et seq.)'' and inserting ``shall be deposited into 
 the fund, subject to section 5 of the Resources 2000 
 Act, from amounts due and payable to the United States 
 as qualified Outer Continental Shelf revenues (as that 
 term is defined in section 4 of that Act)''; and
 (B) in the proviso by striking ``covered'' and 
 inserting ``deposited''.

SEC. 103. AVAILABILITY OF AMOUNTS.

 Section 3 (16 U.S.C. 460l-6) is amended by striking so much as 
precedes the third sentence and inserting the following:

 ``appropriations

 ``Sec. 3. (a) Of amounts in the fund, up to $900,000,000 shall be 
available each fiscal year for obligation or expenditure without 
further appropriation, and shall remain available until expended.
 ``(b) Moneys made available for obligation or expenditure from the 
fund or from the special account established under section 4(i)(1) may 
be obligated or expended only as provided in this Act.
 ``(c) The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest moneys in the fund 
that are excess to expenditures in public debt securities with 
maturities suitable to the needs of the fund, as determined by the 
Secretary of the Treasury, and bearing interest at rates determined by 
the Secretary of the Treasury, taking into consideration current market 
yields on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States of 
comparable maturity. Interest earned on such investments shall be 
deposited into the fund.''.

SEC. 104. ALLOCATION AND USE OF FUND.

 Section 5 (16 U.S.C. 460l-7) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 5. ALLOCATION AND USE OF FUNDS.

 ``(a) In General.--Of the amounts made available for each fiscal 
year by this Act--
 ``(1) 50 percent shall be available for Federal purposes 
 (in this section referred to as the `Federal portion'); and
 ``(2) 50 percent shall be available for grants to States.
 ``(b) Use of Federal Portion.--The President shall, in the annual 
budget submitted by the President for each fiscal year, specify the 
purposes for which the Federal portion of the fund is to be used by the 
Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture. Such funds 
shall be used by the Secretary concerned for the purposes specified by 
the President in such budget submission unless the Congress, in an Act 
making appropriations for the Department of the Interior and related 
agencies for such fiscal year, specifies that any part of such Federal 
portion shall be used by the Secretary concerned for other Federal 
purposes as authorized by this Act.
 ``(c) Federal Priority List.--(1) For purposes of the budget 
submission of the President for each fiscal year, the President shall 
require the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture 
to prepare Federal priority lists for expenditure of the Federal 
portion.
 ``(2) The Secretaries shall prepare the lists in consultation with 
the head of each affected bureau or agency, taking into account the 
best professional judgment regarding the land acquisition priorities 
and policies of each bureau or agency.
 ``(3) In preparing the priority lists, the Secretaries shall 
consider--
 ``(A) the potential adverse impacts which might result if a 
 particular acquisition is not undertaken;
 ``(B) the availability of land appraisal and other 
 information necessary to complete an acquisition in a timely 
 manner; and
 ``(C) such other factors as the Secretaries consider 
 appropriate.''.

SEC. 105. EXPANSION OF STATE ASSISTANCE PURPOSES.

 Section 6(a) (16 U.S.C. 460l-8) is amended by striking ``outdoor 
recreation:''.

SEC. 106. ALLOCATION OF AMOUNTS AVAILABLE FOR STATE PURPOSES.

 Section 6(b) (16 U.S.C. 460l-8) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(b) Distribution Among the States.--(1) Sums made available from 
the fund each fiscal year for State purposes shall be apportioned among 
the several States by the Secretary, in accordance with this 
subsection. The determination of the apportionment by the Secretary 
shall be final.
 ``(2) Two-thirds of the sums made available from the fund each 
fiscal year for State purposes shall be distributed by the Secretary 
using criteria developed by the Secretary under the following formula:
 ``(A) 30 percent shall be distributed equally among the 
 several States.
 ``(B) 70 percent shall be distributed on the basis of the 
 ratio which the population of each State bears to the total 
 population of all States.
 ``(3) One-third of the sums made available from the fund each 
fiscal year for State purposes shall be distributed among the several 
States by the Secretary under a competitive grant program, subject to 
such criteria as the Secretary determines necessary to further the 
purposes of the Act.
 ``(4) The total allocation to an individual State under paragraphs 
(2) and (3) for a fiscal year shall not exceed 10 percent of the total 
amount allocated to the several States under this subsection for that 
fiscal year.
 ``(5) The Secretary shall notify each State of its apportionment, 
and the amounts thereof shall be available thereafter to the State for 
planning, acquisition, or development projects as hereafter described. 
Any amount of any apportionment that has not been paid or obligated by 
the Secretary during the fiscal year in which such notification is 
given and the two fiscal years thereafter shall be reapportioned by the 
Secretary in accordance with paragraph (3), without regard to the 10 
percent limitation to an individual State specified in paragraph (4).
 ``(6)(A) For the purposes of paragraph (2)(A)--
 ``(i) the District of Columbia shall be treated as a State; 
 and
 ``(ii) Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, Guam, 
 and American Samoa--
 ``(I) shall be treated collectively as one State; 
 and
 ``(II) shall each be allocated an equal share of 
 any amount distributed to them pursuant to clause (i).
 ``(B) Each of the areas referred to in subparagraph (A) shall be 
treated as a State for all other purposes of this Act.''.

SEC. 107. STATE PLANNING.

 Section 6(d) (16 U.S.C. 460l-8(d)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(d) State Plan.--(1)(A) A State plan shall be required prior to 
the consideration by the Secretary of financial assistance for 
acquisition or development projects. In order to reduce costly 
repetitive planning efforts, a State may use for such plan a current 
State comprehensive outdoor recreation plan, a State recreation plan, 
or a State action agenda under criteria developed by the Secretary if, 
in the judgment of the Secretary, the plan used encompasses and 
promotes the purposes of this Act. No plan shall be approved for a 
State unless the Governor of the State certifies that ample opportunity 
for public participation in development and revision of the plan has 
been accorded. The Secretary shall develop, in consultation with 
others, criteria for public participation, and such criteria shall 
constitute the basis for certification by the Governor.
 ``(B) The plan or agenda shall contain--
 ``(i) the name of the State agency that will have the 
 authority to represent and act for the State in dealing with 
 the Secretary for purposes of this Act;
 ``(ii) an evaluation of the demand for and supply of 
 outdoor conservation and recreation resources and facilities in 
 the State;
 ``(iii) a program for the implementation of the plan or 
 agenda; and
 ``(iv) such other necessary information as may be 
 determined by the Secretary.
 ``(C) The plan or agenda shall take into account relevant Federal 
resources and programs and be correlated so far as practicable with 
other State, regional, and local plans.
 ``(2) The Secretary may provide financial assistance to any State 
for the preparation of a State plan under subsection (d)(1) when such 
plan is not otherwise available or for the maintenance of such a 
plan.''.

SEC. 108. ASSISTANCE TO STATES FOR OTHER PROJECTS.

 Section 6(e) (16 U.S.C. 460l-8(e)) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (e)(1) by striking ``, but not including 
 incidental costs relating to acquisition''; and
 (2) in subsection (e)(2) by inserting before the period at 
 the end the following: ``or to enhance public safety.''.

SEC. 109. CONVERSION OF PROPERTY TO OTHER USE.

 Section 6(f)(3) (16 U.S.C. 460l-8(f)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(A)'' before ``No property''; and
 (2) by striking the second sentence and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(B)(i) The Secretary shall approve such conversion only if the 
State demonstrates that no prudent or feasible alternative exists.
 ``(ii) Clause (i) shall not apply to property that is no longer 
viable as an outdoor conservation or recreation facility due to changes 
in demographics, or that must be abandoned because of environmental 
contamination which endangers public health and safety.
 ``(C)(i) The Secretary may not approve such conversion unless the 
conversion satisfies any conditions the Secretary considers necessary 
to assure the substitution of other conservation and recreation 
properties of at least equal market value and reasonable equivalent 
usefulness and location and which are in accord with the existing State 
Plan for conservation and recreation.
 ``(ii) For purposes of clause (i), wetland areas and interests 
therein, as identified in a plan referred to in that clause and 
proposed to be acquired as suitable replacement property within the 
same State, that is otherwise acceptable to the Secretary shall be 
considered to be of reasonably equivalent usefulness with the property 
proposed for conversion.''.

 TITLE II--URBAN PARK AND RECREATION RECOVERY PROGRAM AMENDMENTS

SEC. 201. AMENDMENT OF URBAN PARK AND RECREATION RECOVERY ACT OF 1978.

 Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this title an 
amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal 
of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to 
be made to a section or other provision of the Urban Park and 
Recreation Recovery Act of 1978 (16 U.S.C. 2501 et seq.).

SEC. 202. PURPOSES.

 The purpose of this title is to provide a dedicated source of 
funding to assist local governments in improving their park and 
recreation systems.

SEC. 203. AUTHORITY TO DEVELOP NEW AREAS AND FACILITIES.

 Section 1003 (16 U.S.C. 2502) is amended by inserting ``development 
of new recreation areas and facilities, including the acquisition of 
lands for such development,'' after ``rehabilitation of critically 
needed recreation areas, facilities,''.

SEC. 204. DEFINITIONS.

 Section 1004 (16 U.S.C. 2503) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (j) by striking ``and'' after the 
 semicolon;
 (2) in paragraph (k) by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting a semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(l) `development grants'--
 ``(1) means matching capital grants to units of 
 local government to cover costs of development, land 
 acquisition, and construction on existing or new 
 neighborhood recreation sites, including indoor and 
 outdoor recreational areas and facilities, and support 
 facilities; and
 ``(2) does not include landscaping, routine 
 maintenance, and upkeep activities;
 ``(m) `qualified Outer Continental Shelf revenues' has the 
 meaning given that term in section 4 of the Resources 2000 Act; 
 and
 ``(n) `Secretary' means the Secretary of the Interior.''.

SEC. 205. ELIGIBILITY.

 Section 1005(a) (16 U.S.C. 2504(a)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(a) Eligibility of general purpose local governments to compete 
for assistance under this title shall be based upon need as determined 
by the Secretary. Generally, eligible general purpose local governments 
shall include the following:
 ``(1) All political subdivisions of Metropolitan, Primary, 
 or Consolidated Statistical Areas, as determined by the most 
 recent Census.
 ``(2) Any other city or town within such a Metropolitan 
 Statistical Area, that has a total population of 50,000 or more 
 as determined by the most recent Census.
 ``(3) Any other county, parish, or township with a total 
 population of 250,000 or more as determined by the most recent 
 Census.''.

SEC. 206. GRANTS.

 Section 1006 (16 U.S.C. 2505) is amended by striking so much as 
precedes subsection (a)(3) and inserting the following:
 ``Sec. 1006. (a)(1) The Secretary may provide 70 percent matching 
grants for rehabilitation, development, and innovation purposes to any 
eligible general purpose local government upon approval by the 
Secretary of an application submitted by the chief executive of such 
government.
 ``(2) At the discretion of such an applicant, a grant under this 
section may be transferred in whole or part to independent special 
purpose local governments, private nonprofit agencies, or county or 
regional park authorities, if--
 ``(A) such transfer is consistent with the approved 
 application for the grant; and
 ``(B) the applicant provides assurance to the Secretary 
 that the applicant will maintain public recreation 
 opportunities at assisted areas and facilities owned or managed 
 by the applicant in accordance with section 1010.
 ``(3) Payments may be made only for those rehabilitation, 
development, or innovation projects that have been approved by the 
Secretary. Such payments may be made from time to time in keeping with 
the rate of progress toward completion of a project, on a reimbursable 
basis.''.

SEC. 207. RECOVERY ACTION PROGRAMS.

 Section 1007(a) (16 U.S.C. 2506(a)) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a) in the first sentence by inserting 
 ``development,'' after ``commitments to ongoing planning,''; 
 and
 (2) in subsection (a)(2) by inserting ``development and'' 
 after ``adequate planning for''.

SEC. 208. STATE ACTION INCENTIVES.

 Section 1008 (16 U.S.C. 2507) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(a) In General.--'' before the first 
 sentence; and
 (2) by striking the last sentence of subsection (a) (as 
 designated by paragraph (1) of this section) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(b) Coordination With Land and Water Conservation Fund 
Activities.--(1) The Secretary and general purpose local governments 
are encouraged to coordinate preparation of recovery action programs 
required by this title with State plans required under section 6 of the 
Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965, including by allowing 
flexibility in preparation of recovery action programs so they may be 
used to meet State and local qualifications for local receipt of Land 
and Water Conservation Fund grants or State grants for similar purposes 
or for other conservation or recreation purposes.
 (2) The Secretary shall encourage States to consider the findings, 
priorities, strategies, and schedules included in the recovery action 
programs of their urban localities in preparation and updating of State 
plans in accordance with the public coordination and citizen 
consultation requirements of subsection 6(d) of the Land and Water 
Conservation Fund Act of 1965.''.

SEC. 209. CONVERSION OF RECREATION PROPERTY.

 Section 1010 (16 U.S.C. 2509) is amended to read as follows:

 ``conversion of recreation property

 ``Sec. 1010. (a)(1) No property developed, acquired, or 
rehabilitated under this title shall, without the approval of the 
Secretary, be converted to any purpose other than public recreation 
purposes.
 ``(2) Paragraph (1) shall apply to--
 ``(A) property developed with amounts provided under this 
 title; and
 ``(B) the park, recreation, or conservation area of which 
 the property is a part.
 ``(b)(1) The Secretary shall approve such conversion only if the 
grantee demonstrates no prudent or feasible alternative exists.
 ``(2) Paragraph (1) shall apply to property that is no longer a 
viable recreation facility due to changes in demographics or that must 
be abandoned because of environmental contamination which endangers 
public health or safety.
 ``(c) Any conversion must satisfy any conditions the Secretary 
considers necessary to assure substitution of other recreation property 
that is--
 ``(1) of at least equal fair market value, or reasonably 
 equivalent usefulness and location; and
 ``(2) in accord with the current recreation recovery action 
 plan of the grantee.''.

SEC. 210. AVAILABILITY OF AMOUNTS.

 Section 1013 (16 U.S.C. 2512) is amended to read as follows:

 ``appropriations

 ``Sec. 1013. (a) In General.--
 ``(1) Establishment of fund.--There is established in the 
 Treasury of the United States a fund that shall be known as the 
 `Urban Park and Recreation Recovery Fund' (in this section 
 referred to as the `Fund'). The Fund shall consist of such 
 amounts as are deposited into the Fund under this subsection. 
 Amounts in the fund shall only be used to carry out this title.
 ``(2) Deposits.--Subject to section 5 of the Resources 2000 
 Act, from amounts received by the United States as qualified 
 Outer Continental Shelf revenues there shall be deposited into 
 the fund $100,000,000 each fiscal year.
 ``(3) Availability.--Of amounts in the fund, up to 
 $100,000,000 shall be available each fiscal year without 
 further appropriation, and shall remain available until 
 expended.
 ``(4) Investment of excess amounts.--The Secretary of the 
 Treasury shall invest moneys in the Fund that are excess to 
 expenditures in public debt securities with maturities suitable 
 to the needs of the Fund, as determined by the Secretary of the 
 Treasury, and bearing interest at rates determined by the 
 Secretary of the Treasury, taking into consideration current 
 market yields on outstanding marketable obligations of the 
 United States of comparable maturity. Interest earned on such 
 investments shall be deposited into the Fund.
 ``(b) Limitations on Annual Grants.--Of amounts available to the 
Secretary each fiscal year under this section--
 ``(1) not more that 3 percent may be used for grants for 
 the development of local park and recreation recovery action 
 programs pursuant to sections 1007(a) and 1007(c);
 ``(2) not more than 10 percent may be used for innovation 
 grants pursuant to section 1006; and
 ``(3) not more than 15 percent may be provided as grants 
 (in the aggregate) for projects in any one State.
 ``(c) Limitation on Use for Grant Administration.--The Secretary 
shall establish a limit on the portion of any grant under this title 
that may be used for grant and program administration.''.

SEC. 211. REPEAL.

 Section 1015 (16 U.S.C. 2514) is repealed.

 TITLE III--HISTORIC PRESERVATION FUND

SEC. 301. AVAILABILITY OF AMOUNTS.

 Section 108 of the National Historic Preservation Act (16 U.S.C. 
470h) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(a)'' before the first sentence;
 (2) in subsection (a) (as designated by paragraph (1) of 
 this section) by striking ``There shall be covered into such 
 fund'' and all that follows through ``(43 U.S.C. 338),'' and 
 inserting ``Subject to section 5 of the Resources 2000 Act, 
 there shall be deposited into such fund $150,000,000 for each 
 fiscal year after fiscal year 1998 from revenues due and 
 payable to the United States as qualified Outer Continental 
 Shelf revenues (as that term is defined in section 4 of that 
 Act),''.
 (3) by striking the third sentence of subsection (a) (as so 
 designated) and all that follows through the end of the 
 subsection and inserting ``Such moneys shall be used only to 
 carry out the purposes of this Act.''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(b)(1) Of amounts in the fund, up to $150,000,000 shall be 
available each fiscal year after September 30, 1999, for obligation or 
expenditure without further appropriation to carry out the purposes of 
this Act, and shall remain available until expended.
 ``(2) At least \1/2\ of the funds obligated or expended each fiscal 
year under this section shall be used in accordance with this Act for 
preservation projects on historic properties. In making such funds 
available, the Secretary shall give priority to the preservation of 
endangered historic properties.
 ``(c) The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest moneys in the fund 
that are excess to expenditures in public debt securities with 
maturities suitable to the needs of the fund, as determined by the 
Secretary of the Treasury, and bearing interest at rates determined by 
the Secretary of the Treasury, taking into consideration current market 
yields on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States of 
comparable maturity. Interest earned on such investments shall be 
deposited into the fund.''.

 TITLE IV--FARMLAND, RANCHLAND, OPEN SPACE, AND FORESTLAND PROTECTION

SEC. 401. PURPOSE.

 The purpose of this title is to provide a dedicated source of 
funding to the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the 
Interior for programs to provide matching grants to certain eligible 
entities to facilitate the purchase of conservation easements on 
farmland, ranchland, open space, and forestland in order to--
 (1) protect the ability of these lands to continue in 
 productive sustainable agricultural use; and
 (2) prevent the loss of their value to the public as open 
 space because of nonagricultural development.

SEC. 402. FARMLAND, RANCHLAND, OPEN SPACE, AND FORESTLAND PROTECTION 
 FUND; AVAILABILITY OF AMOUNTS.

 (a) Establishment of Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of 
the United States a fund that shall be known as the ``Farmland, 
Ranchland, Open Space, and Forestland Protection Fund'' (in this title 
referred to as the ``Fund''). Subject to section 5 of this Act, there 
shall be deposited into the Fund $150,000,000 of qualified Outer 
Continental Shelf revenues received by the United States each fiscal 
year.
 (b) Availability.--Amounts in the Fund shall be available as 
provided in section 403, without further appropriation, and shall 
remain available until expended.
 (c) Investment of Excess Amounts.--The Secretary of the Treasury 
shall invest moneys in the Fund that are excess to expenditures in 
public debt securities with maturities suitable to the needs of the 
Fund, as determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, and bearing 
interest at rates determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, taking 
into consideration current market yields on outstanding marketable 
obligations of the United States of comparable maturity. Interest 
earned on such investments shall be deposited into the Fund.

SEC. 403. AUTHORIZED USES OF FARMLAND, RANCHLAND, OPEN SPACE, AND 
 FORESTLAND PROTECTION FUND.

 (a) Farmland Protection Program.--The Secretary of Agriculture may 
use up to $50,000,000 annually from the Farmland, Ranchland, Open 
Space, and Forestland Protection Fund for the Farmland Protection 
Program established under section 388 of the Federal Agriculture 
Improvement and Reform Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-127; 16 U.S.C. 3830 
note), as amended by section 404.
 (b) Ranchland Protection Program.--The Secretary of the Interior 
may use up to $50,000,000 annually from the Fund for the Ranchland 
Protection Program established by section 405.
 (c) Forest Legacy Program.--The Secretary of Agriculture may use up 
to $50,000,000 annually from the Fund for the Forest Legacy Program 
established by section 7 of the Cooperative Forestry Assistance Act of 
1978 (16 U.S.C. 2103c).

SEC. 404. FARMLAND PROTECTION PROGRAM.

 (a) Expansion of Existing Program.--Section 388 of the Federal 
Agriculture Improvement and Reform Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-127; 16 
U.S.C. 3830 note) is amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 388. FARMLAND PROTECTION PROGRAM.

 ``(a) Grants Authorized; Purpose.--The Secretary of Agriculture 
shall establish and carry out a program, to be known as the `Farmland 
Protection Program', under which the Secretary shall provide grants to 
eligible entities described in subsection (c) to provide the Federal 
share of the cost of purchasing permanent conservation easements in 
land with prime, unique, or other productive soil for the purpose of 
protecting the continued use of the land as farmland or open space by 
limiting nonagricultural uses of the land.
 ``(b) Federal Share.--The Federal share of the cost of purchasing a 
conservation easement described in subsection (a) may not exceed 50 
percent of the total cost of purchasing the easement.
 ``(c) Eligible Entity Defined.--In this section, the term `eligible 
entity' means--
 ``(1) an agency of a State or local government;
 ``(2) a federally recognized Indian tribe; or
 ``(3) any organization that is organized for, and at all 
 times since its formation has been operated principally for, 
 one or more of the conservation purposes specified in clause 
 (i), (ii), or (iii) of section 170(h)(4)(A) of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 and--
 ``(A) is described in section 501(c)(3) of the 
 Code;
 ``(B) is exempt from taxation under section 501(a) 
 of the Code; and
 ``(C) is described in paragraph (2) of section 
 509(a) of the Code, or paragraph (3) of such section, 
 but is controlled by an organization described in 
 paragraph (2) of such section.
 ``(d) Title; Enforcement.--Any eligible entity may hold title to a 
conservation easement described in subsection (a) and enforce the 
conservation requirements of the easement.
 ``(e) State Certification.--As a condition of the receipt by an 
eligible entity of a grant under subsection (a), the attorney general 
of the State in which the conservation easement is to be purchased 
using the grant funds shall certify that the conservation easement to 
be purchased is in a form that is sufficient, under the laws of the 
State, to achieve the conservation purpose of the Farmland Protection 
Program and the terms and conditions of the grant.
 ``(f) Conservation Plan.--Any land for which a conservation 
easement is purchased under this section shall be subject to the 
requirements of a conservation plan to the extent that the plan does 
not negate or adversely affect the restrictions contained in the 
easement.
 ``(g) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary of Agriculture may not 
use more than 10 percent of the amount that is made available for any 
fiscal year under this program to provide technical assistance to carry 
out this section.''.
 (b) Effect on Existing Easements.--The amendment made by subsection 
(a) shall not affect the validity or terms of conservation easements 
and other interests in lands purchased under section 388 of the Federal 
Agriculture Improvement and Reform Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-127; 16 
U.S.C. 3830 note) before the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 405. RANCHLAND PROTECTION PROGRAM.

 (a) Grants Authorized; Purpose.--The Secretary of Interior shall 
establish and carry out a program, to be known as the ``Ranchland 
Protection Program'', under which the Secretary shall provide grants to 
eligible entities described in subsection (c) to provide the Federal 
share of the cost of purchasing permanent conservation easements on 
ranchland, which is in danger of conversion to nonagricultural uses, 
for the purpose of protecting the continued use of the land as 
ranchland or open space.
 (b) Federal Share.--The Federal share of the cost of purchasing a 
conservation easement described in subsection (a) may not exceed 50 
percent of the total cost of purchasing the easement.
 (c) Eligible Entity Defined.--In this section, the term ``eligible 
entity'' means--
 (1) an agency of a State or local government;
 (2) a federally recognized Indian tribe; or
 (3) any organization that is organized for, and at all 
 times since its formation has been operated principally for, 
 one or more of the conservation purposes specified in clause 
 (i), (ii), or (iii) of section 170(h)(4)(A) of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 and--
 (A) is described in section 501(c)(3) of the Code;
 (B) is exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of 
 the Code; and
 (C) is described in paragraph (2) of section 509(a) 
 of the Code, or paragraph (3) of such section, but is 
 controlled by an organization described in paragraph 
 (2) of such section.
 (d) Title; Enforcement.--Any eligible entity may hold title to a 
conservation easement described in subsection (a) and enforce the 
conservation requirements of the easement.
 (e) State Certification.--As a condition of the receipt by an 
eligible entity of a grant under subsection (a), the attorney general 
of the State in which the conservation easement is to be purchased 
using the grant funds shall certify that the conservation easement to 
be purchased is in a form that is sufficient, under the laws of the 
State, to achieve the conservation purpose of the Ranchland Protection 
Program and the terms and conditions of the grant.
 (f) Conservation Plan.--Any land for which a conservation easement 
is purchased under this section shall be subject to the requirements of 
a conservation plan to the extent that the plan does not negate or 
adversely affect the restrictions contained in the easement.
 (g) Ranchland Defined.--In this section, the term ``ranchland'' 
means private or tribally owned rangeland, pastureland, grazed forest 
land, and hay land.
 (h) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary of the Interior may not 
use more than 10 percent of the amount that is made available for any 
fiscal year under this program to provide technical assistance to carry 
out this section.

 TITLE V--FEDERAL AND INDIAN LANDS RESTORATION FUND

SEC. 501. PURPOSE.

 The purpose of this title is to provide a dedicated source of 
funding for a coordinated program on Federal and Indian lands to 
restore degraded lands, protect resources that are threatened with 
degradation, and protect public health and safety.

SEC. 502. FEDERAL AND INDIAN LANDS RESTORATION FUND; AVAILABILITY OF 
 AMOUNTS; ALLOCATION.

 (a) Establishment of Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of 
the United States a fund that shall be known as the ``Federal and 
Indian Lands Restoration Fund''. Subject to section 5 of this Act, 
there shall be deposited into the fund $250,000,000 of qualified Outer 
Continental Shelf revenues received by the United States each fiscal 
year. Amounts in the fund shall only be used to carry out the purpose 
of this title.
 (b) Availability.--Of amounts in the fund, up to $250,000,000 shall 
be available each fiscal year without further appropriation, and shall 
remain available until expended.
 (c) Allocation.--Amounts made available under this section shall be 
allocated as follows:
 (1) Department of the interior.--60 percent shall be 
 available to the Secretary of the Interior to carry out the 
 purpose of this title on lands within the National Park System, 
 National Wildlife Refuge System, and public lands administered 
 by the Bureau of Land Management.
 (2) Department of agriculture.--30 percent shall be 
 available to the Secretary of Agriculture to carry out the 
 purpose of this title on lands within the National Forest 
 System.
 (3) Indian tribes.--10 percent shall be available to the 
 Secretary of the Interior for competitive grants to qualified 
 Indian tribes under section 503(b).
 (d) Investment of Excess Amounts.--The Secretary of the Treasury 
shall invest moneys in the fund that are excess to expenditures in 
public debt securities with maturities suitable to the needs of the 
fund, as determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, and bearing 
interest at rates determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, taking 
into consideration current market yields on outstanding marketable 
obligations of the United States of comparable maturity. Interest 
earned on such investments shall be deposited into the fund.

SEC. 503. AUTHORIZED USES OF FUND.

 (a) In General.--Funds made available pursuant to this title shall 
be used solely for restoration of degraded lands, resource protection, 
maintenance activities related to resource protection, or protection of 
public health or safety.
 (b) Competitive Grants to Indian Tribes.--
 (1) Grant authority.--The Secretary of the Interior shall 
 administer a competitive grant program for Indian tribes, using 
 such criteria as may be developed by the Secretary to achieve 
 the purpose of this title.
 (2) Limitation.--The amount received for a fiscal year by a 
 single Indian tribe in the form of grants under this subsection 
 may not exceed 10 percent of the total amount provided to all 
 Indian tribes for that fiscal year in the form of such grants.
 (c) Priority List.--The Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary 
of Agriculture shall each establish priority lists for the use of funds 
available under this title. Each list shall give priority to projects 
based upon the protection of significant resources, the severity of 
damages or threats to resources, and the protection of public health or 
safety.
 (d) Compliance With Applicable Plans.--Any project carried out on 
Federal lands with amounts provided under this title shall be carried 
out in accordance with all management plans that apply under Federal 
law to the lands.
 (e) Tracking Results.--Not later than the end of the first full 
fiscal year for which funds are available under this title, the 
Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture shall 
jointly establish a coordinated program for--
 (1) tracking the progress of activities carried out with 
 amounts made available by this title; and
 (2) determining the extent to which demonstrable results 
 are being achieved by those activities.

SEC. 504. INDIAN TRIBE DEFINED.

 In this title, the term ``Indian tribe'' means an Indian or Alaska 
Native tribe, band, nation, pueblo, village, or community that the 
Secretary of the Interior recognizes as an Indian tribe under section 
104 of the Federally Recognized Indian Tribe List Act of 1994 (25 
U.S.C. 479a-1).

 TITLE VI--LIVING MARINE RESOURCES CONSERVATION, RESTORATION, AND 
 MANAGEMENT ASSISTANCE

SEC. 601. PURPOSE.

 The purpose of this title is to provide a dedicated source of 
funding for a coordinated program to--
 (1) preserve biological diversity and natural assemblages 
 of living marine resources, and their habitat; and
 (2) provide financial assistance to the coastal States, 
 private citizens, and nongovernmental entities for the 
 conservation, restoration, and management of living marine 
 resources and their habitat.

SEC. 602. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO COASTAL STATES.

 (a) Authorization of Assistance.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary may use amounts allocated to 
 an eligible coastal State under subsection (b) to reimburse the 
 State for costs described in paragraph (3) that are incurred by 
 the State.
 (2) Eligible coastal states.--A coastal State shall be an 
 eligible coastal State under paragraph (1) if--
 (A) the State has a Living Marine Resources 
 Conservation Plan that is approved under subsection 
 (d); or
 (B) the Secretary determines that the State is 
 making sufficient progress toward completion of such a 
 plan.
 (3) Costs eligible for reimbursement.--The costs referred 
 to in paragraph (1) are the following:
 (A) The costs of developing a Living Marine 
 Resources Conservation Plan pursuant to subsection (d), 
 as follows:
 (i) Not to exceed 90 of such costs incurred 
 in each of the first three fiscal years that 
 begin after the date of the enactment of this 
 Act.
 (ii) Not to exceed 75 percent of such costs 
 incurred in each of the fourth and fifth fiscal 
 years that begin after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.
 (iii) Not to exceed 75 percent of such 
 costs incurred in the sixth or seventh year 
 that begins after the date of the enactment of 
 this Act (or both), upon a showing by the State 
 of a need for that assistance for that year and 
 a finding by the Secretary that the plan is 
 likely to be completed within that 2-fiscal-
 year period.
 (B) Not to exceed 75 percent of the costs of 
 implementing and revising an approved conservation 
 plan.
 (C) Not to exceed 90 percent of implementing 
 conservation actions under an approved conservation 
 plan that are undertaken--
 (i) in cooperation with one or more other 
 coastal States; or
 (ii) in coordination with Federal actions 
 for the conservation, restoration, or 
 management of living marine resources.-
 (4) Emergency funding.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the 
 Secretary may reimburse a coastal State for 100 percent of the 
 cost of conservation actions on a showing of need by the State 
 and if those actions--
 (A) are substantial in character and design;
 (B) meet such of the requirements of subsection (d) 
 as may be appropriate; and
 (C) are considered by the Secretary to be necessary 
 to fulfill the purpose of this title.
 (5) In-kind contributions; limitation on included costs.--
 (A) In computing the costs incurred by any State during any 
 fiscal year for purposes of paragraphs (1) and (4), the 
 Secretary, subject to subparagraph (B), shall take into 
 account, in addition to each outlay by the State, the value of 
 in-kind contributions (including real and personal property and 
 services) received and applied by the State during the year for 
 activities for which the costs are computed.
 (B) In computing the costs incurred by any State during any 
 fiscal year for purposes of paragraphs (1) and (4)--
 (i) the Secretary shall not include costs paid by 
 the State using Federal moneys received and applied by 
 the State, directly or indirectly, for the activities 
 for which the costs are computed; and
 (ii) the Secretary shall not include in-kind 
 contributions in excess of 50 percent of the amount of 
 reimbursement paid to the State under this subsection 
 for the fiscal year.
 (C) For purposes of subparagraph (A), in-kind contributions 
 may be in the form of, but are not required to be limited to, 
 personal services rendered by volunteers in carrying out 
 surveys, censuses, and other scientific studies regarding 
 living marine resources. The Secretary shall by regulation 
 establish--
 (i) the training, experience, and other 
 qualifications which such volunteers must have in order 
 for their services to be considered as in-kind 
 contributions; and
 (ii) the standards under which the Secretary will 
 determine the value of in-kind contributions and real 
 and personal property for purposes of subparagraph (A).
 (D) Any valuation determination made by the Secretary for 
 purposes of this paragraph shall be final and conclusive.
 (b) Allocation of Funds.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall allocate among all 
 coastal States the funds available each fiscal year under 
 section 604(b), as follows:
 (A) A portion equal to \2/3\ of the funds shall be 
 allocated by allocating to each coastal State an amount 
 that bears the same ratio to that portion as the 
 coastal population of the State bears to the total 
 coastal population of all coastal States.
 (B) A portion equal to \1/3\ of the funds shall be 
 allocated by allocating to each coastal State an amount 
 that bears the same ratio to that portion as the 
 shoreline miles of the State bears to the shoreline 
 miles of all coastal States.
 (2) Minimum and maximum allocations.--Notwithstanding 
 paragraph (1), the total amount allocated to a coastal State 
 under subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) for a fiscal 
 year shall be not less than \1/2\ of one percent, and not more 
 than 10 percent, of the total amount of funds available under 
 section 604(b) for the fiscal year.
 (c) Availability of Funds to States.--
 (1) In general.--Amounts allocated to a coastal State under 
 this section for a fiscal year shall be available for 
 expenditure by the State in accordance with this section 
 without further appropriation, and shall remain available for 
 expenditure for the subsequent fiscal year.
 (2) Reversion.--(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), 
 amounts allocated under subsection (b)(1) to a coastal State 
 for a fiscal year that are not expended before the end of the 
 subsequent fiscal year shall, upon the expiration of the 
 subsequent fiscal year, revert to the Fund and remain available 
 for reallocation under subsection (b).
 (B) Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to amounts that are 
 otherwise subject to reallocation under this paragraph if the 
 Secretary certifies in writing that the purposes of this title 
 would be better served if the amounts remained available for 
 use by the coastal State.
 (C) Amounts that remain available to a coastal State 
 pursuant to a certification under subparagraph (B) may remain 
 available for a period specified by the Secretary in the 
 certification, which shall not exceed 2 fiscal years.
 (d) Approval of Coastal State Living Marine Resources Conservation 
Plans.--
 (1) Submission.--A coastal State that seeks financial 
 assistance under this section shall submit to the Secretary, in 
 such manner as the Secretary shall by regulation prescribe, an 
 application that contains a proposed Living Marine Resources 
 Conservation Plan.
 (2) Review and approval.--As soon as is practicable, but no 
 later than 180 days, after the date on which a coastal State 
 submits (or resubmits in the case of a prior disapproval) an 
 application for the approval of a proposed Living Marine 
 Resources Conservation Plan, the Secretary shall--
 (A) approve the plan, if the Secretary determines 
 that the plan--
 (i) fulfills the purpose of this title;
 (ii) is substantial in character and 
 design; and
 (iii) meets the requirements set forth in 
 subsection (e); or
 (B) if the proposed plan does not meet the criteria 
 set forth in subparagraph (A), disapprove the 
 conservation plan and provide the coastal State--
 (i) a written statement of the reasons for 
 disapproval;
 (ii) an opportunity to consult with the 
 Secretary regarding deficiencies in the plan 
 and the modifications required for approval; 
 and
 (iii) an opportunity to revise and resubmit 
 the plan.
 (e) Living Marine Resources Conservation Plans.--The Secretary may 
not approve an Living Marine Resources Conservation Plan proposed by a 
coastal State unless the Secretary determines that the plan--
 (1) promotes balanced and diverse assemblages of living 
 marine resources;
 (2) provides for the vesting in a designated State agency 
 the overall responsibility for the development and revision of 
 the plan;
 (3) provides for an inventory of the living marine 
 resources that are within the waters of the State and are of 
 value to the public for ecological, economic, cultural, 
 recreational, scientific, educational, and esthetic benefits;
 (4) with respect to species inventoried under paragraph (3) 
 (in this subsection referred to as ``plan species''), provides 
 for--
 (A) determination of the size, range, and 
 distribution of their populations; and
 (B) identification of the extent, condition, and 
 location of their habitats;
 (5) provides for identification of any significant factors 
 which may adversely affect the plan species and their habitats;
 (6) provides for determination and implementation of the 
 actions that should be taken to conserve, restore, and manage 
 the plan species and their habitats;
 (7) provides for establishment of priorities for 
 implementing conservation actions determined under paragraph 
 (6);
 (8) provides for the monitoring, on a regular basis, of the 
 plan species and the effectiveness of the conservation actions 
 determined under paragraph (6);
 (9) provides for review and, if appropriate, revision of 
 the plan, at intervals of not more than 3 years;
 (10) ensures that the public is given opportunity to make 
 its views known and considered during the development, 
 revision, and implementation of the plan;
 (11) identifies and establishes mechanisms for coordinating 
 conservation, restoration, and management actions under the 
 plan with appropriate Federal and interstate bodies with 
 responsibility for living marine resources management and 
 conservation; and
 (12) provides for consultation by the State agency 
 designated under paragraph (2), as appropriate, with Federal 
 and State agencies, interstate bodies, nongovernmental 
 entities, and the private sector during the development, 
 revision, and implementation of the plan, in order to minimize 
 duplication of effort and to ensure that the best information 
 is available to all parties.

SEC. 603. OCEAN CONSERVATION PARTNERSHIPS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary may use amounts available under 
section 604(b) to make grants for the conservation, restoration, or 
management of living marine resources.
 (b) Eligibility and Application.--Any person may apply to the 
Secretary for a grant under this section, in such manner as the 
Secretary shall by regulation prescribe.
 (c) Review Process.--Not later than 6 months after receiving an 
application for a grant under this section, the Secretary shall--
 (1) request written comments on the project proposal 
 contained in the application from each State or territory of 
 the United States, and from each Regional Fishery Management 
 Council established under the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery 
 Conservation and Management Act (16 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.), 
 having jurisdiction over any area in which the project is 
 proposed to be carried out;
 (2) provide for the merit-based peer review of the project 
 proposal and require standardized documentation of that peer 
 review;
 (3) after reviewing any written comments and 
 recommendations received under subsection (c)(1), and based on 
 such comments and recommendations and peer review, approve or 
 disapprove the proposal; and
 (4) provide written notification of that approval or 
 disapproval to the applicant.
 (d) Criteria for Approval.--The Secretary may approve a proposal 
for a grant under this section only if the Secretary determines that 
the proposed project--
 (1) fulfills the purposes of this title;
 (2) is substantial in character and design; and
 (3) provide for the long-term conservation, restoration, or 
 management of living marine resources.
 (e) Priority Consideration.--In approving and disapproving 
proposals under this section, the Secretary shall give priority to 
funding proposed projects that, in addition to satisfying the criteria 
of subsection (d), will--
 (1) establish or enhance existing cooperation and 
 coordination between the public and private sectors;
 (2) assist in achieving the objectives of a National 
 Estuary, National Marine Sanctuary, National Estuarine 
 Research, Reserve, or other marine protected area established 
 under Federal or State law; or
 (3) assist in the conservation and enhancement of essential 
 fish habitat pursuant to the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and 
 Management Act (16 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.).
 (f) Limitation on Amount of Grants.--The amount provided to a 
private person in a fiscal year in the form of a grant under this 
section may not exceed 2 percent of the total amount available for the 
fiscal year for such grants.
 (g) Terms and Conditions of Grants.--The Secretary shall require 
that each grantee under this section shall conform with such record-
keeping requirements, reporting requirements, and other terms and 
conditions as the Secretary shall by regulation prescribe.

SEC. 604. LIVING MARINE RESOURCES CONSERVATION FUND; AVAILABILITY OF 
 AMOUNTS.

 (a) Establishment of Fund.--
 (1) In general.--There is established in the Treasury of 
 the United States a fund which shall be known as the ``Living 
 Marine Resources Conservation Fund''.
 (2) Contents.--The Fund shall consist of--
 (A) amounts deposited into the Fund under this 
 section; and
 (B) amounts that revert to the Fund under section 
 602(c)(2).
 (3) Deposit of ocs revenues.--Subject to section 5 of this 
 Act, from amounts received by the United States as qualified 
 Outer Continental Shelf revenues each fiscal year, there shall 
 be deposited into the Fund the following:
 (A) For each of fiscal years 2000 and 2001, 
 $100,000,000.
 (B) For each of fiscal years 2002, 2003, and 2004, 
 $200,000,000.
 (C) For each of fiscal year 2005 and each fiscal 
 year thereafter, $300,000,000.
 (b) Availability of Amounts.--
 (1) In general.--Of amounts in the Fund, up to the amount 
 stated for a fiscal year in paragraph (3) shall be available to 
 the Secretary for that fiscal year without further 
 appropriation to carry out this title, and shall remain 
 available until expended.
 (2) Use.--Of the amounts expended under this subsection for 
 a fiscal year--
 (A) \2/3\ shall be used by the Secretary for 
 providing financial assistance to coastal States under 
 section 602; and
 (B) \1/3\ shall be used by the Secretary for grants 
 under section 603.
 (c) Investment of Excess Amounts.--The Secretary of the Treasury 
shall invest moneys in the Fund that are excess to expenditures in 
public debt securities with maturities suitable to the needs of the 
Fund, as determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, and bearing 
interest at rates determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, taking 
into consideration current market yields on outstanding marketable 
obligations of the United States of comparable maturity. Interest 
earned on such investments shall be deposited into the Fund.

SEC. 605. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Coastal population.--The term ``coastal population'' 
 means the population of all political subdivisions, as 
 determined by the most recent official data of the Census 
 Bureau, contained in whole or in part within the designated 
 coastal boundary of a State as defined in a State's coastal 
 zone management program under the Coastal Zone Management Act 
 of 1972 (16 U.S.C. 1451 et seq.).
 (2) Fund.--The term ``Fund'' means the Living Marine 
 Resources Conservation Fund established by section 604.
 (3) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Commerce.
 (4) Living marine resources.--The term ``living marine 
 resources'' means indigenous fin fish, anadromous fish, 
 mollusks, crustaceans, and all other forms of marine animal and 
 plant life, including marine mammals and birds, that inhabit 
 marine or brackish waters of the United States during all or 
 part of their life cycle.

TITLE VII--FUNDING FOR STATE NATIVE FISH AND WILDLIFE CONSERVATION AND 
 RESTORATION

SEC. 701. AMENDMENTS TO FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.

 (a) Findings.--Section 2(a) of the Fish and Wildlife Conservation 
Act of 1980 (16 U.S.C. 2901(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1) by striking ``Fish and wildlife'' and 
 inserting ``Native fish and wildlife'';
 (2) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by striking ``fish and wildlife, particularly 
 nongame fish and wildlife'' and inserting ``native fish 
 and wildlife, particularly nongame species''; and
 (B) by striking ``maintaining fish and wildlife'' 
 and inserting ``maintaining biological diversity'';
 (3) in paragraph (3) by striking ``fish and wildlife'' and 
 inserting ``native fish and wildlife'';
 (4) in paragraph (4) by striking ``nongame fish and 
 wildlife'' and inserting ``native fish and wildlife''; and
 (5) in paragraph (5) by striking ``fish and wildlife'' and 
 all that follows through the end of the sentence and inserting 
 ``native fish and wildlife.''.
 (b) Purposes.--Section 2(b) of the Fish and Wildlife Conservation 
Act of 1980 (16 U.S.C. 2901(b)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``nongame fish and wildlife'' each place it 
 appears and inserting ``native fish and wildlife'';
 (2) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as paragraphs 
 (2) and (3), respectively, and inserting before paragraph (2) 
 (as so redesignated) the following:
 ``(1) to preserve biological diversity by maintaining 
 natural assemblages of native fish and wildlife;''; and
 (3) in paragraph (2), as redesignated, by inserting after 
 ``States'' the following: ``(and through the States to local 
 governments where appropriate)''.

SEC. 702. DEFINITIONS.

 Section 3 of the Fish and Wildlife Conservation Act of 1980 (16 
U.S.C. 2902) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2) by striking ``fish and wildlife'' and 
 inserting ``native fish and wildlife'';
 (2) in paragraph (3)--
 (A) by striking ``fish and wildlife'' and inserting 
 ``native fish and wildlife''; and
 (B) by striking ``development'' and inserting ``and 
 restoration'';
 (3) in paragraph (4) by striking ``fish and wildlife'' and 
 inserting ``native fish and wildlife'';
 (4) by amending paragraph (5) to read as follows:
 ``(5) The term `native fish and wildlife'--
 ``(A) subject to subparagraph (B), means a fish, 
 animal, or plant species that--
 ``(i) historically occurred or currently 
 occurs in an ecosystem, other than as a result 
 of an introduction; and
 ``(ii) lives in an unconfined state; and
 ``(B) does not include any population of a 
 domesticated species that has reverted to a feral 
 existence.
 Any determination by the Secretary that a species is or is not 
 a species of native fish and wildlife for purposes of this Act 
 shall be final.'';
 (5) by striking paragraph (6) and redesignating paragraphs 
 (7) and (8) as paragraphs (6) and (7), respectively; and
 (6) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(8) The term `Native Wildlife Fund' means the Native Fish 
 and Wildlife Conservation and Restoration Fund established by 
 section 11.
 ``(9) The term `qualified Outer Continental Shelf revenues' 
 has the meaning given that term in section 4 of the Resources 
 2000 Act.''.

SEC. 703. CONSERVATION PLANS.

 Section 4 of the Fish and Wildlife Conservation Act of 1980 (16 
U.S.C. 2903) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (1) through (10) in order 
 as paragraphs (2) through (11);
 (2) by inserting before paragraph (2) (as so redesignated) 
 the following:
 ``(1) promote balanced and diverse assemblages of native 
 fish and wildlife;'';
 (3) in paragraph (3) (as so redesignated) by striking 
 ``nongame'' and all that follows through ``appropriate,'' and 
 inserting ``native fish and wildlife'';
 (4) in paragraph (4) (as so redesignated) by striking 
 ``(2)'' and inserting ``(3)'';
 (5) in paragraph (5) (as so redesignated) by striking 
 ``problems'' and inserting ``factors''; and
 (6) in paragraphs (7) and (8) (as so redesignated) by 
 striking ``(5)'' and inserting ``(6)''.

SEC. 704. CONSERVATION ACTIONS IN ABSENCE OF CONSERVATION PLAN.

 (a) In General.--Section 5 of the Fish and Wildlife Conservation 
Act of 1980 (16 U.S.C. 2904) is amended--
 (1) in the section heading by striking ``nongame'';
 (2) by striking subsection (c), and redesignating 
 subsection (d) as subsection (c); and
 (3) in subsection (c) (as so redesignated) by--
 (A) in the subsection heading, by striking 
 ``nongame'';
 (B) striking ``nongame fish and wildlife'' and 
 inserting ``native fish and wildlife''; and
 (C) striking ``and'' after the semicolon at the end 
 of paragraph (1), striking the period at the end of 
 paragraph (2) and inserting ``; and'', and adding at 
 the end the following:
 ``(3) are consistent with the purposes of this Act.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--Section 6 of the Fish and Wildlife 
Conservation Act of 1980 (16 U.S.C. 2905) is amended by striking 
``section 5(c) and (d)'' each place it appears and inserting ``section 
5(c)''.

SEC. 705. AMENDMENTS RELATING TO REIMBURSEMENT PROCESS.

 Section 6 of the Fish and Wildlife Conservation Act of 1980 (16 
U.S.C. 2905) is amended--
 (1) in the section heading by striking ``nongame'';
 (2) in subsection (a)(3) by striking ``nongame fish and 
 wildlife'';
 (3) in subsection (d) by striking ``appropriated'' and 
 inserting ``available'';
 (4) in subsection (e)(2)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A) by striking ``1991'' and 
 inserting ``2010'';
 (B) in subparagraph (B)--
 (i) by striking ``1986'' and inserting 
 ``2005'';
 (ii) by striking ``section 5(d)'' and 
 inserting ``section 5(c)'';
 (iii) by striking ``nongame fish and 
 wildlife'' and inserting ``conservation''; and
 (iv) by adding ``or'' after the semicolon;
 (C) by striking subparagraphs (C), (D), and (E);
 (D) by redesignating subparagraph (F) as 
 subparagraph (C);
 (E) in subparagraph (C) (as so redesignated) by 
 striking ``nongame fish and wildlife'' and inserting 
 ``native fish and wildlife''; and
 (F) in subparagraph (C)(ii) (as so redesignated) by 
 striking ``10 percent'' and inserting ``50 percent'';
 (5) in subsection (e)(3)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A) by striking ``1982, 1983, 
 and 1984'' and inserting ``2001, 2002, and 2003'';
 (B) in subparagraph (B) by striking ``nongame fish 
 and wildlife''; and
 (C) by amending subparagraph (D) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(D) after September 30, 2010, may not exceed 75 
 percent of the cost of implementing and revising the 
 plan during the fiscal year.''; and
 (6) in subsection (e)(4)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A) by striking ``nongame fish 
 and wildlife''; and
 (B) in subparagraph (B) by striking ``fish and 
 wildlife'' and inserting ``native fish and wildlife''.

SEC. 706. ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIVE FISH AND WILDLIFE CONSERVATION AND 
 RESTORATION TRUST FUND; AVAILABILITY OF AMOUNTS.

 (a) Establishment of Fund.--Section 11 of the Fish and Wildlife 
Conservation Act of 1980 (16 U.S.C. 2910) is amended to read as 
follows:

``SEC. 11. NATIVE FISH AND WILDLIFE CONSERVATION AND RESTORATION FUND.

 ``(a) Establishment of Fund.--(1) There is established in the 
Treasury of the United States a fund which shall be known as the 
`Native Fish and Wildlife Conservation and Restoration Fund'. The 
Native Fish and Wildlife Conservation Fund shall consist of amounts 
deposited into the Fund under this subsection.
 ``(2) Subject to section 5 of the Resources 2000 Act, from amounts 
received by the United States as qualified Outer Continental Shelf 
revenues each fiscal year, there shall be deposited into the Fund the 
following amounts:
 ``(A) For each of fiscal years 2000 and 2001, $100,000,000.
 ``(B) For each of fiscal years 2002, 2003, and 2004, 
 $200,000,000.
 ``(C) For fiscal year 2005 and each fiscal year thereafter, 
 $350,000,000.
 ``(3) The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest moneys in the Fund 
that are excess to expenditures in public debt securities with 
maturities suitable to the needs of the Fund, as determined by the 
Secretary of the Treasury, and bearing interest at rates determined by 
the Secretary of the Treasury, taking into consideration current market 
yields on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States of 
comparable maturity. Interest earned on such investments shall be 
deposited into the Fund.
 ``(b) Availability for Reimbursement to States.--Of amounts in the 
Native Wildlife Fund--
 ``(1) up to the amount stated in subsection (a)(2) for a 
 fiscal year shall be available to the Secretary of the Interior 
 for that fiscal year, without further appropriation, to 
 reimburse States under section 6 in accordance with the terms 
 and conditions that apply under sections 7 and 8; and
 ``(2) shall remain available until expended.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--Section 8 of the Fish and Wildlife 
Conservation Act of 1980 (16 U.S.C. 2907) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a) by striking ``appropriated'' and 
 inserting ``available''; and
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1) by 
 striking ``appropriated'' and inserting ``available''; 
 and
 (B) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by striking ``8 percent'' and inserting 
 ``2 percent''; and
 (ii) by striking ``the purposes for which 
 so appropriated'' and inserting ``the purposes 
 for which the amount is available''.

 TITLE VIII--ENDANGERED AND THREATENED SPECIES RECOVERY

SEC. 801. PURPOSES.

 The purposes of this title are the following:
 (1) To provide a dedicated source of funding to the Fish 
 and Wildlife Service and the National Marine Fisheries Service 
 for the purpose of implementing an incentives program to 
 promote the recovery of endangered species and threatened 
 species and the habitat upon which they depend.
 (2) To promote greater involvement by non-Federal entities 
 in the recovery of the Nation's endangered species and 
 threatened species and the habitat upon which they depend.

SEC. 802. ENDANGERED AND THREATENED SPECIES RECOVERY ASSISTANCE.

 (a) Financial Assistance.--The Secretary may use amounts in the 
Endangered and Threatened Species Recovery Fund established by section 
804 to provide financial assistance to any person for development and 
implementation of Endangered and Threatened Species Recovery Agreements 
entered into by the Secretary under section 804.
 (b) Priority.--In providing assistance under this section, the 
Secretary shall give priority to the development and implementation of 
recovery agreements that--
 (1) implement actions identified under recovery plans 
 approved by the Secretary under section 4(f) of the Endangered 
 Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1533(f));
 (2) have the greatest potential for contributing to the 
 recovery of an endangered or threatened species; and
 (3) to the extent practicable, require use of the 
 assistance--
 (A) on land owned by a small landowner; or
 (B) on a family farm by the owner or operator of 
 the family farm.
 (c) Prohibition on Assistance for Required Activities.--The 
Secretary may not provide financial assistance under this section for 
any action that is required by a permit issued under the Endangered 
Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.) or that is otherwise 
required under that Act or any other Federal law.
 (d) Payments Under Other Programs.--
 (1) Other payments not affected.--Financial assistance 
 provided to a person under this section shall be in addition 
 to, and shall not affect, the total amount of payments that the 
 person is otherwise eligible to receive under the conservation 
 reserve program established under subchapter B of chapter 1 of 
 subtitle D of title XII of the Food Security Act of 1985 (16 
 U.S.C. 3831 et seq.), the wetlands reserve program established 
 under subchapter C of that chapter (16 U.S.C. 3837 et seq.), or 
 the Wildlife Habitat Incentives Program established under 
 section 387 of the Federal Agriculture Improvement and Reform 
 Act of 1996 (16 U.S.C. 3836a).
 (2) Limitation.--A person may not receive financial 
 assistance under this section to carry out activities under a 
 species recovery agreement in addition to payments under the 
 programs referred to in paragraph (1) made for the same 
 activities if the terms of the species recovery agreement do 
 not require financial or management obligations by the person 
 in addition to any such obligations of the person under such 
 programs.

SEC. 803. ENDANGERED AND THREATENED SPECIES RECOVERY AGREEMENTS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary may enter into Endangered and 
Threatened Species Recovery Agreements for purposes of this title in 
accordance with this section.
 (b) Required Terms.--The Secretary shall include in each species 
recovery agreement provisions that--
 (1) require the person--
 (A) to carry out on real property owned or leased 
 by the person activities not otherwise required by law 
 that contribute to the recovery of an endangered or 
 threatened species;
 (B) to refrain from carrying out on real property 
 owned or leased by the person otherwise lawful 
 activities that would inhibit the recovery of an 
 endangered or threatened species; or
 (C) to do any combination of subparagraphs (A) and 
 (B);
 (2) describe the real property referred to in paragraph 
 (1)(A) and (B) (as applicable);
 (3) specify species recovery goals for the agreement, and 
 measures for attaining such goals;
 (4) require the person to make measurable progress each 
 year in achieving those goals, including a schedule for 
 implementation of the agreement;
 (5) specify actions to be taken by the Secretary or the 
 person (or both) to monitor the effectiveness of the agreement 
 in attaining those recovery goals;
 (6) require the person to notify the Secretary if--
 (A) any right or obligation of the person under the 
 agreement is assigned to any other person; or
 (B) any term of the agreement is breached by the 
 person or any other person to whom is assigned a right 
 or obligation of the person under the agreement;
 (7) specify the date on which the agreement takes effect 
 and the period of time during which the agreement shall remain 
 in effect;
 (8) provide that the agreement shall not be in effect on 
 and after any date on which the Secretary publishes a 
 certification by the Secretary that the person has not complied 
 with the agreement; and
 (9) allocate financial assistance provided under this title 
 for implementation of the agreement, on an annual or other 
 basis during the period the agreement is in effect based on the 
 schedule for implementation required under paragraph (4).
 (c) Review and Approval of Proposed Agreements.--Upon submission by 
any person of a proposed species recovery agreement under this section, 
the Secretary--
 (1) shall review the proposed agreement and determine 
 whether it complies with the requirements of this section and 
 will contribute to the recovery of endangered or threatened 
 species that are the subject of the proposed agreement;
 (2) propose to the person any additional provisions 
 necessary for the agreement to comply with this section; and
 (3) if the Secretary determines that the agreement complies 
 with the requirements of this section, shall approve and enter 
 with the person into the agreement.
 (d) Monitoring Implementation of Agreements.--The Secretary shall--
 (1) periodically monitor the implementation of each species 
 recovery agreement entered into by the Secretary under this 
 section; and
 (2) based on the information obtained from that monitoring, 
 annually or otherwise disburse financial assistance under this 
 title to implement the agreement as the Secretary determines is 
 appropriate under the terms of the agreement.

SEC. 804. ENDANGERED AND THREATENED SPECIES RECOVERY FUND; AVAILABILITY 
 OF AMOUNTS.

 (a) Establishment of Fund.--
 (1) Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of 
 the United States a fund that shall be known as the 
 ``Endangered and Threatened Species Recovery Fund''. The Fund 
 shall consist of such amounts as are deposited into the Fund 
 under this section.
 (2) Deposits.--Subject to section 5 of this Act, from 
 amounts received by the United States as qualified Outer 
 Continental Shelf revenues there shall be deposited into the 
 Fund $100,000,000 each fiscal year.
 (b) Availability.--Of amounts in the Fund up to $100,000,000 shall 
be available to the Secretary each fiscal year, without further 
appropriation, for providing financial assistance under section 802, 
and shall remain available until expended.
 (c) Investment of Excess Amounts.--The Secretary of the Treasury 
shall invest moneys in the Fund that are excess to expenditures in 
public debt securities with maturities suitable to the needs of the 
Fund, as determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, and bearing 
interest at rates determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, taking 
into consideration current market yields on outstanding marketable 
obligations of the United States of comparable maturity. Interest 
earned on such investments shall be deposited into the Fund.

SEC. 805. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Endangered or threatened species.--The term 
 ``endangered or threatened species'' means any species that is 
 listed as an endangered species or threatened species under 
 section 4 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 
 1533).
 (2) Family farm.--The term ``family farm'' means a farm 
 that--
 (A) produces agricultural commodities for sale in 
 such quantities so as to be recognized in the community 
 as a farm and not as a rural residence;
 (B) produces enough income, including off-farm 
 employment, to pay family and farm operating expenses, 
 pay debts, and maintain the property;
 (C) is managed by the operator;
 (D) has a substantial amount of labor provided by 
 the operator and the operator's family; and
 (E) uses seasonal labor only during peak periods, 
 and uses no more than a reasonable amount of full-time 
 hired labor.
 (3) Fund.--The term ``Fund'' means the Endangered and 
 Threatened Species Recovery Fund established by section 804.
 (4) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of the Interior or the Secretary of Commerce, in accordance 
 with section 3 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 
 1532).
 (5) Small landowner.--The term ``small landowner'' means an 
 individual who owns 50 acres or fewer of land.
 (6) Species recovery agreement.--The term ``species 
 recovery agreement'' means an Endangered and Threatened Species 
 Recovery Agreement entered into by the Secretary under section 
 803.
 <all>