HR 4070 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 4070
To provide for universal access to basic group health benefits coverage and
to remove barriers and provide incentives in order to make such coverage
more affordable.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
February 22, 1990
Mr. GRANDY (for himself, Mr. GOODLING, and Mr. BUNNING) introduced the
following bill; which was referred jointly to the Committees on Education
and Labor, Ways and Means, and Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To provide for universal access to basic group health benefits coverage and
to remove barriers and provide incentives in order to make such coverage
more affordable.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Universal Health Benefits Empowerment and
 Partnership Act of 1990'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF POLICY.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) the health care delivery system of the United States provides most
 Americans with a level of access and quality of care that is unsurpassed;
 (2) for a significant minority of Americans, the system works less well
 because they cannot obtain or otherwise do not have basic health care
 coverage under either public or private programs;
 (3) these individuals represent a diversity of situations for which there
 is no single solution;
 (4) assuring access to basic health care coverage and quality care for
 these individuals is a compelling national priority that will require
 commitments from both the private and public sectors;
 (5) the most practical and effective solutions for these access problems
 are ones that--
 (A) preserve the pluralistic base of the health care delivery system of
 the United States;
 (B) emphasize incentives, innovation, and the removal of current barriers
 to access; and
 (C) recognize that both the complexity of the problem and the existence of
 fiscal constraints means that responsibility must be shared among employers,
 employees, insurers, providers, and patients, as well as Federal, State,
 and local governments;
 (6) Federal efforts need to be closely coordinated with others who share
 in the responsibility for improving access to basic health care services;
 (7) Federal efforts need to reflect not only the diversity of interested
 parties but also the diversity of areas where action is appropriate,
 including public health, basic group health coverage, State initiatives,
 medical malpractice laws, Medicaid, and tax incentives; and
 (8) improving access requires dealing with many of the most difficult
 problems in the health system, including--
 (A) the escalating costs, State mandated health benefits, and other factors
 that have made health care coverage less affordable for many employers
 and individuals, especially the near poor who need more creative workplace
 and public options to be able to obtain basic health care coverage; and
 (B) the inability of many individuals to protect themselves against
 catastrophic health care expenses because preexisting conditions make them
 `uninsurable'.
 (b) PURPOSES- Therefore the Congress declares the purposes of this Act
 to be to provide a sound, flexible, and workable Federal framework to
 simultaneously address the issues of access to basic health care coverage
 and the affordability of such coverage, with an emphasis on improving
 health care quality by--
 (1) empowering employers, employees, and other individuals to obtain more
 affordable basic health care coverage, and
 (2) providing incentives for private and public-private partnership
 arrangements to be established for such purposes.
 (c) DECLARATION OF POLICY- In carrying out such purposes, it is the policy
 of this Act to--
 (1) provide universal access to basic group health coverage for all Americans
 under plans offered by employers or, in the case in which such coverage
 is unavailable to employees and other individuals from private sources or
 existing public programs, under a State health benefits system; and
 (2) make such basic health coverage more affordable--
 (A) by removing barriers and encouraging `group' plans and arrangements
 to spread risk and lower expenses;
 (B) by preempting State health benefit mandates, thereby encouraging
 group health coverage providers to offer lower cost basic coverage to
 the uninsured;
 (C) by preempting State barriers to the providing of managed care,
 thereby encouraging competition, innovation of cost-control approaches,
 and quality review;
 (D) by encouraging the development of treatment practice guidelines and
 outcomes research to aid in reducing unnecessary services, increasing
 quality care, and reducing malpractice costs;
 (E) by eliminating tax inequities and barriers--
 (i) to the full deductibility of contributions to health plans covering
 the self-employed, and
 (ii) to the establishment of soundly financed multiple employer basic
 group health plans.
SEC. 3. UNIVERSAL COVERAGE UNDER GROUP HEALTH PLANS AND STATE HEALTH BENEFITS
SYSTEMS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income
 Security Act of 1974 is amended--
 (1) by striking the heading for part 6 and inserting the following:
`Subpart E--Continuation Coverage Requirements';
 (2) by redesignating sections 601 through 608 as sections 641 through 648,
 respectively; and
 (3) by inserting after part 5 the following:
`PART 6--Universal Coverage under Group Health Plans and State Health
Benefits Systems
`Subpart A--General Provisions
`SEC. 601. DEFINITIONS AND SPECIAL RULES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this part--
 `(1) GROUP HEALTH PLAN- The term `group health plan' means an employee
 welfare benefit plan providing medical care (as defined in section 213(d)
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) to participants or beneficiaries
 directly or through insurance, reimbursement, or otherwise.
 `(2) BASIC GROUP HEALTH PLAN-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `basic group health plan' means a group health
 plan, or any combination of two or more group health plans, which includes
 at least a basic health benefits provision.
 `(B) TREATMENT OF UNINSURABLE RISKS- A plan which excludes from coverage
 any individual (who would otherwise be eligible for coverage) solely
 because the individual is an uninsurable risk shall not be treated as
 a basic group health plan, unless the requirements of subparagraph (D)
 are met for purposes of this subparagraph with respect to such individual.
 `(C) TREATMENT OF MATERIAL PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS- A plan which provides
 coverage to any individual under a substantial restriction based on
 a material pre-existing condition shall not be treated as a basic group
 health plan, unless the requirements of subparagraph (D) are met for
 purposes of this subparagraph with respect to such individual.
 `(D) EXEMPTION WHERE ADEQUATE STATE HEALTH BENEFITS SYSTEM OR ALTERNATIVE
 SYSTEM IS AVAILABLE- The requirements of this subparagraph are met with
 respect to any individual--
 `(i) for purposes of subparagraph (B), if such individual is eligible for
 coverage under a health benefits system established and maintained by a State
 under terms and conditions in accordance with subpart C (or any alternative
 basic health benefits system with respect to which the Secretary of Health
 and Human Services has made a determination pursuant to section 4 of the
 Universal Health Benefits Empowerment and Partnership Act of 1990 relating
 to the element of coverage described in section 4(a)(2)(B)(i) of such Act
 (relating to treatment of individuals as uninsurable risks)), or
 `(ii) for purposes of subparagraph (C), if such individual is eligible for
 coverage for the material pre-existing condition referred to in subparagraph
 (C) under a health benefits system established and maintained by a State
 under terms and conditions in accordance with subpart C (or any alternative
 basic health benefits system with respect to which the Secretary of Health
 and Human Services has made a determination pursuant to section 4 of the
 Universal Health Benefits Empowerment and Partnership Act of 1990 relating
 to the element of coverage described in section 4(a)(2)(B)(ii) of such Act
 (relating to treatment of material pre-existing conditions)).
 `(3) BASIC HEALTH BENEFITS PROVISION- The term `basic health benefits
 provision' means, with respect to any plan or combination of plans, an
 arrangement which--
 (A) provides to individuals provided coverage under such plan or combination
 of plans, directly or through insurance, reimbursement, or otherwise, medical
 care (as defined in section 213(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986)--
 `(i) which consists of services determined by the Secretary of Health and
 Human Services, under regulations prescribed by such Secretary pursuant to
 section 3(c) of the Universal Health Benefits Empowerment and Partnership Act
 of 1990, to consist of basic health care services (including physician's,
 inpatient hospital, and outpatient hospital services which are prevalent
 under group health plans and other services which may be necessary for
 basic health care), and
 `(ii) which is covered at a percentage of cost determined by such Secretary
 under such regulations (by means of deductibles, coinsurance, and other
 limits on covered services) to be not less than a percentage which is, taking
 into account the population covered and the extent of cost currently covered
 under group health plans, adequate to meet basic health care needs, and
 `(B) in the case of any individual described in paragraph (2) (B) or (C)
 in relation to a basic group health plan maintained by the employer of
 such individual (or of the person of whom such individual is a dependent),
 requires contributions by the employer of not less than the amount provided
 under the plan with respect to individuals covered under such plan who
 are similarly situated, disregarding any condition under the plan relating
 to uninsurable risks (in the case of an individual described in paragraph
 (2)(B)) or to material pre-existing conditions (in the case of an individual
 described in paragraph (2)(C)).
 `(4) DEPENDENT- The term `dependent' means, with respect to any individual,
 any person who--
 `(A) is the spouse or surviving spouse of the individual, or
 `(B) is, under regulations of the Secretary, a child of such individual who--
 `(i) is under 18 years of age,
 `(ii) is under 23 years of age and a full-time student, or
 `(iii) is otherwise dependent on such individual.
 `(5) EMPLOYER- The term `employer' shall have the meaning applicable under
 section 3(5), except that such term shall include any State (or political
 subdivision thereof), or any agency or instrumentality of 1 or more of
 the foregoing.
 `(6) ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL- The term `eligible individual' means any employee
 or dependent thereof who is not covered under a basic group health plan which
 is maintained by the employer and to which the employer makes contributions,
 unless such employee or dependent--
 `(A) was eligible for coverage under such plan but such coverage was
 declined under such plan, or
 `(B) is excluded from coverage under the plan as an uninsurable risk but
 is eligible for uninsurable risk coverage under any health benefits system
 established and maintained by a State in accordance with subpart C (or any
 alternative basic health benefits system with respect to which the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services has made a determination pursuant to section
 4 of the Universal Health Benefits Empowerment and Partnership Act of 1990
 relating to the element of coverage described in section 4(a)(2)(B)(i)
 of such Act (relating to treatment of individuals as uninsurable risks)).
 `(7) UNINSURABLE RISK- An individual shall be deemed to have been rejected
 for coverage by a basic group health plan or a health benefits system
 established and maintained by a State as an `uninsurable risk' if the plan
 or system supports the denial of coverage--
 `(A) in such terms, or
 `(B) in such other terms or under such circumstances as are, subject to such
 regulations as the Secretary of Health and Human Services may prescribe,
 reasonably equivalent to such a denial.
 `(8) MATERIAL PRE-EXISTING CONDITION- An individual shall be deemed to have
 been provided coverage by a basic group health plan, or by a health benefits
 system established and maintained by a State, under a restriction based
 on a `material pre-existing condition' if, subject to such regulations as
 the Secretary of Health and Human Services may prescribe, under the plan
 or system--
 `(A) benefits (which would otherwise be payable) are not paid solely on
 the basis of a material pre-existing condition, or
 `(B) the costs for coverage of the individual with a material pre-existing
 condition, to either an employer or to the individual, are at a rate
 materially greater than costs for coverage of similarly situated individuals
 without such a material pre-existing condition, to the extent such costs
 are payable to a third party.
 `(b) CROSS-REFERENCES-
 `(1) GENERAL RULE- Except as otherwise provided in this part, for definitions
 of terms used in this part, see section 3.
 `(2) SECRETARY- Except with respect to references specifically to the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, for the definition of `Secretary',
 see section 3(13).
 `(3) REGULATIONS- Except with respect to provisions for which regulatory
 authority is specifically provided to the Secretary of Health and Human
 Services, for provisions governing regulatory authority under this part,
 see section 505.
`Subpart B--Required Coverage Options; Group Health Payroll Deduction Plans
`SEC. 611. COVERAGE FOR ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS UNDER BASIC GROUP HEALTH PLANS
OR GROUP HEALTH PAYROLL DEDUCTION PLANS.
 `(a) REQUIREMENT THAT EMPLOYERS OFFER COVERAGE FOR ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS
 UNDER BASIC GROUP HEALTH PLANS OR GROUP HEALTH PAYROLL DEDUCTION PLANS-
 Each employer shall maintain with respect to each eligible individual a
 basic group health plan under which coverage of such individual may be
 elected or a group health payroll deduction plan (as defined in section 612).
 `(b) SPECIAL RULES-
 `(1) EXCLUSION OF CERTAIN EMPLOYERS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- This section shall not apply to any employer for any plan
 year if, as of the beginning of such plan year--
 `(i) such employer (including any predecessor thereof) has been an employer
 for less than 2 years,
 `(ii) such employer has no more than 2 individuals in such employer's
 employ, or
 `(iii) no more than 2 individuals in such employer's employ are not covered
 under any basic group health plan.
 `(B) EXCLUSION OF FAMILY MEMBERS- Under such procedures as the Secretary
 may prescribe, any relative of an employer may be, at the election of the
 employer, excluded from consideration as an employee for purposes of this
 paragraph. In the case of an employer that is not an individual, an employee
 who is a relative of a key employee (as defined in section 416(i)(1) of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986) of the employer may, at the election of the
 key employee, be considered a relative excludible under this subparagraph.
 `(2) EXCLUSION OF CERTAIN TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES- A plan shall not be treated
 as failing to meet the requirements of this section solely because a period
 of service by an employee of not more than 60 days is required under the
 plan for coverage of such employee or any dependent thereof under the plan.
`SEC. 612. GROUP HEALTH PAYROLL DEDUCTION PLANS.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- For purposes of this subpart, the term `group health
 payroll deduction plan' means a basic group health plan under which
 amounts are deducted by the employer from the employee's wages pursuant
 to an election by the employee and paid as a contribution to such plan in
 accordance with such regulations as the Secretary may prescribe relating
 to withholding procedures and timely payment of premiums.
 `(b) ELECTIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Any election by an employee under a group health payroll
 deduction plan shall specify the amount which is to be deducted in relation
 to the benefits provided under the plan. Any such election may be revoked
 or changed by the employee under the terms of the plan.
 `(2) MANNER FOR MAKING OR REVOKING ELECTIONS- Any election under a group
 health payroll deduction plan (and any revocation or change of such an
 election) shall be made in such form and in such manner as the Secretary
 may by regulations prescribe.
`SEC. 613. AVAILABILITY OF COVERAGE UNDER STATE HEALTH BENEFITS SYSTEMS.
 `In any case in which there is in effect, as of the beginning of a plan
 year of any group health payroll deduction plan, an entity determined by
 the Secretary of Health and Human Services to be a health benefits system
 which is established and maintained by a State and meets the requirements
 of subpart C with respect to the employee, such plan shall not be treated
 as failing to meet the requirements of section 612(a) for such plan solely
 because the amounts deducted are, under such plan, paid for such plan year
 or the succeeding plan year as a contribution to such a system accepting
 coverage of such employee rather than to such plan, if a provider of
 group health plan coverage with respect to the plan rejects an individual
 otherwise eligible for coverage under such plan because of a requirement
 that a certain number or percentage of individuals otherwise eligible for
 coverage under the plan are not covered.
`Subpart C--State Health Benefits Systems
`SEC. 621. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this part, a health benefits system
 established and maintained by a State in accordance with this subpart is
 any system which--
 `(1) is established by State law,
 `(2) is administered by a nonprofit corporation which is established by
 and regulated under the laws of such State and with respect to which the
 requirements of subsection (b) are met,
 `(3) meets the reporting requirements of section 622,
 `(4) meets the participation requirements of section 623 with respect to
 residents of the State,
 `(5) meets the benefit requirements of section 624,
 `(6) meets the contribution requirements of section 625, and
 `(7) provides coverage in accordance with subpart D (relating to uninsurable
 risks and material pre-existing conditions) with respect to residents of
 the State.
 `(b) GOVERNANCE OF SYSTEM- The requirements of this subsection are met
 with respect to a corporation referred to in subsection (a)(2) if--
 `(1) such corporation is governed by a Board of Directors whose membership
 includes repesentatives of at least employers, employee organizations,
 and providers of group health plan coverage, and
 `(2) such corporation is subject under State law to the supervision of an
 agency of the State which is responsible for the regulation of providers
 of group health plan coverage.
`SEC. 622. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- A health benefits system established and maintained by
 a State meets the reporting requirements of this section if the system
 maintains a program under which the system provides, upon the request of
 group health payroll deduction plans under which amounts are paid from
 such plans to the system, such information held by the system as the plans
 require to meet the requirements of part 1 of subtitle B of title I.
 `(b) FORM OF REQUESTS- Each system shall be required to process requests
 made under this section only if such requests are made in such form and
 manner as may be prescribed in regulations of the Secretary.
`SEC. 623. PARTICIPATION REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- A health benefits system established and maintained
 by a State meets the participation requirements of this section if the
 system provides that an individual is provided coverage under the system
 if such individual--
 `(1) is an eligible individual (as defined in section 601(a)(6)),
 `(2) is an individual required to be provided coverage under subpart E of
 this part or under title XXII of the Public Health Service Act,
 `(3) is an individual described in section 632, or
 `(4) is an individual (other than an individual described in paragraph
 (1), (2), or (3)) who is not covered under any arrangement providing basic
 health care services described in section 601(a)(3)(A),
and is not otherwise eligible for coverage under a basic group health plan or
under a plan for medical assistance under title XIX of the Social Security Act.
 `(b) EXCLUSIONS- A health benefits system established and maintained by a
 State does not meet the participation requirements of this section unless
 such system excludes from coverage--
 `(1) except to the extent permitted under section 625(c)(3), individuals
 entitled to benefits under title XVIII or XIX of the Social Security Act, or
 `(2) inmates of public institutions.
`SEC. 624. BENEFITS REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- A health benefits system established and maintained by
 a State meets the benefits requirements of this section if the system
 provides medical care in the form of at least the following options,
 available at the election of the individual provided coverage:
 `(1) BASIC AND CATASTROPHIC BENEFITS- Coverage of basic health care services
 (including physician's services, inpatient and outpatient hospital services,
 and other services that may be necessary for basic health care), including
 catastrophic coverage.
 `(2) CATASTROPHIC ONLY COVERAGE- Catastrophic coverage with respect to
 basic health care services.
 `(3) BENEFITS EQUIVALENT TO STATE EMPLOYEE BENEFITS- Benefits which are
 equivalent to coverage available to a substantial number of employees of
 the State government.
 `(b) COST CONTAINMENT AND QUALITY OF CARE- A health benefits system
 established and maintained by a State shall, to the maximum extent
 practicable, taking into account quality of care, provide for a hospital
 precertification utilization review program, constraint of costs to
 the extent practicable through the use of appropriately managed care,
 and such other cost containment procedures as may from time to time be
 proven effective.
 `(c) TREATMENT OF UNINSURABLE RISKS AND MATERIAL PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS-
 In any case in which the requirements of section 633 are met with respect
 to any individual with respect to whom the system meets the requirements
 of section 631, the requirements of subsection (a) shall be treated as
 satisfied with respect to such individual.
 `(d) DURATION OF COVERAGE- Subject to section 623(b), coverage under a health
 benefits system established and maintained by a State shall not terminate
 solely by reason of the termination of a period of coverage required under
 subpart E of this part or title XXII of the Public Health Service Act.
 `(e) COVERAGE UNDER STATE SYSTEM SECONDARY TO COVERAGE UNDER EMPLOYEE
 BENEFIT PLANS- Coverage under a health benefits system established and
 maintained by a State with respect to any claim shall be secondary to
 coverage provided under any employee benefit plan with respect to such claim.
`SEC. 625. CONTRIBUTION REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this section, a health
 benefits system established and maintained by a State meets the contribution
 requirements of this section if the system does not require, for coverage
 of individuals described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 623(a),
 contributions in excess of levels determined--
 `(1) on the basis of its own experience with respect to covered individuals
 described in such paragraphs (1) and (2), and
 `(2) without regard to any coverage provided under the system to individuals
 who are not described in such paragraphs (1) and (2).
 `(b) VARIANCES IN RATE LEVEL-
 `(1) SEPARATE SCHEDULE REQUIRED FOR CHILDREN-ONLY COVERAGE- A health
 benefits system established and maintained by a State does not meet the
 contribution requirements of this section unless the system provides for
 a separate schedule of contributions with respect to children-only coverage.
 `(2) OTHER VARIANCES PERMITTED- A health benefits system established
 and maintained by a State shall not be treated as failing to meet the
 requirements of this section solely because the system otherwise provides
 for differing rates of contributions to reflect the age, family composition,
 or income of the covered individual and the location at which the covered
 individual is expected to normally receive medical care.
 `(c) CERTAIN STATE AND OTHER CONTRIBUTIONS PERMITTED- A health benefits
 system established and maintained by a State shall not be treated as
 failing to meet the requirements of this section solely because the system
 provides for--
 `(1) payment by the State or any other entity of part or all of the
 contribution with respect to any covered individual,
 `(2) varying the amount of such payment based on the individual's income
 or any other basis, or
 `(3) payment by the State or any other entity of all or part of monthly
 premiums for purposes of enrollment under section 1818 or 1818A of the
 Social Security Act, or of premiums under section 1916(c) of such Act.
 `(d) MAXIMIZED PARTICIPATION- A health benefits system established and
 maintained by a State shall be treated as failing to meet the contribution
 requirements of this section if the Secretary of Health and Human Services
 determines, under regulations prescribed by such Secretary and on the
 basis of past experience, that, under such system, contributions are not
 established and maintained in such form and manner as to be promotive of
 participation in the system.
`SEC. 626. RECIPROCITY AND RELIANCE BY STATES ON OTHER STATE SYSTEMS.
 `The requirements of the preceding provisions of this subpart may be met
 with respect to any State by means of reciprocity agreements between such
 State and any other State with respect to which such requirements are met.
`SEC. 627. REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES.
 `The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall prescribe such regulations
 as such Secretary considers necessary to carry out the provisions of this
 subpart (other than section 622).
`Subpart D--State Coverage for Uninsurable Risks and Material Pre-Existing
Conditions
`SEC. 631. STATE COVERAGE FOR UNINSURABLE RISKS AND PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS.
 `A health benefits system established and maintained by a State provides
 coverage in accordance with this subpart if such system--
 `(1) meets the participation requirements of section 632,
 `(2) meets the benefits requirements of section 633, and
 `(3) to the extent practicable and actuarially sound, provides for separate
 accounting for such coverage so as to separately account at least for
 individuals described in section 632(1)(A) and for individuals described
 in section 632(2)(A).
`SEC. 632. PARTICIPATION REQUIREMENTS FOR UNINSURABLE RISKS AND MATERIAL
PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS.
 `A health benefits system established and maintained by a State meets
 the participation requirements of this section if the system meets the
 following requirements:
 `(1) COVERAGE FOR UNINSURABLE RISKS- The system provides that an individual
 is provided coverage under the system if such individual--
 `(A) is an employee (or a dependent thereof) and has been rejected for
 coverage under a basic group health plan maintained by the employer or by
 the system but would be eligible for such coverage but for the rejection
 of such employee (or dependent) as an uninsurable risk, or
 `(B) is not an employee (or dependent) described in subparagraph (A), and--
 `(i) is rejected for coverage under the system, or
 `(ii) in the case of an individual not otherwise eligible for coverage under
 a basic group health plan, the system, or title XIX of the Social Security
 Act, is rejected for coverage under any policy of insurance which provides
 at least basic health care services described in section 601(a)(3)(A),
but would be eligible for such coverage but for the rejection of such
individual as an uninsurable risk.
 `(2) COVERAGE FOR MATERIAL PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS- The system provides
 that an individual is provided coverage under the system for any material
 pre-existing condition if such individual--
 `(A) is an employee (or a dependent thereof) who is provided coverage under
 a basic group health plan or the system under a substantial restriction
 based on such material pre-existing condition, or
 `(B) is not an employee (or dependent) described in subparagraph (A), and--
 `(i) is provided coverage under the system under subpart C, or
 `(ii) in the case of an individual not otherwise eligible for coverage
 under a basic group health plan, the system under subpart C, or title
 XIX of the Social Security Act, is provided coverage under a policy of
 insurance which provides at least basic health care services,
but such coverage is provided under such a substantial restriction.
`SEC. 633. BENEFITS REQUIREMENTS FOR UNINSURABLE RISKS AND MATERIAL
PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS.
 `A health benefits system established and maintained by a State meets the
 benefits requirements of this section if the system provides, directly or
 through insurance, reinsurance, or otherwise--
 `(1) in the case of individuals described in section 632(1), benefits
 described in section 624(a), and
 `(2) in the case of individuals described in section 632(2), coverage of
 the material pre-existing condition which is not otherwise covered to the
 extent necessary to constitute basic health care services described in
 section 601(a)(3)(A) with respect to such condition, in accordance with
 such regulations as the Secretary of Health and Human Services may prescribe.
`SEC. 634. REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES.
 `The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall prescribe such regulations
 as such Secretary considers necessary to carry out the provisions of
 this subpart.'.
 (b) REGULATIONS FOR DEFINING BASIC HEALTH CARE PROVISIONS-
 (1) INITIAL REGULATIONS- Not later than July 1, 1991, the Secretary of Health
 and Human Services shall publish in the Federal Register proposed regulations
 referred to in section 601(a)(3) of the Employee Retirement Income Security
 Act of 1989 (as amended by subsection (a)). In prescribing such proposed
 regulations, the Secretary shall take into account recommendations submitted
 to the Secretary by the Federal Advisory Council on Health Care Coverage
 and Costs pursuant to section 9(d)(1) of this Act.
 (2) INTERIM REVIEW PERIOD BEFORE ISSUANCE OF FINAL REGULATIONS- The Secretary
 of Health and Human Services shall not issue the regulations referred to
 in section 601(a)(3) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
 1974 in final form before July 1, 1992.
 (3) REVISION OF REGULATIONS- In revising, on or after the effective
 date of the amendments made by this section, the regulations referred to
 in section 601(a)(3) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
 1974, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall take into account
 recommendations submitted to the Secretary by the Federal Advisory Council
 on Health Care Coverage and Costs pursuant to section 9(d)(2) of this Act.
 (c) ENFORCEMENT OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS BY SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND HUMAN
 SERVICES- Section 502(a) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act
 of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1132(a)) is amended by adding at the the end, after
 and below paragraph (6), the following new flush sentence:
`With respect to provisions of subparts C and D of part 6 (other than
section 622), the references to `Secretary' in paragraph (5), and in other
provisions of this part relating to actions brought under such paragraph,
shall be deemed a reference to the Secretary of Health and Human Services.'.
 (d) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of contents in section 1 of such Act
 is amended by striking out the items relating to part 6 of subtitle B of
 title I and inserting the following new items:
`Part 6--Coverage Under Group Health Plans and State Health Benefits Systems
`Subpart A--General Provisions
`Sec. 601. Definitions and special rules.
`Subpart B--Required Coverage Options; Group Health Payroll Deduction Plans
`Sec. 611. Coverage for eligible individuals under basic group health plans
or group health payroll deduction plans.
`Sec. 612. Group health payroll deduction plans.
`Sec. 613. Availability of coverage under State health benefits systems.
`Subpart C--State Health Benefits Systems
`Sec. 621. General requirements.
`Sec. 622. Reporting requirements.
`Sec. 623. Participation requirements.
`Sec. 624. Benefits requirements.
`Sec. 625. Contribution requirements.
`Sec. 626. Reciprocity and reliance by States on other State systems.
`Sec. 627. Regulatory Authority of Secretary of Health and Human Services.
`Subpart D--State Coverage for Uninsurable Risks and Material Pre-Existing
Conditions
`Sec. 631. State coverage for uninsurable risks and material pre-existing
conditions.
`Sec. 632. Participation requirements for uninsurable risks and material
pre-existing conditions.
`Sec. 633. Benefit requirements for uninsurable risks and material pre-existing
conditions.
`Sec. 634. Regulatory authority of Secretary of Health and Human Services.
`Subpart E--Continuation Coverage Requirements
`Sec. 641. Plans must provide continuation coverage to certain individuals.
`Sec. 642. Continuation coverage.
`Sec. 643. Qualifying event.
`Sec. 644. Applicable premium.
`Sec. 645. Election.
`Sec. 646. Notice requirements.
`Sec. 647. Definitions.
`Sec. 648. Regulations.'.
SEC. 4. ALTERNATIVES TO STATE HEALTH BENEFITS SYSTEMS.
 (a) ALTERNATIVE BASIC HEALTH BENEFITS SYSTEMS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- If, at any time before the effective date for the amendments
 made by section 3, the Secretary of Health and Human Services determines,
 under regulations prescribed by the Secretary--
 (A) that there is in effect, with respect to any group of individuals,
 an arrangement which is an alternative basic health benefits system, and
 (B) that, with respect to such group of individuals, such system meets
 requirements (provided in such regulations) for a specified element of
 coverage which are substantially equivalent to the requirements of the
 specified ERISA provision which is applicable to such specified element
 of coverage,
then the requirements of such specified ERISA provision shall be treated
as met with respect to such individuals until such Secretary nullifies such
determination under such regulations.
 (2) DEFINITIONS AND SPECIAL RULES- For purposes of this subsection--
 (A) ALTERNATIVE BASIC HEALTH BENEFITS SYSTEM- The term `alternative basic
 health benefits system' means, with respect to any group of individuals,
 any arrangement (other than a health benefits system established and
 maintained by a State in accordance with subpart C of part 6 of subtitle
 B of title I of ERISA) which--
 (i) includes at least a basic health benefits provision (as defined in
 section 601(a)(3) of ERISA), and
 (ii) meets, with respect to such individuals, the reporting requirements
 of section 622 of ERISA, the participation requirements of section 623
 of ERISA, the benefits requirements of section 624 of ERISA, and the
 contribution requirements of section 625 of ERISA.
 (B) SPECIFIED ELEMENT OF COVERAGE- The term `specified element of coverage'
 means any of the following:
 (i) TREATMENT OF UNINSURABLE RISKS- Rejection by a plan of an individual
 for coverage as an uninsurable risk, within the meaning of section 601(a)(7)
 of ERISA.
 (ii) TREATMENT OF MATERIAL PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS- Provision of coverage by
 a plan to an individual under a restriction based on a material pre-existing
 condition, within the meaning of section 601(a)(8) of ERISA.
 (iii) PROVISION OF CONTINUATION COVERAGE- Provision of coverage by a plan
 to qualified beneficiaries required under subpart E of part 6 of subtitle
 B of title I of ERISA or under title XXII of the Public Health Service Act.
 (C) SPECIFIED ERISA PROVISIONS-
 (i) TREATMENT OF UNINSURABLE RISKS- The `specified ERISA provision'
 applicable to the specified element of coverage described in subparagraph
 (B)(i) is section 601(a)(2)(D)(i) of ERISA.
 (ii) TREATMENT OF MATERIAL PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS- The `specified ERISA
 provision' applicable to the specified element of coverage described in
 subparagraph (B)(ii) is section 601(a)(2)(D)(ii) of ERISA.
 (iii) PROVISION OF CONTINUATION COVERAGE- The `specified ERISA provisions'
 applicable to the specified element of coverage described in subparagraph
 (B)(iii) are section 641(b) of ERISA, section 4980B(f)(8) of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 (as amended by section 3(b)), and section 2201(b)
 of the Public Health Service Act (as amended by section 5(c)).
 (D) STATE- The term `State' has the meaning provided in section 3(10)
 of ERISA.
 (E) ERISA- The term `ERISA' means the Employee Retirement Income Security
 Act of 1974, as amended by this Act.
 (b) FEDERAL ASSISTANCE IN ESTABLISHMENT OF UNIVERSAL COVERAGE-
 (1) GRANT PROGRAM- The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall
 establish by regulation a program of monetary assistance in the form of
 grants to health benefits systems established and maintained by States
 (within the meaning of section 3(10) of the Employee Retirement Income
 Security Act of 1974) pursuant to the amendments made by this Act and
 to alternative basic health benefits systems with respect to which such
 Secretary has made determinations described in subparagraphs (A) and (B)
 of subsection (a)(1). Grants to any system shall be in such amount as
 such Secretary considers appropriate to facilitate the effectuation of
 the policies of this Act.
 (2) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There is authorized to be appropriated
 for the Department of Health and Human Services, for the purpose of carrying
 out the provisions of paragraph (1), $200,000,000 for each of the fiscal
 years 1991, 1992, and 1993.
SEC. 5. CONTINUATION COVERAGE AND STATE HEALTH BENEFITS SYSTEMS OR ALTERNATIVE
SYSTEMS.
 (a) AMENDMENT TO ERISA- Section 641(b) of the Employee Retirement Income
 Security Act of 1974 (as redesignated by section 3) is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(b) SUBSTITUTION OF STATE HEALTH BENEFITS SYSTEM OR ALTERNATIVE SYSTEM-
 The requirements of this subpart may be met by providing, as an option
 to qualified beneficiaries or otherwise, for coverage of them under an
 applicable health benefits system established and maintained by a State
 (or any alternative basic health benefits system with respect to which
 the Secretary of Health and Human Services has made a determination
 pursuant to section 4 of the Universal Health Benefits Empowerment and
 Partnership Act of 1990 relating to the element of coverage described in
 section 4(a)(2)(B)(iii) of such Act (relating to provision of continuation
 coverage)) in lieu of coverage as otherwise required under this subpart.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT TO INTERNAL REVENUE CODE- Section 4980B of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to excise tax for failure to satisfy
 continuation coverage requirements of group health plans) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (d), by striking paragraph (1) and redesignating paragraphs
 (2) and (3) as paragraphs (1) and (2), respectively; and
 (2) by adding at the end of subsection (f) the following new paragraph:
 `(8) SUBSTITUTION OF STATE HEALTH BENEFITS SYSTEM OR ALTERNATIVE SYSTEM-
 The requirements of this subsection may be met by providing, as an option
 to qualified beneficiaries or otherwise, for coverage of them under an
 applicable health benefits system established and maintained by a State in
 accordance with part 6 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement
 Income Security Act of 1974 (or any alternative basic health benefits
 system with respect to which the Secretary of Health and Human Services
 has made a determination pursuant to section 4 of the Universal Health
 Benefits Empowerment and Partnership Act of 1990 relating to the element
 of coverage described in section 4(a)(2)(B)(iii) of such Act (relating
 to provision of continuation coverage)) in lieu of coverage as otherwise
 required under this subsection.'.
 (c) CONFORMING AMENDMENT TO PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT- Section 2201 of
 the Public Health Service Act is amended by striking subsection (b) and
 inserting the following new subsection:
 `(b) SUBSTITUTION OF STATE HEALTH BENEFITS SYSTEM OR ALTERNATIVE SYSTEM- The
 requirements of this title may be met by providing, as an option to qualified
 beneficiaries or otherwise, for coverage of them under an applicable health
 benefits system established and maintained by a State in accordance with
 part 6 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security
 Act of 1974 (or any alternative basic health benefits system with respect to
 which the Secretary of Health and Human Services has made a determination
 pursuant to section 4 of the Universal Health Benefits Empowerment and
 Partnership Act of 1990 relating to the element of coverage described in
 section 4(a)(2)(B)(iii) of such Act (relating to provision of continuation
 coverage)) in lieu of coverage as otherwise required under this title.'.
SEC. 6. PREEMPTION OF STATE LAW TO PROVIDE FOR MORE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE
COVERAGE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 514(b)(2)(B) of the Employee Retirement Income
 Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1144(b)(2)(B)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(i)' after `(B)'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 `(ii) A provision of State law which provides that one or more specific
 benefits must be provided or made available by a contract or policy of
 health insurance issued to an employee benefit plan, or which provides that
 services rendered by one or more particular classes of health care providers
 must be covered under such a contract or policy, is a law which relates
 to an employee benefit plan within the meaning of subsection (a) and is
 not a law which regulates insurance within the meaning of subparagraph (A).'.
 (b) PREEMPTION OF CERTAIN STATE LAWS RESTRICTING MANAGED CARE UNDER EMPLOYEE
 WELFARE BENEFIT PLANS- Section 514(b) of such Act is amended by adding at
 the end the following new paragraph:
 `(9) For purposes of this section, a provision of State law which in
 any manner restricts managed care under an employee welfare benefit plan
 providing medical care (as defined in section 213(d) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986) to participants or beneficiaries directly or through insurance,
 reimbursement, or otherwise, by restricting the ability to negotiate provider
 reimbursement rates or to set such rates for any provider, limiting the
 number or type of providers, or restricting utilization or quality review
 in connection with such plan shall be deemed a law which relates to an
 employee benefit plan within the meaning of subsection (a) and not a law
 which regulates insurance within the meaning of paragraph (2)(A).'.
SEC. 7. ENCOURAGEMENT OF MULTIPLE EMPLOYER ARRANGEMENTS PROVIDING BASIC
HEALTH BENEFITS.
 (a) TAX EXEMPT STATUS- Paragraph (9) of section 501(c) of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to exempt organizations) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(A)' after `(9)'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 `(B) Any determination of whether a multiple employer welfare arrangement
 (as defined in section 3(25) of the Employee Retirement Income Security
 Act of 1974) is a voluntary employees' beneficiary association meeting
 the requirements of this paragraph shall be made without regard to any
 determination of commonality of interest or geographic location if--
 `(i) such arrangement provides at least basic health care services described
 in section 601(a)(3)(A) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
 1974, and
 `(I) such arrangement is fully insured, or
 `(II) there is a provision of applicable State law which provides standards,
 requiring the maintenance of specified levels of reserves and specified
 levels of contributions, which such arrangement must meet in order to be
 considered under such law able to pay benefits in full when due, and
 `(ii) meets the reporting requirements similar to the requirements of
 section 622 of such Act.'.
 (b) REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR MEWA'S- Section 4 of the Employee Retirement
 Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1003) is amended by adding at the
 end the following new subsection:
 `(c) A multiple employer welfare arrangement that provides medical care
 (as defined in section 213(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) to
 employees or their dependents shall be treated as an employee welfare
 benefit plan for purposes of this title with respect to the requirements
 of this title relating to the filing of annual reports under section 103,
 except that such requirements shall not be treated as met with respect
 to such arrangement unless such report is also filed with the insurance
 commissioner (or similar official) of each State in which at least 5
 percent of the individuals covered under such arrangement reside.'.
SEC. 8. TREATMENT PRACTICE GUIDELINES AND OUTCOMES RESEARCH FOR ALL AMERICANS.
 (a) AGENCY FOR HEALTH CARE POLICY AND RESEARCH- So much of part A of title
 IX of the Public Health Service Act as precedes section 902(c) is amended
 to read as follows:
`PART A--ESTABLISHMENT AND GENERAL DUTIES
`SEC. 901. ESTABLISHMENT.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- There is established within the Service an agency to be
 known as the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research.
 `(b) PURPOSE- The purpose of the Agency is to enhance the quality,
 appropriateness, and effectiveness of health care services for all Americans,
 and access to such services, through the establishment of a broad base of
 scientific research and through the promotion of improvements in clinical
 practice and in the organization, financing, and delivery of health care
 services.
 `(c) APPOINTMENT OF ADMINISTRATOR- There shall be at the head of the
 Agency an official to be known as the Administrator for Health Care Policy
 and Research. The Administrator shall be appointed by the Secretary. The
 Secretary, acting through the Administrator, shall carry out the authorities
 and duties established in this title.
`SEC. 902. GENERAL AUTHORITIES AND DUTIES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- In carrying out section 901(b), the Administrator shall
 conduct and support research, demonstration projects, evaluations, training,
 guideline development, and the dissemination of information, on health care
 services and on systems for the delivery of such services to all Americans,
 including activities with respect to--
 `(1) the effectiveness, efficiency, and quality of health care services;
 `(2) subject to subsection (d), the outcomes of health care services
 and procedures;
 `(3) clinical practice, including primary care and practice-oriented
 research;
 `(4) health care technologies, facilities, and equipment;
 `(5) health care costs, productivity, and market forces;
 `(6) health promotion and disease prevention;
 `(7) health statistics and epidemiology; and
 `(8) medical liability.
 `(b) REQUIREMENTS WITH RESPECT TO RURAL AREAS AND UNDERSERVED POPULATIONS-
 In carrying out subsection (a), the Administrator shall undertake and
 support research, demonstration projects, and evaluations with respect to--
 `(1) the delivery of health care services in rural areas (including frontier
 areas) to Americans of all ages; and
 `(2) the health of low-income groups, minority groups, and the elderly.'.
 (b) FORUM FOR QUALITY AND EFFECTIVENESS IN HEALTH CARE- So much of part
 B of title IX of the Public Health Service Act as precedes section 912(c)
 is amended to read as follows:
`PART B--FORUM FOR QUALITY AND EFFECTIVENESS IN HEALTH CARE
`SEC. 911. ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE.
 `There is established within the Agency an office to be known as the Office
 of the Forum for Quality and Effectiveness in Health Care. The office
 shall be headed by a Director, who shall be appointed by the Administrator.
`SEC. 912. DUTIES.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT OF FORUM PROGRAM- The Administrator, acting through the
 Director, shall establish a program to be known as the Forum for Quality
 and Effectiveness in Health Care. For the purpose of promoting the quality,
 appropriateness, and effectiveness of health care, the Director, using
 the process set forth in section 913, shall arrange for the development
 and periodic review and updating of--
 `(1) clinically relevant guidelines that may be used by physicians,
 educators, and health care practitioners to assist in determining how
 diseases, disorders, and other health conditions can most effectively and
 appropriately be prevented, diagnosed, treated, and managed clinically; and
 `(2) standards of quality, performance measures, and medical review criteria
 through which health care providers and other appropriate entities may assess
 or review the provision of health care and assure the quality of such care.
 `(b) CERTAIN REQUIREMENTS- Guidelines, standards, performance measures,
 and review criteria under subsection (a) shall--
 `(1) be based on the best available research and professional judgment
 regarding the effectiveness and appropriateness of health care services
 and procedures;
 `(2) be presented--
 `(A) in formats appropriate for use by physicians, health care practitioners,
 providers, medical educators, and medical review organizations,
 `(B) in formats appropriate for use by group health plans (as defined in
 section 601(a)(1) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974),
 health benefits systems established and maintained by States in accordance
 with subpart C of part 6 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement
 Income Security Act of 1974, and alternative basic health benefits systems
 with respect to which the Secretary has made a determination pursuant to
 section 4 of the Universal Health Benefits Empowerment and Partnership Act
 of 1990 relating to an element of coverage described in section 4(a)(2)(B)
 of such Act, and
 `(C) in formats appropriate for use by consumers of health care; and
 `(3) include treatment-specific or condition-specific practice guidelines for
 clinical treatments and conditions in forms appropriate for use in clinical
 practice, for use in educational programs, and for use in reviewing quality
 and appropriateness of medical care.'.
 (c) DISSEMINATION OF STANDARDS, CRITERIA, ETC- Section 914(c) of the Public
 Health Service Act is amended to read as follows:
 `(c) DISSEMINATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Director shall promote and support the dissemination
 of the guidelines, standards, performance measures, and review criteria
 described in section 912(a).
 `(2) ORGANIZATIONS UTILIZED- Such dissemination shall be carried out
 through--
 `(1) organizations representing health care providers,
 `(2) group health plans (as defined in section 601(a)(1) of the Employee
 Retirement Income Security Act of 1974),
 `(3) health benefits systems established and maintained by States in
 accordance with subpart C of part 6 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee
 Retirement Income Security Act of 1974,
 `(4) alternative basic health benefits systems with respect to which the
 Secretary has made a determination pursuant to section 4 of the Universal
 Health Benefits Empowerment and Partnership Act of 1990 relating to an
 element of coverage described in section 4(a)(2)(B) of such Act,
 `(5) organizations representing health care consumers,
 `(6) peer review organizations,
 `(7) accrediting bodies, and
 `(8) other appropriate entities.'.
 (d) STUDY OF ROLE OF PRACTICE GUIDELINES IN REDUCING MALPRACTICE COSTS-
 As soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act, the
 Federal Advisory Council on Health Care Coverage and Costs shall undertake
 a study of the manner in which practice guidelines may be used in reducing
 medical malpractice costs. The Council shall submit the results of such
 study together with any recommendations to the Secretary of Health and
 Human Services.
 (e) AUTHORIZATION OF ADDITIONAL APPROPRIATIONS- Section 926(a) of the
 Public Health Service Act is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `In addition to amounts otherwise authorized by this subsection, for the
 purpose of carrying out the amendments made by section 8 of the Universal
 Health Benefits Empowerment and Partnership Act of 1990, there are authorized
 to be appropriated $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, $15,000,000 for fiscal
 year 1992, and $20,000,000 for fiscal year 1993.'.
SEC. 9. FEDERAL ADVISORY COUNCIL ON HEALTH CARE COVERAGE AND COSTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- There is hereby established a Federal Advisory Council on
 Health Care Coverage and Costs for the purpose of reviewing, overseeing,
 and making recommendations relating to the implementation of the provisions
 of this Act and studying the causes of changes in the costs of health care
 coverage and delivery.
 (b) MEMBERSHIP- The Council shall consist of a Chairman and 12 other persons,
 appointed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services with the concurrence
 of the Secretary of Labor and without regard to the provisions of title 5,
 United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service. The
 appointed members shall, to the extent possible, represent organizations of
 small and large employers, employee organizations, health care providers,
 providers of group health plan coverage, State and local governments,
 the field of actuarial counseling, and the general public.
 (c) EXPENSES-
 (1) SERVICES AND ASSISTANCE- The Council is authorized to engage such
 technical assistance, including actuarial services, as may be required to
 carry out its functions, and the Secretary of Health and Human Services and
 the Secretary of Labor shall, in addition, make available to the Council
 such secretarial, clerical, and other assistance as it may require to
 carry out such functions. The Secretary of Health and Human Services and
 the Secretary of Labor shall, in addition, make available to the Council
 such actuarial and other pertinent data prepared by the Department of
 Health and Human Services, the Department of Labor, or other agencies of
 the Government as it may require to carry out such functions.
 (2) TRAVEL AND PER DIEM- Appointed members of the Council, while serving
 on the business of the Council (inclusive of travel time), while so serving
 away from their homes or regular places of business, may be allowed travel
 expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by
 section 5703 of title 5, United States Code, for persons in the Government
 employed intermittently.
 (d) FUNCTIONS- The Council shall--
 (1) make timely recommendations to the Secretary of Health and Human
 Services for purposes of the issuance of initial regulations in accordance
 with paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 3(b),
 (2) make recommendations to the Secretary of Health and Human Services
 relating to appropriate mechanisms for and the frequency of revisions of
 regulations in accordance with paragraph (3) of section 3(b),
 (3) otherwise advise the Secretary of Health and Human Services and the
 Secretary of Labor with respect to the implementation of the amendments
 made by this Act,
 (4) offer States and other entities advice regarding health benefits
 systems and implementation of the amendments made by this Act,
 (5) serve as a forum for exchange of advice, recommendations, and information
 regarding the amendments made by this Act, their implementation, and health
 benefits systems established and maintained by States, and otherwise
 foster cooperation between States and other entities in implementing
 such amendments,
 (6) make from time to time such recommendations as it considers appropriate
 relating to possible improvements relating to the financing and affordability
 of health care coverage for individuals eligible for coverage under health
 benefits systems established and maintained by States and other entities, and
 (7) make from time to time such recommendations to the Secretary of Health
 and Human Services and to the Congress as it considers appropriate relating
 to changes in the costs of health care coverage and delivery.
 (e) REPORTS- The Council shall, at least annually, submit a report to the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Secretary of Labor of any
 findings or recommendations relating to matters considered by the Council,
 and such reports shall thereupon be transmitted to the Congress.
 (f) FINAL REPORT AND TERMINATION- Upon the request of the Secretary of
 Health and Human Services, the Council shall submit a final report to
 such Secretary and the Secretary of Labor. The Council shall terminate
 upon the submission of such final report.
SEC. 10. INCREASE IN DEDUCTION FOR HEALTH INSURANCE COSTS OF SELF-EMPLOYED
INDIVIDUALS FROM 25 PERCENT TO 100 PERCENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Paragraph (1) of section 162(l) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (relating to special rules for health insurance costs of
 self-employed individuals) is amended by striking `25 percent of'.
 (b) REPEAL OF TERMINATION PROVISION- Paragraph (5) of section 162(l)
 of such Code (relating to termination) is repealed.
SEC. 11. EFFECTIVE DATES.
 (a) SECTIONS 3 AND 5- The amendments made by section 3 shall take effect
 January 1, 1993, and the amendments made by section 5 shall apply with
 respect to plan years beginning on or after such date.
 (b) SECTION 4- The provisions of section 4 shall take effect on the date
 of the enactment of this Act.
 (c) SECTION 6- The amendments made by section 6(b) shall take effect
 January 1, 1991. The amendments made by section 6(a) shall take effect
 January 1, 1991, except that with respect to plans in effect on the date
 of the enactment of this Act, such amendments shall take effect on the
 effective date of section 3.
 (d) SECTION 7- The amendments made by section 7(a) shall apply with respect
 to determinations made on or after January 1, 1991. The amendment made by
 section 7(b) shall apply to plan years beginning on or after January 1, 1991.
 (e) SECTION 8- The amendments made by section 8 shall take effect January
 1, 1991.
 (f) SECTION 9- The provisions of section 9 shall take effect on the date
 of the enactment of this Act.
 (g) SECTION 10- The amendments made by section 10 shall apply with respect
 to taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 1991.