[Congressional Bills 106th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 1941 Introduced in House (IH)]

106th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 1941

 To protect the privacy of personally identifiable health information.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 May 25, 1999

Mr. Condit (for himself, Mr. Waxman, Mr. Markey, Mr. Dingell, Mr. Brown 
of Ohio, Mr. Turner, Mr. Lantos, Mr. Cramer, Mr. Wise, Mr. Owens, Mrs. 
Tauscher, Mr. Towns, Mr. Shows, Mr. Kanjorski, Mrs. Mink of Hawaii, Mr. 
 Sanders, Mrs. Maloney of New York, Ms. Norton, Mr. Fattah, Mr. 
 Cummings, Mr. Kucinich, Mr. Blagojevich, Mr. Davis of Illinois, Mr. 
 Tierney, Mr. Allen, Mr. Ford, Ms. Schakowski, Mr. Romero-Barcelo, and 
 Mr. Stupak) introduced the following bill; which was referred to the 
 Committee on Commerce, and in addition to the Committee on Government 
 Reform, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in 
 each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the 
 jurisdiction of the committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To protect the privacy of personally identifiable health information.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Health Information 
Privacy Act''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings and purposes.
 TITLE I--PROTECTION OF HEALTH INFORMATION

Sec. 101. Restrictions on uses.
Sec. 102. Restrictions on disclosure.
Sec. 103. Standards for authorizations for use and disclosure.
Sec. 104. Safeguards against misuse and prohibited disclosures.
 TITLE II--RIGHTS OF PROTECTED INDIVIDUALS

Sec. 201. Right of access.
Sec. 202. Right of correction and amendment.
Sec. 203. Right to review disclosure history.
Sec. 204. Right to notice of information practices and opportunity to 
 seek additional protections.
 TITLE III--PERMISSIBLE DISCLOSURES OF PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION

Sec. 301. Provision of and payment for health care.
Sec. 302. Health oversight.
Sec. 303. Public health.
Sec. 304. Health research.
Sec. 305. Law enforcement.
Sec. 306. Judicial or administrative proceedings.
Sec. 307. Other disclosures.
Sec. 308. Redisclosures.
 TITLE IV--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Sec. 401. Specific classes of individuals.
Sec. 402. False pretenses.
Sec. 403. Obligations of affiliated persons.
Sec. 404. Prohibition of retaliation with respect to employment.
Sec. 405. Mental health and other especially sensitive information.
Sec. 406. Cessation of operations.
Sec. 407. Conforming amendments to Federal Privacy Act.
 TITLE V--GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sec. 501. Authority of the Secretary.
Sec. 502. Enforcement.
Sec. 503. Relationship to other laws.
Sec. 504. Definitions.
Sec. 505. Effective date.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.

 (a) Findings.--The Congress finds as follows:
 (1) The right to privacy is a personal and fundamental 
 right protected by the Constitution of the United States.
 (2) Individuals have a right to privacy regarding their 
 individually identifiable health information.
 (3) The improper use or disclosure of individually 
 identifiable health information about an individual may cause 
 significant harm to the interests of the individual in privacy 
 and health care, and may unfairly affect the ability of the 
 individual to obtain employment, education, insurance, credit, 
 and other necessities.
 (4) Current legal protections for health information vary 
 from State to State and are inadequate to protect the privacy 
 of an individual's health information and ensure fair 
 information practices standards.
 (5) The movement of individuals and health information 
 across State lines, access to and exchange of health 
 information from automated data banks and networks, and the 
 emergence of multistate health care providers and payers create 
 a compelling need for Federal law, rules, and procedures 
 governing the use, maintenance, and disclosure of health 
 information.
 (6) Federal rules governing the use, maintenance, and 
 disclosure of health information are an essential part of 
 health care reform, are necessary to support the 
 computerization of health information, and can reduce the cost 
 of providing health services by making the necessary transfer 
 of health information more efficient.
 (7) An individual needs access to health information about 
 the individual as a matter of fairness, to enable the 
 individual to make informed decisions about health care, and to 
 correct inaccurate or incomplete information.
 (b) Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are as follows:
 (1) To protect the privacy of health information that 
 reveals the identity of an individual.
 (2) To define the rights and responsibilities of a person 
 who creates or maintains individually identifiable health 
 information that originates or is used in the health treatment 
 or payment process.
 (3) To define the rights of an individual with respect to 
 health information about the individual that is created or 
 maintained as part of the health treatment and payment process.

 TITLE I--PROTECTION OF HEALTH INFORMATION

SEC. 101. RESTRICTIONS ON USES.

 (a) In General.--Use of protected health information by health 
information custodians--
 (1) shall protect the reasonable expectation of privacy of 
 protected individuals; and
 (2) shall be in accordance with fair information practices.
 (b) Minimum Requirements.--
 (1) Limitation on uses.--Unless otherwise authorized by a 
 protected individual under section 103, a health information 
 custodian may use protected health information only for the 
 uses for which disclosure is authorized under title III.
 (2) Minimum amount of information.--A health information 
 custodian shall limit use of protected health information to 
 the minimum amount and duration necessary to accomplish the 
 use.

SEC. 102. RESTRICTIONS ON DISCLOSURE.

 (a) In General.--Disclosure of protected health information by a 
health information custodian shall protect the reasonable expectations 
of privacy of protected individuals.
 (b) Minimum Requirements.--
 (1) Limitation on disclosures.--A health information 
 custodian may not disclose protected health information 
 unless--
 (A) the disclosure is authorized by the protected 
 individual under section 103; or
 (B) the disclosure is authorized under title III.
 (2) Minimum amount of information.--A health information 
 custodian shall limit a disclosure of protected health 
 information to the minimum amount of information necessary to 
 accomplish the purpose for which the information is disclosed.
 (c) No Requirement To Disclose.--Nothing in this Act shall be 
construed as requiring disclosure of protected health information that 
is not otherwise required to be disclosed by law.

SEC. 103. STANDARDS FOR AUTHORIZATIONS FOR USE AND DISCLOSURE.

 (a) In General.--A health information custodian may use or disclose 
protected information pursuant to an authorization by a protected 
individual only if that authorization is based on informed consent by 
the protected individual.
 (b) Minimum Requirements.--
 (1) Prohibition on conditioning.--A health information 
 custodian may not, as a condition of providing or paying for 
 health care, require a protected individual to execute an 
 authorization for use or disclosure of protected health 
 information.
 (2) Informed consent.--For the purposes of subsection (a), 
 an authorization shall not be considered to be based on 
 informed consent unless, at a minimum, it satisfies the 
 conditions in part II.D.1 of the Secretary's HIPAA 
 recommendations (relating to ``Disclosure with Patient 
 Authorization: Authorization Content'').

SEC. 104. SAFEGUARDS AGAINST MISUSE AND PROHIBITED DISCLOSURES.

 (a) In General.--Health information custodians shall establish and 
implement safeguards against misuse and prohibited disclosure of 
protected health information.
 (b) Minimum Requirements.--The safeguards under subsection (a) 
shall include reasonable and appropriate administrative, technical, and 
physical safeguards--
 (1) to ensure that protected health information is used or 
 disclosed only when necessary;
 (2) to ensure the integrity and confidentiality of 
 protected health information;
 (3) to protect against any reasonably anticipated threats 
 or hazards to the security or integrity of the information or 
 unauthorized use or disclosure of the information; and
 (4) otherwise to ensure compliance with this Act.
 (c) Mental Health and Other Especially Sensitive Information.--In 
establishing and implementing the safeguards under subsection (a), a 
health information custodian shall consider providing additional 
protections for mental health and other especially sensitive protected 
health information, as appropriate.
 (d) Relationship to Social Security Act Administrative 
Simplification Requirements.--Any safeguard established under this 
section shall be consistent with the standards adopted by the Secretary 
under paragraph (1) of section 1173(d) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1320d-2(d)) and the requirement in paragraph (2) of such 
section.

 TITLE II--RIGHTS OF PROTECTED INDIVIDUALS

SEC. 201. RIGHT OF ACCESS.

 (a) In General.--Protected individuals shall have the right to a 
reasonable opportunity to inspect and copy protected health information 
maintained by a health information custodian.
 (b) Minimum Requirements.--Subject to section 405(b), a health 
information custodian, at a minimum, shall provide a protected 
individual at least as much opportunity to inspect and copy protected 
health information as was recommended by the Secretary in part II.C.2 
of the Secretary's HIPAA recommendations (relating to ``Patient 
Inspection and Copying of Records'').

SEC. 202. RIGHT OF CORRECTION AND AMENDMENT.

 (a) In General.--Protected individuals shall have the right to a 
reasonable opportunity to correct or amend protected health information 
maintained by a health information custodian.
 (b) Minimum Requirements.--A health information custodian, at a 
minimum, shall provide a protected individual correction and amendment 
protections that are at least equivalent to those recommended by the 
Secretary in part II.C.3 of the Secretary's HIPAA recommendations 
(relating to ``Patient Correction of Records'').

SEC. 203. RIGHT TO REVIEW DISCLOSURE HISTORY.

 (a) In General.--Protected individuals shall have the right to a 
reasonable opportunity to review a history of the disclosures of 
protected health information about the individual made by a health 
information custodian.
 (b) Minimum Requirements.--A health information custodian, at a 
minimum, shall implement procedures that ensure a protected individual 
at least as much opportunity to review the individual's disclosure 
histories as was recommended by the Secretary in part II.C.4 of the 
Secretary's HIPAA recommendations (relating to ``Disclosure History'').

SEC. 204. RIGHT TO NOTICE OF INFORMATION PRACTICES AND OPPORTUNITY TO 
 SEEK ADDITIONAL PROTECTIONS.

 (a) In General.--Protected individuals shall have--
 (1) the right to notice of the information practices of 
 health information custodians; and
 (2) a reasonable opportunity to seek limitations on the use 
 and disclosure of protected health information in addition to 
 the limitations provided in such practices.
 (b) Minimum Requirements.--
 (1) Notice and opportunity to seek additional 
 protections.--To the maximum extent practicable, before 
 obtaining protected health information from a protected 
 individual, a health information custodian--
 (A) shall provide the protected individual with a 
 clear and conspicuous notice of the custodian's health 
 information practices, which notice shall include, at a 
 minimum, the explanation recommended in part II.C.1 of 
 the Secretary's HIPAA recommendations (relating to 
 ``Explanation of Information Practices'');
 (B) shall provide the protected individual a 
 reasonable opportunity to seek limitations on the use 
 or disclosure of protected health information in 
 addition to the limitations provided in such practices; 
 and
 (C) shall obtain a signed acknowledgment from the 
 protected individual acknowledging that the notice 
 required under subparagraph (A) has been provided to 
 the protected individual and the individual has been 
 informed of the opportunity to seek additional 
 limitations required to be provided under subparagraph 
 (B).
 (2) Other health information custodians.--A health 
 information custodian who receives protected health information 
 about a protected individual from a source other than the 
 individual shall provide a notice of the custodian's health 
 information practices that is consistent with paragraph (1)(A) 
 to the individual upon request.
 (c) Compliance.--If a protected individual seeks limitations on the 
use or disclosure of protected health information in addition to the 
limitations described in a health information custodian's notice of 
health information practices, and the custodian agrees to provide such 
additional limitations, the custodian shall comply with such additional 
limitations, unless such compliance would violate another provision of 
law.

 TITLE III--PERMISSIBLE DISCLOSURES OF PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION

SEC. 301. PROVISION OF AND PAYMENT FOR HEALTH CARE.

 (a) In General.--A health information custodian, to the extent the 
Secretary determines appropriate, may disclose protected health 
information, without obtaining an authorization under section 103, for 
the purpose of providing health care to an individual or paying for 
health care provided to an individual, except as provided in subsection 
(c).
 (b) Construction.--For purposes of subsection (a), a disclosure of 
protected health information by a health information custodian for the 
purpose of rendering an employment decision, conducting a marketing 
activity, or conducting an insurance underwriting activity, shall not 
be considered a disclosure for the purpose of providing health care to 
an individual or paying for health care provided to an individual.
 (c) Special Rule for Patients Paying for Care.--In the case of 
health care provided to an individual who pays for the care himself or 
herself, a health information custodian may not disclose to a health 
care payer, without obtaining an authorization under section 103, 
protected health information created or received in the course of 
providing such care.

SEC. 302. HEALTH OVERSIGHT.

 (a) In General.--A health information custodian, to the extent the 
Secretary determines appropriate, may disclose protected health 
information for the purpose of health oversight, without obtaining an 
authorization under section 103.
 (b) Minimum Requirements.--The Secretary--
 (1) shall permit a health information custodian to disclose 
 protected health information to Federal, State, and local 
 agencies (or affiliated persons of such agencies) that are 
 authorized by law to investigate, regulate, enforce laws 
 relating to, or license, certify, or accredit persons engaged 
 in, the provision of, or payment for, health care; and
 (2) may permit a health information custodian to disclose 
 protected health information to appropriate private 
 organizations engaged in licensing, certification, or 
 accreditation of health care providers.

SEC. 303. PUBLIC HEALTH.

 A health information custodian, to the extent the Secretary 
determines appropriate, may disclose protected health information, 
without obtaining an authorization under section 103--
 (1) to a public health authority for use in legally 
 authorized disease or injury reporting, public health 
 surveillance, or a public health investigation or intervention; 
 or
 (2) to a person who is otherwise authorized by law or a 
 public health authority to receive the information for public 
 health purposes.

SEC. 304. HEALTH RESEARCH.

 (a) In General.--A health information custodian, to the extent the 
Secretary determines appropriate, may disclose protected health 
information for health research, without obtaining an authorization 
under section 103.
 (b) Minimum Requirements.--A health information custodian may 
disclose protected health information without such an authorization 
only for uses that have been approved by an entity certified by the 
Secretary.
 (c) Regulations.--The Secretary shall promulgate regulations that, 
at a minimum--
 (1) require that, before approving a use of protected 
 health information for purposes of subsection (b), a certified 
 entity shall determine that--
 (A) the importance of the health research outweighs 
 the intrusion into the privacy of the protected 
 individuals who are the subjects of the protected 
 health information; and
 (B) it would be impracticable to conduct the health 
 research without using the protected health 
 information;
 (2) establish requirements for certifying entities that 
 ensure that such entities--
 (A) meet the requirements for institutional review 
 boards established under section 491(a) of the Public 
 Health Service Act with respect to information 
 protection, use, and disclosure; and
 (B) are qualified to assess and protect the 
 confidentiality of protected health information; and
 (3) require a person conducting health research to remove 
 or destroy personal identifiers at the earliest opportunity 
 consistent with the purpose of the research, unless a certified 
 entity has determined that there is a health or research 
 justification for retention of identifiers and the person has 
 an adequate plan to protect the identifiers from improper use 
 and disclosure.

SEC. 305. LAW ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) In General.--A health information custodian may disclose 
protected health information to a law enforcement official for a law 
enforcement inquiry if the law enforcement official complies with the 
fourth amendment to the Constitution.
 (b) Construction.--For purposes of subsection (a), all protected 
health information shall be treated as if it were held in a home over 
which the protected individual has exclusive authority.
 (c) Relationship to Health Oversight Activities.--This section 
shall not apply to a disclosure of protected health information for 
purposes of health oversight.

SEC. 306. JUDICIAL OR ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDINGS.

 (a) In General.--A health information custodian, to the extent the 
Secretary determines appropriate, may disclose protected health 
information, without obtaining an authorization under section 103, 
pursuant to--
 (1) a judicial or administrative subpoena issued in a civil 
 administrative or judicial adjudication; or
 (2) a subpoena issued by a defendant in a criminal 
 proceeding.
 (b) Minimum Requirements.--A health information custodian may not 
disclose protected health information about a protected individual 
under this section, unless the individual has had--
 (1) reasonable notice of the subpoena; and
 (2) a reasonable opportunity to move the court, or other 
 presiding official, to quash the subpoena on the basis that the 
 individual's privacy interest outweighs the interest of the 
 person seeking the information.

SEC. 307. OTHER DISCLOSURES.

 A health information custodian, to the extent the Secretary 
determines appropriate, may disclose protected health information, 
without obtaining an authorization under section 103--
 (1) where necessary to prevent or lessen a serious threat 
 to the health or safety of an individual;
 (2) to a next of kin;
 (3) to individuals with close personal relationships with 
 the protected individual;
 (4) for purposes of directory information within a health 
 care facility; and
 (5) for State data systems.

SEC. 308. REDISCLOSURES.

 (a) In General.--A health information custodian who receives 
protected health information through a disclosure under this title, to 
the extent the Secretary determines appropriate, may redisclose such 
information to carry out the purposes for which the information was 
disclosed to the custodian.
 (b) Prohibition.--Notwithstanding subsection (a), protected health 
information received by a health information custodian through a 
disclosure under this title may not be disclosed to any person for use 
in, or be used in, any administrative, civil, or criminal action or 
investigation directed against the protected individual who is the 
subject of the information, unless--
 (1) the action or investigation arises out of and is 
 directly related to the purpose for which the information was 
 obtained by the custodian; or
 (2) the use or disclosure is authorized--
 (A) by law for the protection of the public health; 
 or
 (B) by an appropriate order of a court of competent 
 jurisdiction, granted, after a hearing with notice to 
 the health information custodian and to all other 
 affected individuals, on the basis that there is--
 (i) probable cause to believe that all 
 other possible sources for the information have 
 been exhausted; and
 (ii) a specific and compelling public 
 interest in disclosure or use that outweighs--
 (I) the privacy interest of the 
 protected individual;
 (II) the effect of the disclosure 
 on future provision of health care; and
 (III) the effect of the disclosure 
 on health research and health oversight 
 functions.

 TITLE IV--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

SEC. 401. SPECIFIC CLASSES OF INDIVIDUALS.

 (a) Minors.--Individuals under the age of 18 shall have privacy 
protections regarding protected health information that are at least 
equivalent to those recommended in part II.F.4 of the Secretary's HIPAA 
recommendations (relating to ``Minors'').
 (b) Agents and Attorneys.--
 (1) In general.--To the extent the Secretary determines 
 appropriate, a person may exercise the rights of a protected 
 individual under this Act, if--
 (A) the person is authorized by law (other than on 
 account of minority), or by an instrument recognized 
 under law, to act for the protected individual; or
 (B) the protected individual is not capable of 
 exercising his or her rights under this Act and there 
 has been no formal legal arrangement for others to 
 exercise the rights.
 (2) Relationship to recommendations.--The authority of such 
 a person to exercise the rights of a protected individual shall 
 be equivalent to the authority described in parts II.F.5 and 
 II.F.6 of the Secretary's HIPAA recommendations (relating to 
 ``Powers of Attorney'' and ``Patients Unable to Make Choices 
 for Themselves'').
 (c) Deceased Persons.--Deceased individuals shall have privacy 
protections regarding protected health information that are at least 
equivalent to those recommended by the Secretary in part II.F.1 of the 
Secretary's HIPAA recommendations (relating to ``Deceased Persons'').

SEC. 402. FALSE PRETENSES.

 A person may not--
 (1) obtain or disclose protected health information from a 
 health information custodian or affiliated person under false 
 pretenses; or
 (2) knowingly disseminate protected health information 
 obtained in violation of this Act.

SEC. 403. OBLIGATIONS OF AFFILIATED PERSONS.

 An affiliated person shall be subject to the same requirements with 
respect to use and disclosure of protected health information as apply 
to the health information custodian with whom the affiliated person is 
affiliated, except that an affiliated person--
 (1) is subject to the requirements of sections 201 and 202 
 only if the affiliated person maintains the individual's 
 protected health information and the health information 
 custodian does not maintain the individual's protected health 
 information; and
 (2) is subject to the requirements of section 203 only to 
 the extent that the affiliated person makes a disclosure.

SEC. 404. PROHIBITION OF RETALIATION WITH RESPECT TO EMPLOYMENT.

 A person may not subject an individual to retaliation, in regard to 
job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of 
employees, employee compensation, job training, or other terms, 
conditions, and privileges of employment, for reporting to a 
governmental agency conditions that may constitute a violation of a 
requirement under this Act.

SEC. 405. MENTAL HEALTH AND OTHER ESPECIALLY SENSITIVE INFORMATION.

 (a) Additional Limitations.--Not later than 1 year after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary--
 (1) shall consider, after consulting with physicians and 
 other health care providers, patients, and other appropriate 
 groups, additional limitations relating to access to, and use 
 and disclosure of, mental health and other especially sensitive 
 protected health information; and
 (2) shall promulgate regulations to provide any such 
 additional limitations as the Secretary determines to be 
 appropriate.
 (b) Right of Access.--For purposes of subsection (a)(2), the 
Secretary may limit an individual's access to his or her mental health 
information, if the information is not used by, or disclosed to, any 
person other than the health care provider who received or created the 
information.
 (c) Psychotherapist-Patient Privilege.--Nothing in this Act shall 
be construed to preempt, supersede, or modify the operation of the 
psychotherapist-patient privilege recognized by the Supreme Court in 
Jaffee v. Redmond, 518 U.S. 1 (1996).

SEC. 406. CESSATION OF OPERATIONS.

 Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary shall promulgate regulations that ensure that the 
reasonable expectation of privacy of protected individuals in protected 
health information is maintained when health information custodians 
cease operations.

SEC. 407. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO FEDERAL PRIVACY ACT.

 (a) New Subsection.--Section 552a of title 5, United States Code, 
is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(w) Medical Exemptions.--The head of an agency that is a health 
information custodian (as defined in section 504 of the Health 
Information Privacy Act) shall promulgate rules, in accordance with the 
requirements (including general notice) of subsections (b)(1), (b)(2), 
(b)(3), (c), and (e) of section 553 of this title, to exempt a system 
of records within the agency, to the extent that the system of records 
contains protected health information (as defined in section 504 of 
such Act), from all provisions of this section except subsections 
(e)(1), (e)(2), subparagraphs (A) through (C) and (E) through (I) of 
subsection (e)(4), and subsections (e)(5), (e)(6), (e)(9), (e)(12), 
(l), (n), (o), (p), (q), (r), and (u).''.
 (b) Repeal.--
 (1) In general.--Section 552a(f)(3) of title 5, United 
 States Code, as amended by this Act, is amended by striking 
 ``pertaining to him,'' and all that follows through the 
 semicolon and inserting ``pertaining to the individual;''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) 
 shall take effect 18 months after the date of the enactment of 
 this Act.

 TITLE V--GENERAL PROVISIONS

SEC. 501. AUTHORITY OF THE SECRETARY.

 (a) Regulations.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate such 
 regulations as may be necessary to implement this Act, 
 including regulations establishing recordkeeping or reporting 
 requirements. Such regulations may provide greater protection 
 of protected health information, or more rights to protected 
 individuals regarding such information, than is provided by the 
 minimum requirements set forth in this Act.
 (2) Protections for other health information.--The 
 Secretary may promulgate such regulations as may be necessary 
 to protect the privacy of individually identifiable health 
 information that is not protected health information.
 (3) Consultation.--In promulgating regulations under this 
 Act, the Secretary shall consult with elected State and local 
 government officials.
 (b) Research and Development.--The Secretary may sponsor or carry 
out research and development activities related to the protection of 
the privacy of individually identifiable health information.
 (c) Public Awareness and Training.--The Secretary may sponsor or 
carry out activities to inform protected individuals of their rights 
under this Act or to inform other persons of their rights or 
responsibilities under this Act. The Secretary may also sponsor or 
carry out training to increase compliance with requirements under this 
Act.
 (d) Other Authorities.--The Secretary may hold hearings, administer 
oaths, require the testimony or deposition of witnesses, require the 
production of documents or the answering of interrogatories, or enter 
and inspect premises owned or controlled by health information 
custodians in order to ensure compliance with this Act or otherwise 
further the purposes of this Act.

SEC. 502. ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) Equitable Relief.--The Secretary may bring an action in an 
appropriate court to enjoin a violation of a requirement under this Act 
or to obtain such other equitable relief as may be appropriate under 
the circumstances.
 (b) Civil Money Penalties.--Any person who the Secretary determines 
has failed to comply with a requirement under this Act shall be 
subject, in addition to any other penalties that may be prescribed by 
law, to a civil penalty of not more than $10,000 for each such failure. 
The provisions of section 1128A of the Social Security Act (other than 
subsections (a) and (b)) shall apply to the imposition of a civil money 
penalty under this subsection in the same manner as such provisions 
apply with respect to the imposition of a penalty under section 1128A 
of such Act.
 (c) Criminal Penalties.--
 (1) In general.--Whoever knowingly violates a requirement 
 under this Act shall be fined under title 18, United States 
 Code, imprisoned for not more than 5 years, or both.
 (2) Monetary gain.--Whoever knowingly violates a 
 requirement under this Act, with the intent to sell, transfer, 
 or use protected health information obtained through the 
 violation for profit or monetary gain, shall be fined under 
 title 18, United States Code, imprisoned for not more than 10 
 years, or both.
 (d) Civil Actions.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) Injunction or damages.--A protected individual 
 who is adversely affected by a person's violation of a 
 requirement under this Act may bring an action--
 (i) to enjoin the violation; or
 (ii) in the case of a knowing or negligent 
 violation, to recover from the person the 
 greater of--
 (I) the compensatory damages 
 (including nonpecuniary damages) 
 incurred by the protected individual as 
 a result of the violation; or
 (II) liquidated damages of $5,000 
 per action.
 (B) Costs and attorney's fees.--A protected 
 individual bringing an action under subparagraph (A) 
 may recover the costs of litigation and reasonable 
 attorney's fees (including expert fees). The United 
 States shall be liable for fees and costs under this 
 subparagraph the same as a private person.
 (C) Punitive damages.--In the case of a knowing 
 violation, the person committing the violation may also 
 be held liable for punitive damages.
 (2) Time for commencing action.--An action under this 
 subsection shall be commenced not later than 3 years after the 
 date on which the violation was discovered or reasonably should 
 have been discovered.

SEC. 503. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Federal, state, or local laws.--The requirements under 
 this Act shall not preempt, supersede, or modify the operation 
 of, any Federal, State, or local law that provides--
 (A) greater protection of protected health 
 information; or
 (B) more rights to protected individuals regarding 
 such information.
 (2) Petitions.--
 (A) Advisory determinations.--Any person may 
 petition the Secretary for an advisory determination 
 whether the operation of a particular Federal, State, 
 or local law satisfies the standard in paragraph (1). 
 Any person who acts in reliance on such advisory 
 determination shall not be subject to any penalty or 
 liability under section 502, except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B).
 (B) Contrary court determination.--If a Federal or 
 State court has reached a determination whether the 
 operation of a particular Federal, State, or local law 
 satisfies the standard in paragraph (1), a person 
 thereafter may not rely on an advisory determination 
 under subparagraph (A) to the contrary.
 (b) Specific Laws.--This Act shall not be construed to preempt, 
supersede, or modify the operation of, any of the following:
 (1) Any law that provides for the reporting of vital 
 statistics such as birth or death information.
 (2) Any law that requires the reporting of abuse or neglect 
 information about an individual or other information relating 
 to violence against an individual.
 (3) Subpart II of part E of title XXVI of the Public Health 
 Service Act (relating to notifications of emergency response 
 employees of possible exposure to infectious diseases).
 (4) The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
 (5) Any law that establishes a privilege for records used 
 in health professional peer review activities.
 (6) Any law that requires the disclosure of protected 
 health information, if the disclosure is permitted under this 
 Act.
 (c) Department of Veterans Affairs.--The limitations on use and 
disclosure of protected health information under this Act shall not be 
construed to prevent any exchange of such information within and among 
components of the Department of Veterans Affairs that determine 
eligibility for or entitlement to, or that provide, benefits under laws 
administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
 (d) Congress.--Nothing in this Act shall be interpreted to affect 
the ability of the Congress, a committee of the Congress, or the 
Members of the Congress referred to in section 2954 of title 5, United 
States Code, to obtain such information as may be necessary for the 
fulfillment of the Congress', the committee's, or the Members' 
legislative or oversight functions.
 (e) Privileges.--A disclosure about a protected individual made 
under title III, or a protected individual's disclosure of protected 
health information for the purpose of obtaining, or paying for, health 
care, may not be construed as diminishing, waiving, or otherwise 
impairing any privilege that the protected individual has in a court of 
a State or the United States.

SEC. 504. DEFINITIONS.

 For purposes of this Act:
 (1) Affiliated person.--The term ``affiliated person'' 
 means a person who--
 (A) is not a health information custodian;
 (B) is an agent or contractor of a health 
 information custodian; and
 (C) pursuant to an agreement with such custodian, 
 receives, creates, uses, maintains, or discloses 
 protected health information.
 (2) Disclose.--The term ``disclose'', when used with 
 respect to protected health information, means to provide 
 access to the information to a person other than--
 (A) the custodian or an officer or employee of the 
 custodian;
 (B) an affiliated person of the custodian; or
 (C) a protected individual who is a subject of the 
 information.
 (3) Disclosure.--The term ``disclosure'' means the act or 
 an instance of disclosing.
 (4) Health care.--The term ``health care'' means--
 (A) any preventive, diagnostic, therapeutic, 
 rehabilitative, maintenance, or palliative care, 
 counseling, service, or procedure--
 (i) with respect to the physical or mental 
 condition, or functional status, of an 
 individual; or
 (ii) affecting the structure or function of 
 the human body or any part of the human body, 
 including banking of blood, sperm, organs, or 
 any other tissue for administration to 
 patients; or
 (B) any sale or dispensing of a drug, device, 
 equipment, or other item to an individual, or for the 
 use of an individual, pursuant to a prescription.
 (5) Health care payer.--The term ``health care payer'' 
 means a person who pays for health care in the ordinary course 
 of business.
 (6) Health care provider.--The term ``health care 
 provider'' means a person who provides health care in the 
 ordinary course of business or practice of a profession, 
 pursuant to license, certification, accreditation, or other 
 legal authorization.
 (7) Health information custodian.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``health information 
 custodian'' means a health care provider, a health care 
 payer, or any other person who obtains protected health 
 information as a result of a disclosure authorized 
 under this Act.
 (B) Exceptions.--Such term does not include--
 (i) an affiliated person;
 (ii) an individual who obtains protected 
 health information under paragraph (2), (3), or 
 (4) of section 307; or
 (iii) an individual who receives protected 
 health information in a public health 
 intervention because the individual's health is 
 at risk.
 (8) Health research.--The term ``health research'' means a 
 biomedical, epidemiological, or health services research or 
 statistics project, or a research project on behavioral and 
 social factors affecting health, that is designed to develop or 
 contribute to generalizable scientific or clinical knowledge.
 (9) Law enforcement inquiry.--The term ``law enforcement 
 inquiry'' means a lawful investigation or official proceeding 
 inquiring into a violation of, or failure to comply with, any 
 criminal or civil statute or any regulation, rule, or order 
 issued pursuant to such a statute.
 (10) Person.--The term ``person'' includes an authority of 
 the United States, a State, or a political subdivision of a 
 State.
 (11) Protected health information.--The term ``protected 
 health information'' means any information, whether oral or 
 recorded in any form or medium, that--
 (A) relates in any way to the past, present, or 
 future physical or mental health or condition of a 
 protected individual, the provision of health care to 
 an individual, or payment for the provision of health 
 care to an individual;
 (B) is received or created by a health care 
 provider in the ordinary course of business or practice 
 of a profession or by a health care payer, or is 
 obtained as a result of a disclosure authorized under 
 this Act; and
 (C) identifies the individual, or with respect to 
 which there is a reasonable basis to believe that the 
 information can be used to identify the individual.
 (12) Protected individual.--The term ``protected 
 individual'' means an individual who is the subject of 
 protected health information.
 (13) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (14) Secretary's hipaa recommendations.--The term 
 ``Secretary's HIPAA recommendations'' means the recommendations 
 of the Secretary of Health and Human Services, pursuant to 
 section 264 of the Health Insurance Portability and 
 Accountability Act of 1996, entitled ``Confidentiality of 
 Individually-Identifiable Health Information'' that were 
 submitted to the Committee on Commerce and the Committee on 
 Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and the 
 Committee on Labor and Human Resources and the Committee on 
 Finance of the Senate, on September 11, 1997.
 (15) State.--The term ``State'' includes the District of 
 Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American 
 Samoa, and the Northern Mariana Islands.
 (16) Use.--The term ``use'', when used with respect to 
 protected health information that is held by a health 
 information custodian, means--
 (A) to use, or provide access to, the information 
 in any manner that does not constitute a disclosure; or
 (B) any act or instance of using, or providing 
 access, described in subparagraph (A).

SEC. 505. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 The requirements under this Act applicable to health information 
custodians and affiliated persons shall take effect 18 months after the 
date of the enactment of this Act.
 <all>