HR 1601 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1601
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide for a maximum long-term
capital gains rate of 15 percent.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
MARCH 23, 1989
Mr. ARCHER introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Ways and Means
A BILL
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide for a maximum long-term
capital gains rate of 15 percent.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. REDUCTION IN INDIVIDUAL CAPITAL GAINS RATE.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Subsection (j) of section 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of
 1986 (relating to maximum capital gains rate) is amended to read as follows:
 `(j) MAXIMUM CAPITAL GAINS RATE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- If a taxpayer has a net capital gain for any taxable year,
 then the tax imposed by this section shall not exceed the sum of--
 `(A) a tax computed at the rates and in the same manner as if this
 subsection had not been enacted on the taxable income reduced by the net
 capital gain, plus
 `(B) a tax of 15 percent of the net capital gain.
 `(2) TRANSITIONAL RULE- In the case of a taxable year in which the date of
 the enactment of this sentence occurs, the amount taken into account as the
 net capital gain under paragraph (1) and subsection (g)(1)(A) shall not
 exceed the net capital gain determined by only taking into account gains
 and losses properly taken into account for the portion of the taxable year
 after such date of enactment.'
 (b) PHASE-OUT OF 15-PERCENT RATE AND PERSONAL EXEMPTIONS NOT TO APPLY TO NET
 CAPITAL GAIN- Subparagraph (A) of section 1(g)(1) of such Code (relating
 to phase-out of 15 percent rate and personal exemptions) is amended by
 inserting `, reduced by the net capital gain' after `taxable income'.
 (c) TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Paragraph (1) of section 170(e) of such Code is amended by striking
 `the amount of gain' in the material following subparagraph (B)(ii) and
 inserting `15/28 (15/34 in the case of a corporation) of the amount of gain'.
 (2)(A) The second sentence of section 7518(g)(6)(A) of such Code is amended
 by striking `28 percent (34 percent in the case of a corporation)' and
 inserting `15 percent'.
 (B) The second sentence of section 607(h)(6)(A) of the Merchant Marine
 Act, 1936, is amended by striking `28 percent (34 percent in the case of
 a corporation)' and inserting `15 percent'.
SEC. 2. REDUCTION IN CORPORATE CAPITAL GAINS RATE.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Section 1201 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating
 to alternative tax for corporations) is amended by redesignating subsection
 (b) as subsection (c), and by striking subsection (a) and inserting the
 following:
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- If for any taxable year a corporation has a net capital
 gain, then, in lieu of the tax imposed by section 11, 511, or 831(a)
 (whichever applies), there is hereby imposed a tax (if such tax is less
 than the tax imposed by such section) which shall consist of the sum of--
 `(1) a tax computed on the taxable income reduced by the net capital gain,
 at the same rates and in the same manner as if this subsection had not
 been enacted, plus
 `(2) a tax of 15 percent of the net capital gain.
 `(b) TRANSITIONAL RULE- In the case of a taxable year in which the date of
 the enactment of this sentence occurs, the amount taken into account as the
 net capital gain under subsection (a) shall not exceed the net capital gain
 determined by only taking into account gains and losses properly taken into
 account for the portion of the taxable year after such date of enactment.'
 (b) TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Clause (iii) of section 852(b)(3)(D) of such Code is amended by striking
 `66 percent' and inserting `85 percent'.
 (2) Paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 1445(e) of such Code are each amended
 by striking `34 percent' and inserting `15 percent'.
SEC. 3. REDUCTION OF MINIMUM TAX RATE ON CAPITAL GAINS.
 Subparagraph (A) of section 55(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
 (relating to tentative minimum tax) is amended to read as follows:
 `(A) the sum of--
 `(i) 15 percent of the lesser of--
 `(I) the net capital gain (determined with the adjustments provided in this
 part and (to the extent applicable) the limitations of sections 1(j)(2)
 and 1201(b)), or
 `(II) so much of the alternative minimum taxable income for the taxable
 year as exceeds the exemption amount, plus
 `(ii) 20 percent (21 percent in the case of a taxpayer other than a
 corporation) of the amount (if any) by which the excess referred to in
 clause (i)(I) exceeds the net capital gain (as so determined), reduced by'.
SEC. 4. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Except as provided in subsection (b), the amendments
 made by this Act shall apply to taxable years ending after the date of
 the enactment of this Act.
 (b) EXCEPTION- The amendments made by sections 1(c) and 2(b)(2) shall
 apply to transactions after the date of the enactment of this Act.