[Congressional Bills 103th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]
[S. 1057 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

103d CONGRESS
 1st Session
 S. 1057

 To provide for the establishment of a nationwide, universal access 
 health coverage program, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 May 27 (legislative day, April 19), 1993

 Mr. Jeffords introduced the following bill; which was read twice and 
 referred to the Committee on Finance

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To provide for the establishment of a nationwide, universal access 
 health coverage program, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``MediCORE Health Act of 1993''.

SEC. 2. TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 The table of contents is as follows:

Sec. 1. Short title.
Sec. 2. Table of contents.
Sec. 3. Findings.
Sec. 4. Definitions.
 (1) Board.
 (2) CORE services.
 (3) Secretary.
 (4) State.
 (5) State plan.
 (6) State program.

 TITLE I--ELIGIBILITY AND ENROLLMENT

Sec. 101. Eligibility.
 (a) In general.
 (b) Lawful resident alien defined.
 (c) Overseas residents and travelers.
 (1) Overseas residents.
 (2) Travelers.
 (d) Non-resident aliens and illegal immigrants.
 (e) Primary residence.
Sec. 102. Enrollment in State programs.
 (a) Enrollment process.
 (1) Automatic enrollment.
 (2) Enrollment process for other individuals.
 (3) Default enrollment.
 (b) MediCORE cards.

 TITLE II--ADMINISTRATION BY FEDERAL MEDICORE BOARD

Sec. 201. Establishment and composition. 
 (a) Establishment.
 (b) Composition.
 (1) Appointment.
 (2) Terms.
 (3) Vacancies.
 (4) Chairperson.
 (5) Compensation.
 (c) Staff.
 (1) Authority.
 (2) Applicability of civil service provisions.
Sec. 202. Duties of MediCORE Board.
 (a) General administration.
 (b) CORE services.
 (c) Federal MediCORE guidelines.
 (d) Approval and oversight of State programs.
 (e) Model MediCORE Administration Manual.
 (1) In general.
 (2) Contents.
 (3) Time for provision of manuals.
 (f) National data bank system.
 (1) Establishment.
 (2) Functions.
 (g) Studies.
 (1) In general.
 (2) Immigrants and early retirees.
 (3) Veterans affairs.
 (4) Malpractice reform.
 (5) Coordination of programs.
 (h) Annual report.
Sec. 203. Organization.
 (a) In general.
 (b) Subcommittees.
 (c) Advisory panels.

 TITLE III--CORE SERVICES

Sec. 301. CORE services.
 (a) Review.
 (b) Scope and content of CORE services.
 (c) Specific components.
 (1) Medically necessary services.
 (2) Medicare services.
 (3) Supplemental benefits.
 (4) Preventive health care services.
 (5) Long-term health, custodial or personal 
 assistance.
 (6) Catastrophic care.
 (d) Adjustment or expansion of CORE services.
Sec. 302. Special supplemental food program.
 (a) In general.
 (b) Appropriation.

 TITLE IV--FEDERAL MEDICORE GUIDELINES

Sec. 401. Federal MediCORE guidelines.
 (a) Procedure.
 (1) Submission to States.
 (2) Adjustment of guidelines.
 (b) Requirements.
 (1) Universality.
 (2) Portability.
 (3) Single administrator.
 (4) Choice and managed competition.
 (5) Rural and underserved areas.
 (6) Private health insurance.
 (7) Cost sharing.
 (8) Mental health.
 (9) Primary care.

 TITLE V--APPROVAL AND OVERSIGHT OF STATE PROGRAMS

Sec. 501. Approval and oversight of State programs.
 (a) In general.
 (b) Submission of programs.
 (1) In general.
 (2) Regional programs.
 (c) Review and approval of programs.
 (d) Annual review.
 (e) Failure of approval.
 (1) Resubmission.
 (2) Sanctions.
 (f) Payments, premiums, copayments, deductibles, 
 etc.
 (1) Reimbursements.
 (2) Mandatory assignment.
 (g) Administration by State.
 (1) In general.
 (2) Administration by contract.

 TITLE VI--MEDICORE BUDGET

Sec. 601. MediCORE budget.
 (a) Budgetary requirement.
 (b) National average per capita costs.
 (1) In general.
 (2) Adjustments for risk groups.
 (3) State adjustments to national average per 
 capita costs.
 (c) State total expenditures.
 (d) Federal contributions.
 (1) In general.
 (2) State share.
 (3) State protection.
 (e) Subsequent calculations.
Sec. 602. Health care revenue share payments to States.
 (a) In general.
 (b) Use of funds.
Sec. 603. MediCORE trust fund.
 (a) Trust fund established.
 (1) In general.
 (2) Transfer of amounts equivalent to certain 
 taxes.
 (3) Transfer of funds.
 (4) Appropriation of additional sums.
 (5) Incorporation of trust fund provisions.
 (b) Expenditures.
 (1) To States.
 (2) Administrative expenses.
 (c) Trust fund off-budget.
Sec. 604. Health care revenue sharing provisions.
 (a) Payroll taxes.
 (1) Tax on employees.
 (2) Tax on employers.
 (3) Tax on self-employment income.
 (4) Elimination of limit on employer-portion of 
 wages or self-employment income subject to 
 MediCORE tax.
 (5) Additional Federal, State, and local 
 employees subject to MediCORE taxes.
 (6) Effective date.
 (b) Individual tax on certain adjusted gross 
 income.
 (1) In general.
 (2) Conforming amendment.
 (3) Effective date.
 (d) Treatment of health care deductions, 
 exclusions, and credits.
 (1) Limitation on exclusion of compensation for 
 injuries or sickness.
 (2) Termination of exclusion for amounts 
 received under accident and health plans.
 (3) Termination of exclusion for contributions 
 by employer to accident and health plans.
 (4) Limitation on cafeteria plans.
 (5) Prohibition on use of MediCORE expenses as 
 business expense deduction for employer.
 (6) Deduction for medical expenses limited to 
 uncompensated expenses and employee MediCORE 
 tax.
 (7) Termination of pension payment of medical 
 benefits.
 (8) Termination of child health insurance 
 credit.
 (9) Effective date.

 TITLE VII--PREPARATION AND SUBMISSION OF MEDICORE BUDGET TO CONGRESS

Sec. 701. Preparation and submission.
Sec. 702. Publication and comment.
Sec. 703. Submission to Congress.
 (a) In general.
 (b) Income requirements.
Sec. 704. Action by Congress.
 TITLE VIII--EFFECTIVE DATE; REPEALS; TRANSITION; RELATION TO ERISA

Sec. 801. Effective date.
Sec. 802. Repeals.
 (a) In general.
 (b) Repeal of CHAMPUS provisions.
 (1) Amendments to chapter 55 of title 10.
 (2) Table of sections.
 (3) Conforming amendments.
 (c) Health care financing administration.
 (d) Effective date.
Sec. 803. Authorization of appropriations and transition.
 (a) Authorization of appropriations.
 (b) Regulations.
Sec. 804. Relation to ERISA.
Sec. 805. Relation to other laws.
 (a) In general.
 (b) Definition.

SEC. 3. FINDINGS.

 Congress finds the following:
 (1) The rate of growth in health care costs in the United 
 States in both the public and private sectors is excessive and 
 destructive, and more specifically--
 (A)(i) between 1980 and 1992, health care spending 
 in the United States increased from 9 percent of the 
 Gross Domestic Product to 14 percent and in 1993 it is 
 expected to rise to 15 percent, a higher percentage of 
 Gross Domestic Product than that of any other 
 industrialized nation; and
 (ii) by the year 2000 health care spending in the 
 United States will exceed 18 percent of the Gross 
 Domestic Product if left at current spending levels;
 (B) expenditures for health care in the United 
 States will total approximately $885,000,000,000 in 
 1993, a rise of 13 percent since 1992, while Gross 
 Domestic Product rose at only a 4.6-percent rate over 
 the same period;
 (C)(i) health care costs for an average family in 
 the United States grew by 147 percent while average 
 family income rose by 88 percent during the 1980s;
 (ii) average family cost for health care was $1,742 
 in 1980 and has grown to $4,887 in 1992; and
 (iii) 50 percent of all personal bankruptcies are 
 caused by unmanageable health care costs;
 (D) the average cost of private employer health 
 plans rose approximately 119 percent between 1984 and 
 1991, badly eroding company profits and international 
 competitiveness;
 (E)(i) the cost of Medicare grew from 
 $34,000,000,000 in 1980 to $104,000,000,000 in fiscal 
 year 1990; and
 (ii) 27 percent of Medicare costs are paid for from 
 general funds from the Treasury and not from 
 specifically dedicated taxes;
 (F)(i) the cost of Medicaid is expected to increase 
 38 percent between 1991 and 1993 and Medicaid has grown 
 from 10.2 percent of State health budgets in 1987 to 
 approximately 46 percent in 1992;
 (ii) all Federal expenditures for Medicaid are 
 financed from general funds from the Treasury; and
 (iii) by the year 2000 under current spending 
 levels, State Medicaid will have grown to 56 percent of 
 State health care budgets;
 (G) the cost of medical care in general in the 
 United States continues to rise at approximately three 
 times the rate of the Consumer Price Index;
 (H) these disproportionate rises in health care 
 costs are inflicting undue burdens on the United States 
 economy, business and citizens in recessionary and 
 deficit ridden times;
 (I) the Congressional Budget Office estimates that 
 unless costs are stabilized, medical care cost 
 increases in Federal programs above increases in 
 Federal revenues, will by themselves increase the 
 Federal debt by over $1,500,000,000,000 by the middle 
 of the next decade, and will result in an increase in 
 annual Federal medical care costs over baseline by 
 $190,000,000,000 at the end of a decade; and
 (J) unless Federal health care cost increases are 
 halted it will take Draconian measures to bring the 
 Federal deficit under control.
 (2) Structural defects in the organization of the health 
 care system in the United States are leading to excessive 
 costs, to unequal and limited access, and to fragmentation, 
 complexity, and confusion in the delivery of health care 
 because--
 (A) an anachronism in tax policy carried forward 
 from World War II has led to great inequities in health 
 care between those employed in firms paying for health 
 care of employees, and those working for companies 
 without such coverage and all others paying for health 
 care coverage;
 (B) the employer-based system, due to inherent 
 limitations, has been ineffective in providing 
 affordable health care to large segments of the 
 population including the poor and elderly;
 (C) the costs of ``uncompensated care'' are shifted 
 in concealed and indirect ways to providers, employers 
 and the insured, and ultimately to governments and 
 taxpayers;
 (D) the widespread coverage gaps caused by the 
 employer-based health care system have been 
 inadequately compensated for by public programs, in 
 terms of the number of people covered, the scope of 
 services provided, and the efficiency of providing 
 services;
 (E) private and public insurance alike have adopted 
 reimbursement policies which encourage providers to 
 maximize income with unnecessary services and consumers 
 to overutilize;
 (F)(i) attempts to reduce costs of overburdened and 
 under funded public programs have caused increasing 
 cost shifting back to employers, further diminishing 
 the ability of employers to provide adequate health 
 insurance and to be competitive internationally;
 (ii) for these reasons and others retiree health 
 benefits are being curtailed dramatically; and
 (iii) such shifts are also limiting the 
 availability and affordability of adequate coverage to 
 others;
 (G) piecemeal attempts to control cost escalation 
 in both the private and public sectors, including the 
 use of managed care and other alternative delivery 
 systems, by themselves are not succeeding in 
 significantly controlling cost or cost shifting;
 (H) cost escalation has left gaps is coverage, 
 especially with respect to preventive, primary and 
 long-term care, and protection against catastrophic 
 costs;
 (I)(i) increasing costs and cost shifts have 
 resulted in insurers reducing cost by reducing risks 
 with the result that more and more individuals are left 
 uncovered;
 (ii) this has substantially reduced the 
 effectiveness of private health insurance as a adequate 
 answer to health care problems because--
 (I) insurance companies use defensive 
 practices such as pre-existing conditions 
 exclusions and ``cherry-picking'' which reduce 
 access rather than promote cost efficient 
 competition on the basis of price and product 
 design;
 (II) short-term ``experience ratings'' are 
 depriving Americans of consistent protection 
 against catastrophic health care occurrences; 
 and
 (III) employer-group organized health care 
 has spawned excessive numbers of commercial 
 insurers causing undue advertising costs, 
 administrative expense and confusion, and 
 redtape for employers, providers and consumers;
 (J) tax induced employer-based health care has 
 diminished the market role of both employers and 
 employees in making prudent and thrifty choices for 
 efficient and cost conscious health care coverage; and
 (K) the administrative difficulties, payment 
 inequities, regional differences in cost of services, 
 and the cost containment problems of Medicare exemplify 
 the difficulties of a federally run program.
 (3) Other factors, as well, demonstrate the need for 
 comprehensive reform in the nations health care systems. These 
 include:
 (A) Current health care spending with proper cost 
 sharing and resource allocation is sufficient to cover 
 presently uncovered benefits, such as preventative 
 health, long-term health care, pharmaceutical costs, 
 and catastrophic protection.
 (B) The reduction of present administrative 
 inefficiencies, defensive medical costs, and increased 
 use of outcome research will accommodate improved 
 coverage and care.
 (C) State run programs, with single or 
 administrative agencies, but federally structured and 
 coordinated will result in a less costly, more 
 efficient and diversified system.
 (D) Present tax inequities can only be corrected at 
 the Federal level, and only Federal funds can provide 
 sufficient funding for comprehensive change.
 (E) A coordinated global cost containment structure 
 can only be provided by the Federal Government.
 (F) States are best placed to create efficient 
 competition among health care providers for 
 administrative and service cost reductions.

SEC. 4. DEFINITIONS.

 As used in this Act:
 (1) Board.--The term ``Board'' means the Federal MediCORE 
 Board established under section 201.
 (2) CORE services.--The term ``CORE SERVICES'' means those 
 health care services specified in section 301.
 (3) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (4) State.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``State'' includes the 
 District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, 
 the United States Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, 
 and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
 (B) Region.--A reference to a State under this Act 
 shall be considered to include a region implementing a 
 regional program under the authority of this Act.
 (5) State plan.--The term ``State plan'' means a health 
 delivery plan approved under a State program.
 (6) State program.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``State program'' means a 
 State health care program approved under section 501.
 (B) Regional program.--A reference to a State 
 program under this Act shall be considered to include a 
 regional program implemented under the authority of 
 this Act.

 TITLE I--ELIGIBILITY AND ENROLLMENT

SEC. 101. ELIGIBILITY.

 (a) In General.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, each 
individual who is a legal resident of the United States, including 
lawful resident aliens, is eligible for CORE SERVICES under the State 
program in the State in which the individual maintains a primary 
residence.
 (b) Lawful Resident Alien Defined.--For purposes of this section, 
the term ``lawful resident alien'' means an alien lawfully admitted for 
permanent residence or for educational purposes and any other alien 
lawfully residing permanently in the United States under color of law, 
including an alien with lawful temporary resident status under section 
210, 210A, or 245A of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 
1160, 1161, or 1255a).
 (c) Overseas Residents and Travelers.--
 (1) Overseas residents.--As used in subsection (a), the 
 term ``legal resident of the United States'' does not include a 
 United States citizen or lawful resident alien who has 
 established a primary residence outside of the United States.
 (2) Travelers.--An individual described in subsection (a) 
 who is traveling at the time at which CORE SERVICES are 
 provided to such individual shall be covered under the State 
 program in the State in which the individual maintains a 
 primary residence.
 (d) Non-Resident Aliens and Illegal Immigrants.--The Board shall 
develop and implement special procedures with respect to the 
eligibility of non-resident aliens and illegal immigrants for CORE 
SERVICES under a State program. In developing such procedures, the 
Board shall ensure that those States with the highest incidence of 
illegal immigrants receive some type of additional payment under this 
Act for the provision of CORE SERVICES to such aliens and immigrants.
 (e) Primary Residence.--As used in this title, the term ``primary 
residence'' means that State in which the individual resides for the 
greatest period of time (not necessarily a consecutive period of time) 
during the calendar year. With respect to individuals who are 
unemancipated students, the primary residence of such individuals shall 
be the primary residence of their parents or legal guardians. With 
respect to a homeless individual, the State of primary residence shall 
be the State in which such individual applies for CORE benefits.

SEC. 102. ENROLLMENT IN STATE PROGRAMS.

 (a) Enrollment Process.--
 (1) Automatic enrollment.--Each State program shall provide 
 for the automatic enrollment of an individual described in 
 section 101 who is born after the effective date described in 
 section 801, on the date on which such individual is born.
 (2) Enrollment process for other individuals.--With respect 
 to individuals described in section 101 who are not 
 automatically enrolled under paragraph (1), each State program 
 shall develop and utilize an understandable and readily 
 available process for the enrollment of such individuals in the 
 State program.
 (3) Default enrollment.--In the case of an individual 
 described in section 101 who otherwise is not enrolled in a 
 State program, such individual shall be covered by the State 
 program in the State in which such individual maintains a 
 primary residence. The State shall provide a process for 
 enrollment of the individual at the time and place in which the 
 individual first is provided (after the effective date 
 described in section 801) CORE SERVICES under a State program.
 (b) MediCORE Cards.--Upon enrollment in a State program, an 
individual shall be issued a MediCORE card that shall--
 (1) indicate the State program in which the individual is 
 enrolled;
 (2) contain a brief description of any cost-sharing, 
 benefit or delivery features of the program in which such 
 individual is enrolled;
 (3) where feasible, and if privacy interests can be 
 maintained, contain the health record of the individual; and
 (4) indicate any other information determined appropriate 
 by the Board.

 TITLE II--ADMINISTRATION BY FEDERAL MEDICORE BOARD

SEC. 201. ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION.

 (a) Establishment.--There is established within the Department of 
Health and Human Services a Federal MediCORE Board.
 (b) Composition.--
 (1) Appointment.--The Board shall be composed of nine 
 members to be appointed by the President not later than 60 days 
 after the date of enactment of this Act, by and with the advice 
 and consent of the Senate, from among individuals who will, as 
 a whole, represent the interests of the following--
 (A) Federal and State governments;
 (B) employers;
 (C) employees and labor unions;
 (D) health care providers;
 (E) consumers;
 (F) academic and industry experts in health care 
 delivery; and
 (G) cost containment and quality improvement 
 experts.
 (2) Terms.--Individuals appointed to the Board under 
 paragraph (1) shall serve for a term of 5 years, except that 
 the terms of individuals initially appointed shall be as 
 follows--
 (A) three of such individuals shall be appointed 
 for a term of 2 years;
 (B) three of such individuals shall be appointed 
 for a term of 3 years; and
 (C) three of such individuals shall be appointed 
 for a term of 4 years.
 (3) Vacancies.--The President shall fill any vacancy in the 
 membership of the Board in the same manner as the original 
 appointment and such members shall serve for the remainder of 
 the term for which the predecessor of the member was appointed. 
 The vacancy shall not affect the power of the remaining members 
 to execute the duties of the Board.
 (4) Chairperson.--
 (A) Initial chairperson.--The initial chairperson 
 of the Board shall be selected by the President and 
 serve for a term of 3 years.
 (B) Subsequent chairpersons.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (A), the members of the Board shall select 
 a chairperson of the Board from among such members and 
 such chairperson shall serve for a term of 3 years.
 (5) Compensation.--Members of the Board shall be 
 compensated at a level comparable to level II of the Executive 
 Schedule, in accordance with section 5313 of title 5, United 
 States Code. Amounts for such compensation shall be derived 
 from the MediCORE Trust Fund.
 (c) Staff.--
 (1) Authority.--The Board shall employ such staff as the 
 Board may determine necessary and such staff shall be 
 compensated in accordance with paragraph (2).
 (2) Applicability of civil service provisions.--The staff 
 of the Board may be appointed without regard to the provisions 
 of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the 
 competitive service and be compensated without regard to the 
 provisions of chapter 51, and subchapter III of chapter 53 of 
 title 5 relating to classification and General Schedule pay 
 rates, except that no individual may receive pay more than the 
 rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive 
 Schedule. Amounts for such compensation shall be derived from 
 the MediCORE Trust Fund.

SEC. 202. DUTIES OF MEDICORE BOARD.

 (a) General Administration.--The Board shall be responsible for the 
overall administration of this Act and for the oversight of State 
compliance with this Act, as well as the development of CORE SERVICES 
and of specific guidelines to permit States to carry out this Act.
 (b) CORE SERVICES.--The Board shall, in accordance with title III, 
determine a basic, comprehensive package of health care services 
(referred to in this Act as ``CORE SERVICES'') that shall be provided 
under this Act.
 (c) Federal MediCORE Guidelines.--The Board shall, in accordance 
with title IV, develop and implement Federal guidelines for the 
equitable and efficient delivery of CORE SERVICES through State 
programs operating under this Act.
 (d) Approval and Oversight of State Programs.--Not later than 16 
months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Board shall, in 
accordance with title V, develop and administer procedures for the 
approval of State programs under this Act and for the monitoring of 
State compliance with the requirements of this Act. Such procedures 
shall be published in the Federal Register and made available to 
States.
 (e) Model MediCORE Administration Manual.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall develop, publish and make 
 available to each State a Model MediCORE Administration Manual.
 (2) Contents.--The Manual developed under paragraph (1) 
 shall contain--
 (A) recommendations, models, policies and 
 procedures, in sufficient detail, concerning all 
 aspects of the administration required for a State 
 program covering CORE SERVICES so as to avoid any 
 unnecessary duplication of development effort by 
 States;
 (B) sample requests for proposals and model 
 selection criteria for a claims administrator, managed 
 care vendors, health care provider networks and 
 regional or areawide providers of highly specialized or 
 tertiary health services;
 (C) model fee schedules with respect to all 
 professional and ancillary health services (such 
 schedules shall allow for regional cost differences);
 (D) model payment systems with respect to 
 hospitals, skilled nursing facilities and other health 
 care facilities, developed in a manner that would 
 encourage the efficient bundling of services;
 (E) outcome review procedures that may be 
 implemented by the States through the establishment of 
 a State outcome review panel;
 (F) ethical consideration policies that may be 
 implemented by the States through the establishment of 
 a State Medical Ethics Panel; and
 (G) any other information determined appropriate by 
 the Board.
 (3) Time for provision of manuals.--With respect to the 
 Manual developed under paragraph (1)--
 (A) an initial draft of such Manual shall be 
 provided to the States for comment not later than 12 
 months after the date of enactment of this Act; and
 (B) the final draft of such Manual shall be 
 provided to the States not later than 14 months after 
 the date of enactment of this Act.
 (f) National Data Bank Data System.--
 (1) Establishment.--Not later than 12 months after the date 
 of enactment of this Act, the Board, in consultation with the 
 National Institutes of Health and the Health Care Financing 
 Administration, shall establish and administer the operation of 
 a National Data Bank System.
 (2) Functions.--The National Data Bank System shall--
 (A) function as the nationwide repository for 
 health care data and information collected under this 
 Act;
 (B) collect information, with respect to State 
 programs, concerning--
 (i) comprehensive individual medical 
 records, available health insurance and 
 delivery plans and health services under such 
 plans, and administrative data including 
 claims, billing and electronic billing 
 information; and
 (ii) outcomes analyses that detail the 
 effectiveness, efficiency, viability and 
 ethical considerations involved in medical 
 treatments, technology and practice; and
 (C) assist in conducting and supervising the 
 studies required under subsection (g).
 (g) Studies.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) General report.--Not later than 18 months after 
 the date of enactment of this Act, the Board, acting 
 through the National Data Bank System, if appropriate, 
 shall prepare and submit to the Secretary and the 
 appropriate committees of Congress, a report concerning 
 the studies conducted under this paragraph.
 (B) National service and home health care.--The 
 Board, acting through the National Data Bank System, if 
 appropriate, either directly or in consultation and 
 cooperation with the Commission on National and 
 Community Service, shall conduct studies or 
 demonstration projects concerning--
 (i) the feasibility and desirability of 
 instituting a national service program under 
 which individuals under the age of 25 who are 
 not serving in the armed forces would 
 coordinate with other home health service 
 providers to provide assistance to disabled or 
 older individuals in their homes; and
 (ii) the feasibility and desirability of 
 providing financial assistance to families that 
 care for and provide financial assistance to 
 disabled or older individuals in their homes, 
 evaluated both as a cost savings measure and as 
 an avenue to improve the quality of care and 
 quality of life of such individuals.
 (C) Other studies.--The Board, acting through the 
 National Data Bank System, if appropriate, shall 
 conduct, either directly or through grant or contract, 
 studies to determine the feasibility and desirability 
 of--
 (i) authorizing certain States to implement 
 statewide demonstration health delivery 
 programs, consistent with the MediCORE program, 
 prior to the full implementation of this Act as 
 models for the MediCORE program;
 (ii) implementing a program to provide for 
 reduced deductibles or other cost-sharing 
 mechanisms with respect to CORE SERVICES for 
 individuals or families certified as being free 
 of substance use or as abiding by a specified 
 physical fitness program; and
 (iii) including health information on a 
 MediCORE card pursuant to section 102(b)(3), 
 particularly as it relates to the privacy 
 interests of individuals.
 (2) Immigrants and early retirees.--Not later than 14 
 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Board, 
 acting through the National Data Bank System, if appropriate, 
 shall conduct a study, and prepare and submit to the Secretary 
 and the appropriate committees of Congress a report, 
 concerning--
 (A) the provision of CORE SERVICES to illegal 
 immigrants and, if appropriate, the implementation of a 
 system to compensate those States with the highest 
 incidence of resident illegal immigrants for such 
 services; and
 (B) the implementation of procedures for the 
 appropriate recapture of the costs of coverage of CORE 
 SERVICES provided to employees retired on the date 
 described in section 801, and those who retire after 
 such date, and further procedures, to be developed with 
 the Secretary of the Treasury, for the equitable 
 treatment of those retirees who have contractual 
 agreements with their former employers for the 
 provision of such health care to ensure that the 
 employees are treated fairly with respect to taxation 
 on their retirement income under this Act.
 (3) Veterans affairs.--
 (A) Study.--The Board shall, either directly or 
 through grant or contract, conduct a study of the role 
 of the Department of Veterans Affairs, and its 
 independent medical care system for veterans under 
 title 38, United States Code, as it relates to the 
 MediCORE program under this Act.
 (B) Conduct.--In conducting the study under 
 subparagraph (A), the Board shall--
 (i) recognize and maintain the independent 
 responsibility of the Department of Veterans 
 Affairs for the special health care needs and 
 rights of veterans, its unique and long-
 standing contributions to the health of the 
 United States through medical and mental health 
 care, medical research and health professional 
 education, and its function as the primary 
 back-up to military medicine in time of war;
 (ii) identify opportunities for entering 
 into health care, research and education 
 sharing arrangements with the Department of 
 Veterans Affairs to optimize the use of medical 
 and mental health resources in the United 
 States;
 (iii) consider the manner in which the cost 
 containment features of the MediCORE program 
 under this Act and of the Department of 
 Veterans Affairs may be coordinated and 
 integrated in the interest of containing 
 national health care costs; and
 (iv) review the findings of the Department 
 of Veterans Affairs Commission on the Future 
 Structure of Veterans Health Care, the 
 Paralyzed Veterans of America, study entitled 
 ``The VA: Responsibility in Tomorrow's National 
 Health Care System,'' and such other 
 publications as it considers appropriate.
 (C) Study.--Not later than 36 months after the date 
 of enactment of this Act, the Board shall prepare and 
 submit to the Secretary and the appropriate committees 
 of Congress a report, concerning the results of the 
 study conducted under this paragraph.
 (4) Malpractice reform.--
 (A) Study and model legislation.--The Board shall 
 conduct a study of Federal and State medical 
 malpractice laws and proposals for the reform of such 
 laws. Not later than 24 months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Board shall develop a model 
 malpractice alternative dispute/claims dispute 
 resolution reform law or laws for the guidance of the 
 States. In developing such model law or laws, the Board 
 shall consider--
 (i) alternative dispute resolution systems 
 and coordination with State claims dispute 
 resolution systems;
 (ii) State tort reforms;
 (iii) payments of future damages;
 (iv) caps on noneconomic damages;
 (v) caps on punitive damages and payment of 
 punitive damages to States for use in 
 monitoring, disciplining and educating of 
 health care providers;
 (vi) collateral source rules;
 (vii) restrictions on attorney fees, 
 including contingency fees, and costs;
 (viii) statutes of limitations;
 (ix) patient protection and disciplinary 
 reforms and coordination with professional 
 self-regulation;
 (x) joint and several liability;
 (xi) community and migrant health care 
 centers and risk retention groups;
 (xii) practice guidelines and quality 
 assurance;
 (xiii) products liability protections for 
 medical products; and
 (xiv) others matters determined 
 appropriate.
 (B) Grants.--The Board shall award grants to 
 selected States from amounts available under the 
 MediCORE Trust Fund for the development or 
 implementation of State malpractice alternative 
 dispute/claims dispute resolution systems under 
 regulations to be adopted by the Board. The Board shall 
 monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of State systems 
 and prepare reports concerning such systems to be 
 included in the annual report required under subsection 
 (h).
 (C) Implementation.--Not later than 2 years after 
 the development of the model law or laws under 
 subparagraph (A), a State shall enact and implement a 
 malpractice alternative dispute/claims dispute 
 resolution system that the Board determined is in 
 substantial conformity with the requirements and 
 guidelines of the Board as developed under 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B).
 (D) Enforcement.--If the Board determines that a 
 State has not complied with the requirements of 
 subparagraph (C), the Board may not grant the approval 
 required in title V.
 (5) Coordination of programs.--
 (A) In general.--The Board shall conduct a study of 
 any agencies of the Department of Health and Human 
 Services, including the Health Care Financing 
 Administration and the Agency for Health Care Policy 
 and Research, and any other department and agency of 
 the Federal Government, to calculate the various 
 programs and activities of such department and 
 agencies, and to recommend how best to coordinate any 
 of such programs and activities with the MediCORE Board 
 and the MediCORE program under this Act. Such study 
 shall determine which activities and programs should be 
 retained, repealed or reorganized, and which should be 
 consigned to State responsibility. Within such study, 
 the Board shall review any ongoing studies being 
 conducted by such departments and agencies, and in 
 particular the debit/credit card study of the Health 
 Care Finance Administration, to determine the 
 feasibility and desirability of such within the 
 MediCORE program.
 (B) Report.--Not later than 14 months after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Board shall prepare 
 and submit to the Secretary and the appropriate 
 committees of Congress a report concerning the results 
 of the study completed under this subparagraph (A).
 (6) Ethical guidelines.--
 (A) In general.--The Board shall conduct a study 
 concerning the feasibility and desirability of 
 establishing ethical guidelines on medical and 
 biomedical issues (such as cutting edge lifesaving 
 techniques and biotechnology procedures) that are 
 consistent with the MediCORE program. Such study shall 
 focus on whether the guidelines can be established 
 prior to the full implementation of this Act and be 
 utilized as an ethical model for the MediCORE program. 
 In conducting such study, the Board shall conduct a 
 review of existing medical ethical studies completed or 
 currently being done within the United States and 
 foreign nations (such as France).
 (B) Report.--Not later than 18 months after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Board shall prepare 
 and submit to the Secretary and the appropriate 
 committees of Congress a report concerning the results 
 of the study completed under this subparagraph (A).
 (7) Primary care.--
 (A) In general.--The Board shall conduct a study 
 concerning the feasibility and desirability of 
 establishing, consistent with the MediCORE program and 
 prior to the full implementation of this Act--
 (i) recruitment guidelines to encourage or 
 provide incentives for medical students to 
 enter into primary care services; and
 (ii) guidelines to attract the physician 
 manpower necessary to insure Americans have 
 access to continued health care and preliminary 
 health care, which may include guidelines for--
 (I) expanding the National Health 
 Service Corps;
 (II) providing increased funding 
 for innovative training schedules;
 (III) developing recruitment 
 policies to increase the number of 
 minority primary care physicians; and
 (IV) the development of flexible 
 loan and loan repayment policies.
 In conducting such study the Board shall review primary 
 care physician shortages in inner-city and rural areas.
 (B) Report.--Not later than 18 months after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Board shall prepare 
 and submit to the Secretary and the appropriate 
 committees of Congress a report concerning the results 
 of the study completed under this subparagraph (A).
 (h) Annual Report.--The Board shall annually prepare and submit to 
the appropriate committees of Congress a report entitled ``The State of 
the Nation's Health Care Services'' which shall concern the 
effectiveness of the MediCORE program and the improvement in health 
care quality and cost effectiveness of CORE SERVICES provided under 
such program.

SEC. 203. ORGANIZATION.

 (a) In General.--The Board may organize itself into such 
subcommittees as the Board determines are appropriate for the efficient 
and effective administration of the requirements of this Act.
 (b) Subcommittees.--In addition to any subcommittees established 
under subsection (a), the Board shall establish--
 (1) a MediCORE Fund Administration Subcommittee that shall 
 be responsible for the day to day administration of this Act 
 and the development of policies and guidelines for such 
 administration, including revenue, payment and reimbursement 
 policies, with special emphasis being placed on the 
 administration of the MediCORE Trust Fund; and
 (2) a MediCORE Health Policy Subcommittee that shall be 
 responsible for--
 (A) the development of health policy 
 recommendations;
 (B) performance outcomes analyses that are based on 
 medical appropriateness determinations and the issuance 
 of guidelines concerning such determinations, with 
 special consideration placed on the ethical 
 implications of the implementation of this Act;
 (C) the development of CORE SERVICES 
 interpretations and access and quality guidelines; and
 (D) any other aspects determined appropriate by the 
 Board.
 (c) Advisory Panels.--The Board may establish such advisory panels 
as the Board determines appropriate to assist the Board in its duties, 
projects or studies.

 TITLE III--CORE SERVICES

SEC. 301. CORE SERVICES.

 (a) Review.--The Board shall conduct a detailed review of the 
health services and benefits provided or assisted under--
 (1) Federal health programs (including programs under 
 titles XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act);
 (2) health insurance plans available to Federal and State 
 employees;
 (3) other private health insurance plans in general (such 
 as Blue Cross/Blue Shield); and
 (4) such other programs or plans determined appropriate by 
 the Board;
that are operating or provided on the date of enactment of this Act.
 (b) Scope and Content of CORE SERVICES.--The Board shall define the 
content and scope of the CORE SERVICES to be as comprehensive as 
practicable taking into consideration the monetary constraints of the 
MediCORE Trust Fund. In making such definition, the Board shall 
consider the estimated costs of the CORE SERVICES and coordinate the 
content and scope of such SERVICES to the extent necessary to reconcile 
such costs, as outlined in the MediCORE Budget, with the amount of 
funds expected to be available with respect to the year involved from 
the MediCORE Trust Fund. The MediCORE Budget Report shall contain a 
detailed description of the CORE SERVICES as required by title VII.
 (c) Specific Components.--In defining the CORE SERVICES to be 
provided under this Act under subsection (b), the Board shall include, 
subject to such limitations, schedules, formularies, appropriateness 
criteria and cost sharing requirements as the Board shall determine 
appropriate, the following components:
 (1) Medically necessary services.--The CORE SERVICES shall 
 include those services determined by the Board as being 
 medically necessary, including prescription drugs, mental 
 health and substance abuse and rehabilitative services.
 (2) Medicare services.--The CORE SERVICES shall include 
 those services that otherwise would have been provided to 
 individuals under title XVIII of the Social Security Act prior 
 to the effective date of the amendments made by section 702 as 
 reconfigured by the Board in consideration of the MediCORE 
 budget.
 (3) Preventive health care services.--
 (A) Specifications.--The CORE SERVICES shall 
 include minimum preventive health care services 
 determined appropriate under specifications developed 
 by the Board taking into consideration the cost-
 effectiveness of such services in significantly 
 reducing preventable illnesses and the administrative 
 efficiency of providing such services within the scope 
 of appropriate State programs.
 (B) Transition.--Prior to the publication of the 
 specifications referred to in subparagraph (A), the 
 preventive health care services that shall be covered 
 under a State program shall include:
 (i) Health screening and immunization 
 services.--Those screening and immunization 
 services recommended in the document entitled 
 ``Guide to Clinical Preventive Services'' 
 published by the Preventive Services Task Force 
 for asyptomatic low-risk pregnant women, 
 infants and all other age groups. Screening 
 services shall include the medical history, 
 physical exam and laboratory or diagnostic 
 procedures described in the Guide, and dental 
 screening for individuals under the age of 18.
 (ii) Education and counseling services.--
 Those education services provided as part of a 
 public education program administered by the 
 State that are designed to educate individuals, 
 including school-aged children, concerning 
 taking personal responsibility for their 
 health. Such services shall include the health 
 aspects of those counseling topics recommended 
 in the Guide referred to in clause (i) such as 
 nutrition, exercise, sexual behavior, tobacco 
 use, substance abuse, injury prevention and the 
 value of periodic preventive health and dental 
 care.
 (C) State election.--Services required under this 
 paragraph shall be delivered under a State program in a 
 manner determined appropriate by the Board. In addition 
 to the services required under subparagraph (B), a 
 State may elect to provide enhanced preventive services 
 for high-risk individuals until such time as such 
 services are mandated under the guidelines developed 
 under subparagraph (A). Individual counseling 
 concerning preventive health care behavior and 
 intervention should be made available as part of a 
 State education or public health program or otherwise 
 incorporated into the delivery of other CORE SERVICES 
 under the State program.
 (4) Long-term health, custodial or personal assistance.--
 The Board shall establish specifications and eligibility 
 criteria with respect to long-term health, custodial or 
 personal assistance services that may be provided under this 
 Act. Benefits such as home health, skilled and unskilled care, 
 respite care and adult day care shall be evaluated by the Board 
 as options to prevent institutionalization and to reduce stress 
 on families. Guidance will be provided to States with respect 
 to supplemental insurance and sliding scale supplemental 
 payments for nursing home care or other additional long-term 
 care benefits that may not be covered initially under the 
 MediCORE program.
 (5) Catastrophic care.--The Board shall impose a limitation 
 concerning the amount of expenses for catastrophic care that an 
 individual shall be liable for with respect to CORE SERVICES 
 provided under the MediCORE program.
 (d) Exclusion of Services.--The Board may not include as part of 
CORE SERVICES the hospital care, medical services and domiciliary care 
provided to veterans for service-connected disabilities pursuant to 
chapter 17 of title 38, United States Code.
 (e) Adjustment or Expansion of CORE SERVICES.--The Board shall 
annually review the type and level of CORE SERVICES that are required 
to be provided under this Act and adjust such SERVICES if the Board 
determines that a more efficient or effective use of available 
resources is desirable. In undertaking such review and making any 
adjustments, the Board shall make available to the States a description 
of such adjustments and provide such States with an appropriate period 
in which to comment on such adjustments.

SEC. 302. SPECIAL SUPPLEMENTAL FOOD PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--Section 17(c)(1) of the Child Nutrition Act of 
1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786(c)(1)) is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence, by striking ``may'' and 
 inserting ``shall''; and
 (2) by inserting after the first sentence the following new 
 sentence: ``Subject to the other provisions of this section, an 
 eligible individual shall be entitled to receive the full 
 amount of benefits authorized under this section, except for 
 those benefits that would otherwise be covered under the 
 MediCORE Health Act of 1993.''.
 (b) Appropriation.--Section 17(g)(1) of such Act is amended by 
striking the first sentence and inserting the following new sentences: 
``For purposes of providing benefits (except for those benefits that 
would otherwise be covered under the MediCORE Health Act of 1993) to 
all eligible individuals in the program and otherwise carrying out this 
section, there are authorized to be appropriated, and there are 
appropriated, to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary 
for fiscal year 1992 and each succeeding fiscal year. The Secretary 
shall make available the sums described in the previous sentence to 
carry out this section.''.

 TITLE IV--FEDERAL MEDICORE GUIDELINES

SEC. 401. FEDERAL MEDICORE GUIDELINES.

 (a) Procedure.--
 (1) Submission to states.--Not later than 14 months after 
 the date of enactment of this Act, the Board shall publish in 
 the Federal Register a description of the preliminary Federal 
 MediCORE guidelines to be implemented by the Board under 
 section 202(c). Subsequent to such publication, the Board shall 
 solicit comments from the States concerning the preliminary 
 guidelines. Not later than 19 months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Board shall publish in the Federal 
 Register the final initial Federal guidelines to be implemented 
 by the Board under section 202(c).
 (2) Adjustment of guidelines.--The Board shall periodically 
 review the Federal MediCORE guidelines developed under this 
 section and adjust such guidelines as the Board determines 
 appropriate. In undertaking such review and making any 
 adjustments, the Board shall make available to the States a 
 description of such adjustments and provide the States with an 
 appropriate period in which to comment on such adjustments.
 (b) Requirements.--Federal guidelines shall be developed and 
implemented by the Board under section 202(c) for the delivery of CORE 
SERVICES to ensure that:
 (1) Universality.--CORE SERVICES are universally accessible 
 and delivered in a nondiscriminatory manner.
 (2) Portability.--CORE SERVICES, with respect to those 
 services and benefits provided by the State of primary 
 residence (as such term is defined in section 101(d)), will be 
 portable across State lines, except that preventive health care 
 services and other specific services may be limited to the 
 State of primary residence.
 (3) Single administrator.--With respect to each State with 
 a program approved under section 501, a single agency is 
 designated as being responsible for the administration of the 
 State program, including ensuring that services and payments to 
 providers are equitably and efficiently delivered under such 
 programs.
 (4) Choice and managed competition.--
 (A) Choice of delivery plans.--A State is 
 encouraged to include two or more CORE SERVICES 
 delivery plans within the State program to permit 
 market forces to operate within such State with respect 
 to health care delivery through managed competition 
 between such plans.
 (B) Consideration by state.--A State should 
 consider the inclusion of at least one CORE SERVICES 
 delivery plan that would permit a significant freedom 
 of choice by consumers with respect to health care 
 providers (including physicians) for which additional 
 fees may be assessed by the State. Other plans may 
 include managed care programs (such as health 
 maintenance organizations or community health centers) 
 and health care provider contracts that share 
 responsibility for cost and outcome management with 
 health care providers or provider networks.
 (C) Provision of information.--A State annually 
 shall provide information to residents of the State 
 concerning the CORE SERVICES delivery plans available 
 within that State. Such information shall be in such 
 form and contain information of such a nature so as to 
 permit State residents to seek the highest health care 
 value within the State for the lowest prices.
 (5) Rural and underserved areas.--Rural and underserved 
 areas, and the disability community, are provided with fair 
 access to CORE SERVICES on equitable terms.
 (6) Private health insurance.--Private insurance covering 
 health care services that are not otherwise covered under this 
 Act may be sold in a State.
 (7) Cost sharing.--A State program may require or permit 
 the assessment of premiums, copayments, coinsurance, or annual 
 deductibles with respect to expenses incurred in the provision 
 of CORE SERVICES under a program to the extent and in a manner 
 consistent with specific guidelines to be developed by the 
 Board. In no event shall cost sharing be permitted with respect 
 to preventive health care CORE SERVICES. Total cost sharing may 
 not exceed 15 percent of the cost of CORE SERVICES as 
 determined in the MediCORE Budget pursuant to section 601. The 
 cost sharing permitted by this paragraph may be income 
 sensitive and should decrease as the cost of the care 
 increases.
 (8) Mental health.--A State program shall ensure that CORE 
 SERVICES include benefits covering medically and 
 psychologically necessary treatments for mental health services 
 that are equitable and comparable to benefits offered for any 
 other illness.
 (9) Primary care.--A State program shall ensure that 
 primary care benefits and services are emphasized and focused 
 within the State program in accordance with the results of the 
 study conducted under section 202(g)(7). In complying with this 
 paragraph, a State shall be encouraged and guided by the Board 
 in order to develop programs to attract, educate and train more 
 primary care physicians, and other primary care providers, and 
 to give the support necessary to retain them in primary care.

 TITLE V--APPROVAL AND OVERSIGHT OF STATE PROGRAMS

SEC. 501. APPROVAL AND OVERSIGHT OF STATE PROGRAMS

 (a) In General.--The Board shall administer this Act, with respect 
to the approval of, and oversight over, State programs, in accordance 
with this section.
 (b) Submission of Programs.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 19 months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, each State shall prepare and submit to 
 the Board the State program in the State.
 (2) Regional programs.--Any State may join with neighboring 
 States to prepare and submit to the Board a regional program to 
 operate in all States so joined in lieu of a State program.
 (c) Review and Approval of Programs.--Not later than 20 months 
after the date of enactment of this Act, the Board shall review the 
programs submitted under subsection (b) and determine whether such 
programs meet the requirements and guidelines of the Board for 
approval. The Board shall not approve such a program unless it 
determines that the program provides, consistent with the provisions of 
this Act, for the following:
 (1) The equitable and efficient delivery of CORE SERVICES 
 within the State or for the delivery of a defined set of health 
 care services determined by the Board to be substantially 
 equivalent to the CORE SERVICES, except that no diminution 
 shall be permitted with respect to the MediCORE guidelines 
 concerning preventive health care services included in the CORE 
 SERVICES. A State may provide additional services and benefits 
 to supplement CORE SERVICES but the cost of any such additional 
 services or benefits shall be borne solely by such State and a 
 State may use demonstrated savings from its MediCORE program to 
 supplement its CORE SERVICES on terms to be approved by the 
 Board.
 (2) Adequate financing of CORE SERVICES under the program, 
 including the annual submission of the State program budget to 
 the Board.
 (3) A system by which the State program shall provide all 
 enrolled individuals within the State with standardized 
 information about CORE SERVICES under the State program.
 (4) Effective cost containment measures and payment 
 methodologies consistent with the guidelines developed by the 
 Board.
 (5) Adequate administration, including the designation of a 
 single agency responsible for administration of the program 
 consistent with the guidelines developed by the Board. 
 Administrative costs of a State may not exceed 5 percent of the 
 cost of CORE SERVICES co-determined in the MediCORE Budget 
 pursuant to section 601.
 (6) Adequate quality assurance mechanisms.
 (7) Organization of a State procedure to determine capital 
 needs and recommend allocation of capital to localities and 
 institutions consistent with the guidelines developed by the 
 Board.
 (8) An organized grievance procedure available to consumers 
 through which complaints about the organization and 
 administration of the State program and delivery of CORE 
 SERVICES covered by the State program may be filed, heard, and 
 resolved.
 (9) A process for developing the State's annual health 
 budget, fee schedules, cost containment measures, payment 
 practices, quality assurance mechanisms, grievance procedures, 
 outcomes review procedures, ethical analyses procedures, and 
 other relevant aspects of the State program, which process 
 shall include regular and adequate opportunities in diverse 
 geographical settings for the citizens of the State to have 
 their opinions solicited and heard, consistent with the 
 guidelines developed by the Board.
 (10) An agreement, if sufficient capacity exists, with 
 veterans hospitals to reimburse the hospitals for care, not 
 required under Federal law, provided to veterans and their 
 dependents (any such agreement shall not be for charges in 
 excess of these charged other providers under the State 
 program).
 (11) A process under which self-insured groups may seek 
 State certification if such groups are made up of at least 
 1,000 participants and if such groups are provided with health 
 care benefits, including quality of care, that is at least 
 equal to that otherwise required under the State program. The 
 State may require such groups to meet other requirements, 
 including data collection or surcharge requirements. Self-
 insured groups certified by the State shall be reimbursed by 
 the State in an amount that equals the actual costs incurred in 
 self-insuring, or 6 percent of the amount the State receives 
 under section 602 for the fiscal year involved, whichever is 
 less.
 (12) Any other matter determined appropriate by the Board.
In assessing the cost containment measures and payment methodologies of 
a State for purposes of paragraph (4), the Board shall consider whether 
the State program includes different CORE SERVICES delivery plans as 
described in section 401(4)(A) that permit enrollees to be presented 
with a choice of delivery plans and allow for health care efficiencies 
and effectiveness to result from the competition of such plans.
 (d) Annual Review.--Beginning the second year after a State program 
under this Act is in operation, and annually thereafter, the Board 
shall review such State program and determine whether such program 
continues to meet the requirements of this Act. At least 3 months prior 
to the conduct of each such review, the Board shall publish a 
description of the criteria to be used by the Board in determining 
whether a State program complies with the requirements of this Act.
 (e) Failure of Approval.--
 (1) Resubmission.--If the Board determines that the initial 
 State program submitted under subsection (b) does not meet the 
 requirements for approval under subsection (c), the Board shall 
 provide notice to the State of such failure and the State 
 shall, not later than 21 months after the date of enactment of 
 this Act, resubmit such program with the modifications required 
 by the Board.
 (2) Sanctions.--
 (A) Resubmission.--If the Board determines that a 
 State program resubmitted under paragraph (1) does not 
 meet the requirements for approval under subsection 
 (c), the Board shall provide notice to the State of 
 such failure and may place the State program in 
 receivership under the jurisdiction of the Board or 
 impose the other sanctions described in subparagraph 
 (C).
 (B) Other failures.--If under a review conducted 
 under subsection (d) the Board determines that a State 
 program previously approved under subsection (c) no 
 longer meets the requirements of such section, the 
 Board shall provide notice to the State of such failure 
 and that unless corrective action is taken within a 
 period of 90 days the sanctions described in 
 subparagraph (C) may be applied, effective 30 days 
 after the end of such 90-day period.
 (C) Sanctions.--The sanctions described in 
 subparagraph (B) are--
 (i) censure;
 (ii) reductions in the future amounts 
 otherwise payable by the Federal Government 
 under this Act to the State, but in no event 
 shall such amount be reduced by more than 5 
 percent; and
 (iii) placing the State program in 
 receivership under the jurisdiction of the 
 Board.
 For purposes of clause (ii), no reduction shall 
 result in the contraction of primary or essential CORE 
 SERVICES as determined appropriate by the Board.
 (3) Receivership.--In the event that a State program is 
 placed in receivership under paragraph (2)(C)(iii), the Board 
 shall ensure that such program is administered using managed 
 competition networks determined appropriate by the Board in all 
 areas in the State except those areas determined to lack 
 sufficient health care providers.
 (f) Payments, Premiums, Copayments, Deductibles, Etc.
 (1) Payments.--A State program shall provide for the 
 payment of CORE service providers according to procedures 
 established under the State program consistent with the 
 guidelines developed by the Board.
 (2) Mandatory assignment.--Each provider of services or 
 other practitioner, institution or facility that receives 
 reimbursement related to CORE SERVICES provided under this Act 
 shall be considered to have agreed to accept the reimbursement 
 amount recognized under the State program for the CORE SERVICES 
 covered under such program as payment in full for such services 
 and may not impose any charges for such services other than 
 those permitted with respect to such services under the 
 procedures established by the State consistent with the 
 guidelines developed by the Board.
 (g) Administration by State.--
 (1) In general.--On the January 1 referred to in section 
 801, and subject to the approval of a State program under 
 subsection (c), the State shall begin the administration, 
 management, and supervision of its program under this Act.
 (2) Administration by contract.--A State may contract with 
 a third party or parties (including private health insurance 
 carriers, claims administrations, and managed care 
 organizations) or with the MediCORE Fund Administration for the 
 administration, management, and supervision of its program, but 
 in no event shall more than one entity be responsible for such 
 duties with respect to CORE SERVICES provided under the State 
 program. The Board may waive the single entity claims 
 processing requirement of the preceding sentence if the Board 
 determines such action appropriate.

 TITLE VI--MEDICORE BUDGET

SEC. 601. MEDICORE BUDGET.

 (a) Budgetary Requirement.--The Board shall prepare an annual 
MediCORE Budget containing estimates of--
 (1) the total expenditures the Board expects to be made 
 during the calendar year for which the budget is being prepared 
 by States and the Federal Government for CORE SERVICES under 
 this Act (including administrative costs); and
 (2) the total amount that the Board expects to be available 
 in the MediCORE Trust Fund for the calendar year for which the 
 budget is being prepared.
 (b) National Average Per Capita Costs.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall compute the national 
 average per capita cost for each category of the CORE SERVICES 
 described in section 301(b) using data from the national health 
 accounts of the Office of National Cost Estimates of the Office 
 of the Actuary of the Health Care Financing Administration, and 
 other available data. On the effective date of the repeals 
 under section 702, the National Data Bank System established 
 under section 202(f) shall compile and maintain the data 
 previously collected by the Office of National Cost Estimates 
 of the Office of the Actuary of the Health Care Financing 
 Administration.
 (2) Adjustments for risk groups.--
 (A) In general.--The Board shall develop an 
 adjustment factor to the national average per capita 
 costs computed under paragraph (1) for each risk group 
 (as designated under subparagraph (B)) to reflect the 
 national average per capita costs for that risk group.
 (B) Risk groups.--The Board shall designate a 
 series of risk groups, determined by age, sex, and 
 other factors that represent distinct patterns of 
 health care services and long-term care services 
 utilization and costs.
 (3) State adjustments to national average per capita 
 costs.--The Board shall develop for each State a factor to 
 adjust the national average per capita costs for each risk 
 group to reflect the differing circumstances with respect to 
 each such State, including--
 (A) the number of illegal immigrants in such State;
 (B) the number of homeless individuals in such 
 State;
 (C) the overall poverty level of the State;
 (D) the percentage of the State that is determined 
 to be rural and the percentage determined to be urban;
 (E) the overall health status of the State; and
 (F) other factors determined appropriate by the 
 Board.
 (c) State Total Expenditures.--The Board shall compute for each 
State total projected expenditures for each of the CORE SERVICES 
described in subsection (a) by multiplying the national average per 
capita costs of each risk group designated in subsection (b)(2)(B) by 
the State adjustment factors described in subsection (b)(3) by the 
number of persons in the State estimated by the Bureau of the Census to 
be resident members of each risk group.
 (d) Federal Contributions.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall determine the appropriate 
 Federal health care revenue contribution for each State. The 
 Federal health care revenue contribution shall be determined by 
 subtracting the State share from 100 percent of the total State 
 expenditures for such State for the calendar year involved (as 
 described under subsection (c)).
 (2) State share.--The State share referred to in paragraph 
 (1) shall not be less than an amount that equals--
 (A) the revenue generated under section 3101(c) of 
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 with respect to a 
 State; and
 (B) the State's share of spending under title XVIII 
 of the Social Security Act in 1995, as adjusted for 
 each subsequent fiscal year based on the increase in 
 the Gross Domestic Product for such year and 
 demographic changes determined relevant by the Board.
 (3) State protection.--In determining the amount of the 
 State share under paragraph (2), the Board shall consider the 
 ability of the State to provide for the continued operation of 
 the State program at a level sufficient to provide individuals 
 within such State with the CORE SERVICES under such program.
 (e) Subsequent Calculations.--For each subsequent calendar year 
during which a program is in effect in a State, the Board shall make 
recomputations under subsections (a), (b), (c), and (d) for the State 
at least 7 months before the beginning of such calendar year.

SEC. 602. HEALTH CARE REVENUE SHARE PAYMENTS TO STATES.

 (a) In General.--Each State with an approved State program is 
entitled to receive, from amounts in the Trust Fund, an amount equal to 
the annual Federal share determined under section 601(d) with respect 
to each such State.
 (b) Use of Funds.--Amounts provided to a State under subsection (a) 
and the State share, as defined in section 601(d)(2) shall be used to 
carry out the State program in such State.

SEC. 603. MEDICORE TRUST FUND.

 (a) Trust Fund Established.--
 (1) In general.--There is hereby created on the books of 
 the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as 
 the ``MediCORE Trust Fund''. The Trust Fund shall consist of 
 such gifts and bequests as may be made and such amounts as may 
 be deposited in, or appropriated to, such Trust Fund as 
 provided in this Act.
 (2) Transfer of amounts equivalent to certain taxes.--
 (A) In general.--There are hereby appropriated to 
 the Trust Fund amounts equivalent to 100 percent of the 
 taxes imposed under sections 59B, 1401(b), 1401(c), 
 3101(b), 3101(c), 3111(b), and 3111(c) of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986.
 (B) Additional revenues.--There are appropriated to 
 the Trust Fund amounts equivalent to the additional 
 revenues received in the Treasury as the result of the 
 amendments made by section 604(d) of this Act.
 (C) Transfers based on estimates.--The amounts 
 appropriated by subparagraphs (A) and (B) shall be 
 transferred from time to time (not less frequently than 
 monthly) from the general fund in the Treasury to the 
 Trust Fund, such amounts to be determined on the basis 
 of estimates by the Secretary of the Treasury of the 
 taxes, specified in such subparagraphs, paid to or 
 deposited into the Treasury; and proper adjustments 
 shall be made in amounts subsequently transferred to 
 the extent prior estimates were in excess of or were 
 less than the taxes specified in such subparagraphs.
 (3) Transfer of funds.--All amounts, not otherwise 
 obligated, that remain in the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust 
 Fund and the Federal Supplemental Medical Insurance Trust Fund 
 on the first day of the year described in section 801 shall be 
 transferred to the Trust Fund.
 (4) Appropriation of additional sums.--There is hereby 
 appropriated to the Trust Fund--
 (A) on January 1 of the year described in section 
 801 of MediCORE Health Act of 1992, an amount equal to 
 the amounts appropriated with respect to titles XVIII 
 and XIX of the Social Security Act, section 1079 of 
 title 10, United States Code (CHAMPUS), and chapter 89 
 of title 5, United States Code, for the fiscal year 
 ending before such year,
 (B) on January 1 of each succeeding year, an amount 
 equal to the amount determined under this paragraph for 
 the preceding year increased by the percentage increase 
 (if any) in Gross Domestic Product.
 (5) Incorporation of trust fund provisions.--The provisions 
 of subsections (b) through (e) of section 1841 of the Social 
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395t), as in effect on the day before 
 the date of the enactment of this Act, shall apply to the Trust 
 Fund in the same manner as such provisions apply to the Federal 
 Supplemental Medical Insurance Trust Fund, except that any 
 reference to the Secretary of Health and Human Services or the 
 Administrator of the Health Care Financing Administration shall 
 be deemed a reference to the Board.
 (b) Expenditures.--
 (1) Reservation.--The Board shall reserve 2 percent of 
 amounts contained in the Trust Fund each fiscal year to provide 
 supplemental payments to States determined by the Board to be 
 in need of such supplemental payments. Such payments may be 
 made by the Board where the Board determines that the amount of 
 payment to which a State is entitled under section 602 is 
 inadequate as a result of an unforeseen health emergency or 
 other increase in health care demand in such State.
 (2) To states.--Payments in each calendar year to each 
 State from the Trust Fund as determined under section 602 are 
 hereby authorized and appropriated.
 (3) Administrative expenses.--There are hereby authorized 
 and appropriated such sums as are necessary for the 
 administrative expenses of the Board for each year, not to 
 exceed 1 percent of the total payments made to the States for 
 such year as determined under section 602.
 (c) Trust Fund Off-Budget.--The receipts and disbursements of the 
Trust Fund and the taxes described in subsection (a)(2) shall not be 
included in the totals of the budget of the United States Government as 
submitted by the President or of the congressional budget and shall be 
exempt from any general budget limitation imposed by statute on 
expenditures and net lending (budget outlays) of the United States 
Government.

SEC. 604. HEALTH CARE REVENUE SHARING PROVISIONS.

 (a) Payroll Taxes.--
 (1) Tax on employees.--Section 3101 of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986 (relating to rate of tax on employees) is amended 
 by redesignating subsections (c) and (d) as subsections (d) and 
 (e) and by inserting after subsection (b) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(c) MediCORE.--In addition to the taxes imposed by the preceding 
subsections, there is hereby imposed on the income of every individual 
a tax equal to 2 percent of the wages (as defined in section 3121(a)) 
received by such individual on or after January 1 of the year described 
in section 801 of MediCORE Health Act of 1992, with respect to 
employment (as defined in section 3121(b)).''.
 (2) Tax on employers.--Section 3111 of such Code (relating 
 to rate of tax on employers) is amended by redesignating 
 subsection (c) as subsection (d) and by inserting after 
 subsection (b) the following new subsection:
 ``(c) MediCORE.--In addition to the taxes imposed by the preceding 
subsections, there is hereby imposed on every employer an excise tax, 
with respect to having individuals in such employer's employ, equal to 
4 percent of the wages (as defined in section 3121(a)) paid by such 
employer during each calendar year beginning on or after January 1 of 
the year described in section 801 of MediCORE Health Act of 1992, with 
respect to employment (as defined in section 3121(b)).''.
 (3) Tax on self-employment income.--Section 1401 of such 
 Code (relating to rate of tax on self-employment income for 
 hospital insurance) is amended by redesignating subsection (c) 
 as subsection (d) and by inserting after subsection (b) the 
 following new subsection:
 ``(c) MediCORE.--In addition to the taxes imposed by the preceding 
subsections, there shall be imposed for each taxable year beginning on 
or after January 1 of the year described in section 801 of MediCORE 
Health Act of 1992, on the self-employment income of every individual, 
a tax equal to the sum of--
 ``(1) 2 percent, plus
 ``(2) 4 percent
of the amount of the self-employment income for such taxable year.''.
 (4) Elimination of limit on employer portion of wages or 
 self-employment income subject to medicore tax.--
 (A) Wages.--Subsection (x) of section 3121 of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to applicable 
 contribution base) is amended by adding at the end 
 thereof the following new paragraph:
 ``(3) Medicore.--
 ``(A) Employee portion.--For purposes of the taxes 
 imposed by section 3101(c), the applicable contribution 
 base is--
 ``(i) $100,000 for the calendar year 
 beginning on January 1 of the year described in 
 section 801 of MediCORE Health Act of 1992, and
 ``(ii) for any calendar year after the 
 calendar year described in clause (i), the 
 applicable contribution base for the preceding 
 year adjusted in the same manner as is used in 
 adjusting the contribution and benefit base 
 under section 230(b) of the Social Security 
 Act.
 ``(B) Employer portion.--For purposes of the taxes 
 imposed by section 3111(c), the applicable contribution 
 base for any calendar year is equal to the remuneration 
 for employment paid to an individual for such calendar 
 year.''.
 (B) Self-employment income.--Subsection (k) of 
 section 1402 of such Code (relating to applicable 
 contribution base) is amended by adding at the end 
 thereof the following new paragraph:
 ``(3) Medicore.--
 ``(A) Employee portion.--For purposes of the taxes 
 imposed by section 1402(c)(1), the applicable 
 contribution base is--
 ``(i) $100,000 for calendar year beginning 
 on January 1 of the year described in section 
 801 of MediCORE Health Act of 1992, and
 ``(ii) for any calendar year after the 
 calendar year described in clause (i), the 
 applicable contribution base for the preceding 
 year adjusted in the same manner as is used in 
 adjusting the contribution and benefit base 
 under section 230(b) of the Social Security 
 Act.
 ``(B) Employer portion.--For purposes of the tax 
 imposed by section 1401(c)(2), the applicable 
 contribution base for any calendar year is equal to the 
 individual's net earnings from self-employment for such 
 calendar year.''.
 (C) Conforming amendment.--Subsection (c) of 
 section 6413 of such Code is amended by adding at the 
 end thereof the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Separate application for medicore taxes.--In applying 
 this subsection with respect to--
 ``(A) the tax imposed by section 3101(c) (or any 
 amount equivalent to such tax), and
 ``(B) so much of the tax imposed by section 3201 as 
 is determined at a rate not greater than the rate in 
 effect under section 3101(c),
 the applicable contribution base determined under section 
 3121(x)(3)(A) for any calendar year shall be substituted for 
 `contribution and benefit base (as determined under section 230 
 of the Social Security Act)' each place it appears.''.
 (5) Additional federal, state, and local employees subject 
 to medicore taxes.--Section 3121(u) (relating to application of 
 hospital insurance tax to Federal, State, and local employment) 
 is amended--
 (A) by striking ``sections 3101(b) and 3111(b)'' in 
 paragraph (1) and inserting ``sections 3101(b), 
 3101(c), 3111(b), and 3111(c)'',
 (B) by striking ``Except as provided in 
 subparagraphs (B) and (C)'' in paragraph (2)(A) and 
 inserting ``Except as provided in subparagraph (B)'' , 
 and
 (C) by striking subparagraphs (C) and (D) of 
 paragraph (2).
 (6) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply with respect to remuneration paid on or after 
 January 1 of the year described in section 801 of MediCORE 
 Health Act of 1992, and with respect to earnings from self-
 employment attributable to taxable years beginning on or after 
 such date.
 (b) Individual Tax on Certain Adjusted Gross Income.--
 (1) In general.--Subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to normal taxes and surtaxes) is 
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new part:

 ``PART VIII--MEDICORE REVENUE SHARING TAXES

 ``Sec. 59B. Individual MediCORE tax.

``SEC. 59B. INDIVIDUAL MEDICORE TAX.

 ``(a) In General.--In the case of an individual, there is hereby 
imposed (in addition to any other tax imposed by this subtitle) a tax 
equal to the excess (if any) of--
 ``(1) the tax determined under subsection (b), over
 ``(2) the sum of--
 ``(A) the tax imposed under section 3111(c) or 
 1402(c)(2) for such taxable year with respect to the 
 wages or self-employment income (as the case may be) of 
 such individual which does not exceed the applicable 
 contribution base under section 3121(x)(3)(A) or 
 1402(k)(3)(A) (as the case may be), plus
 ``(B) the retiree health care amount available to 
 the individual for such taxable year.
 ``(b) Tax on Adjusted Gross Income.--The tax imposed under this 
subsection is as follows:
 ``(1) Married individuals filing joint returns and 
 surviving spouses.--There is hereby imposed on the adjusted 
 gross income of--
 ``(A) every married individual (as defined in 
 section 7703) who makes a single return jointly with 
 such individual's spouse under section 6013, and
 ``(B) every surviving spouse (as defined in section 
 2(a)),
 a tax determined in accordance with the following table:

``If adjusted gross income is: The tax is:
 Not over $10,000...............
 $0.
 Over $10,000 but not over 
 $11,000.
 $0, plus 1% of the excess over 
 $10,000.
 Over $11,000 but not over 
 $12,000.
 $10, plus 2% of the excess over 
 $11,000.
 Over $12,000 but not over 
 $13,000.
 $30, plus 3% of the excess over 
 $12,000.
 Over $13,000 but not over 
 $14,000.
 $60, plus 4% of the excess over 
 $13,000.
 Over $14,000 but not over 
 $15,000.
 $100, plus 5% of the excess 
 over $14,000.
 Over $15,000 but not over 
 $162,500.
 $150, plus 6% of the excess 
 over $15,000.
 ``(2) Unmarried individuals (other than surviving 
 spouses).--There is hereby imposed on the adjusted gross income 
 of every individual (other than a surviving spouse as defined 
 in section 2(a)) who is not a married individual (as defined in 
 section 7703) a tax determined in accordance with the following 
 table:

``If adjusted gross income is: The tax is:
 Not over $7,000................
 $0.
 Over $7,000 but not over $8,000
 $0, plus 1% of the excess over 
 $7,000.
 Over $8,000 but not over $9,000
 $10, plus 2% of the excess over 
 $8,000.
 Over $9,000 but not over 
 $10,000.
 $30, plus 3% of the excess over 
 $9,000.
 Over $10,000 but not over 
 $11,000.
 $60, plus 4% of the excess over 
 $10,000.
 Over $11,000 but not over 
 $12,000.
 $100, plus 5% of the excess 
 over $11,000.
 Over $12,000 but not over 
 $109,500.
 $150, plus 6% of the excess 
 over $12,000.
 ``(3) Married individuals filing separate returns.--There 
 is hereby imposed on the adjusted gross income of every married 
 individual (as defined in section 7703) who does not make a 
 single return jointly with such individual's spouse under 
 section 6013, a tax determined in accordance with the following 
 table:

``If adjusted gross income is: The tax is:
 Not over $5,000................
 $0.
 Over $5,000 but not over $5,500
 $0, plus 1% of the excess over 
 $5,000.
 Over $5,500 but not over $6,000
 $5, plus 2% of the excess over 
 $5,500.
 Over $6,000 but not over $6,500
 $15, plus 3% of the excess over 
 $6,000.
 Over $6,500 but not over $7,000
 $30, plus 4% of the excess over 
 $6,500.
 Over $7,000 but not over $7,500
 $50, plus 5% of the excess over 
 $7,000.
 Over $7,500 but not over 
 $81,250.
 $75, plus 6% of the excess over 
 $7,500.
 ``(c) Retiree Health Care Amounts.--For purposes of subsection 
(a)(2)(B), and to the extent provided by regulation, an individual's 
retiree health care amount is equal to the amount deposited in the 
MediCORE Trust Fund by the individual's employer with respect to such 
individual under an agreement with the Secretary.''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--The table of parts of subchapter 
 A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end 
 thereof the following new item:

 ``Part VIII. MediCORE taxes.''.
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply to taxable years beginning on or after January 1 of 
 the year described in section 801 of MediCORE Health Act of 
 1992.
 (c) Treatment of Health Care Deductions, Exclusions, and Credits.--
 (1) Limitation on exclusion of compensation for injuries or 
 sickness.--Subsection (a) of section 104 of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to compensation for injuries or 
 sickness) is amended--
 (A) by striking paragraph (3) and inserting the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(3) amounts received through MediCORE for personal 
 injuries or sickness;'', and
 (B) by striking the second sentence thereof.
 (2) Termination of exclusion for amounts received under 
 accident and health plans.--
 (A) In general.--Section 105 of such Code (relating 
 to amounts received under accident and health plans) is 
 amended--
 (i) by striking ``income'' and all that 
 follows in subsection (a) and inserting 
 ``income.'',
 (ii) by striking subsections (b), (e), (f), 
 (g), and (h), and
 (iii) by redesignating subsections (c) and 
 (i) as subsections (b) and (c), respectively.
 (B) Conforming amendment.--Paragraph (6) of section 
 7871(a)(6) of such Code is amended by striking 
 subparagraph (A) and by redesignating subparagraphs 
 (B), (C), and (D) as subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C), 
 respectively.
 (3) Termination of exclusion for contributions by employer 
 to accident and health plans.--
 (A) In general.--Section 106 of such Code (relating 
 to contributions by employer to accident and health 
 plans) is repealed.
 (B) Conforming amendments.--
 (i) Subsection (c) of section 104 of such 
 Code is amended to read as follows:
 ``(c) Cross Reference.--
 ``For exclusion of part of disability 
retirement pay from the application of subsection (a)(4) of this 
section, see section 1403 of title 10, United States Code (relating to 
career compensation laws).''.
 (ii) Sections 414(n)(3)(C), 414(t)(2), and 
 6039D(d)(1) of such Code are each amended by 
 striking ``106,''.
 (4) Limitation on cafeteria plans.--Subsection (g) of 
 section 125 of such Code (relating to cafeteria plans) is 
 amended by striking paragraph (2) and by redesignating 
 paragraphs (3) and (4) as paragraphs (2) and (3), respectively.
 (5) Prohibition on use of medicore expenses as business 
 expense deduction for employer.--Subsection (l) of section 162 
 of such Code (relating to trade or business expenses) is 
 amended to read as follows:
 ``(l) Employer MediCORE Expenses.--No amount paid or incurred with 
respect to MediCORE may be allowed as a deduction under this 
section.''.
 (6) Deduction for medical expenses limited to uncompensated 
 expenses and employee medicore tax.--
 (A) In general.--Subsection (a) of section 213 of 
 such Code (relating to medical, dental, etc., expenses) 
 is amended to read as follows:
 ``(a) Allowance of Deduction.--There shall be allowed as a 
deduction the expenses paid during the taxable year, not compensated 
for by insurance or otherwise for--
 ``(1) medical care of the taxpayer, the taxpayer's spouse, 
 or a dependent of the taxpayer (as defined in section 152), to 
 the extent that such expenses exceed 7.5 percent of adjusted 
 gross income, and
 ``(2) the tax imposed under section 3101(c) or 
 1402(c)(1).''.
 (B) Conforming amendments.--Subsection (d) of 
 section 213 of such Code (relating to definitions) is 
 amended--
 (i) by inserting ``or'' at the end of 
 paragraph (1)(A),
 (ii) by striking ``, or'' at the end of 
 paragraph (1)(B) and inserting a period,
 (iii) by striking paragraph (1)(C),
 (iv) by striking paragraphs (6) and (7) and 
 by redesignating paragraphs (8) and (9) as 
 paragraphs (6) and (7), respectively.
 (7) Termination of pension payment of medical benefits.--
 Subsection (h) of section 401 of such Code (relating to 
 qualified pension, profit-sharing, and stock bonus plans) is 
 repealed.
 (8) Termination of child health insurance credit.--Clause 
 (i) of section 32(b)(2)(A) of such Code (relating to health 
 insurance credit) is amended by inserting ``(0 percent for 
 taxable years beginning on or after January 1 of the year 
 described in section 801 of MediCORE Health Act of 1992)'' 
 after ``6 percent''.
 (9) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
 shall apply with respect to taxable years beginning on or after 
 January 1 of the year described in section 801 of MediCORE 
 Health Act of 1992.

 TITLE VII--PREPARATION AND SUBMISSION OF MEDICORE BUDGET TO CONGRESS

SEC. 701. PREPARATION AND SUBMISSION.

 The Board shall annually prepare and submit to Congress a MediCORE 
Budget Report. Such Report shall include a description of--
 (1) the content and scope of the CORE SERVICES as required 
 under title III;
 (2) the MediCORE Budget prepared under section 601(a) (1) 
 and (2);
 (3) the national average per capita cost for each category 
 of the CORE SERVICES as required under section 601(b);
 (4) the adjustments for risk groups as required under 
 section 601(b)(2) (A) and (B);
 (5) the State adjustment factor as computed under section 
 601(b)(3);
 (6) the total projected expenditures for each State for 
 each of the CORE SERVICES as computed under section 601(c); and
 (7) the recommended Federal contributions and State share 
 for each State, including the state protection required under 
 section 601(d).

SEC. 702. PUBLICATION AND COMMENT.

 In preparing the MediCORE Budget Report under section 701, the 
Board shall--
 (1) not later than 9 months prior to the first January 1 
 referred to in section 801, and each January 1 thereafter, 
 publish in the Federal Register the preliminary findings and 
 recommendations of the Board with respect to the Report;
 (2) not later than 2 months after the publication required 
 under paragraph (1) is made, solicit from each State comments 
 concerning the published preliminary findings and 
 recommendations; and
 (3) consider the comments received under paragraph (2) in 
 developing the final MediCORE Budget Report to be submitted to 
 Congress pursuant to section 703.

SEC. 703. SUBMISSION TO CONGRESS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 4 months prior to the effective 
date of the Act referred to in section 801, and prior to January 1 of 
each succeeding calendar year, the Board shall submit the final 
MediCORE Budget Report to Congress.
 (b) Income Requirements.--With respect to a calendar year for which 
the Board determines in the MediCORE Budget Report that the Federal 
income and administrative expenses required under this Act exceed the 
amounts expected to be available from the MediCORE Trust Fund for such 
calendar year, the Board shall recommend in the MediCORE Budget Report 
one of the following:
 (1) That a reduction be made in the CORE SERVICES covered 
 under section 301 to the extent necessary to meet the 
 limitation of such Budget, with a description of the details as 
 to the manner in which such a reduction will be accomplished 
 (which may include the establishment of restrictions on the 
 availability of services so as to achieve the greatest possible 
 social benefit). The Report shall also contain guidelines for 
 the States as to the methodology of and the cost containment 
 measures for the States to accomplish the reduction.
 (2) That an increase be made in the revenues generated for 
 deposit into the MediCORE Trust Fund.
 (3) That a combination of the measures described in 
 paragraphs (1) and (2) be implemented.

SEC. 704. ACTION BY CONGRESS.

 If Congress fails to act with respect to any increase in funds 
recommended under section 703(b)(2) and (3) within 2 months of the date 
of the submission of the MediCORE Budget, the Board shall proceed to 
reduce the CORE SERVICES covered under section 301 as required by the 
recommendation referred to in section 703(b)(1).

 TITLE VIII--EFFECTIVE DATE; REPEALS; TRANSITION; RELATION TO ERISA

SEC. 801. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 The program established under this Act shall become effective in 
each State on January 1 of the first calendar year beginning after the 
date that is 24 months after the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 802. REPEALS.

 (a) In General.--Titles XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act 
and chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, are repealed.
 (b) Repeal of CHAMPUS Provisions.--
 (1) Amendments to chapter 55 of title 10.--Sections 1079 
 through 1083, 1086, and 1097 through 1100 of title 10, United 
 States Code, are repealed.
 (2) Table of sections.--The table of sections at the 
 beginning of chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, is 
 amended by striking out the items relating to the sections 
 referred to in paragraph (1).
 (3) Conforming amendments.--Chapter 55 of title 10, United 
 States Code, is amended as follows:
 (A) Definition.--Section 1072 is amended by 
 striking out paragraph (4).
 (B) Reimbursement of the department of veterans 
 affairs.--Section 1104(b) is amended--
 (i) in the subsection heading, by striking 
 out ``from CHAMPUS funds''; and
 (ii) by striking out ``from funds'' and all 
 that follows and inserting in lieu thereof 
 ``for medical care provided by the Department 
 of Veterans Affairs pursuant to such 
 agreement.''.
 (c) Health Care Financing Administration.--Upon the effective date 
of the repeals described in subsection (a), the duties and activities 
of the Health Care Financing Administration shall be transferred to and 
assumed by the Board.
 (d) Effective Date.--The repeals and amendments made by this 
section shall take effect on the first day of the year described in 
section 801.

SEC. 803. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS AND TRANSITION.

 (a) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated for each of the fiscal years beginning after the effective 
date referred to in section 801, such sums as may be necessary to 
provide for financial assistance to States in the planning and 
development of State programs.
 (b) Regulations.--The Board shall issue such regulations as are 
necessary to provide for a transition to the MediCORE health care 
program established under this Act from the programs repealed under 
section 802.

SEC. 804. RELATION TO ERISA.

 The provisions of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act are 
superseded to the extent inconsistent with the requirements of this 
Act.

SEC. 805. RELATION TO OTHER LAWS.

 (a) In General.--Notwithstanding any provision of the antitrust 
laws, it shall not be considered a violation of the antitrust laws for 
a State to develop or implement a State program under this Act.
 (b) Definition.--For purposes of subsection (a), the term 
``antitrust laws'' means--
 (1) the Act entitled ``An Act to protect trade and commerce 
 against unlawful restraints and monopolies'', approved July 2, 
 1890, commonly known as the Sherman Act (26 Stat. 209; chapter 
 647; 15 U.S.C. 1 et seq.);
 (2) the Federal Trade Commission Act, approved September 
 26, 1914 (38 Stat. 717; chapter 311; 15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.);
 (3) the Act entitled ``An Act to supplement existing laws 
 against unlawful restraints and monopolies'', and for other 
 purposes, approved October 15, 1914, commonly known as the 
 Clayton Act (38 Stat. 730; chapter 323; 15 U.S.C. 12 et seq.; 
 18 U.S.C. 402, 660, 3285, 3691; 29 U.S.C. 52, 53); and
 (4) any State antitrust laws that would prohibit the State 
 from carrying out a State program under this Act.

 <all>

S 1057 IS----2
S 1057 IS----3
S 1057 IS----4
S 1057 IS----5
S 1057 IS----6
S 1057 IS----7