[Congressional Bills 106th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 1369 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

106th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 S. 1369

To enhance the benefits of the national electric system by encouraging 
 and supporting State programs for renewable energy sources, universal 
electric service, affordable electric service, and energy conservation 
 and efficiency, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 July 14, 1999

 Mr. Jeffords (for himself, Mr. Lieberman, Mr. Moynihan, Mr. Schumer, 
 Mr. Kerry, Mr. Lautenberg, Mr. Dodd, and Mr. Kennedy) introduced the 
 following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on 
 Energy and Natural Resources

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

To enhance the benefits of the national electric system by encouraging 
 and supporting State programs for renewable energy sources, universal 
electric service, affordable electric service, and energy conservation 
 and efficiency, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Clean Energy Act of 1999''.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS.

 Congress finds that--
 (1) the generation of electricity is unique in its combined 
 influence on the security, environmental quality, and economic 
 efficiency of the United States;
 (2) the generation and sale of electricity has a direct and 
 profound impact on interstate commerce;
 (3) the Federal Government and the States have a joint 
 responsibility for the maintenance of public purpose programs 
 affected by the national electric system;
 (4) notwithstanding the public's interest in and enthusiasm 
 for programs that enhance the environment, encourage the 
 efficient use of resources, and provide for affordable and 
 universal service, the investments in those public purposes by 
 existing means continues to decline;
 (5) the dependence of the United States on foreign sources 
 of fossil fuels is contrary to our national security; 
 alternative, sustainable energy sources must be pursued as the 
 United States moves into the 21st century;
 (6) emissions from electric power generating facilities are 
 today the largest industrial source responsible for persistent 
 public health and environmental problems;
 (7) consumers have a right to certain information in order 
 to make objective choices on their electric service providers; 
 and
 (8) net metering of small systems for self-generation of 
 electricity is in the public interest in order to encourage 
 private investment in renewable energy resources, stimulate 
 economic growth, and enhance the continued diversification of 
 the energy resources used in the United States.

SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.

 In this Act:
 (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the 
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
 (2) Board.--The term ``Board'' means the National Electric 
 System Public Benefits Board established under section 5.
 (3) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Federal 
 Energy Regulatory Commission.
 (4) Fund.--The term ``Fund'' means the National Electric 
 System Public Benefits Fund established by section 6.
 (5) Renewable energy.--The term ``renewable energy'' means 
 electricity generated from a renewable energy technology.
 (6) Renewable energy technology.--The term ``renewable 
 energy technology'' means wind, biomass (including organic 
 waste but excluding incinerated municipal solid waste), or a 
 geothermal, solar thermal, or photovoltaic source.
 (7) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Energy.

SEC. 4. EMISSIONS STANDARDS AND ALLOCATIONS.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Covered generation facility.--The term ``covered 
 generation facility'' means an electric generation facility 
 (other than a nuclear facility) with a nameplate capacity of 15 
 megawatts or greater that uses a combustion device to generate 
 electricity for sale.
 (2) Generating plant.--The term ``generating plant'' means 
 1 or more covered generation facilities located at a single 
 site.
 (3) Cogeneration.--The term ``cogeneration'' means a 
 process of simultaneously generating electricity and thermal 
 energy in which a portion of the energy value of fuel consumed 
 is recovered as heat that is used to meet heating or cooling 
 loads outside the generation facility.
 (4) Pollutant.--The term ``pollutant'' means--
 (A) carbon dioxide;
 (B) mercury;
 (C) nitrogen oxide;
 (D) sulfur dioxide; or
 (E) any other substance that the Administrator may 
 identify by regulation as a substance the emission of 
 which into the air from a combustion device used in the 
 generation of electricity endangers public health or 
 welfare.
 (b) Nationwide Emissions Standards.--
 (1) Schedule.--Not later than July 1, 2001, the 
 Administrator shall promulgate a final regulation that 
 establishes a schedule of limits on the quantity of each 
 pollutant that all covered generation facilities in the 
 aggregate nationwide shall be permitted to emit in each 
 calendar year beginning in calendar year 2002.
 (2) Limit.--The nationwide emissions standard for calendar 
 year 2005 and each year thereafter established under paragraph 
 (1) shall be not greater than--
 (A) for carbon dioxide, 1,914,000,000 tons;
 (B) for mercury, 5 tons;
 (C) for nitrogen oxide, 1,660,000 tons; and
 (D) for sulfur dioxide, 3,580,000 tons.
 (3) Adjustment.--The Administrator may adjust the schedule 
 established under paragraph (1), within the limits established 
 by paragraph (2), if the Administrator determines that an 
 adjustment would be in the best interests of the public health 
 and welfare.
 (c) Generation Performance Standard.--
 (1) Annual determination.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than October 1 of each 
 year, the Administrator, in consultation with the 
 Commission, shall determine the generation performance 
 standard for carbon dioxide, mercury, nitrogen oxide, 
 and sulfur dioxide emissions per megawatt-hour of 
 electric production by covered generation facilities 
 for the next calendar year.
 (B) Method.--The Administrator shall determine by 
 regulation the method to be used in determining an 
 estimate under subparagraph (A).
 (2) Formula.--The generation performance standard shall be 
 determined by dividing the annual nationwide emissions standard 
 as established under subsection (b) by the Administrator's 
 estimate of the nationwide megawatt-hour production for the 
 next calendar year by all covered generation facilities.
 (d) Individual Emissions Allocation.--The quantity of each 
pollutant that a covered generation facility shall be permitted to emit 
during a calendar year shall be equal to--
 (1) the facility's annual generation of megawatt-hours of 
 electricity multiplied by the generation performance standard 
 as established in subsection (c); plus
 (2) the facility's annual generation of thermal energy used 
 to meet heating and cooling loads resulting from the 
 cogeneration process, which shall be expressed by the 
 Administrator in units of measurement that provide a reasonable 
 comparison between energy generated in the form of electricity 
 and energy generated in the form of thermal energy and then 
 multiplied by the generation performance standard as 
 established under subsection (c).
 (e) Ozone Season.--In determining the individual emissions 
allocation for a covered generation facility under subsection (d), the 
quantity of nitrogen oxide emitted by covered generation facility and 
the number of megawatt-hours of electricity generated by the covered 
generation facility during the period May 1 through September 30 of 
each year shall each be multiplied by 3.
 (f) Monitoring.--
 (1) Establishment of system.--The Administrator shall 
 establish a system for the accurate monitoring of the quantity 
 of each pollutant that a covered generation facility emits 
 during a year.
 (2) Requirements.--The monitoring system under paragraph 
 (1) shall require--
 (A) installation on each combustion device of a 
 continuous monitoring system for each pollutant; or
 (B) use of an alternative mechanism that the 
 Administrator determines will provide data with 
 precision, reliability, accessibility, and timeliness 
 that are equal to or greater than those that would be 
 achieved by a continuous emissions monitoring system.
 (g) Emissions Credits.--
 (1) Comparison of actual combustion device outputs with 
 individual emission allocations.--At the end of each year, the 
 Administrator shall compare the quantity of a pollutant emitted 
 by a generation facility during the year with the individual 
 emissions allocation as established under subsection (d) 
 applicable to the covered generation facility for the year.
 (2) Issuance of emissions credits.--Not later than April 1 
 of each year, the Administrator shall issue to a covered 
 generation facility 1 emissions credit for each ton by which 
 the quantity of a pollutant emitted by the covered generation 
 facility during the preceding year was less than the individual 
 emissions allocation as established under subsection (d) 
 applicable to the covered generation facility.
 (3) Submission of emissions credits.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than July 1 of each 
 year, a covered generation facility that emitted a 
 greater quantity of a pollutant than the individual 
 emissions allocation applicable to the covered 
 generation facility during the preceding year shall 
 submit to the Administrator 1 emissions credit for each 
 ton by which the quantity of the pollutant emitted was 
 greater than the individual emissions allocation as 
 established under subsection (d).
 (B) Penalty.--The owner or operator of a covered 
 generation facility that is required to submit an 
emissions credit under subparagraph (A) that fails to submit the 
emissions credit shall pay to the Administrator a civil penalty in an 
amount equal to--
 (i) $100 for each ton of carbon dioxide 
 emissions in excess of the individual emissions 
 allocation applicable to the facility under 
 subsection (d) for which a carbon dioxide 
 emissions credit has not been submitted under 
 subparagraph (A);
 (ii) $2500 for each pound of mercury 
 emissions in excess of the individual emissions 
 allocation applicable to the facility under 
 subsection (D) for which a mercury emissions 
 credit has not been submitted under 
 subparagraph (A);
 (iii) $15,000 for each ton of nitrogen 
 oxide emissions in excess of the individual 
 emissions allocation applicable to the facility 
 under subsection (d) for which a nitrogen oxide 
 emissions credit has not been submitted under 
 subparagraph (A); and
 (iv) $2,500 for each ton of sulfur dioxide 
 emissions in excess of the individual emissions 
 allocation applicable to the facility under 
 subsection (d) for which a sulfur dioxide 
 emissions credit has not been submitted under 
 subparagraph (A).
 (C) Penalty adjustment.--The Administrator shall 
 annually adjust the penalty specified in subparagraph 
 (B) for inflation based on the Consumer Price Index.
 (4) Use of emissions credits.--A covered generation 
 facility may--
 (A) retain an emissions credit from year to year 
 for future submission to the Administrator under 
 paragraph (3); or
 (B) on notice to the Administrator, sell or 
 otherwise transfer an emissions credit to another 
 person.
 (h) Generating Plants.--
 (1) In General.--The Administrator may permit the average 
 rate of emissions of nitrogen oxide or sulfur dioxide at a 
 generating plant over any 365-day period to exceed the 
 generation performance standard established under subsection 
 (c) if the generating plant has a sufficient quantity of 
 emissions credits.
 (2) Significant adverse local impacts.--
 (A) Study.--
 (i) In general.--If the average rate of 
 emissions of nitrogen oxide or sulfur dioxide 
 at a generating plant exceeds 125 percent of 
 the generation performance standard established 
 under subsection (c) in any calendar year, the 
 Administrator shall review the generating plant 
 to determine whether emissions in excess of 125 
 percent of the generation performance standard 
 may reasonably be anticipated to cause or 
 contribute to any significant adverse local 
 impacts, including degradation of the 
 environment or public health, either 
 independently of or in combination with other 
 emissions.
 (ii) Public comment; timing.--A 
 determination under clause (i)--
 (I) shall be made after public 
 notice and opportunity for public 
 comment; and
 (II) shall be published in final 
 form not later than 240 days after the 
 end of the calendar year in which the 
 average rate of emissions of nitrogen 
 oxide or sulfur dioxide at a generating 
 plant exceeds 125 percent of the 
 standard.
 (B) Additional review.--If the Administrator 
 determines under subparagraph (A) that excess emissions 
 from a generating plant cannot reasonably be 
 anticipated to cause or contribute to significant 
 adverse local impacts, and the average rate of 
 emissions of nitrogen oxide or sulfur dioxide from the 
 generating plant exceeds 125 percent of the generation 
 performance standard established under subsection (c) 
 in any calendar year, any person may petition the 
 Administrator to conduct an additional study under 
 subparagraph (A).
 (C) Prohibition.--
 (i) In general.--If the Administrator 
 determines that nitrogen oxide or sulfur 
 dioxide emissions from a generating plant in 
 excess of 125 percent of the generation 
 performance standard established under 
 subsection (c) may reasonably be anticipated to 
 cause or contribute to significant adverse 
 local impacts, it shall be unlawful for the 
 generating plant to emit nitrogen oxide or 
 sulfur dioxide in excess of 125 percent of the 
 general performance standard.
 (ii) Penalty.--The Administrator shall 
 assess the owner or operator of a generating 
 plant that violates clause (i) a civil penalty 
 of $25,000 per day for each day in which the 
 average emission rate of the generating plant 
 over any 365-day period exceeds the maximum 
 emission rate 125 percent of the general 
 performance standard.
 (i) Powers.--The Administrator may promulgate such regulations, 
conduct such investigations, and take such other actions as are 
appropriate to implement this section.

SEC. 5. NATIONAL ELECTRIC SYSTEM PUBLIC BENEFITS BOARD.

 (a) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a National 
Electric System Public Benefits Board to carry out the functions and 
responsibilities described in this section.
 (b) Membership.--The Board shall be composed of--
 (1) 1 representative of the Commission appointed by the 
 Commission;
 (2) 2 representatives of the Secretary appointed by the 
 Secretary;
 (3) 2 persons nominated by the national organization 
 representing State regulatory commissioners and appointed by 
 the Secretary;
 (4) 1 person nominated by the national organization 
 representing State utility consumer advocates and appointed by 
 the Secretary;
 (5) 1 person nominated by the national organization 
 representing State energy offices and appointed by the 
 Secretary;
 (6) 1 person nominated by the national organization 
 representing energy assistance directors and appointed by the 
 Secretary; and
 (7) 1 representative of the Environmental Protection Agency 
 appointed by the Administrator.
 (c) Chairperson.--The Secretary shall select a member of the Board 
to serve as Chairperson of the Board.
 (d) Manager.--
 (1) Appointment.--The Board shall by contract appoint an 
 electric systems public benefits manager for a term of not more 
 than 3 years, which term may be renewed by the Board.
 (2) Compensation.--The compensation and other terms and 
 conditions of employment of the manager shall be determined by 
 a contract between the Board and the individual or the other 
 entity appointed as manager.
 (3) Functions.--The manager shall--
 (A) monitor the amounts in the Fund;
 (B) receive, review, and make recommendations to 
 the Board regarding applications from States under 
 section 6(b); and
 (C) perform such other functions as the Board may 
 require to assist the Board in carrying out its duties 
 under this Act.

SEC. 6. NATIONAL ELECTRIC SYSTEM PUBLIC BENEFITS FUND.

 (a) Establishment.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall establish an account or 
 accounts at 1 or more financial institutions, which account or 
 accounts shall be known as the ``National Electric System 
 Public Benefits Fund'', consisting of amounts deposited in the 
 fund under subsection (c).
 (2) Status of fund.--The wires charges collected under 
 subsection (c) and deposited in the Fund--
 (A) shall constitute electric system revenues and 
 shall not constitute funds of the United States;
 (B) shall be held in trust by the manager of the 
 Fund solely for the purposes stated in subsection (b); 
 and
 (C) shall not be available to meet any obligations 
 of the United States.
 (b) Use of Fund.--
 (1) Funding of public purpose programs.--Amounts in the 
 Fund shall be used by the Board to provide matching funds to 
 States for the support of State public purpose programs 
 relating to--
 (A) renewable energy sources;
 (B) universal electric service;
 (C) affordable electric service;
 (D) energy conservation and efficiency; or
 (E) research and development in areas described in 
 subparagraphs (A) through (D).
 (2) Distribution.--
 (A) In general.--Except for amounts needed to pay 
 costs of the Board in carrying out its duties under 
 this section, the Board shall instruct the manager of 
 the Fund to distribute all amounts in the Fund to 
 States to fund public purpose programs under paragraph 
 (1).
 (B) Fund share.--
 (i) In general.--Subject to clause (iii), 
 the Fund share of a public purpose program 
 funded under paragraph (1) shall be 50 percent.
 (ii) Proportionate reduction.--To the 
 extent that the amount of matching funds 
 requested by States exceeds the maximum 
 projected revenues of the Fund, the matching 
 funds distributed to the States shall be 
 reduced by an amount that is proportionate to 
 each State's annual consumption of electricity 
 compared to the aggregate annual consumption of 
 electricity in the United States.
 (iii) Additional state funding.--A State 
 may apply funds to public purpose programs in 
 addition to the amount of funds applied for the 
 purpose of matching the Fund share.
 (3) Program criteria.--The Board shall recommend 
 eligibility criteria for public benefits programs funded under 
 this section for approval by the Secretary.
 (4) Application.--Not later than August 1 of each year 
 beginning in 2000, a State seeking matching funds for the 
 following year shall file with the Board, in such form as the 
 Board may require, an application--
 (A) certifying that the funds will be used for an 
 eligible public purpose program; and
 (B) stating the amount of State funds earmarked for 
 the program.
 (c) Wires Charge.--
 (1) Determination of needed funding.--Not later than August 
 1 of each year, the Board shall determine and inform the 
 Commission of the aggregate amount of wires charges that it 
 will be required to be paid into the Fund to pay matching funds 
 to States and the operating costs of the Board in the following 
 year.
 (2) Imposition of wires charge.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than December 15 of each 
 year, the Commission shall impose a nonbypassable, 
 competitively neutral wires charge to be paid directly 
 into the Fund by the operator of the wire on 
 electricity carried through the wire (measured as it 
exits the busbar at a generation facility) that affects interstate 
commerce.
 (B) Amount.--The wires charge shall be set at a 
 rate equal to the lesser of--
 (i) 2 mills per kilowatt-hour; or
 (ii) a rate that is estimated to result in 
 the collection of an amount of wires charges 
 that is as nearly as possible equal to the 
 amount of needed funding determined under 
 paragraph (1).
 (3) Deposit in the fund.--The wires charge shall be paid by 
 the operator of the wire directly into the Fund at the end of 
 each month during the calendar year for distribution by the 
 electric systems public benefits manager under section 5.
 (4) Penalties.--The Commission may assess against a wire 
 operator that fails to pay a wires charge as required by this 
 subsection a civil penalty in an amount equal to not more than 
 the amount of the unpaid wires charge.
 (d) Auditing.--
 (1) In general.--The Fund shall be audited annually by a 
 firm of independent certified public accountants in accordance 
 with generally accepted auditing standards.
 (2) Access to records.--Representatives of the Secretary 
 and the Commission shall have access to all books, accounts, 
 reports, files, and other records pertaining to the Fund as 
 necessary to facilitate and verify the audit.
 (3) Reports.--
 (A) In general.--A report on each audit shall be 
 submitted to the Secretary, the Commission, and the 
 Secretary of the Treasury, who shall submit the report 
 to the President and Congress not later than 180 days 
 after the close of the fiscal year.
 (B) Requirements.--An audit report shall--
 (i) set forth the scope of the audit; and
 (ii) include--
 (I) a statement of assets and 
 liabilities, capital; and surplus or 
 deficit;
 (II) a statement of surplus or 
 deficit analysis;
 (III) a statement of income and 
 expenses;
 (IV) any other information that may 
 be considered necessary to keep the 
 President and Congress informed of the 
 operations and financial condition of 
 the Fund; and
 (V) any recommendations with 
 respect to the Fund that the Secretary 
 or the Commission may have.

SEC. 7. RENEWABLE ENERGY PORTFOLIO STANDARDS.

 (a) Definition of Covered Generation Facility.--In this section, 
the term ``covered generation facility'' means a nonhydroelectric 
facility that generates electric energy for sale.
 (b) Required Renewable Energy.--Of the total amount of electricity 
sold by covered generation facilities during a calendar year, the 
amount generated by renewable energy sources shall be not less than--
 (1) 2.5 percent in 2000;
 (2) 3.0 percent in 2001;
 (3) 3.5 percent in 2002;
 (4) 4.0 percent in 2003;
 (5) 4.5 percent in 2004;
 (6) 5.0 percent in 2005;
 (7) 6.0 percent in 2006;
 (8) 7.0 percent in 2007;
 (9) 8.0 percent in 2008;
 (10) 9.0 percent in 2009;
 (11) 10.0 percent in 2010;
 (12) 11.0 percent in 2011;
 (13) 12.0 percent in 2012;
 (14) 13.0 percent in 2013;
 (15) 14.0 percent in 2014;
 (16) 15.0 percent in 2015;
 (17) 16.0 percent in 2016;
 (18) 17.0 percent in 2017;
 (19) 18.0 percent in 2018;
 (20) 19.0 percent in 2019; and
 (21) 20.0 percent in 2020 and each year thereafter.
 (c) Renewable Energy Credits.--
 (1) Identification of energy sources.--The Commission shall 
 establish standards and procedures under which a covered 
 generation facility shall certify to a purchaser of 
 electricity--
 (A) the amount of the electricity that is generated 
 by a renewable energy source; and
 (B) the amount of the electricity that is generated 
 by a source other than a renewable energy source.
 (2) Issuance of renewable energy credits.--Not later than 
 April 1 of each year beginning in 2001, the Commission shall 
 issue to a covered generation facility 1 renewable energy 
 credit for each megawatt-hour of electricity sold by the 
 covered generation facility in the preceding calendar year that 
 was generated by a renewable source.
 (3) Submission of renewable energy credits.--Not later than 
 July 1 of each year, a covered generation facility shall submit 
 credits to the Commission in an amount equal to the total 
 number of megawatt-hours of electricity sold by the covered 
 generation facility in the preceding year multiplied by the 
 applicable renewable energy source requirement under subsection 
 (a).
 (4) Use of renewable energy credits.--
 (A) Time for use.--A renewable energy credit shall 
 be used for the calendar year for the renewable energy 
 credit is issued.
 (B) Permitted uses.--Until July 1 of the year in 
 which a renewable energy credit was issued, a covered 
 generation facility may--
 (i) use the renewable energy credit to make 
 a submission to the Commission under paragraph 
 (3); or
 (ii) on notice to the Commission, sell or 
 otherwise transfer a renewable energy credit to 
 another covered generation facility.
 (d) Recordkeeping.--The Commission shall maintain records of all 
renewable energy credits issued and all credits sold or exchanged.
 (e) Penalties.--
 (1) In general.--The Commission may bring an action in 
 United States district court to impose a civil penalty on any 
 person that fails to comply with subsection (a).
 (2) Amount of penalty.--A person that fails to comply with 
 a requirement to submit renewable energy credits under 
 subsection (b)(3) shall be subject to a civil penalty of not 
 more than 3 times the estimated national average market value 
 (as determined by the Commission) for the calendar year 
 concerned of that quantity of renewable energy credits.
 (f) Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978.--
 (1) Repeal of cogeneration and small power production 
 provision.--Effective January 1, 2000, the Public Utility 
 Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 is amended by striking section 
 210 (16 U.S.C. 824a-3).
 (2) Existing contracts.--The amendment made by paragraph 
 (1) shall not affect the continued validity and enforceability 
 of contracts entered into under section 210 of the Public 
 Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 before the date of 
 enactment of this Act.
 (3) Continued jurisdiction.--Notwithstanding the amendment 
 made by paragraph (1), the Commission shall retain jurisdiction 
 to--
 (A) ensure the continued status of qualifying small 
 power production facilities under section 210 of the 
 Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 (16 
 U.S.C. 824a-3); and
 (B) continue exemptions granted under subsection 
 (e) of that section before the date of enactment of 
 this Act.
 (g) Powers.--The Commission may promulgate such regulations, 
conduct such investigations, and take such other actions as are 
necessary or appropriate to implement and obtain compliance with this 
section and regulations promulgated under this section.

SEC. 8. SELF-GENERATION AND NET METERING.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Customer-generator.--The term ``customer-generator'' 
 means a retail electric customer that generates electricity 
 measured by a net metering system.
 (2) Electric company.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``electric company'' 
 means a company that is engaged in the business of 
 distributing electricity to retail electric customers.
 (B) Inclusions.--The term ``electric company'' 
 includes an investor-owned utility, public utility 
 district, irrigation district, port district, electric 
 cooperative, or municipal electric utility.
 (3) Net metering.--The term ``net metering'' means the 
 measuring of the difference between--
 (A) the quantity of electricity supplied by an 
 electric company to a customer-generator during a 
 billing period; and
 (B) the quantity of electricity generated by a 
 customer-generator and fed back to the electric company 
 by a net metering system during the billing period.
 (4) Net metering system.--The term ``net metering system'' 
 means a facility for generation of electricity that--
 (A) is of not more than 100 kilowatts capacity;
 (B) is interconnected and operates in parallel with 
 the transmission and distribution system of an electric 
 company;
 (C) is intended primarily to offset some or all of 
 the electricity requirements of a customer-generator;
 (D) is located on the premises of a customer-
 generator; and
 (E) employs a renewable energy source.
 (b) Requirement To Allow Net Metering.--An electric company shall 
allow a retail electric customer to interconnect and employ a net 
metering system using--
 (1) a kilowatt-hour meter capable of registering the flow 
 of electricity in 2 directions; or
 (2) another type of comparably equipped meter that would 
 otherwise be applicable to the customer's usage but for the use 
 of net metering.
 (c) Net Metering Accounting.--
 (1) In general.--Electric energy measurements for a net 
 metering system shall be calculated in accordance with this 
 subsection.
 (2) Rates and charges.--An electric company--
 (A) shall charge a customer-generator rates and 
 charges that are identical to those that would be 
 charged other retail electric customers of the electric 
 company in the same rate class; and
 (B) shall not charge a customer-generator any 
 additional standby, capacity, interconnection, or other 
 rate or charge.
 (3) Measurement.--An electric company that supplies 
 electricity to a customer-generator shall measure the quantity 
 of electricity produced by the customer-generator and the 
 quantity of electricity consumed by the customer-generator 
 during a billing period in accordance with normal metering 
 practices.
 (4) Electricity supplied exceeding electricity generated.--
 If the quantity of electricity supplied by an electric company 
 during a billing period exceeds the quantity of electricity 
 generated by the customer-generator and fed back to the 
 electric distribution system during the billing period, 
the electric company may bill the customer-generator for the net 
quantity of electricity supplied by the electric company, in accordance 
with normal metering practices.
 (5) Electricity generated exceeding electricity supplied.--
 If the quantity of electricity generated by a customer-
 generator during a billing period exceeds the quantity of 
 electricity supplied by the electric company during the billing 
 period--
 (A) the electric company may bill the customer-
 generator for the appropriate charges for the billing 
 period in accordance with paragraph (1); and
 (B) the customer-generator shall be credited for 
 the excess kilowatt-hours generated during the billing 
 period, with the kilowatt-hour credit appearing on the 
 bill for the following billing period.
 (6) Unused credits.--At the beginning of each calendar 
 year, any unused kilowatt-hour credits accumulated by a 
 customer-generator during the previous calendar year shall 
 expire without compensation to the customer-generator.
 (d) Safety.--
 (1) Requirements.--
 (A) Interim provision.--A net metering system using 
 photovoltaic generation shall conform to applicable 
 electrical safety, power quality, and interconnection 
 requirements established by the National Electrical 
 Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronic 
 Engineers, and Underwriters Laboratories.
 (B) Regulation.--Not later than March 1, 2001, the 
 Commission shall adopt electrical safety, power 
 quality, and interconnection requirements for net 
 metering systems that use generation technology other 
 than photovoltaic technology.
 (2) Testing and inspection.--An electric company may, at 
 its own expense, and upon reasonable written notice to a 
 customer-generator, perform such testing and inspection of a 
 net metering system as is necessary to demonstrate to the 
 satisfaction of the electric company that the system conforms 
 to applicable electric safety, power quality, and 
 interconnection requirements.
 (3) Additional meters.--An electric company may, at its own 
 expense and with the written consent of a customer-generator, 
 install 1 or more additional meters to monitor the flow of 
 electricity in each direction.

SEC. 9. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Emissions data.--The term ``emissions data'' means the 
 type and amount of each pollutant emitted or released by a 
 generation facility in generating electricity.
 (2) Generation data.--The term ``generation data'' means 
 the type of fuel (such as coal, oil, nuclear energy, or solar 
 power) used by a generation facility to generate electricity.
 (b) Disclosure System.--The Secretary shall establish a system of 
disclosure that--
 (1) enables retail consumers to knowledgeably compare 
 retail electric service offerings, including comparisons based 
 on generation source portfolios, emissions data, and price 
 terms; and
 (2) considers such factors as--
 (A) cost of implementation;
 (B) confidentiality of information; and
 (C) flexibility.
 (c) Regulation.--Not later than March 1, 2001, the Secretary, in 
consultation with the Board, and with the assistance of a Federal 
interagency task force that includes representatives of the Commission, 
the Federal Trade Commission, the Food and Drug Administration, and the 
Environmental Protection Agency, shall promulgate a regulation 
prescribing--
 (1) the form, content, and frequency of disclosure of 
 emissions data and generation data of electricity by generation 
 facilities to electricity wholesalers or retail companies and 
 by wholesalers to retail companies;
 (2) the form, content, and frequency of disclosure of 
 emissions data, generation data, and the price of electricity 
 by retail companies to ultimate consumers; and
 (3) the form, content, and frequency of disclosure of 
 emissions data, generation data, and the price of electricity 
 by generation facilities selling directly to ultimate 
 consumers.
 (d) Access to Records.--The Secretary shall have full access to the 
records of all generation facilities, electricity wholesalers, and 
retail companies to obtain any information necessary to administer and 
enforce this section.
 (e) Failure To Disclose.--The failure of a retail company to 
accurately disclose information as required by this section shall be 
treated as a deceptive act in commerce under section 5 of the Federal 
Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 45).
 (f) Regulations.--The Secretary may promulgate such regulations, 
conduct such investigations, and take such other actions as are 
necessary or appropriate to implement and obtain compliance with this 
section and regulations promulgated under this section.

SEC. 10. STATE AND LOCAL LAW.

 Nothing in this Act precludes a State or political subdivision of a 
State from adopting and enforcing--
 (1) any standard or limitation respecting emissions of air 
 pollutants; or
 (2) any requirement respecting control or abatement of air 
 pollution;
except that a State or political subdivision may not adopt or enforce 
any emission standard or limitation that is less stringent than the 
requirements imposed under this Act.
 <all>