HR 2597 SC
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2597
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to enhance the enforcement
authority of the Food and Drug Administration, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
June 7, 1991
Mr. WAXMAN (for himself and Mr. DINGELL) introduced the following bill;
which was referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce
September 26, 1991
Additional sponsors: Mr. FLAKE and Mr. Rangel
A BILL
To amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to enhance the enforcement
authority of the Food and Drug Administration, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; REFERENCE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Food, Drug, Cosmetic,
 and Device Enforcement Amendments of 1991'.
 (b) REFERENCE- Except as otherwise provided, whenever in this Act an
 amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of,
 a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made
 to a section or other provision of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
 (c) TABLE OF CONTENTS-
Sec. 1. Short title; reference; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Judicial recall authority.
Sec. 3. Administrative recall authority.
Sec. 4. Seizure and embargo authority.
Sec. 5. Subpoena authority.
Sec. 6. Civil money penalties.
Sec. 7. Inspections, records, and reports.
Sec. 8. Imported products.
Sec. 9. Interstate commerce.
Sec. 10. Biological products.
Sec. 11. Technical amendments.
SEC. 2. JUDICIAL RECALL AUTHORITY.
 (a) AMENDMENT- Section 302(a) (21 U.S.C. 332(a)) is amended by adding
 `(1)' after `(a)' and by adding at the end the following:
 `(2) Any district court of the United States may order the appropriate
 person (including the manufacturer, importer, distributor, or retailer
 of a food, drug, device, or cosmetic) to recall a food, drug, device,
 or cosmetic which is in violation of this Act if the violation involves
 fraud or presents a significant risk to human or animal health.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Section 201 (21 U.S.C. 321) is amended by adding at the end the
 following:
 `(bb) The term `recall' means the retrieval, repair, or replacement of
 a product.
 `(cc) The term `district court of the United States' includes a United
 States court of the Territories.'.
 (2) The heading for section 302 (21 U.S.C. 332) is amended by adding at
 the end `AND RECALL'.
SEC. 3. ADMINISTRATIVE RECALL AUTHORITY.
 (a) AMENDMENT- Chapter III is amended by adding at the end the following:
`RECALL
 `SEC. 308. (a) If the Secretary determines that a food, drug, or cosmetic is
 in violation of this Act and that the violation involves fraud or presents
 a significant risk to human or animal health, the Secretary shall require
 the appropriate person (including the manufacturer, importer, distributor,
 or retailer of such product) to recall such product. A recall order issued
 by the Secretary pursuant to this subsection shall be a final agency action.
 `(b) Manufacturers and distributors of foods, drugs, devices, or cosmetics
 shall report to the Secretary any recall of a food, drug, device,
 or cosmetic initiated by the manufacturer or distributor and any recall
 required under section 302(a)(2). Such a report shall be made not later
 than 5 days after such a recall or within such shorter period as the
 Secretary may by regulation require.
 `(c) The Secretary may issue regulations that require manufacturers and
 distributors of foods, drugs, and cosmetics to adopt a method of tracking
 to facilitate a recall under subsection (a) or section 302(a)(2).'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 301(r) (21 U.S.C. 331(r)) is amended
 by inserting before the period ` or the failure to comply with a recall
 order under 308(a), a requirement to report under section 308(b), or a
 regulation under section 308(c)'.
SEC. 4. SEIZURE AND EMBARGO AUTHORITY.
 (a) SEIZURE- Section 304(a) (21 U.S.C. 334(a)) is amended, in the first
 sentence of paragraph (1), by striking out `Any article' and all that follows
 through `shall be liable' and inserting in lieu thereof `Any article of food,
 drug, device, or cosmetic that is in violation of this Act shall be liable'.
 (b) EMBARGO-
 (1) DETENTION- Section 304(g) (21 U.S.C. 334(g)) is amended--
 (A) in the first sentence of paragraph (1), by striking out all that
 precedes `such officer or employee' and inserting in lieu thereof `If an
 officer or employee of the Department has reason to believe that a food,
 drug, device, or cosmetic is in violation of this Act',
 (B) in such first sentence, by striking out `(in accordance with regulations
 prescribed by the Secretary)',
 (C) by striking out the second sentence and the last two sentences, and
 (D) by striking out `device' each place it appears and inserting in lieu
 thereof `food, drug, device, or cosmetic'.
 (2) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Section 301(r) is amended--
 (A) by striking out `device' the first time it occurs and inserting in
 lieu thereof `food, drug, device, or cosmetic', and
 (B) by striking out `the device' and inserting in lieu thereof `such
 product'.
SEC. 5. SUBPOENA AUTHORITY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 307 (21 U.S.C. 337) is amended by adding at the
 end the following:
 `(c) For the purpose of--
 `(1) any hearing, investigation, or other proceeding respecting a violation
 of this Act,
 `(2) any hearing, investigation, or other proceeding to determine if a person
 is in compliance with a standard or other requirement under this Act, or
 `(3) any hearing, investigation, or other proceeding to establish a standard
 or other requirement under this Act,
the Commissioner may issue subpoenas requiring the attendance and testimony
of witnesses and the production of documentary evidence. Such attendance of
witnesses and production of evidence at the designated place of such hearing,
investigation, or other proceeding may be required from any place in the United
States or in any territory or possession of the United States. Subpoenas of
the Commissioner shall be served by a person authorized by the Commissioner
by delivering a copy thereof to the person named therein or by certified
mail addressed to such person at such person's last known dwelling place or
principal place of business. A verified return by the person so serving the
subpoena setting forth the manner of service, or, in the case of service by
certified mail, the return post office receipt therefor signed by the person
so served, shall be proof of service. Witnesses so subpoenaed shall be paid
the same fees and mileage as are paid witnesses in the district courts of
the United States.
 `(d) In case of a refusal to obey a subpoena duly served upon any person
 under subsection (c), any district court of the United States for the
 judicial district in which such person charged with refusal to obey is found,
 resides, or transacts business, upon application by the Commissioner, shall
 have jurisdiction to issue an order requiring such person to appear and give
 testimony or to appear and produce evidence, or both. The failure to obey
 such order of the court may be punished by the court as contempt thereof.'.
 (b) ENFORCEMENT- Section 301 (21 U.S.C. 331) is amended by adding at the
 end the following:
 `(u) The failure or refusal to obey a subpoena issued by the Commissioner
 under section 307(b).'.
SEC. 6. CIVIL MONEY PENALTIES.
 (a) AMENDMENT- Chapter III, as amended by section 3, is amended by adding
 at the end the following new section:
`CIVIL MONEY PENALTIES
 `SEC. 309. (a) Any person that--
 `(1) violates any provision of this Act, or
 `(2) in connection with a matter under the jurisdiction of the Food and
 Drug Administration under this Act--
 `(A) made or caused to be made, to any officer, employee, or agent of the
 Department, a statement or representation with relation to a material fact
 that such person knew or should have known is false,
 `(B) failed to disclose, to an officer, employee, or agent of the Department,
 a material fact which such person knew or should have known such person
 has an obligation to disclose,
 `(C) bribed or attempted to bribe, paid or attempted to pay an illegal
 gratuity to, or induced or attempted to induce any other person to bribe or
 pay an illegal gratuity to any officer, employee, or agent of the Department,
 `(D) destroyed, altered, removed, or secreted, or procured the destruction,
 alteration, removal, or secretion of, any document or other evidence which
 was the property of or in the possession of the Department, for the purpose
 of interfering with the Department's discharge of its responsibilities, or
 `(E) obstructed an investigation of the Department,
shall be subject, in addition to any other penalties that may be prescribed
by law, to a civil money penalty of not more than $250,000 in the case of an
individual, and $1,000,000, in the case of any other person, for each such act.
 `(b) In determining the amount of any penalty imposed pursuant to subsection
 (a), the Secretary shall take into account such matters as justice may
 require, including, as the Secretary finds appropriate, the nature of the
 act subject to penalty, the degree of culpability, the gain or advantage to
 the person or cost or other injury to others resulting from the violative
 act, any history of prior offenses, and the financial condition of the
 person subject to penalty.
 `(c)(1) A civil money penalty under subsection (a) shall be assessed by
 the Secretary by an order made on the record after affording the person
 written notice and an opportunity for an agency hearing on disputed issues
 of material fact and the amount of the penalty.
 `(2) The Secretary may not initiate an action under paragraph (1) with
 respect to any act with respect to which civil money penalties are to be
 assessed more than 6 years after the date when facts, material to such act,
 are known or reasonably should have been known by the Secretary, but in
 no event more than 10 years after the date on which the act took place.
 `(d) Any person that is subject to an order assessing a penalty under
 subsection (c)(1) may obtain a review of such order by the United States
 Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia or for any other circuit in
 which the person resides or in which the person has its principal place
 of business, by filing a petition with such court within 60 days following
 the date of the order.
 `(e)(1) Civil money penalties assessed on a person under subsection (c)(1)
 may be recovered in a civil action in the name of the United States brought
 by the Secretary in accordance with paragraph (2) or by the Attorney
 General in the United States district court for any district in which
 such person resides or transacts business. The amount of such penalty,
 including any amount agreed upon in compromise, may be deducted from any
 sum then or later owing by the United States to the person against whom
 the penalty has been imposed.
 `(2) Before initiating an action under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall
 notify the Attorney General of the Secretary's intent to initiate such an
 action. The Secretary shall not initiate such an action until after--
 `(A) the Attorney General advises the Secretary of the Attorney General's
 decision not to proceed with criminal prosecution, or
 `(B) 60 days have elapsed without the Secretary being notified by the
 Attorney General of a decision to proceed with criminal prosecution.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Section 303(f) (21 U.S.C. 333(f)) is repealed.
SEC. 7. INSPECTIONS, RECORDS, AND REPORTS.
 (a) GENERAL AUTHORITY- Section 704(a) (21 U.S.C. 374(a)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by striking out the second sentence of paragraph (1) and in the first
 sentence of paragraph (1), by striking out `are authorized' and all that
 follows and inserting in lieu thereof `are authorized--
 `(A) to enter and inspect at reasonable times--
 `(i) any factory, warehouse, or establishment (including consulting
 laboratories) in which--
 `(I) food, drugs, devices, or cosmetics, or
 `(II) packaging, labeling, or containers for such products,
are manufactured, processed, packed, or held for introduction into interstate
commerce, or
 `(ii) any vehicle being used to transport or hold such products in
 interstate commerce;
 `(B) to collect and retain samples of articles referred to in subparagraph
 (A) or of any other thing found during an inspection under such subparagraph
 and bearing on whether such articles are in violation of this Act; and
 `(C) to copy any records subject to an inspection under subparagraph (A)
 and to document or make records of such inspection by any reasonable means,
 including use of photographic equipment, tape and videotape recorders,
 and other electronic devices.
An inspection under subparagraph (A) shall extend to all things (including
equipment, finished and unfinished materials, containers, labeling, records,
files, papers, processes, controls, and facilities) bearing on whether the
articles are in violation of this Act.',
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking out `The provisions of the second
 sentence of paragraph (1)' and inserting in lieu thereof `An inspection
 under paragraph (1)', and
 (3) by striking out paragraph (3).
 (b) RECORDS- Section 704(e) (21 U.S.C. 374(e)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `this subsection or' before `section 519', and
 (2) by inserting after `(e)' the following new sentence: `Each manufacturer,
 importer, and distributor of products regulated under this Act and each
 owner, operator, or agent in charge of a factory, warehouse, consulting
 laboratory, or other establishment subject to inspection under subsection (a)
 shall maintain such records and make such reports as the Secretary determines
 to be necessary to enable the manufacturer, importer, or distributor or
 owner, operator, or agent to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.'.
 (c) OTHER AUTHORITIES- Section 702(e) (21 U.S.C. 372(e)) is amended--
 (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking out `relating to
 counterfeit drugs', and
 (2) in paragraph (4)--
 (A) by striking out `with respect to such drugs',
 (B) by striking out `his' and inserting in lieu thereof `such officer or
 employee's', and
 (C) by striking out `he' and inserting in lieu thereof `such officer
 or employee'.
 (d) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- The heading for section 704 (21 U.S.C. 374)
 is amended to read as follows: `INSPECTIONS, RECORDS, AND REPORTS'.
SEC. 8. IMPORTED PRODUCTS.
 (a) AMENDMENTS- Section 801 (21 U.S.C. 381) is amended--
 (1) in the third sentence of subsection (a), by striking out `, or in
 violation of section 505' and inserting in lieu thereof `, in violation
 of section 505, or otherwise in violation of this Act', and
 (2) by striking out the fourth sentence of subsection (a) and inserting in
 lieu thereof the following: `If an article which is refused admission is
 to be exported, the Secretary of the Treasury shall require the importer
 of such article to mark it `refused entry into the United States' before
 it is exported and to report to the Secretary the intended destination of
 such article. Before such an article may be exported, the Secretary of the
 Treasury shall certify to the Secretary of Health and Human Services that
 the article has been marked as required.',
 (3) by inserting before the first sentence of subsection (a) the following:
 `The Secretary of the Treasury shall provide notification to the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services of food, drugs, devices, and cosmetics which
 are being imported or offered for import into the United States.',
 (4) by striking out in the last sentence of subsection (a) `third' and
 inserting in lieu thereof `fourth',
 (5) in the first sentence of subsection (b), by striking out `by him of
 a good and sufficient bond providing for' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `by the owner or consignee of a good and sufficient bond which is equal to
 at least 3 times the invoice value of such article and which provides for',
 (6) by striking out the period at the end of the second sentence of
 subsection (b) and inserting in lieu thereof a comma and the following:
 `except that if the Secretary of Health and Human Services finds that such
 article presents a significant risk to human or animal health, the article
 shall be destroyed in accordance with subsection (c).',
 (7) in the last sentence of subsection (b), by striking out `or other
 action' and inserting in lieu thereof `, other action' and by inserting
 after `authorization' the following: `, or destruction under subsection (c)',
 (8) by striking out `(b) Pending' and inserting in lieu thereof `(b)(1)
 Except as provided in paragraph (2), pending' and by adding at the end of
 subsection (b) the following:
 `(2) The Secretary of the Treasury shall, upon a determination of the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, refuse to authorize delivery of
 an article to the owner or consignee of the article in accordance with
 paragraph (1). If the Secretary of the Treasury refuses to authorize the
 delivery of an article, the article must remain under the physical custody
 of the Secretary of the Treasury pending decision as to its admission.'.
 (9) by redesignating subsections (c), (d), and (e) as subsections (d), (e),
 and (f), respectively, and by inserting after subsection (b) the following:
 `(c) As to any article which is refused admission under subsection (a)--
 `(1) in the case of an article which the Secretary of Health and Human
 Services finds presents a significant risk to human or animal health,
 the Secretary of the Treasury shall cause the destruction of such article
 within 30 days of the date of the notice of such refusal, or
 `(2) in the case of any other article, the Secretary of the Treasury shall
 cause the destruction of such article unless such article is exported,
 under regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury, within 30
 days of the date of notice of such refusal or within such additional time
 as may be prescribed pursuant to such regulations.', and
 (10) by adding at the end the following:
 `(g) The owner or consignee of an article, a sample of which was delivered to
 the Secretary of Health and Human Services or was examined under subsection
 (a), may not make a claim for a payment for such sample.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Section 301(t) (21 U.S.C. 331(t)) is amended by striking out `801(d)(1)'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `801(e)(1)'.
 (2) Section 303(b)(1) (21 U.S.C. 333(b)(1)) is amended by striking out
 `801(d)(1)' and inserting in lieu thereof `801(e)(1)'.
 (3) Section 304(d)(1) (21 U.S.C. 334(d)(1)) is amended--
 (A) by striking out `801(d)' the first time it appears and inserting in
 lieu thereof `801(f)', and
 (B) by striking out `801(d)' each time it appears and inserting in lieu
 thereof `801(e)'.
 (4) Section 802 (21 U.S.C. 382) is amended, in subsections (b)(1)(G)
 and (f)(1)(E), by striking out `801(d)(1)' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `801(e)(1)'.
SEC. 9. INTERSTATE COMMERCE.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) Section 201(b) (21 U.S.C. 321(b)) is amended by striking out `and
 (2)' and inserting in lieu thereof `(2)' and by adding before the period
 the following: `, or (3) commerce involving an article or activity which
 affects interstate commerce', and
 (2) Section 531(4) (21 U.S.C. 360hh(4)) is amended by striking out `and (B)'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `(B)' and by adding before the last semicolon
 the following: `, or (C) commerce involving an article or activity which
 affects interstate commerce'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 709 (21 U.S.C. 379a) is amended by striking
 out `device' and inserting in lieu thereof `food, drug, device, or cosmetic'.
SEC. 10. BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS.
 (a) TRANSFER- Section 351 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262)
 is transferred to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, inserted after
 section 505, redesignated as section 505A, and amended--
 (1) by striking out `(1)' in subsection (d) and by striking out paragraph
 (2) of such subsection,
 (2) by striking out subsection (f) and redesignating subsections (g) and
 (h) as subsections (f) and (g), respectively, and
 (3) by amending subsection (f) (as so redesignated) to read as follows:
 `(f) This section shall not be construed to affect, modify, repeal,
 or supersede any other provision of this Act and no other provision of
 this Act shall be construed to affect, modify, repeal, or supersede any
 provision of this section.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) The Public Health Service Act is amended--
 (A) in section 227(c)(5) (42 U.S.C. 236), by striking out `section 351 of
 this Act' and inserting in lieu thereof `section 505A of such Act',
 (B) in section 352 (42 U.S.C. 263), by striking out `section 351' each place
 it occurs and inserting in lieu thereof `section 505A of the Federal Food,
 Drug, and Cosmetic Act',
 (C) in section 2122(b)(2) (42 U.S.C. 300aa-22(b)(2)), by striking out
 `and section 351 of the Public Health Service Act', and
 (D) in section 2123(d)(2)(A) (42 U.S.C. 300aa-23(d)(2)(A)), by striking out
 `section 351' and inserting in lieu thereof `section 505A of such Act'.
 (2) The Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as amended by section 5(b),
 is amended--
 (A) by adding at the end of section 301 (21 U.S.C. 331) the following:
 `(v) The violation or the aiding or abetting a violation of section 505A.',
 (B) in section 525(a) (21 U.S.C. 360aa(a)(3)), by striking out `section
 351 of the Public Health Service Act' each place it occurs and inserting
 in lieu thereof `section 505A',
 (C) in section 526 (21 U.S.C. 360bb), by striking out `section 351 of
 the Public Health Service Act' each place it occurs and inserting in lieu
 thereof `section 505A',
 (D) in section 527(a) (21 U.S.C. 360cc(a)(3)), by striking out `section
 351 of the Public Health Service Act' each place it occurs and inserting
 in lieu thereof `section 505A',
 (E) in section 802 (21 U.S.C. 382), by striking out `section 351 of the
 Public Health Service Act' each place it occurs and inserting in lieu
 thereof `section 505A', and
 (F) in section 902(c) (21 U.S.C. 392(c)), by striking out `the provisions of
 section 351 of the Public Health Service Act (relating to viruses, serums,
 toxins, and analogous products applicable to man);' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `section 505A;'.
 (3) Section 28(b)(2)(A)(ii)(II) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is
 amended by striking out `section 351 of the Public Health Service Act'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `section 505A of such Act'.
 (4) Section 156 of title 35, United States Code, is amended--
 (A) in subsection (f)(4)(A), by striking out `section 351 of the Public
 Health Service Act' and inserting in lieu thereof `section 505A of the
 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act',
 (B) in subsection (g)(1)(B)(i), by striking out `351' and inserting in
 lieu thereof `505A', and
 (C) in subsection (g)(1)(B)(ii), by striking out `section 351' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `section 505A'.
 (5) Section 1861(t)(2)(B)(ii) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395x(t)(2)(B)(ii)), by striking out `section 351 of the Public
 Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262)' and inserting in lieu thereof `section
 505A of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act'.
SEC. 11. TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS.
 Sections 201 (c), (d), and (y) (21 U.S.C. 321 (c), (d), and (y)) of the
 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act are each amended by striking out
 `Health, Education, and Welfare' and inserting in lieu thereof `Health
 and Human Services' and section 201(d) (21 U.S.C. 321(d)) is amended
 by adding before the period the following: `and the term `Commissioner'
 means the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration'.