HR 2128 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2128
To amend the Communications Act of 1934 to require that substantial rate
increases in rates charged by cable television operators be subject to
approval by local regulatory authorities.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
April 26, 1989
Mr. PAYNE of Virginia introduced the following bill; which was referred to
the Committee on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Communications Act of 1934 to require that substantial rate
increases in rates charged by cable television operators be subject to
approval by local regulatory authorities.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. FINDINGS; PURPOSE.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) since passage of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, which
 effectively deregulated the cable industry, the Consumer Price Index has
 risen 18.4 percent;
 (2) during the same period of time, a nationwide study has shown that
 rates for basic cable service have risen by at least twice the rate of
 the Consumer Price Index;
 (3) these rate increases have placed an unreasonable hardship on consumers,
 especially those on fixed incomes; and
 (4) since 1984 the cable industry has been operating as an unregulated
 monopoly and the consumer has no recourse to prevent further substantial
 increases in basic cable service rates.
 (b) PURPOSE- The purpose of this Act therefore is to require that substantial
 rate increases in basic cable service rates charged by cable television
 operators be subject to prior negotiation with the local franchising
 authority.
SEC. 2. AMENDMENT.
 Section 623(e) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 543(e)) is
 amended by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraph:
 `(3)(A) Nothing in this title shall prohibit a State or franchising authority
 from requiring a cable operator to obtain the approval of that State or
 franchising authority prior to putting into effect any rate increase for
 basic cable service which, expressed as a percentage, exceeds the higher of--
 `(i) 5 percent, or
 `(ii) the percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for the 12 most
 recent preceding months for which such Index is computed.
 `(B) For purposes of subparagraph (A), any two or more rate increases
 within any 12 month period shall be considered as a single rate increase
 in determining whether approval may be required.'.
SEC. 3. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 The amendment made by section 3 shall apply with respect to any rate increase
 proposed on or after the date of enactment of this Act, but a State or
 franchising authority may act to require approval of rate increases under
 such amendment pursuant to franchising agreements entered into or State
 laws enacted before such date.