S 2550 IS
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 2550
To amend certain provisions of the Employee Retirement Income and Security
Act of 1974 and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to assure the provision
of health care to retired members of the United Mine Workers of America
Union and to their family dependents who receive health care benefits from
the United Mine Workers of America 1950 Benefit Plan (`1950 Benefit Plan')
or from the United Mine Workers of America 1974 Benefit Plan (`1974 Benefit
Plan'), and, to assure the manner in which such care is funded and maintained,
and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
April 8 (legislative day, MARCH 26), 1992
Mr. BOREN (for himself, Mr. DOLE, Mr. SIMPSON, Mr. WALLOP, and Mr. NICKLES)
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the
Committee on Finance
A BILL
To amend certain provisions of the Employee Retirement Income and Security
Act of 1974 and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to assure the provision
of health care to retired members of the United Mine Workers of America
Union and to their family dependents who receive health care benefits from
the United Mine Workers of America 1950 Benefit Plan (`1950 Benefit Plan')
or from the United Mine Workers of America 1974 Benefit Plan (`1974 Benefit
Plan'), and, to assure the manner in which such care is funded and maintained,
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `United Mine Workers of America Retiree Health
 Benefit Act of 1992'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF POLICY.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) it is necessary to modify the current private benefit plan structure
 of the 1950 Benefit Plan and the 1974 Benefit Plan in order to stabilize
 the provision of health care benefits to UMWA retirees and their family
 dependents who receive benefits from these Plans; and
 (2) it is necessary to supplement the current private benefit plan structure
 with a benefit protection program that will assure continued and adequate
 funding.
 (b) DECLARATION OF POLICY- It is hereby declared to be the policy of
 this Act--
 (1) to remedy problems with the provision and funding of health care to
 beneficiaries of the 1950 Benefit Plan and the 1974 Benefit Plan;
 (2) to provide reasonable protection for the health benefits of beneficiaries
 of the 1950 Benefit Plan and the 1974 Benefit Plan;
 (3) to provide and assure sufficient operating assets to the 1950 Benefit
 Plan and the 1974 Benefit Plan; and
 (4) to provide a financially self-sufficient program for the provision of
 UMWA retiree health benefits.
SEC. 3. DETERMINATION AND DISPOSITION OF EXCESS PENSION ASSETS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new subtitle:
`Subtitle J--Transfer of Excess Pension Plan Assets
`CHAPTER 99--TRANSFER OF EXCESS PENSION PLAN ASSETS
`SEC. 9701.
 `(a) DETERMINATION OF EXCESS PENSION ASSETS-
 `(1) Within 30 days after the enactment of this chapter, the joint board
 of trustees of the United Mine Workers of America 1950 Pension Plan (`1950
 Pension Plan') shall, through the independent actuaries of the 1950 Pension
 Plan, calculate the amount of the excess pension assets. The trustees of
 the 1950 Pension Plan shall recalculate the excess pension assets at any
 time that they are directed to do so by the settlors.
 `(2) Immediately following the calculation (or recalculation) of the excess
 pension assets, the trustees of the 1950 Pension Plan shall segregate
 the excess pension assets from the remaining assets of such plan. The
 segregated excess pension assets (including all earnings thereon) shall
 be held in the plan until disbursed pursuant to subsection (b).
 `(b) DISPOSITION OF EXCESS PENSION ASSETS- Notwithstanding any other
 provision of law, the excess pension assets (including all earnings thereon)
 shall be transferred to the 1950 Benefit Plan and to the 1974 Benefit Plan,
 in pro-rata amounts based on the deficit in each benefit plan.
 `(c) TAX TREATMENT, VALIDITY OF TRANSFER OF EXCESS PENSION ASSETS-
 `(1) No deduction shall be allowed under this title with respect to the
 expenditure of excess pension assets pursuant to subsections (a) and (b),
 but such transfer shall not adversely affect the deductibility (under
 applicable provisions of this title) of contributions previously made
 by employers or amounts hereafter contributed by employers to the 1950
 Pension Plan, 1950 Benefit Plan or 1974 Benefit Plan.
 `(2) The expenditure of excess pension assets pursuant to subsection (b)--
 `(A) shall not be treated as an employer reversion from a qualified plan
 for purposes of section 4980, and
 `(B) shall not be includible in the gross income of any employer contributing
 to the 1950 Pension Plan.
 `(3) Neither the segregation of excess pension assets pursuant to subsection
 (a)(2), the transfer of excess pension assets pursuant to subsection (b),
 nor any direction made by the settlors pursuant to subsection (a)(1) shall
 be deemed to violate or be prohibited by any provision of law, or to cause
 the settlors, joint board of trustees, employers or any related person to
 incur or be subject to taxes, fines, or penalties of any kind whatsoever.
 `(d) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this chapter 99--
 `(1) The term `excess pension assets' shall mean the excess of the current
 value of plan assets (as defined in section 3(26) of the Employee Retirement
 Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(26)) of the 1950 Pension Plan
 over the actuarial present value of all benefits for all plan participants
 under such plan, determined as of the date of enactment, in accordance
 with the actuarial assumptions and methods which reflect the plan actuary's
 best estimate of anticipated experience under such plan, except that where
 excess pension assets are recalculated as required under subsection (a)(1),
 the amount of excess pension assets shall be determined as of the July 1
 next preceding the date of the recalculation.
 `(2) The term `settlors' means the United Mine Workers of America and the
 Bituminous Coal Operators' Association, Inc. (hereinafter referred to as
 the `BCOA'), except that if the BCOA ceases to exist, members of the BCOA
 representing more than 50 percent of the tonnage membership of BCOA on
 the date of enactment of this Act shall collectively be considered a settlor.
 `(3) The term `United Mine Workers of America 1950 Benefit Plan' and the
 term `1950 Benefit Plan' mean that health benefit plan established by
 the Bituminous Coal Operators' Association and the United Mine Workers
 of America which provides health care benefits to individuals who retired
 prior to January 1, 1976, and to their dependents.
 `(4) The term `United Mine Workers of America 1974 Benefit Plan' and the
 term `1974 Benefit Plan' mean that health benefit plan established by
 the Bituminous Coal Operators' Association and the United Mine Workers of
 America which provides health care benefits to individuals who retired on
 or after January 1, 1976, and to their dependents.
 `(5) The term `United Mine Workers of America 1950 Pension Plan' and the term
 `1950 Pension Plan' mean that pension plan established by the Bituminous
 Coal Operators' Association and the United Mine Workers of America which
 provides pension benefits to individuals who retired prior to January 1,
 1976, and to their dependents.'.
SEC. 4. SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR WITHDRAWAL FROM UMWA BENEFIT PLANS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974,
 as amended by the Multiemployer Pension Plan Amendment Act of 1980, is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subtitle:
`Subtitle G--Coal Industry Health Benefit Plan
`CHAPTER --Coal Industry Health Benefit Plan
`WITHDRAWAL LIABILITY ESTABLISHED
 `SEC. 4501. (a) If an employer which produced or processed more than
 300,000 tons of coal during the term of the 1988 National Bituminous Coal
 Wage Agreement and which is signatory (i) to the 1988 National Bituminous
 Coal Wage Agreement, or (ii) to a labor agreement entered subsequent to the
 enactment of this legislation which requires contributions to the United
 Mine Workers of America 1950 Benefit Plan or to the United Mine Workers
 of America 1974 Benefit Plan, or a continuation thereof, withdraws from
 the plan in a complete withdrawal or a partial withdrawal on or after the
 effective date of this legislation, then the employer is liable to the
 plan in the amount determined under this part to be the withdrawal liability.
 `(b) For purposes of subsection (a):
 `(1) The withdrawal liability of an employer to a plan is the amount
 determined under section 4507 to be the allocable amount of unfunded vested
 benefits, adjusted--
 `(A) first, by any de minimis reduction applicable under section 4508(a); and
 `(B) next, in the case of a partial withdrawal, in accordance with
 section 4506.
 `(2) The term `complete withdrawal' means a complete withdrawal described
 in section 4203.
 `(3) The term `partial withdrawal' means a partial withdrawal described
 in section 4205(1).
`DETERMINATION AND COLLECTION OF LIABILITY; NOTIFICATION OF EMPLOYER
 `SEC. 4502. When an employer described in section 4501 withdraws from a
 plan described in section 4501, the plan administrator, in accordance with
 this part, shall--
 `(1) determine the amount of the employer's withdrawal liability,
 `(2) notify the employer of the amount of the withdrawal liability, and
 `(3) collect the amount of the withdrawal liability from the employer.
`COMPLETE WITHDRAWAL
 `SEC. 4503. (a) For purposes of this part, a complete withdrawal from a
 plan occurs when an employer described in section 4501--
 `(1) permanently ceases to have an obligation to contribute under the
 plan; or
 `(2) permanently ceases all covered operations under the plan.
 `(b) For purposes of this part, the date of a complete withdrawal is the
 date of the cessation of the obligation to contribute or the cessation of
 covered operations.
`SALE OF ASSETS
 `SEC. 4504. A complete or partial withdrawal of an employer described in
 section 4501 (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `seller')
 under this section does not occur solely because, as a result of a bona
 fide, arm's-length sale of assets to an unrelated party (hereinafter in this
 section referred to as the `purchaser'), the seller ceases covered operations
 or ceases to have an obligation to contribute for such operations. Whether
 such sale shall result in withdrawal liability shall be determined in
 accordance with the provisions of section 4204 (a), (b) and (d).
`PARTIAL WITHDRAWALS
 `SEC. 4505. (a) There is a partial withdrawal by an employer described in
 section 4501 from a plan on the last day of a plan year if for such plan
 year there is a 70-percent contribution decline.
 `(b) For purposes of determining if a withdrawal under subsection (a)
 has occurred the provisions of section 4205(b)(1) shall apply.
`ADJUSTMENT FOR PARTIAL WITHDRAWAL
 `SEC. 4506. (a) The amount of an employer's liability for a partial
 withdrawal is equal to the product of--
 `(1) the amount determined under section 4507, and adjusted under section
 4508(a) if appropriate, determined as if the employer had withdrawn from
 the plan in a complete withdrawal on the last day of the first plan year
 in the 3-year testing period, multiplied by
 `(2) a fraction which is 1 minus a fraction--
 `(A) the numerator of which is the employer's contribution base units for the
 plan year following the plan year in which the partial withdrawal occurs, and
 `(B) the denominator of which is the average of the employer's contribution
 base units for the 5 plan years immediately preceding the beginning of
 the 3-year testing period.
 `(b)(1) In the case of an employer that has withdrawal liability for a
 partial withdrawal from a plan, any withdrawal liability of that employer
 for a partial or complete withdrawal from that plan in a subsequent plan
 year shall be reduced by the amount of any partial withdrawal liability
 (reduced by any abatement or reduction of such liability) of the employer
 with respect to the plan for a previous plan year.
 `(2) The plan administrator shall prescribe such rules as may be necessary
 to provide for proper adjustments in the reduction provided by paragraph
 (1) for--
 `(A) changes in unfunded vested benefits arising arising after the close
 of the prior year for which partial withdrawal liability was determined,
 `(B) changes in contribution base units occurring after the close of the
 prior year for which partial withdrawal liability was determined, and
 `(C) any other factors for which it determines adjustment to be appropriate,
 so that the liability for any complete or partial withdrawal in any
 subsequent year (after the application of the reduction) properly reflects
 the employer's share of liability with respect to the plan.
`METHOD FOR COMPUTING WITHDRAWAL LIABILITY
 `SEC. 4507. (a) The amount of the unfunded vested benefits allocable to
 an employer under this paragraph is the product of--
 `(1) the plan's unfunded vested benefits as of the end of the plan year
 preceding the plan year in which the employer withdraws, less the value as
 of the end of such year of all outstanding claims for withdrawal liability
 which can reasonably be expected to be collected from employers withdrawing
 before such year; multiplied by
 `(2) a fraction--
 `(i) the numerator of which is the total amount required to be contributed
 by the employer under the plan for the last 5 plan years ending before
 the withdrawal, and
 `(ii) the denominator of which is the total amount contributed under the
 plan by all employers described in section 4501 for the last 5 plan years
 ending before the withdrawal, increased by any employer contribution owed
 with respect to earlier periods which were collected in those plan years,
 and decreased by any amount contributed to the plan during those plan
 years by employers who withdrew from the plan under this section during
 those plan years.
 `(b) The amount of a plan's unfunded vested benefits at the end of each
 plan year shall be determined by the plan's actuary and shall include due
 consideration to--
 `(1) the projected rate of increase or decrease in the beneficiary population
 of the plan taking into account--
 `(A) projected life expectancy;
 `(B) eligibility rules of the plan; and
 `(C) other reasonably foreseeable trends or events.
 `(2) The effect of benefit increases or cost savings programs that would
 tend to affect long-term health care costs.
 `(3) Reasonable projections concerning general increases in the cost of
 providing health care benefits.
 `(4) Other developments which could materially affect the projected cost
 of providing health care to plan beneficiaries.
`OBLIGATION TO CONTRIBUTE; SPECIAL RULES
 `SEC. 4508. (a) The amount of unfunded vested benefits allocable under
 section 4507 to an employer who withdraws from a plan shall be reduced
 by $50,000.
 `(b) Payments of withdrawal liability under this part shall not be considered
 contributions for purposes of this part.
 `(c) If a principal purpose of any transaction is to evade or avoid
 liability under this part, this part shall be applied (and liability shall
 be determined and collected) without regard to such transaction.
 `(d) For purposes of this part the plan administrator shall make all
 assessments and collections in accordance with the provisions of section
 4001(b).
`WITHDRAWAL NOT TO OCCUR MERELY BECAUSE OF CHANGE IN BUSINESS FORM OR
SUSPENSION OF CONTRIBUTIONS DURING LABOR DISPUTE
 `SEC. 4509. Notwithstanding any other provision of this part, an employer
 shall not be considered to have withdrawn from a plan solely because of
 events or circumstances described in section 4218.
`NOTICE, COLLECTION, ETC., OF WITHDRAWAL LIABILITY
 `SEC. 4510. (a) An employer shall, within 30 days after a written
 request from the plan administrator, furnish such information as the plan
 administrator reasonably determines to be necessary to enable the plan
 administrator to comply with the requirements of this part.
 `(b)(1) As soon as practicable after an employer's complete or partial
 withdrawal, the plan administrator shall--
 `(A) notify the employer of--
 `(i) the amount of the liability, and
 `(ii) the schedule for liability payments, and
 `(B) demand payment in accordance with the schedule.
 `(2)(A) No later than 90 days after the employer receives the notice
 described in paragraph (1), the employer--
 `(i) may ask the plan administrator to review any specific matter relating to
 the determination of the employer's liability and the schedule of payments,
 `(ii) may identify any inaccuracy in the determination of the amount of
 the unfunded vested benefits allocable to the employer, and
 `(iii) may furnish any additional relevant information to the plan
 administrator.
 `(B) After a reasonable review of any matter raised, the plan administrator
 shall notify the employer of--
 `(i) the plan administrator's decision,
 `(ii) the basis for the decision, and
 `(iii) the reason for any change in the determination of the employer's
 liability or schedule of liability payments.
 `(c)(1) An employer shall pay the amount determined under section 4507,
 adjusted first under section 4508(a) and then under section 4506, over a
 period of 60 months, in equal monthly installments.
 `(2) Withdrawal liability shall be payable in accordance with the schedule
 set forth by the plan administrator under subsection (b)(1) beginning no
 later than 60 days after the date of the demand notwithstanding any request
 for review or appeal of determinations of the amount of such liability or
 of the schedule.
 `(3) The employer shall be entitled to prepay the outstanding amount of
 the unpaid annual withdrawal liability payments determined under paragraph
 (c)(1), plus accrued interest, if any, in whole or in part, without penalty.
 `(4) In the event of a default, a plan administrator may require immediate
 payment of the outstanding amount of an employer's withdrawal liability,
 plus accrued interest on the total outstanding liability from the due
 date of the first payment which was not timely made. For purposes of this
 section, the term `default' shall have the same meaning as set forth in
 section 4219(c)(5)(A).
 `(5) Interest under this subsection shall be charged at rates based on
 prevailing market rates for comparable obligations, in accordance with
 rules prescribed by the plan administrator.
 `(6) The plan administrator may adopt rules for other terms and conditions
 for the satisfaction of an employer's withdrawal liability if such rules
 are consistent with this Act.
 `(7) In the case of a terminated multiemployer plan, an employer's obligation
 to make payments under this section ceases at the end of the plan year in
 which the assets of the plan (exclusive of withdrawal liability claims)
 are sufficient to meet all obligations of the plan, as determined by the
 Secretary of Labor.
 `(d) The prohibitions provided in section 4106(a) do not apply to any
 action required or permitted under this part.
`RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES
 `SEC. 4511. Any dispute between an employer and the plan administrator
 concerning a determination made under sections 4501 through 4513 shall
 be resolved in accordance with the applicable procedures set forth in
 section 4221.
`GUARANTEE OF FUNDING
 `SEC. 4512. (a) The settlors of a plan described in section 4501(a) shall,
 on or before February 1, 1993, establish a contribution rate payable to
 the plan by each employer described in section 4501(a). The settlors shall
 jointly establish rates to be paid on a monthly basis over a sixty-month
 period (the five year projection period). At lest ninety days before the
 end of the five year projection period, the settlors shall jointly announce
 the monthly rates which will be in effect during each successive five year
 projection period.
 `(b) Should the contribution rate established under subsection (a) result
 in a deficit at the end of any month, the plan administrator shall notify
 the settlors. If, in the opinion of the plan administrator, the deficit
 results from an insufficient contribution rate, the plan administrator
 shall recalculate the contribution rate necessary to insure that no deficit
 will exist at the end of the applicable five year projection period, and
 inform each employer of the revised rate. Each employer will begin making
 payments to the plan at the revised rate beginning thirty days after the
 date of the plan administrator's notice.
 `(c) If, for any reason whatsoever, the settlors should fail to establish
 the five year projection rate required under subsection (a), or should
 the plan administrator fail to establish a revised rate as required under
 subsection (b), the Secretary of Labor shall assume such responsibility,
 and take such action as may be necessary to assess and collect from each
 employer the amounts necessary to provide the benefits payable from the plan.
 `(d) Nothing in this section shall be construed to supersede the rights
 and obligations of the settlors of a plan to take any action concerning the
 plan which, as of the effective date the settlors were empowered to take,
 including but not limited to their right to amend, modify, or otherwise
 restructure.
`DEFINITIONS
 `SEC. 4513. (a) The term `settlors' means the United Mine Workers of America
 and the Bituminous Coal Operators' Association, Inc. (hereinafter referred
 to as the `BCOA'), except that if the BCOA ceases to exist, members of the
 BCOA representing more than 50 percent of the tonnage membership of BCOA on
 the date of enactment of this Act shall collectively be considered a settlor.
 `(b) The term `plan administrator' means the trustees of the UMWA 1950
 and/or 1974 Benefit Plans, or their designated representatives.
 `(c) The term `1988 National Bituminous Coal Wage Agreement shall mean the
 collective bargaining agreement negotiated by the settlors and signed by
 them on or about February 1, 1988.
 `(d) The term `United Mine Workers of America 1950 Pension Plan' and the term
 `1950 Pension Plan' mean the pension plan established by the Bituminous
 Coal Operators' Association and the United Mine Workers of America which
 provides pension benefits to individuals who retired prior to January 1,
 1976, and to their dependents.
 `(e) The term `United Mine Workers of America 1950 Benefit Plan' and the
 term `1950 Benefit Plan' mean that health benefit plan established by
 the Bituminous Coal Operators' Association and the United Mine Workers
 of America which provides health care benefits to individuals who retired
 prior to January 1, 1976, and to their dependents.
 `(f) The term `United Mine Workers of America 1974 Benefit Plan' and the
 term `1974 Benefit Plan' mean that health benefit plan established by
 the Bituminous Coal Operators' Association and the United Mine Workers of
 America which provides health care benefits to individuals who retired on
 or after January 1, 1976, and to their dependents.'.
SEC. 5. ADOPTION OF MANDATORY COST CONTAINMENT PROGRAM.
 (a)(1) On or before sixty days from the effective date the Secretary of
 Health and Human Services shall establish an advisory committee for the
 purpose of advising the Secretary with respect to appropriate changes in
 plan design and other policies and procedures relevant to enhancing the
 cost effective delivery of services to beneficiaries of the United Mine
 Workers of America 1950 and 1974 Benefit Plans.
 (2) The advisory committee shall consist of seven members expert in the
 provision of health care services and appointed by the Secretary. The
 Secretary shall designate one member as chairman at the time of the
 appointment of that member.
 (3) Members shall serve until the earlier of (i) the date the report of the
 advisory committee is presented to the Secretary or, (ii) January 31, 1993.
 (4) Members shall be chosen on the basis of their experience with the
 administration of health care services, benefit plans, or otherwise on
 account of outstanding demonstrated ability in related fields.
 (5) The Secretary shall appoint and fix the compensation of such employees
 as he determines necessary in order for the advisory committee to discharge
 its duties, including the hiring of experts and consultants in accordance
 with the provisions of section 3109 of title 5, United States Code. The
 Secretary shall furnish to the advisory committee such professional,
 secretarial and other services as the committee may request.
 (6) Members of the advisory committee shall, for each day (including
 travel time) during which they are attending meetings or conferences of
 the committee or otherwise engaged in the business of the committee, be
 compensated at a rate fixed by the Secretary which is not in excess of the
 daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay in effect for grade GS-18
 or the General Schedule, and while away from their homes or regular places
 of business they may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu
 of subsistence, as authorized by section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
 (7) The Federal Advisory Committee Act shall not apply to the advisory
 committee established by this subsection.
 (b) On or before November 31, 1992, and after due consideration to
 the findings and recommendations of the advisory committee established
 under subparagraph (a), the Secretary shall develop and promulgate rules
 binding on the UMWA 1950 and 1974 Benefit Plans which, among other things,
 establish a managed care network by allowing a point of service decision
 as to whether a network medical provider will be used. Any managed care
 or cost containment program shall have as a primary goal the provision of
 quality medical care at or below medical price inflation. Major elements
 of such rules shall include, but not be limited to--
 (1) implementing formulary for drugs and subjecting the prescription
 program to a rigorous review of appropriate use;
 (2) obtaining a unit price discount in exchange for patient volume and
 preferred provider status, with the amount of the potential discount
 varying by geographic region;
 (3) limiting benefit payments to physicians to the medicare allowable charge;
 (4) utilizing Medicare's `appropriateness of service' protocols in the
 claims payment function where they are more stringent;
 (5) creating mandatory utilization review (UR) procedures, but placing
 the responsibility to follow such procedures on the physician or hospital,
 not the beneficiaries;
 (6) selecting the most efficient physicians and state-of-the-art utilization
 management techniques, including ambulatory care techniques, for medical
 services delivered by the managed care network;
 (7) utilizing a managed care network provider system as practiced
 in the health care industry at the time medical services are needed
 (point-of-service) in order to receive maximum benefits available under
 this section;
 (8) requiring beneficiary reenrollment or recertification on not less than
 a yearly basis;
 (9) imposing cost sharing arrangements as may be reasonable after due
 consideration to the nature of the plans and the beneficiaries;
 (10) developing eligibility limitations to ensure that benefit entitlement
 is consistent with need and with the settlors' coverage intentions.
 (c) Any beneficiary or affected party may petition the Secretary to modify
 or amend any rule promulgated pursuant to subparagraph (b), or to otherwise
 engage in further rulemaking provided, however, that such rulemaking shall
 be at the sole discretion of the Secretary.
 (d) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the settlors of the
 UMWA 1950 or 1974 Benefit Plans and trusts from jointly agreeing to take
 any action or make any change relating to such plan provided, however,
 that no action or change which would conflict with the rules promulgated
 under subsection (b) shall become effective until such change is approved
 in writing by the Secretary.