S 1409 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1409
To provide for damages in cases of intentional employment discrimination,
and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
June 27 (legislative day, JUNE 11), 1991
Mr. DANFORTH introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources
A BILL
To provide for damages in cases of intentional employment discrimination,
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Civil Rights and Remedies Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. FINDING AND PURPOSE.
 (a) FINDING- Congress finds that additional remedies under Federal law
 are needed to deter unlawful harassment and intentional discrimination in
 the workplace.
 (b) PURPOSE- The purpose of this Act is to provide appropriate remedies
 for intentional discrimination and unlawful harassment in the workplace.
SEC. 3. DAMAGES IN CASES OF INTENTIONAL DISCRIMINATION.
 The Revised Statutes are amended by inserting after section 1977 the
 following new section:
`SEC. 1977A. DAMAGES IN CASES OF INTENTIONAL DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT.
 `(a) RIGHT OF RECOVERY-
 `(1) CIVIL RIGHTS- In an action brought by a complaining party under
 section 706 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-5 (e))
 against a respondent who intentionally engaged in an unlawful employment
 practice prohibited under section 703 or 704 of the Act (42 U.S.C. 2000e-2,
 2000e-3), and: Provided That the complaining party cannot recover under
 section 1977 of the Revised Statutes (42 U.S.C. 1981), the complaining
 party may recover the compensatory and punitive damages as allowed in
 subsection (b), in addition to any relief authorized by section 706(g)
 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, from the respondent.
 `(2) DISABILITY- In an action brought by a complaining party under the
 powers, remedies, and procedures set forth in section 706 of the Civil
 Rights Act of 1964 (as provided in section 107(a) of the Americans with
 Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12117(a))) against a respondent who
 intentionally engaged in a practice that constitutes discrimination under
 section 102 of the Act (42 U.S.C. 12112), other than discrimination described
 in subsection (b) paragraphs (3)(A), or other than discrimination described
 in subsection (b) paragraph (6) (except for practices intended to screen
 out individuals with disabilities), against an individual, the complaining
 party may recover the compensatory and punitive damages as allowed in
 subsection (b), in addition to any relief authorized by section 706(g)
 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, from the respondent.
 `(3) REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION AND GOOD FAITH EFFORT- In cases where a
 violation involves the provision of a reasonable accommodation pursuant
 to section 102(b)(5), damages may not be awarded where the covered entity
 demonstrates good faith efforts, in consultation with the person with the
 disability who has informed the covered entity that accommodation is needed,
 to identify and make a reasonable accommodation that would provide such
 individual with an equally effective opportunity and would not cause an
 undue hardship on the operation of the business.
 `(b) COMPENSATORY AND PUNITIVE DAMAGES-
 `(1) DETERMINATION OF PUNITIVE DAMAGES- A complaining party may recover
 punitive damages under this subsection if the complaining party demonstrates
 that the respondent engaged in a discriminatory practice or discriminatory
 practices with malice or with reckless indifference to the federally
 protected rights of an aggrieved individual.
 `(2) EXCLUSIONS FROM COMPENSATORY DAMAGES- Compensatory damages awarded
 under this section shall not include back pay, interest on back pay,
 or any other type of relief authorized under section 706(g) of the Civil
 Rights Act of 1964.
 `(3) LIMITATIONS- The sum of the amount of compensatory damages awarded
 under this section for future pecuniary losses, emotional pain, suffering,
 inconvenience, mental anguish, loss of enjoyment of life, and other
 nonpecuniary losses, and the amount of punitive damages awarded under this
 section, shall not exceed--
 `(A) in the case of a respondent who has one hundred or fewer employees in
 each of twenty or more calendar weeks in the current or preceding calendar
 year, $50,000;
 `(B) in the case of a respondent who has more than one hundred and fewer
 than five hundred and one employees in each of twenty or more calendar
 weeks in the current or preceding calendar year, $100,000; and
 `(C) in the case of a respondent who has more than five hundred employees in
 each of twenty or more calendar weeks in the current or preceding calendar
 year, $300,000.
 `(4) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in the amendments made by this section shall
 be construed to limit the scope of, or the relief available under, section
 1977 of the Revised Statutes (42 U.S.C. 1981).
 `(c) JURY TRIAL-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- (A) If a complaining party seeks compensatory or punitive
 damages under this section, any party may demand a trial by jury.
 `(B) The court shall not inform the jury of the limitations described in
 subsection (b)(3).
 `(d) DEFINITION- As used in this section:
 `(1) COMPLAINING PARTY- The term `complaining party' means--
 `(A) in the case of a person seeking to bring an action under subsection
 (a)(1), a person who may bring an action or proceeding under title VII of
 the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.); or
 `(B) in the case of a person seeking to bring an action under subsection
 (a)(2), a person who may bring an action or proceeding under title I of
 the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.).
 `(2) DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE- The term `discriminatory practice' means a
 practice described in paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (a).'.
SEC. 4. ATTORNEYS' FEES.
 The last sentence of section 722 of the Revised Statutes (42 U.S.C. 1988)
 is amended by inserting `, 1981A' after `1981'.
SEC. 5. COVERAGE OF CONGRESS AND THE AGENCIES OF THE LEGISLATIVE BRANCH.
 (a) Coverage of the Senate-
 (1) APPLICATION TO SENATE EMPLOYMENT- The rights and protections provided
 pursuant to the amendment made by this Act shall, subject to paragraphs (2)
 through (5), apply with respect to any employee in an employment position
 in the Senate and any employing authority of the Senate.
 (2) INVESTIGATION AND ADJUDICATION OF CLAIMS- All claims raised by any
 individual with respect to Senate employment pursuant to the provision
 described in paragraph (1) shall be investigated and adjudicated by the
 Select Committee on Ethics, pursuant to S. Res. 338 Eighty-eighth Congress,
 as amended, or such other entity as the Senate may designate.
 (3) RIGHTS OF EMPLOYEES- The Committee on Rules and Administration shall
 ensure that Senate employees are informed of their rights under the
 provisions described in paragraph (1).
 (4) APPLICABLE REMEDIES- When assigning remedies to individuals found to have
 a valid claim under the provisions described in paragraph (1), the Select
 Committee on Ethics, or such other entity as the Senate may designate,
 shall to the extent practicable apply the same remedies applicable to all
 other employees covered by the provisions described in paragraph (1). Such
 remedies shall apply exclusively.
 (5) EXERCISE OF RULEMAKING POWER- Notwithstanding any other provision of
 law, enforcement and adjudication of the rights and protections referred to
 in paragraph (1) shall be within the exclusive jurisdiction of the United
 States Senate. The provisions of paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) are enacted
 by the Senate as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate, with
 full recognition of the right of the Senate to change its rules, in the
 same manner, and to the same extent, as in the case of any other rule of
 the Senate.
 (b) Coverage of the House of Representatives-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the purposes
 of this Act shall, subject to paragraph (2), apply with respect to any
 employee in an employment position in the House of Representatives and
 any employing authority of the House of Representatives.
 (2) Employment in the house-
 (A) APPLICATION- The rights and protections under the amendment made by
 this Act shall, subject to subparagraph (B), apply with respect to any
 employee in an employment position in the House of Representatives and
 any employing authority of the House of Representatives.
 (B) Administration-
 (i) IN GENERAL- In the administration of this paragraph, the remedies and
 procedures made applicable pursuant to the resolution described in clause
 (ii) shall apply exclusively.
 (ii) RESOLUTION- The resolution referred to in clause (i) is House
 Resolution 15 of the One Hundred First Congress, as agreed to January 3,
 1989, or any other provision that continues in effect the provisions of,
 or is a successor to, the Fair Employment Practices Resolution (House
 Resolution 558 of the One Hundredth Congress, as agreed to October 4, 1988).
 (C) EXERCISE OF RULEMAKING POWER- The provisions of subparagraph (B) are
 enacted by the House of Representatives as an exercise of the rulemaking
 power of the House of Representatives, with full recognition of the right
 of the House to change its rules, in the same manner, and to the same
 extent as in the case of any other rule of the House.
 (c) Instrumentalities of Congress-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The rights and protections under the amendment made by this
 Act, shall, subject to paragraph (2), apply with respect to any employee
 in an employment position in an instrumentality of the Congress and any
 chief official of such an instrumentality.
 (2) ESTABLISHMENT OF REMEDIES AND PROCEDURES BY INSTRUMENTALITIES- The chief
 official of each instrumentality of the Congress shall establish remedies
 and procedures to be utilized with respect to the rights and protections
 provided pursuant to paragraph (1). Such remedies and procedures shall
 apply exclusively.
 (3) REPORT TO CONGRESS- The chief official of each instrumentality of the
 Congress shall, after establishing remedies and procedures for purposes
 of paragraph (2), submit to the Congress a report describing the remedies
 and procedures.
 (4) DEFINITION OF INSTRUMENTALITIES- For purposes of this section,
 instrumentalities of the Congress include the Architect of the Capitol, the
 Congressional Budget Office, the General Accounting Office, the Government
 Printing Office, the Office of Technology Assessment, and the United States
 Botanic Garden.
SEC. 6. SEVERABILITY.
 If any provision of this Act, or an amendment made by this Act, or the
 application of such provision to any person or circumstances is held to
 be invalid, the remainder of this Act and the amendments made by this Act,
 and the application of such provision to other persons and circumstances,
 shall not be affected.