HR 4551 IH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 4551
To require each State to adopt by 1995 a plan for ensuring the provision of
health insurance to all residents of the State, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
April 18, 1990
Mr. OBEY (for himself and Mr. MCDERMOTT) introduced the following bill;
which was referred jointly to the Committees on Energy and Commerce and Ways
and Means
A BILL
To require each State to adopt by 1995 a plan for ensuring the provision of
health insurance to all residents of the State, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Universal Health Coverage Act of 1990'.
SEC. 2. ADOPTION OF HEALTH INSURANCE PLANS BY STATES; DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL
HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN.
 (a) ADOPTION OF PLAN- Not later than July 1, 1994, each State shall submit to
 the Secretary of Health and Human Services a description of a State health
 insurance plan designed to be administered by the State and containing the
 provisions described in section 3, together with such other provisions as
 the Secretary may consider appropriate, and shall have such plan in place
 and operating not later than January 1, 1995.
 (b) PAYMENTS TO STATES-
 (1) PLANNING GRANTS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall make grants to States for planning
 and developing the State health insurance plans described in subsection (a).
 (B) ALLOTMENT OF FUNDS- Each State submitting an application to the Secretary
 for a grant under subparagraph (A) shall be entitled to receive a grant
 in an amount which bears the same ratio to the total amount appropriated
 as authorized by this Act as the State's population bears to the total
 population of the United States.
 (C) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 for grants under this paragraph not more than $25,000,000.
 (2) GRANTS FOR OPERATION OF HEALTH INSURANCE PLANS-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Funds appropriated to the Universal Health Coverage Trust
 Fund under section 4(b) shall be made available for payments to eligible
 States by the Secretary of Health and Human Services, in amounts determined
 in accordance with the representative revenue system established by the
 Advisory Committee on Intergovernmental Relations, to assist those States
 in the operation of the plans developed under subsection (a).
 (B) ELIGIBILITY- A State is eligible to receive payments under subparagraph
 (A) if its State health insurance plan is approved by the Secretary pursuant
 to subsection (c)(1).
 (c) REVIEW OF PLANS BY SECRETARY-
 (1) EVALUATION AND APPROVAL- The Secretary shall evaluate the State plans
 developed and implemented under subsection (a) and, not later than January 1,
 1995, shall approve those plans that efficiently and effectively provide
 quality health care to State residents in a cost-effective manner, and
 shall periodically review such plans during 1996 and 1997 to ensure that
 such plans continue to meet the requirements of this Act.
 (2) REPORT TO CONGRESS- Not later than January 1, 1998, the Secretary
 shall submit a report to Congress listing those States with approved plans
 and those States whose plans have not been approved pursuant to paragraph
 (1). Such report shall consist of--
 (A) the Secretary's determination as to which State plans most efficiently
 and effectively provide quality health care to State residents in a
 cost-effective manner and should be adopted in whole or in part by other
 States; and
 (B) the Secretary's determination as to whether the experience gained has
 demonstrated that the administration of universal health coverage should
 be moved to the Federal Government or remain at the State level.
SEC. 3. REQUIRED PROVISIONS OF HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The health insurance plan developed and implemented by a
 State under section 2 shall include at least the following provisions:
 (1) A requirement that each employer in the State that employs 25 or more
 persons shall enroll its employees and members of their immediate families
 in a health benefit plan that meets, at a minimum, the requirements of
 subsection (b).
 (2) The creation of mechanisms (including insurance pools) designed to
 reduce the costs of providing health insurance coverage for self-employed
 individuals, unemployed individuals, and individuals employed by businesses
 with fewer than 25 employees.
 (3) The establishment of a health benefit plan--
 (A) under which--
 (i) low-income individuals in the State,
 (ii) individuals in the State who, regardless of income, are unable to
 obtain health insurance because of preexisting health conditions, and
 (iii) other individuals in the State who are otherwise unable to obtain
 health insurance, including those unable to obtain such insurance through
 employment, or those who are not eligible to be provided health benefits
 under title XVIII of the Social Security Act or the State plan for medical
 assistance under title XIX of the Social Security Act,
are provided health insurance coverage for a premium that is proportional
to the individuals' incomes; and
 (B) that meets the requirements of subsection (b).
 (4) The creation of mechanisms designed to limit an individual's costs
 of coverage under health insurance plans offered under the State plan,
 including limitations on the amount of premiums, deductibles, copayment,
 and coinsurance which may be assessed against an individual participating
 in such plans.
 (5) A requirement that the State plan for medical assistance under title XIX
 of the Social Security Act meet the national minimum standards established
 by the Secretary pursuant to section 9 of this Act.
 (6) The creation of mechanisms designed to assure, monitor, and maintain
 the provision of high quality health care to individuals in the State.
 (7) The creation of mechanisms designed to control the costs of providing
 high quality health care to individuals in the State under the State plan.
 (b) PLAN REQUIREMENTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Each health benefit plan described in paragraphs (1)
 and (3) of subsection (a) shall include, at a minimum, coverage for the
 following care and services:
 (A) Inpatient and outpatient hospital care, except that treatment for
 a mental disorder is subject to the special limitations described in
 subparagraph (E)(i).
 (B) Inpatient and outpatient physician services, except that psychotherapy
 or counseling for a mental disorder is subject to the special limitations
 described in subparagraph (E)(ii).
 (C) Diagnostic and screening tests.
 (D) Prenatal care and well-baby care provided to children who are 1 year
 of age or younger.
 (E)(i) Inpatient hospital care for a mental disorder for not less than 45
 days per year.
 (ii) Outpatient psychotherapy and counseling for a mental disorder for
 not less than 20 visits per year.
 (F) Long-term care services, including nursing home and home health care.
 (2) EXCEPTIONS- Paragraph (1) shall not be construed as requiring a health
 benefit plan described in paragraphs (1) and (3) of subsection (a) to
 provide coverage for--
 (A) care and services that are not medically necessary, or
 (B) experimental services and procedures.
 (3) AMOUNT, SCOPE, AND DURATION OF CERTAIN BENEFITS- Except as provided in
 paragraph (2), a health benefit plan described in paragraphs (1) and (3)
 of subsection (a) shall place no limits on the amount, scope, or duration
 of benefits described in subparagraphs (A) through (C) of paragraph (1).
 (4) PANELS AND MANAGED CARE SYSTEMS- Nothing in this subsection shall
 prohibit a health benefit plan described in paragraphs (1) and (3)
 of subsection (a) from providing the care and benefits described in
 this subsection through a panel or other form of managed care system,
 and from selecting particular health care providers or types, classes,
 or categories of health care providers to participate in such panel or
 managed care system. Such panel or managed care system shall provide, in
 accordance with regulations issued by the Secretary, reasonable access to
 care by plan enrollees.
 (5) MENTAL HEALTH CARE- (A) With respect to inpatient hospital care
 described in paragraph (1)(E)(i), such care shall include reimbursement
 for professional care provided to the individual while receiving such
 inpatient care. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to modify
 hospital practices with regard to scope of practice, admitting privileges,
 or billing arrangements.
 (B) The Secretary shall establish standards that providers of services
 described in paragraph (1)(E)(ii) must meet to be eligible for payment under
 a health benefit plan described in paragraphs (1) and (3) of subsection (a).
 (6) PROHIBITION OF PREEXISTING CONDITION PROVISIONS- A health benefit plan
 described in paragraphs (1) and (3) of subsection (a) may not exclude or
 otherwise limit any individual from coverage under the plan on the basis
 that the individual has (or at any time has had) any disease, disorder,
 or condition.
 (7) PERMITTING PROPORTIONAL CONTRIBUTION BY PART-TIME EMPLOYEES- (A)
 A health benefit plan described in paragraph (1) of subsection (a) may
 require a part-time employee to pay a proportional premium based on the
 number of hours worked by the employee, in accordance with regulations
 promulgated by the Secretary.
 (B) In this paragraph, the term `part-time employee' means, with respect
 to an employer, an employee who normally performs on a monthly basis less
 than 25 hours of service per week for that employer.
 (8) MULTI-STATE INSURANCE MECHANISMS- Nothing in this subsection shall
 prohibit a State from establishing or participating in a joint or multistate
 mechanism with one or more other States to establish health insurance
 plans that cover residents of more than one State.
SEC. 4. UNIVERSAL HEALTH COVERAGE TRUST FUND.
 (a) CREATION- There is hereby created on the books of the Treasury of the
 United States a trust fund to be known as the `Universal Health Coverage
 Trust Fund'. The Trust Fund shall consist of such amounts appropriated to
 it under subsection (b).
 (b) FUNDING- (1) There are hereby appropriated to the Trust Fund amounts
 equivalent to 100 percent of the revenue paid to or deposited into the
 Treasury as a result of the enactment of sections 5 and 6 of the Universal
 Health Coverage Act of 1990.
 (2) The amounts appropriated under paragraph (1) shall be transferred
 from time to time (not less frequently than monthly) from the general
 fund in the Treasury to the Trust Fund. Such amounts shall be determined
 on the basis of estimates by the Secretary of the Treasury of the revenue
 described in paragraph (1), and proper adjustments shall be made in amounts
 subsequently transferred to the extent prior estimates were in excess of
 or were less than the revenue specified in such paragraph, so that at the
 close of each year, the transfers made under this subsection shall reflect
 all the revenue specified in such paragraph paid or deposited into the
 Treasury during such year.
 (c) ADMINISTRATION OF TRUST FUND- The provisions of subsections (b) through
 (i) of section 1841 of the Social Security Act shall apply to the Trust
 Fund in the same manner in which they apply to the Federal Supplementary
 Medical Insurance Trust Fund.
 (d) REPORTS ON OUTLAYS AND BALANCES- (1) Not later than July 1 of each year,
 the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Board of Trustees
 of the Trust Fund, shall publish in the Federal Register information on
 the outlays made from the Trust Fund in the preceding year and the balance
 in the Trust Fund at the close of the preceding year, and shall submit a
 report to Congress describing the distribution of outlays from the Trust
 Fund in the preceding year.
 (2) Not later than September 1 of each year, the Comptroller General shall
 submit a report to Congress evaluating the completeness and accuracy of
 the report submitted to Congress by the Secretary of the Treasury under
 paragraph (1).
 (3) For purposes of this subsection, the terms `outlays' and `receipts'
 mean, with respect to a quarter or other period, gross outlays and receipts,
 as such terms are employed in the `Monthly Treasury Statement of Receipts
 and Outlays of the United States Government (MTS)', as published by the
 Department of the Treasury, for months in such quarter of other period.
 (e) USES OF TRUST FUND- Amounts in the Trust Fund shall be used for the
 following purposes:
 (1) Payments made to States for the operation of a State health insurance
 plan under section 2(b)(2).
 (2) Payments under the demonstration program established under section 7.
 (3) Payments to reimburse the general fund in the Treasury for amounts
 appropriated for grants to States pursuant to section 2(b)(1) for the
 planning and development of health insurance plans.
SEC. 5. INCREASE IN EXCISE TAXES ON CERTAIN TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND COSMETICS.
 (a) TOBACCO PRODUCTS-
 (1) CIGARS- Subsection (a) of section 5701 of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 (relating to rate of tax on cigars) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking `75 cents' and inserting `$1.50', and
 (B) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) by striking `8 1/2 percent' and inserting `17 percent', and
 (ii) by striking `$20' and inserting `$40'.
 (2) CIGARETTES- Subsection (b) of section 5701 of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (relating to rate of tax on cigarettes) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking `$8' and inserting `$16', and
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking `$16.80' and inserting `$33.60'.
 (3) SMOKELESS TOBACCO- Subsection (e) of section 5701 of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (relating to rate of tax on smokeless tobacco) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking `24 cents' and inserting `48 cents', and
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking `8 cents' and inserting `16 cents'.
 (4) FLOOR STOCKS-
 (A) IMPOSITION OF TAX- On any item subject to tax under section 5701 of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to rate of tax on tobacco products)
 that is removed before the expiration of the 90-day period which begins
 on the date of the enactment of this Act and held after the expiration of
 such 90-day period for sale by any person, there shall be imposed a tax
 equal to the difference between--
 (i) the tax that would have been imposed on such item under such section
 if such item had been removed after the expiration of such 90-day period, and
 (ii) the tax that was imposed on such item under such section.
 (B) LIABILITY FOR TAX AND METHOD OF PAYMENT-
 (i) LIABILITY FOR TAX- A person holding an item to which any tax imposed
 by subparagraph (A) applies shall be liable for such tax.
 (ii) METHOD OF PAYMENT- The tax imposed on any item by subparagraph (A)
 shall be treated as a tax imposed under section 5701 of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 and shall be due and payable 180 days after the date of the
 enactment of this Act in the same manner as the tax imposed under such
 section is payable with respect to such items removed after the expiration
 of the 90-day period which begins on the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (C) EXCEPTION FOR RETAILERS- The taxes imposed by subparagraph (A) shall
 not apply to items in retail stocks held after the expiration of the 90-day
 period which begins on the date of the enactment of this Act at the place
 where intended to be sold at retail.
 (b) COSMETICS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Chapter 32 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended
 by inserting after subchapter D the following new subchapter:
`Subchapter E--Cosmetics
`Sec. 4191. Imposition of tax.
`Sec. 4192. Definition.
`SEC. 4191. IMPOSITION OF TAX.
 `There is hereby imposed on the sale of any cosmetic by the manufacturer,
 producer, or importer a tax equal to 50 percent of the price for which
 so sold.
`SEC. 4192. DEFINITION.
 `For purposes of this subchapter, the term `cosmetic' means articles
 intended to be rubbed, poured, sprinkled, or sprayed on, introduced into,
 or otherwise applied to the human body or any part thereof for cleansing,
 beautifying, promoting attractiveness, or altering the appearance, or
 articles intended for use as a component of any such articles, except that
 such term shall not include soap.'.
 (2) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of subchapters for chapter 32 of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after the item
 relating to subchapter D the following:
`Subchapter E. Cosmetics.'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) shall
 apply to items removed after the expiration of the 90-day period which
 begins on the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 6. ELIMINATION OF PROVISION REDUCING MARGINAL TAX RATE FOR HIGH-INCOME
TAXPAYERS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating
 to tax imposed) is amended--
 (1) by striking the item beginning `Over $29,750' and all that follows in
 subsection (a) (relating to married individuals filing joint returns and
 surviving spouses) and inserting the following new items:
`Over $29,750 but not over $71,900
$4,462.50, plus 28% of the excess over $29,750.
Over $71,900
$16,264.50, plus 33% of the excess over $71,900.',
 (2) by striking the item beginning `Over $23,900' and all that follows
 in subsection (b) (relating to heads of households) and inserting the
 following new items:
`Over $23,900 but not over $61,650
$3,585, plus 28% of the excess over $23,900.
Over $61,650
$14,155, plus 33% of the excess over $61,650.',
 (3) by striking the item beginning `Over $17,850' and all that follows in
 subsection (c) (relating to unmarried individuals, other than surviving
 spouses and heads of households) and inserting the following new items:
`Over $17,850 but not over $43,150
$2,677.50, plus 28% of the excess over $17,850.
Over $43,150
$9,761.50, plus 33% of the excess over $43,150.',
 (4) by striking the item beginning `Over $14,875' and all that follows in
 subsection (d) (relating to married individuals filing separate returns)
 and inserting the following new items:
`Over $14,875 but not over $35,950
$2,231.25, plus 28% of the excess over $14,875.
Over $35,950
$8,132.25, plus 33% of the excess over $35,950.',
and
 (5) by striking the item beginning `Over $5,000' and all that follows in
 subsection (e) (relating to estates and trusts) and inserting the following
 new items:
`Over $5,000 but not over $13,000
$750, plus 28% of the excess over $5,000.
Over $13,000 13,000
$2,990, plus 33% of the excess over $13,000.'
 (b) REPEAL OF PHASEOUT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 1 of such Code is amended by striking subsection
 (g) (relating to phaseout of 15-percent rate and personal exemptions).
 (2) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Subparagraph (A) of section 1(f)(6) of such Code
 (relating to adjustments for inflation) is amended by striking `subsection
 (g)(4),'.
 (c) 28 PERCENT MAXIMUM CAPITAL GAINS RATE- Subsection (j) of section 1
 of such Code (relating to maximum capital gains rate) is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(j) MAXIMUM CAPITAL GAINS RATE- If a taxpayer has a net capital gain for
 any taxable year, then the tax imposed by this section shall not exceed
 the sum of--
 `(1) a tax computed at the rates and in the same manner as if this subsection
 had not been enacted on the greater of--
 `(A) taxable income reduced by the amount of the net capital gain, or
 `(B) the amount of taxable income taxed at a rate below 28 percent, plus
 `(2) a tax of 28 percent of the amount of taxable income in excess of the
 amount determined under paragraph (1).'
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1990.
SEC. 7. DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) ESTABLISHMENT- Not earlier than December 31, 1992, the Secretary shall
 establish a demonstration program under which the Secretary shall make
 grants to 10 eligible States to cover the Federal share of the costs to
 such a State of implementing not more than 1 feature of the State's health
 insurance plan under section 2 during a period determined by the Secretary.
 (2) LIMIT ON PAYMENTS UNDER PROGRAM- There is authorized to be appropriated
 from the Universal Health Coverage Trust Fund for grants described in
 paragraph (1), an amount not to exceed 5 percent of the amount appropriated
 to the Trust Fund under section 4(b)(1) during 1992.
 (b) ELIGIBILITY- A State shall be eligible to receive a grant under
 subsection (a) if it submits to the Secretary, at such time and in such
 form as the Secretary may require by rule, an application containing--
 (1) assurances that the State has adopted, and assumed responsibility for
 enforcing, the State health insurance plan under section 2; and
 (2) such other information and assurances as the Secretary may require
 by rule.
 (c) CRITERIA- In determining those States that are to receive grants under
 this section, the Secretary shall give preference to States that will
 use the grant to finance a feature of the State health insurance plan
 that is designed to provide health care to a category of individuals
 experiencing difficulty in obtaining reasonably priced quality care,
 including individuals living in rural areas, non-institutionalized elderly
 and disabled individuals, and the homeless, or to States that will use the
 grant to finance the establishment and operation of a mechanism designed
 to control the costs of providing high quality health care to individuals
 in the State under the State health insurance plan.
 (d) FEDERAL SHARE- The Federal share referred to in subsection (a) may
 not exceed 50 percent.
SEC. 8. STATE ADOPTION OF PLAN REQUIRED TO RECEIVE MEDICAID PAYMENTS.
 Section 1903 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b) is amended by
 adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(w)(1) In order to receive payments under this title for any quarter
 beginning on or after January 1, 1995, a State must certify to the Secretary
 that it has adopted, and assumed responsibility for enforcing, an approved
 State health insurance plan under section 2 of the Universal Health Coverage
 Act of 1990, or has otherwise adopted, and assumed responsibility for
 enforcing laws, rules, or regulations which ensure the provision of health
 insurance coverage to all residents of the State as effectively as such plan.
 `(2)(A) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a State for
 any quarter--
 `(i) that follows the quarter during which the State meets the requirements
 of this subsection; or
 `(ii) with respect to which the Secretary determines that the State is
 unable to comply with the relevant requirements of this subsection--
 `(I) for good cause (but such a waiver may not be for a period in excess
 of 4 quarters), or
 `(II) due to circumstances beyond the control of such State.
 `(B) For purposes of determining deadlines imposed under this subsection,
 any time period during which a State was found under subparagraph (A)(ii)(II)
 to be unable to comply with the requirements of this subsection shall not
 be taken into account, and the Secretary shall modify all such deadlines
 with respect to such State accordingly.'.
SEC. 9. ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STATE MEDICAID PLANS.
 Not later than December 31, 1994, the Secretary shall develop and submit
 to Congress such recommendations for uniform eligibility and coverage
 requirements with respect to title XIX of the Social Security Act as the
 Secretary considers appropriate, except that such requirements shall,
 at a minimum, include the requirements for health benefit plans developed
 under section 3(b) of this Act.
SEC. 10. REQUIRING SELF-INSURANCE PLANS TO COMPLY WITH PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
 Section 514(b) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29
 U.S.C. 1144(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(9) Subsection (a) shall not apply to any State law to the extent such law
 conforms to or reflects the provisions of the State health insurance plan
 developed and implemented by the State under section 2 of the Universal
 Health Coverage Act of 1990.'.
SEC. 11. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this Act--
 (1) the term `employee' means, with respect to an employer, an individual
 who normally performs on a monthly basis 17 1/2 hours of service per week
 for that employer;
 (2) the term `employer' means, with respect to a calendar year, an employer
 that normally employs 25 or more employees on a typical business day during
 the calendar year, including a State or political subdivision thereof;
 (3) the term `health benefit plan' means an employee welfare benefit plan
 (as defined in section 3(1) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act
 of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(1)) that provides medical care to participants or
 beneficiaries directly or through insurance, reimbursement, or otherwise;
 (4) the term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services;
 (5) the term `Trust Fund' means the Universal Health Coverage Trust Fund
 established under section 4(a).