S 3357 IS
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 3357
To abolish punitive damages in certain cases and provide in their place
procedures and substantive standards for assessment of punitive fines.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
October 6 (legislative day, SEPTEMBER 30), 1992
Mr. DANFORTH introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on the Judiciary
A BILL
To abolish punitive damages in certain cases and provide in their place
procedures and substantive standards for assessment of punitive fines.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Punitive Damages Reform Act of 1992'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS, DECLARATIONS, AND PURPOSES.
 (a) FINDINGS AND DECLARATIONS- The Congress finds and declares that--
 (1) the allowance of punitive damages is not a constitutional right but
 is based instead on considerations of public policy;
 (2) unlike compensatory damages, punitive damages serve to penalize a
 defendant and to deter other possible defendants from engaging in the same
 conduct, not to compensate the injured plaintiff;
 (3) the arbitrariness and unpredictability of recent punitive damage
 awards have undermined the courts' ability to effective penalize and deter
 wrongful conduct;
 (4) although State legislatures and the United States Supreme Court
 have acknowledged many of the problems associated with punitive damages,
 meaningful reform has been elusive;
 (5) arbitrary or inflated punitive damage awards have increased litigation,
 particularly at the appellate level, and have increased forum shopping;
 (6) dramatic increases in punitive damages awards have increased the costs of
 consumer goods and reduced incentives for corporate research and development;
 (7) State and Federal courts have contained to uphold awards in cases
 in which defendants' conduct falls short of the intentionally injurious
 behavior that should characterize a case for punitive damages, and this
 has eroded public confidence in the fairness of the judicial system;
 (8) for many of the same reasons that judges in criminal cases determine
 sentencing when juries have determined guilt, civil judges should determine
 punitive damage awards when juries have determined liability for such
 damages; and
 (9) the threat of punitive damage awards under various State laws imposes
 a substantial burden on interstate and foreign commerce.
 (b) PURPOSES- The purposes of this Act are--
 (1) to restore the original purposes of an award of punitive damages by
 making deterrence and punishment the award's primary functions;
 (2) to discourage unnecessary litigation of claims in hopes of obtaining
 excessive and unwarranted punitive damage awards;
 (3) to promote the efficient settlement and adjudication of claims without
 the wasteful transaction costs of unnecessary litigation; and
 (4) to establish fair procedures and substantive standards for the award
 of punitive fines.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 In this Act:
 `Claim arising under Federal law' means a claim in a civil action brought
 in Federal or State court that is based on a provision of the United
 States Constitution, a statute of the United States, or a regulation
 issued thereunder.
 `Claim governed by this Act' means a claim that--
 (1) arises under Federal law; or
 (2) involves commerce within Federal jurisdiction,
with respect to which a punitive fine is sought.
 `Claim involving commerce within Federal jurisdiction' means a claim in
 a civil action brought in Federal court--
 (1) that is in, or affects, commerce within Federal jurisdiction; or
 (2) the disposition of which has affected or will affect commerce within
 Federal jurisdiction.
 `Clear and convincing evidence' means evidence that leaves no serious or
 substantial doubt about the correctness of the conclusions drawn from the
 evidence. It is more than a preponderance of the evidence but less than
 evidence beyond a reasonable doubt.
 `Commerce within Federal jurisdiction' means trade, traffic, transportation,
 transmission, or communication--
 (1) between a point in a State and a point outside the State;
 (2) between points in a State through a point outside the State; or
 (3) within the District of Columbia or a possession of the United States.
 `Economic damages' means damages that are intended to compensate for
 pecuniary expenses, including those arising from--
 (1) medical expenses and medical care;
 (2) rehabilitation services;
 (3) custodial care;
 (4) loss of earnings and earning capacity;
 (5) loss of income;
 (6) burial costs;
 (7) loss of use of property;
 (8) costs of repair or replacement of property;
 (9) costs of obtaining substitute services;
 (10) loss of employment; and
 (11) loss of business or employment opportunities.
 `Malice' means--
 (1) intent to cause serious tangible or intangible injury to a person or
 property; or
 (2) conscious indifference to the safety, health, or other interests of
 another person, with actual awareness that certain conduct will likely result
 in serious tangible or intangible injury to another person or property.
 `Nominal damages' means damages of any kind to the extent that the
 total amount of all economic damages and noneconomic damages awarded to
 a plaintiff with respect to a claim based on a single act or omission of
 a defendant is less than $500.
 `Noneconomic damages' means damages for--
 (1) pain;
 (2) suffering;
 (3) inconvenience;
 (4) physical impairment;
 (5) disfigurement;
 (6) mental anguish;
 (7) emotional distress;
 (8) loss of society and companionship;
 (9) loss of consortium;
 (10) injury to reputation;
 (11) humiliation; and
 (12) any other noneconomic injury under any theory of damages such as fear
 of loss, illness, or injury.
 `Person' means a natural person, corporation, company, association, firm,
 partnership, society, joint stock company, or any other entity, including
 a governmental entity or unincorporated association of persons.
 `Punitive damages' means damages that are awarded against a defendant
 because of aggravating circumstances in order to penalize the defendant for
 the defendant's past conduct and to deter similar conduct by the defendant
 and others in the future, and does not include--
 `(1) economic damages;
 `(2) noneconomic damages;
 `(3) nominal damages;
 `(4) multiple damages under a statute that provides for an award in an
 amount that is a multiple of damages to which a plaintiff would otherwise
 be entitled; or
 `(5) liquidated damages.
 `Punitive fine' means a punitive fine assessed under section 5.
 `State' includes a State of the United States, the District of Columbia,
 Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Guam, Wake Island, and the
 outer Continental Shelf (as defined in section 2 of the Outer Continental
 Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1331)).
SEC. 4. ABOLISHMENT OF PUNITIVE DAMAGES.
 Punitive damages shall not be awarded with respect to a claim governed by
 this Act.
SEC. 5. PUNITIVE FINES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- If the requirements of subsection (b) are met, a court may
 assess a punitive fine with respect to a claim governed by this Act that
 is a claim with respect to which punitive damages were available prior to
 the date of enactment of this Act.
 (b) PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS- The requirements of this
 subsection are as follows:
 (1) PLEADING-
 (A) AMOUNT- The plaintiff shall plead that a punitive fine is sought.
 (B) PRIMA FACIE CASE- A prayer for a punitive fine shall be stricken prior
 to trial unless the plaintiff presents to the court, at least 30 days prior
 to trial, prima facie evidence sufficient to sustain the assessment of
 a punitive fine under this section.
 (2) ELEMENTS OF PROOF FOR ASSESSMENT OF PUNITIVE FINE-
 (A) IN GENERAL- A punitive fine shall not be assessed against a defendant
 with respect to a claim governed by this Act unless--
 (i) the court finds that punishment and deterrence are warranted by the
 facts and circumstances of the case;
 (ii) the plaintiff establishes by clear and convincing evidence that,
 relative to the act or omission on which the claim is based, the defendant
 or, subject to subparagraph (B), the defendant's agent, acted with malice;
 and
 (iii) the plaintiff establishes by clear and convincing evidence all other
 facts necessary to support the assessment of a punitive fine.
 (B) LIABILITY OF PRINCIPAL- A punitive fine shall not be assessed against a
 principal for an act or omission of its agent or employee unless a plaintiff
 shall establish by clear and convincing evidence that--
 (i) the agent or employee acted with malice relative to the act or omission
 on which the claim is based; and
 (ii) a superior officer of the principal, in the exercise of policymaking
 authority, authorized, participated in, or ratified the act or omission.
 (C) NEGLIGENCE- The burden of proof established by subparagraphs (A) and
 (B)(i) is not satisfied by proof of any degree of negligence or gross
 negligence.
 (3) NECESSITY OF AWARD OF ECONOMIC OR NONECONOMIC DAMAGES IN EXCESS OF
 NOMINAL DAMAGES- A punitive fine shall not be awarded with respect to a
 claim unless economic or noneconomic damages (or a combination thereof)
 in excess of nominal damages are awarded with respect to that claim.
 (4) DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The court shall determine the liability of a defendant for
 a punitive fine unless the question of liability for punitive damages on
 a claim with respect to which the punitive fine is sought is a question
 that was required to be referred to a jury prior to the date of enactment
 of this Act, in which case the question shall be decided by a jury.
 (B) SPECIAL INTERROGATORY- A jury that determines the liability of a
 defendant for a punitive fine under subparagraph (A) shall be required to
 answer the following special interrogatory: `Has the plaintiff shown by
 clear and convincing evidence that the act or omission of the defendant
 on which the claim is based was performed with malice, rather than being
 performed through mere negligence or gross negligence?'.
 (5) AMOUNT OF PUNITIVE FINE-
 (A) IN GENERAL- If the requirements of paragraphs (1), (2), (3), and (4)
 are satisfied, the court may assess a punitive fine. The amount of such
 fine shall be sufficient to punish the defendant for the defendant's past
 conduct on which the claim is based and to deter the defendant and others
 from engaging in similar conduct in the future.
 (B) FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED- In determining the amount of a punitive fine,
 the court shall take into account--
 (i) the extent of the harm that has resulted and may result from the
 defendant's wrongful conduct;
 (ii) the degree of reprehensibility of the defendant's conduct, the duration
 of the conduct, the defendant's awareness of the conduct, any concealment
 of the conduct, and the existence and frequency of similar past conduct;
 (iii) the profitability to the defendant of the wrongful conduct and
 desirability of removing that profit;
 (iv) the effect of the punitive fine on the economic viability of the
 defendant; and
 (v) the losses in employment that might occur as a result of the assessment.
 (6) BIFURCATION-
 (A) IN GENERAL- At the request of any party, a claim governed by this Act
 that is tried before a jury shall be conducted in a bifurcated trial,
 before the same jury in both phases, unless a party demonstrates that
 the interest of avoiding the additional time and expense of conducting a
 bifurcated trial significantly outweighs the benefits of fairness to the
 requesting party in conducting a bifurcated trial.
 (B) FIRST PHASE- (i) In the first phase of a bifurcated trial, the jury
 shall determine--
 (I) the liability of the defendant for economic and noneconomic damages; and
 (II) the amount, if any, of economic damages, noneconomic damages, or
 nominal damages to be awarded to the plaintiff.
 (ii) Evidence relevant only to the question whether a punitive fine should
 be assessed or the amount of such a fine shall not be admissible in the
 first phase of a bifurcated trial.
 (C) SECOND PHASE- In the second phase of a bifurcated trial--
 (i) the jury, after hearing any evidence that is relevant only to the
 question whether a punitive fine should be assessed, shall determine that
 question; and
 (ii) the court, after hearing any evidence that is relevant only to the
 amount of a punitive fine, shall determine the amount of the fine in
 accordance with paragraph (5).
 (7) SEVERAL LIABILITY-
 (A) IN GENERAL- When a claim governed by this Act is brought against
 more than one defendant, a punitive fine shall be assessed against each
 defendant specifically, and each defendant shall be liable only for the
 amount of the assessment made against that defendant.
 (B) RELATIVE DEGREE OF CULPABILITY- The amounts of punitive fines assessed
 against each defendant under subparagraph (A), including defendants who
 are a principal and the principal's agent or employee, shall be based on
 the relative degrees of culpability of each defendant.
SEC. 6. AVAILABILITY OF PUNITIVE DAMAGES.
 Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to create any claim for
 punitive damages or a punitive fine for which punitive damages were not
 available prior to the date of enactment of this Act.
SEC. 7. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 This Act shall be effective with respect to any claim in a civil action that
 is made on or after the date that is 120 days after the date of enactment
 of this Act without regard to whether the claim arose prior to the date
 of enactment of this Act.