[Congressional Bills 104th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]
[S. 609 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

104th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 S. 609

 To assure fairness and choice to patients and health care providers, 
 and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 March 23, 1995

 Mr. Wellstone introduced the following bill; which was read twice and 
 referred to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To assure fairness and choice to patients and health care providers, 
 and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Health Care 
Quality and Fairness Act of 1995.''
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act are as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Definitions.
 TITLE I--PROTECTION OF CONSUMER CHOICE

Sec. 101. Protection of consumer choice.
Sec. 102. Enrollment.
 TITLE II--OFFICE FOR CONSUMER INFORMATION, COUNSELING AND ASSISTANCE

Sec. 201. Establishment.
 TITLE III--UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT

Sec. 301. Definitions.
Sec. 302. Requirement for utilization review program.
Sec. 303. Standards for utilization review.
 TITLE IV--HEALTH PLAN STANDARDS

Sec. 401. Health plan standards.
Sec. 402. Minimum solvency requirements.
Sec. 403. Information on terms of plan.
Sec. 404. Access.
Sec. 405. Credentialing for health professionals.
Sec. 406. Grievance procedures.
Sec. 407. Confidentiality standards.
Sec. 408. Discrimination.
Sec. 409. Prohibition on selective marketing.
 TITLE V--HEALTH INSURANCE MARKET REFORM

Sec. 501. Guaranteed issue and renewability.
Sec. 502. Nondiscrimination based on health status.
Sec. 503. Adjustments based on age, geography and family size.
Sec. 504. Risk adjustment.
Sec. 505. Lifetime limits.
Sec. 506. Patient's right to self-determination.
Sec. 507. Affect on State law.
Sec. 508. Association plans.
 TITLE VI--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Sec. 601. Enforcement.
Sec. 602. Effective date.

SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.

 Unless specifically provided otherwise, as used in this Act:
 (1) Carrier.--The term ``carrier'' means a licensed 
 insurance company, a hospital or medical service corporation 
 (including an existing Blue Cross or Blue Shield organization, 
 within the meaning of section 833(c)(2) of Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986 as in effect before the date of the enactment of 
 this Act), a health maintenance organization, or other entity 
 licensed or certified by the State to provide health insurance 
 or health benefits.
 (2) Covered individual.--The term ``covered individual'' 
 means a member, enrollee, subscriber, covered life, patient or 
 other individual eligible to receive benefits under a health 
 plan.
 (3) Dependent.--The term ``dependent'' means a spouse or 
 child (including an adopted child) of an enrollee in a health 
 plan who is financially dependent upon the enrollee.
 (4) Emergency services.--The term ``emergency services'' 
 means those health care services that are provided to a patient 
 after the sudden onset of a medical condition that manifests 
 itself by symptoms of sufficient severity, including severe 
 pain, and the absence of such immediate medical attention could 
 reasonably be expected, to result in--
 (A) placing the patient's health in serious 
 jeopardy;
 (B) serious impairment to bodily function; or
 (C) serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or 
 part.
 (5) Health plan.--The term ``health plan'' includes any 
 organization that seeks to arrange for, or provide for the 
 financing and coordinated delivery of, health care services 
 directly or through a contracted health professional panel, and 
 shall include health maintenance organizations, preferred 
 provider organizations, single service health maintenance 
 organizations, single service preferred provider organizations, 
 other entities such as physician-hospital or hospital-physician 
 organizations, employee welfare benefit plans (as defined in 
 section 3(1) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(1)), and multiple employer welfare plans 
 or other association plans, as well as carriers.
 (6) Health professional.--The term ``health professional'' 
 means individuals who are licensed, certified, accredited, or 
 otherwise credentialed to provide health care items and 
 services as authorized under State law.
 (7) Managed care plan.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``managed care plan'' 
 means a plan operated by a managed care entity (as 
 defined in subparagraph (B)), that provides for the 
 financing and delivery of health care services to 
 persons enrolled in such plan through--
 (i) arrangements with selected providers to 
 furnish health care services;
 (ii) explicit standards for the selection 
 of participating providers;
 (iii) organizational arrangements for 
 ongoing quality assurance, utilization review 
 programs, and dispute resolution; and
 (iv) financial incentives for persons 
 enrolled in the plan to use the participating 
 providers and procedures provided for by the 
 plan.
 (B) Managed care entity.--The term ``managed care 
 entity'' includes a licensed insurance company, 
 hospital or medical service plan (including physician 
 and physician-hospital networks), health maintenance 
 organization, an employer or employee organization, or 
 a managed care contractor (as defined in subparagraph 
 (C)), that operates a managed care plan.
 (C) Managed care contractor.--The term ``managed 
 care contractor'' means a person that--
 (i) establishes, operates, or maintains a 
 network of participating providers;
 (ii) conducts or arranges for utilization 
 review activities; and
 (iii) contracts with an insurance company, 
 a hospital or medical service plan, an 
 employer, an employee organization, or any 
 other entity providing coverage for health care 
 services to operate a managed care plan.
 (8) Physician.--The term ``physician'' means a doctor of 
 medicine, a doctor of osteopathy, or a doctor of allopathy.
 (9) Provider.--The term ``provider'' means a physician, an 
 organized group of physicians, a facility or any other health 
 care professional licensed or certified by the State, where 
 licensure or certification is required.
 (10) Provider network.--The term ``provider network'' 
 means, with respect to a health plan that restricts access, 
 those providers who have entered into a contract or agreement 
 with the plan under which such providers are obligated to 
 provide items and services under the plan to eligible 
 individuals enrolled in the plan, or have an agreement to 
 provide services on a fee-for-service basis.
 (11) Point-of-service plan.--The term ``point-of-service 
 plan'' means a plan that offers services to enrollees through a 
 provider network and also offers additional services or access 
 to care by network or non-network providers.
 (12) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (13) Small group market.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``small group market'' 
 means, with respect to a calendar year, employers 
 (including sole proprietorships, firms, corporations, 
 partnerships, or associations actively engaged in 
 business) that, on at least 50 percent of its business 
 days, employ at least one but not more than 50 
 employees. In determining the number of employees for 
 purposes of this paragraph, entities that are 
 affiliated, or that are eligible to file a combined tax 
 return, shall be considered as a single employer.
 (B) Application of provisions.--Except as 
 specifically provided otherwise, the requirements of 
 this Act that apply to an employer in the small group 
 market shall continue to apply to such employer through 
the end of the rating period in which the employer has failed to meet 
the requirements of subparagraph (A).
 (14) Specialized treatment expertise.--The term 
 ``specialized treatment expertise'' means expertise in 
 diagnosing and treating unusual diseases and condition, 
 diagnosing and treating diseases and conditions that are 
 usually difficult to diagnose or treat, and providing other 
 specialized health care.
 (15) Sponsor.--The term ``sponsor'' means a carrier or 
 employer that provides a health plan.
 (16) Traditional insurance plan.--The term ``traditional 
 insurance plan'' includes plans that offer a health benefits 
 package and that pay for medical services on a fee-for-service 
 basis using a usual, customary, or reasonable payment 
 methodology or a resource based relative value schedule, 
 usually linked to an annual deductible and/or coinsurance 
 payment on each allowed amount.
 (17) Utilization review.--The term ``utilization review'' 
 means a set of formal techniques designed to monitor and 
 evaluate the clinical necessity, appropriateness and efficiency 
 of health care services, procedures, providers and facilities. 
 Techniques may include ambulatory review, prospective review, 
 second opinion, certification, concurrent review, case 
 management, discharge planning and retrospective review.

 TITLE I--PROTECTION OF CONSUMER CHOICE

SEC. 101. PROTECTION OF CONSUMER CHOICE.

 (a) In General.--Each employer, including a self-insured employer, 
who offers, provides, or makes available to employees a health plan 
must provide to each such employee a choice of health plans as required 
under subsection (b).
 (b) Offering of Plans.--Each employer referred to in subsection (a) 
shall include among its health plan offerings at least one of each of 
the following types of health plans, where available:
 (1) A managed care plan, including a health maintenance 
 organization or preferred provider organization.
 (2) A point-of-service plan.
 (3) A traditional insurance plan (as defined in section 2).

SEC. 102. ENROLLMENT.

 Each employer including a self-insured employer, who offers, 
provides, or makes available a health plan shall establish a process 
for enrollment in such plan which consists of--
 (1) a general annual open enrollment period of at least 30 
 days; and
 (2) special open enrollment periods for changes in 
 enrollment as required by the Secretary.

 TITLE II--OFFICE FOR CON- SUMER INFORMATION, COUNSELING AND ASSISTANCE

SEC. 201. ESTABLISHMENT.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall award a grant to each State 
for the establishment of an Office for Consumer Information, Counseling 
and Assistance (hereafter referred to in this section as the 
``Office'') in each such State. Each such Office shall perform public 
outreach and provide education and assistance concerning consumer 
rights with respect to health insurance as provided for in subsection 
(d).
 (b) Use of Grant.--
 (1) In general.--A State shall use a grant under this 
 section--
 (A) to administer the Office and carry out the 
 duties described in subsection (d);
 (B) to solicit and award contracts to private, 
 nonprofit organizations applying to the State to 
 administer the Office and carry out the duties 
 described in subsection (d); or
 (C) in the case of a State operating a consumer 
 information counseling and assistance program on the 
 date of enactment of this Act, to expand and improve 
 such program.
 (2) Contracts.--With respect to the contract described in 
 paragraph (1)(B), the contract period shall be not less than 2 
 years and not more than 4 years.
 (c) Staff.--A State shall ensure that the Office has sufficient 
staff (including volunteers) and local offices throughout the State to 
carry out its duties under this section and a demonstrated ability to 
represent and work with a broad spectrum of consumers, including 
vulnerable and underserved populations.
 (d) Duties.--An Office established under this section shall--
 (1) establish a State-wide toll-free hotline to enable 
 consumers to contact the Office;
 (2) have the ability to provide appropriate assistance 
 under this subsection to individuals with limited English 
 language ability;
 (3) develop outreach programs to provide health insurance 
 information, counseling, and assistance;
 (4) provide outreach and education relating to consumer 
 rights and responsibilities under this Act, including the 
 rights and services available through the Office;
 (5) provide individuals with assistance in enrolling in 
 health plans (including providing plan comparisons) or in 
 obtaining services or reimbursements from health plans;
 (6) provide individuals with assistance in filing 
 applications for appropriate State health plan premium 
 assistance programs;
 (7) provide individuals with information concerning 
 existing grievance procedures and institute systems of referral 
 to appropriate Federal or State departments or agencies for 
 assistance with problems related to insurance coverage 
 (including legal problems);
 (8) ensure that regular and timely access is provided to 
 the services available through the Office;
 (9) implement training programs for staff members 
 (including volunteer staff members) and collect and disseminate 
 timely and accurate health care information to staff members;
 (10) not less than once each year, conduct public hearings 
 to identify and address community health care needs;
 (11) coordinate its activities with the staff of the 
 appropriate departments and agencies of the State government 
 and other appropriate entities within the State; and
 (12) carry out any other activities determined appropriate 
 by the Secretary.
 (e) State Duties.--
 (1) Access to information.--The State shall ensure that, 
 for purposes of carrying out the duties of the Office, the 
 Office has appropriate access to relevant information, subject 
 to the application of procedures to ensure confidentiality of 
 enrollee and proprietary health plan information.
 (2) Reporting and evaluation requirements.--
 (A) Report.--The Office shall annually prepare and 
 submit to the State a report on the nature and patterns 
 of consumer complaints received by the Office during 
 the year for which the report is prepared. Such report 
 shall contain any policy, regulatory, and legislative 
 recommendations for improvements in the activities of 
 the Office together with a record of the activities of 
 the Office.
 (B) Evaluation.--The State shall annually evaluate 
 the quality and effectiveness of the Office in carrying 
 out the activities described in subsection (d).
 (3) Conflicts of interest.--The State shall ensure that no 
 individual involved in selecting the entity with which to enter 
 into a contract under subsection (b)(1)(B), or involved in the 
 operation of the Office, or any delegate of the Office, is 
 subject to a conflict of interest.
 (f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.

 TITLE III--UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT

SEC. 301. DEFINITIONS.

 As used in this title:
 (1) Adverse determination.--The term ``adverse 
 determination'' means a determination that an admission to or 
 continued stay at a hospital or that another health care 
 service that is required has been reviewed and, based upon the 
 information provided, does not meet the clinical requirements 
 for medical necessity, appropriateness, level of care, or 
 effectiveness.
 (2) Ambulatory review.--The term ``ambulatory review'' 
 means utilization review of health care services performed or 
 provided in an outpatient setting.
 (3) Appeals procedure.--The term ``appeals procedure'' 
 means a formal process under which a covered individual (or an 
 individual acting on behalf of a covered individual), attending 
 physician, facility or applicable health care provider may 
 appeal an adverse utilization review decision rendered by the 
 health plan or its designee utilization review organization.
 (4) Case management.--The term ``case management'' means a 
 coordinated set of activities conducted for the individual 
 patient management of serious, complicated, protracted or 
 chronic health conditions that provides cost-effective and 
 benefit-maximizing treatments for extremely resource-intensive 
 conditions.
 (5) Clinical review criteria.--The term ``clinical review 
 criteria'' means the recorded (written or otherwise) screening 
 procedures, decision abstracts, clinical protocols and practice 
 guidelines used by the health plan to determine necessity and 
 appropriateness of health care services.
 (6) Concurrent review.--The term ``concurrent review'' 
 means utilization review conducted during a patient's hospital 
 stay or course of treatment.
 (7) Discharge planning.--The term ``discharge planning'' 
 means the formal process for determining, coordinating and 
 managing the care a patient receives following the discharge of 
 the patient from a facility.
 (8) Facility.--The term ``facility'' means an institution 
 or health care setting providing the prescribed health care 
 services under review. Such term includes hospitals and other 
 licensed inpatient facilities, ambulatory surgical or treatment 
 centers, skilled nursing facilities, residential treatment 
 centers, diagnostic, laboratory and imaging centers and 
 rehabilitation and other therapeutic health care settings.
 (9) Prospective review.--The term ``prospective review'' 
 means utilization review conducted prior to an admission or a 
 course of treatment.
 (10) Retrospective review.--The term ``retrospective 
 review'' means utilization review conducted after health care 
 services have been provided to a patient. Such term does not 
 include the retrospective review of a claim that is limited to 
 an evaluation of reimbursement levels, veracity of 
 documentation, accuracy of coding and adjudication for payment.
 (11) Second opinion.--The term ``second opinion'' means an 
 opportunity or requirement to obtain a clinical evaluation by a 
 provider other than the provider originally making a 
 recommendation for a proposed health service to assess the 
 clinical necessity and appropriateness of the initial proposed 
 health service.
 (12) Utilization review organization.--The term 
 ``utilization review organization'' means an entity that 
 conducts utilization review.

SEC. 302. REQUIREMENT FOR UTILIZATION REVIEW PROGRAM.

 A health plan shall have in place a utilization review program that 
meets the requirements of this title and that is certified by the 
State.

SEC. 303. STANDARDS FOR UTILIZATION REVIEW.

 (a) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish standards for the 
establishment, operation, and certification and periodic 
recertification of health plan utilization review programs.
 (b) Alternative Standards.--
 (1) In general.--A State may certify a health plan as 
 meeting the standards established under subsection (a) if the 
 State determines that the health plan has met the utilization 
 standards required for accreditation as applied by a nationally 
 recognized, independent, nonprofit accreditation entity.
 (2) Review by state.--A State that makes a determination 
 under paragraph (1) shall periodically review the standards 
 used by the private accreditation entity to ensure that such 
 standards meet or exceed the standards established by the 
 Secretary under this title.
 (c) Utilization Review Program Requirements.--The standards 
developed by the Secretary under subsection (a) shall require that 
utilization review programs comply with the following:
 (1) Documentation.--A health plan shall provide a written 
 description of the utilization review program of the plan, 
 including a description of--
 (A) the delegated and nondelegated activities under 
 the program;
 (B) the policies and procedures used under the 
 program to evaluate medical necessity; and
 (C) the clinical review criteria, information 
 sources, and the process used to review and approve the 
 provision of medical services under the program.
 (2) Prohibition.--With respect to the administration of the 
 utilization review program, a health plan may not employ 
 utilization reviewers or contract with a utilization management 
 organization if the conditions of employment or the contract 
 terms include financial incentives to reduce or limit the 
 medically necessary or appropriate services provided to covered 
 individuals.
 (3) Review and modification.--A health plan shall develop 
 procedures for periodically reviewing and modifying the 
 utilization review of the plan. Such procedures shall provide 
 for the participation of providers in the health plan in the 
 development and review of utilization review policies and 
 procedures.
 (4) Decision protocols.--
 (A) In general.--A utilization review program shall 
 develop and apply recorded (written or otherwise) 
 utilization review decision protocols. Such protocols 
 shall be based on sound medical evidence.
 (B) Protocol criteria.--The clinical review 
 criteria used under the utilization review decision 
 protocols to assess the appropriateness of medical 
 services shall be clearly documented and available to 
 participating health professionals upon request. Such 
 protocols shall include a mechanism for assessing the 
 consistency of the application of the criteria used 
 under the protocols across reviewers, and a mechanism 
 for periodically updating such criteria.
 (5) Review and decisions.--
 (A) Review.--The procedures applied under a 
 utilization review program with respect to the 
 preauthorization and concurrent review of the necessity 
 and appropriateness of medical items, services or 
 procedures, shall require that qualified medical 
 professionals supervise review decisions. With respect 
 to a decision to deny the provision of medical items, 
 services or procedures, a physician shall conduct a 
 subsequent review to determine the medical 
 appropriateness of such a denial. Board certified 
 physicians from the appropriate specialty areas of 
 medicine and surgery shall be utilized in the review 
 process as needed.
 (B) Decisions.--All utilization review decisions 
 shall be made in a timely manner, as determined 
 appropriate when considering the urgency of the 
 situation.
 (C) Adverse determinations.--With respect to 
 utilization review, an adverse determination or 
 noncertification of an admission, continued stay, or 
 service shall be clearly documented, including the 
 specific clinical or other reason for the adverse 
 determination or noncertification, and be available to 
 the covered individual and the affected provider or 
 facility. A health plan may not deny or limit coverage 
 with respect to a service that the enrollee has already 
 received solely on the basis of lack of prior 
 authorization or second opinion, to the extent that the 
 service would have otherwise been covered by the plan 
 had such prior authorization or a second opinion been 
 obtained.
 (D) Notification of denial.--A health plan shall 
 provide a covered individual with timely notice of an 
 adverse determination or noncertification of an 
 admission, continued stay, or service. Such a 
 notification shall include information concerning the 
 utilization review program appeals procedure.
 (6) Requests for authorization.--A health plan utilization 
 review program shall ensure that requests by covered 
 individuals or physicians for prior authorization of a 
 nonemergency service shall be answered in a timely manner after 
 such request is received. If utilization review personnel are 
 not available in a timely fashion, any medical services 
 provided shall be considered approved.
 (7) New technologies.--A utilization review program shall 
 implement policies and procedures to evaluate the appropriate 
 use of new medical technologies or new applications of 
 established technologies, including medical procedures, drugs, 
 and devices. The program shall ensure that appropriate 
 professionals participate in the development of technology 
 evaluation criteria.
 (8) Special rule.--Where prior authorization for a service 
 or other covered item is obtained under a program under this 
 section, the service shall be considered to be covered unless 
 there was fraud or incorrect information provided at the time 
 such prior authorization was obtained. If a provider supplied 
 the incorrect information that led to the authorization of 
 medically unnecessary care, the provider shall be prohibited 
 from collecting payment directly from the enrollee, and shall 
 reimburse the plan and subscriber for any payments or 
 copayments the provider may have received.
 (d) Health Plan Requirements.--
 (1) Disclosure of information.--
 (A) Prospective covered individuals.--A health plan 
 shall, with respect to any materials distributed to 
 prospective covered individuals, include a summary of 
 the utilization review procedures of the plan.
 (B) Covered individuals.--A health plan shall, with 
 respect to any materials distributed to newly covered 
 individuals, include a clear and comprehensive 
 description of utilization review procedures of the 
 plan and a statement of patient rights and 
 responsibilities with respect to such procedures.
 (C) State officials.--
 (i) In general.--A health plan shall 
 disclose to the State insurance commissioner, 
 or other designated State official, the health 
 plan utilization review program policies, 
procedures, and reports required by the State for certification.
 (ii) Streamlining of procedures.--To the 
 extent practicable, a State shall implement 
 procedures to streamline the process by which a 
 health plan documents compliance with the 
 requirements of this Act, including procedures 
 to condense the number of documents filed with 
 the State concerning such compliance.
 (2) Toll-free number.--A health plan shall have a 
 membership card which shall have printed on the card the toll-
 free telephone number that a covered individual should call to 
 receive precertification utilization review decisions.
 (3) Evaluation.--A health plan shall establish mechanisms 
 to evaluate the effects of the utilization review program of 
 the plan through the use of member satisfaction data or through 
 other appropriate means.
 (e) Emergency Care.--
 (1) In general.--A health plan shall provide coverage for 
 emergency services provided to an enrollee without regard to 
 whether the health professional or provider furnishing such 
 services has a contractual (or other arrangement) with the 
 plan.
 (2) Preauthorization.--With respect to emergency services 
 furnished in a hospital emergency department, a health plan 
 shall not require prior authorization for the provision of such 
 services if the enrollee arrived at the emergency department 
 with symptoms that reasonably suggested an emergency medical 
 condition, regardless of whether the hospital was affiliated 
 with the health plan. All procedures performed during the 
 evaluation and treatment of an emergency condition shall be 
 covered under the health plan.

 TITLE IV--HEALTH PLAN STANDARDS

SEC. 401. HEALTH PLAN STANDARDS.

 (a) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish standards for the 
certification and periodic recertification of health plans, including 
standards which require plans to meet the requirements of this title.
 (b) State Certification.--
 (1) In general.--A State shall provide for the 
 certification of health plans if the certifying authority 
 designated by the State determines that the plan meets the 
 applicable requirements of this Act.
 (2) Requirement.--Effective on January 1, 1997, a health 
 plan sponsor may only offer a health plan in a State if such 
 plan is certified by the State under paragraph (1).
 (c) Construction.--Whenever in this title a requirement or standard 
is imposed on a health plan, the requirement or standard is deemed to 
have been imposed on the sponsor of the plan in relation to that plan.

SEC. 402. MINIMUM SOLVENCY REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), each State 
shall apply minimum solvency requirements to all health plans offered 
or operating with the State. A health plan shall meet the financial 
reserve requirements that are established by the State to assure proper 
payment for health care services provided under the plan.
 (b) Federal Standards.--The Secretary shall establish minimum 
solvency standards that shall apply to all self-insured health plans. 
Such standards shall at least meet the solvency requirements 
established by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners.

SEC. 403. INFORMATION ON TERMS OF PLAN.

 (a) In General.--A health plan shall provide prospective covered 
individuals with written information concerning the terms and 
conditions of the health plan to enable such individuals to make 
informed decisions with respect to a certain system of health care 
delivery. Such information shall be standardized so that prospective 
covered individuals may compare the attributes of all such plans 
offered within the coverage area.
 (b) Understandability.--Information provided under this section, 
whether written or oral shall be easily understandable, truthful, 
linguistically appropriate and objective with respect to the terms 
used. Descriptions provided in such information shall be consistent 
with standards developed for supplemental insurance coverage under 
title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
 (c) Required Information.--Information required under this section 
shall include information concerning--
 (1) coverage provisions, benefits, and any exclusions by 
 category of service or product;
 (2) plan loss ratios with an explanation that such ratios 
 reflect the percentage of the premiums expended for health 
 services;
 (3) prior authorization or other review requirements 
 including preauthorization review, concurrent review, post-
 service review, post-payment review and procedures that may 
 lead the patient to be denied coverage for, or not be provided, 
 a particular service or product;
 (4) an explanation of how plan design impacts enrollees, 
 including information on the financial responsibility of 
 covered individuals for payment for coinsurance or other out-
 of-plan services;
 (5) covered individual satisfaction statistics, including 
 disenrollment statistics;
 (6) advance directives and organ donation;
 (7) the characteristics and availability of health care 
 professionals and institutions participating in the plan, 
 including descriptions of the financial arrangements or 
 contractual provisions with hospitals, utilization review 
 organizations, physicians, or any other provider of health care 
 services that would affect the services offered, referral or 
 treatment options, or physician's fiduciary responsibility to 
 patients, including financial incentives regarding the 
 provision of medical or other services; and
 (8) quality indicators for the plan and for participating 
 health professionals and providers under the plan, including 
 population-based statistics such as immunization rates and 
 performance measures such as survival after surgery, adjusted 
 for case mix.

SEC. 404. ACCESS.

 (a) In General.--A health plan shall demonstrate that the plan has 
a sufficient number, distribution, and variety of qualified health care 
providers to ensure that all covered health care services will be 
available and accessible in a timely manner to adults, infants, 
children, and individuals with disabilities enrolled in the plan.
 (b) Availability of Services.--A health plan shall ensure that 
services covered under the plan are available in a timely manner that 
ensures a continuity of care, are accessible within a reasonable 
proximity to the residences of the enrollees, are available within 
reasonable hours of operation, and include emergency and urgent care 
services when medically necessary and available which shall be 
accessible within the service area 24-hours a day, seven days a week.
 (c) Specialized Treatment.--A health plan shall demonstrate that 
plan enrollees have access, when medically or clinically indicated in 
the judgment of the treating health professional, to specialized 
treatment expertise.
 (d) Chronic Conditions.--
 (1) In general.--Any process established by a health plan 
 to coordinate care and control costs may not impose an undue 
 burden on enrollees with chronic health conditions. The plan 
 shall ensure a continuity of care and shall, when medically or 
 clinically indicated in the judgment of the treating health 
 professional, ensure direct access to relevant specialists for 
 continued care.
 (2) Care coordinator.--In the case of an enrollee who has a 
 severe, complex, or chronic condition, the health plan shall 
 determine, based on the judgment of the treating health 
 professional, whether it is medically or clinically necessary 
 or appropriate to use a care coordinator from an 
 interdisciplinary team or a specialist to ensure continuity of 
 care.
 (e) Requirement.--
 (1) In general.--The requirements of this section may not 
 be waived and shall be met in all areas where the health plan 
 has enrollees, including rural areas. With respect to children, 
 such services shall include pediatric services.
 (2) Out-of-network services.--If a health plan fails to 
 meet the requirements of this section, the plan shall arrange 
 for the provision of out-of-network services to enrollees in a 
 manner that provides enrollees with access to services in 
 accordance with this section.

SEC. 405. CREDENTIALING FOR HEALTH PROFESSIONALS.

 (a) In General.--A health plan shall credential health 
professionals furnishing health care services under the plan.
 (b) Credentialing Process.--
 (1) In general.--A health plan shall establish a 
 credentialing process. Such process shall ensure that a health 
 professional is credentialed prior to that professional being 
 listed as a health professional in the health plan's marketing 
 materials, in accordance with recorded (written or otherwise) 
 policies and procedures.
 (2) Responsibility of medical director.--The medical 
 director of the health plan, or another designated health 
 professional, shall have responsibility for the credentialing 
 of health professionals under the plan.
 (3) Uniform applications.--A State shall develop a basic 
 uniform application that shall be used by all health plans in 
 the State for credentialing purposes.
 (4) Credentialing committee.--
 (A) Establishment.--The health plan shall establish 
 a credentialing committee that shall be composed of 
 licensed physicians and other health professionals to 
 review credentialing information and supporting 
documents.
 (B) Requirement.--The credentialing process shall 
 provide for the review of an application for 
 credentialing by a credentialing committee with 
 appropriate representation of the applicant's medical 
 specialty.
 (5) Standards.--
 (A) In general.--Credentialing decisions under a 
 health plan shall be based on objective standards with 
 input from health professionals credentialed under the 
 plan. Information concerning all application and 
 credentialing policies and procedures shall be made 
 available for review by the health professional 
 involved upon written request.
 (B) Requirement.--The standards referred to in 
 subparagraph (A) shall include determinations as to--
 (i) whether the health professional has a 
 current valid license to practice the 
 particular health profession involved;
 (ii) whether the health professional has 
 clinical privileges in good standing at the 
 hospital designated by the practitioner and the 
 primary admitting facility, as applicable;
 (iii) whether the health professional has a 
 valid DEA or CDS certificate, as applicable;
 (iv) whether the health professional has 
 graduated from medical school and completed a 
 residency, or received Board certification, as 
 applicable;
 (v) the work history of the health 
 professional;
 (vi) whether the health professional has 
 current, adequate malpractice insurance in 
 accordance with the policy of the health plan; 
 and
 (vii) the professional liability claims 
 history of the health professional.
 (C) Right to review information.--A health 
 professional who undergoes the credentialing process 
 shall have the right to review the basis information, 
 including the sources of that information, that was 
 used to meet the designated credentialing criteria.

SEC. 406. GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES.

 (a) In General.--A health plan shall adopt a timely and organized 
system for resolving complaints and formal grievances filed by covered 
individuals. Such system shall include--
 (1) recorded (written or otherwise) procedures for 
 registering and responding to complaints and grievances in a 
 timely manner;
 (2) documentation concerning the substance of complaints, 
 grievances, and actions taken concerning such complaints and 
 grievances, which shall be in writing, and be available upon 
 request to the Office for Consumer Information, Counseling and 
 Assistance;
 (3) procedures to ensure a resolution of a complaint or 
 grievance;
 (4) the compilation and analysis of complaint and grievance 
 data;
 (5) procedures to expedite the complaint process if the 
 complaint involves a dispute about the coverage of an 
 immediately and urgently needed service; and
 (6) procedures to ensure that if an enrollee orally 
 notifies a health plan about a complaint, the plan (if 
 requested) must send the enrollee a complaint form that 
 includes the telephone numbers and addresses of member 
services, a description of the plan's grievance procedure, and the 
telephone number of the Officer for Consumer Information, Counseling 
and Assistance where enrollees may register complaints.
 (b) Appeal Process.--A health plan shall adopt an appeals process 
to enable covered individuals to appeal decisions that are adverse to 
the individuals. Such a process shall include--
 (1) the right to a review by a grievance panel;
 (2) the right to a second review with a different panel, 
 independent from the health plan, or to a review through an 
 impartial arbitration process which shall be described in 
 writing by the plan; and
 (3) an expedited process for review in emergency cases.
The Secretary shall develop guidelines for the structure and 
requirements applicable to the independent review panel and impartial 
arbitration process described in paragraph (2).
 (c) Notification.--With respect to the complaint, grievance, and 
appeals processes required under this section, a health plan shall, 
upon the request of a covered individual, provide the individual a 
written decision concerning a complaint, grievance, or appeal in a 
timely fashion.
 (d) Non-Impediment to Benefits.--The complaint, grievance, and 
appeals processes established in accordance with this section may not 
be used in any fashion to discourage or prevent a covered individual 
from receiving medically necessary care in a timely manner.
 (e) Due Process With Respect to Credentialing.--
 (1) Receipt of information.--A health professional who is 
 subject to credentialing under section 405 shall, upon written 
 request, receive from the health plan any information obtained 
 by the plan during the credentialing process that, as 
 determined by the credentialing committee, does not meet the 
 credentialing standards of the plan, or that varies 
 substantially from the information provided to the health plan 
 by the health professional.
 (2) Submission of corrections.--A health plan shall have a 
 formal, recorded (written or otherwise) process by which a 
 health professional may submit supplemental information to the 
 credentialing committee if the health professional determines 
 that erroneous or misleading information has been previously 
 submitted. The health professional may request that such 
 information be reconsidered in the evaluation for credentialing 
 purposes.
 (3) No entitlement.--
 (A) In general.--A health professional is not 
 entitled to be selected or retained by a health plan as 
 a participating or contracting provider whether or not 
 such professional meets the credentialing standards 
 established under section 405.
 (B) Economic considerations.--If economic 
 considerations, including the health care 
 professional's patterns of expenditure per patient, are 
 part of a selection decision, objective criteria shall 
 be used in examining such considerations and a written 
 description of such criteria shall be provided to 
 applicants, participating health professionals, and 
 enrollees. Any economic profiling of health 
 professionals must be adjusted to recognize case mix, 
 severity of illness, and the age of patients of a 
 health professional's practice that may account for 
 higher or lower than expected costs, to the extent 
 appropriate data in this regard is available to the 
 health plan.
 (4) Termination, reduction or withdrawal.--
 (A) Procedures.--A health plan shall develop and 
 implement procedures for the reporting, to appropriate 
 authorities, of serious quality deficiencies that 
 result in the suspension or termination of a contract 
 with a health professional.
 (B) Review.--A health plan shall develop and 
 implement policies and procedures under which the plan 
 reviews the contract privileges of health professionals 
 who--
 (i) have seriously violated policies and 
 procedures of the health plan;
 (ii) have lost their privilege to practice 
 with a contracting institutional provider; or
 (iii) otherwise pose a threat to the 
 quality of service and care provided to the 
 enrollees of the health plan.
 At a minimum, the policies and procedures implemented 
 under this subparagraph shall meet the requirements of 
 the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986.
 (C) Due process.--The policies and procedures 
 implemented under subparagraph (B) shall include 
 requirements for the timely notification of the 
 affected health professional of the reasons for the 
 reduction, withdrawal, or termination of privileges, 
 and provide the health professional with the right to 
 appeal the determination of reduction, withdrawal, or 
 termination.
 (D) Availability.--A written copy of the policies 
 and procedures implemented under this paragraph shall 
 be made available to a health professional on request 
 prior to the time at which the health professional 
 contracts to provide services under the plan.

SEC. 407. CONFIDENTIALITY STANDARDS.

 (a) In General.--A health plan shall ensure that the 
confidentiality of specified enrollee patient information and records 
is protected.
 (b) Policies and Procedures.--A health plan shall have written 
confidentiality policies and procedures. Such policies and procedures 
shall, at a minimum--
 (1) maintain the confidentiality of enrollee patient 
 information within the administrative structure of the health 
 plan;
 (2) protect medical record information;
 (3) protect claim information;
 (4) establish requirements for the release of information; 
 and
 (5) inform employees of the confidentiality policies and 
 procedures.
 (c) Patient Care Providers and Facilities.--A health plan shall 
ensure that providers, offices and facilities responsible for providing 
covered items or services to plan enrollees have implemented policies 
and procedures to prevent the unauthorized or inadvertent disclosure of 
confidential patient information to individuals who should not have 
access to such information.
 (d) Release of Information.--An enrollee in a health plan shall 
have the opportunity to approve or disapprove the release of 
identifiable personal patient information by the health plan, except 
where such release is required under applicable law.

SEC. 408. DISCRIMINATION.

 (a) Enrollees.--A health plan (network or non-network) may not 
discriminate or engage (directly or through contractual arrangements) 
in any activity, including the selection of service area, that has the 
effect of discriminating against an individual on the basis of race, 
national origin, gender, language, socio-economic status, age, 
disability, health status, or anticipated need for health services.
 (b) Providers.--A health plan may not discriminate in the selection 
of members of the health professional or provider network (and in 
establishing the terms and conditions for membership in the network) of 
the plan based on--
 (1) the race, national origin, or disability of the health 
 professional;
 (2) the socio-economic status, disability, health status, 
 or anticipated need for health services of the patients of the 
 health professional or provider; or
 (3) the health professional or provider's lack of 
 affiliation with, or admitting privileges at, a hospital.
 (c) License or Certification.--A health plan may not discriminate 
in participation, reimbursement, or indemnification against a health 
professional who is acting within the scope of the license or 
certification of the professional under applicable State law solely on 
the basis of the license or certification of the health professional. A 
health plan may not discriminate in participation, reimbursement, or 
indemnification against a health provider that is providing services 
within the scope of services that it is authorized to perform under 
State law.

SEC. 409. PROHIBITION ON SELECTIVE MARKETING.

 A health plan may not engage in marketing or other practices 
intended to discourage or limit the issuance of health plans to 
individuals on the basis of health condition, geographic area, 
industry, or other risk factors.

 TITLE V--HEALTH INSURANCE MARKET REFORM

SEC. 501. GUARANTEED ISSUE AND RENEWABILITY.

 (a) Guaranteed Issue.--Except as otherwise provided in this 
section, a health plan sponsor offering a health plan to a class of 
individuals shall offer such plan to any individual within such class 
who applies for coverage (either directly with the plan or through an 
employer) under such plan. A health plan may not engage in any practice 
that has the effect of attracting or limiting enrollees on the basis of 
personal characteristics, such as occupation or affiliation with any 
person or entity.
 (b) Renewability.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and 
 (3), a health plan sponsor may not refuse to renew, or may not 
 terminate, coverage under a health plan with respect to any 
 individual or family.
 (2) Grounds for refusal to renew or terminate.--Paragraph 
 (1) shall not apply in the case of--
 (A) nonpayment of premiums;
 (B) fraud on the part of the individual relating to 
 such plan;
 (C) misrepresentation of material facts on the part 
 of the individual relating to an application for 
 coverage or claim for benefits; or
 (D) the occurrence of other acts as prescribed in 
 standards developed by the National Association of 
 Insurance Commissioners.
 (3) Termination of plans.--The Secretary, in consultation 
 with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, shall 
 develop standards under which a health plan sponsor may 
 terminate a health plan.

SEC. 502. NONDISCRIMINATION BASED ON HEALTH STATUS.

 (a) No Limits on Coverage; No Pre-Existing Condition Limits.--
Except as provided in subsection (b), a health plan may not--
 (1) terminate, restrict, or limit coverage or establish 
 premiums based on the health status, medical condition, claims 
 experience, receipt of health care, medical history, 
 anticipated need for health care services, disability, genetic 
 predisposition to medical conditions, or lack of evidence of 
 insurability of an individual;
 (2) terminate, restrict, or limit coverage in any portion 
 of the plan's coverage area;
 (3) except as provided in section 501(b)(2), cancel 
 coverage for any individual until that individual is enrolled 
 in another applicable health plan;
 (4) impose waiting periods before coverage begins; or
 (5) impose a rider that serves to exclude coverage of 
 particular individuals or particular health conditions.
 (b) Treatment of Preexisting Condition Exclusions.--
 (1) In general.--A health plan may impose a limitation or 
 exclusion of benefits relating to treatment of a condition 
 based on the fact that the condition preexisted the effective 
 date of the plan with respect to an individual if--
 (A) the condition was diagnosed or treated during 
 the 3-month period ending on the day before the date of 
 enrollment under the plan;
 (B) the limitation or exclusion extends for a 
 period not more than 6 months after the date of 
 enrollment under the plan;
 (C) the limitation or exclusion does not apply to 
 an individual who, as of the date of birth, was covered 
 under the plan; or
 (D) the limitation or exclusion does not relate to 
 pregnancy.
 (2) Continuous coverage.--A health plan shall provide that 
 if an individual under such plan is in a period of continuous 
 coverage with respect to particular services as of the date of 
 enrollment under such plan, any period of exclusion of coverage 
 with respect to a preexisting condition as permitted under 
 paragraph (1) shall be reduced by 1 month for each month in the 
 period of continuous coverage.
 (3) Definitions.--As used in this subsection:
 (A) Period of continuous coverage.--The term 
 ``period of continuous coverage'' means the period 
 beginning on the date an individual is enrolled under a 
 health plan or health care program which provides 
 benefits equivalent to those provided by the plan in 
 which the individual is seeking to enroll with respect 
 to coverage of a preexisting condition and ends on the 
 date the individual is not so enrolled for a continuous 
 period of more than 3 months.
 (B) Preexisting condition.--The term ``preexisting 
 condition'' means, with respect to coverage under a 
 health plan, a condition which was diagnosed, or which 
 was treated, within the 3-month period ending on the 
 day before the first date of such coverage (without 
 regard to any waiting period).

SEC. 503. ADJUSTMENTS BASED ON AGE, GEOGRAPHY AND FAMILY SIZE.

 (a) In General.--With respect to health plan premiums, the 
Secretary, in consultation with the NAIC, shall specify uniform age, 
geography, and family size categories and maximum rating increments for 
age, geography, and family size adjustment factors that reflect the 
relative actuarial costs of benefit packages among enrollees.
 (b) Age Factors.--With respect to age adjustment factors 
established under subsection (a), for individuals who have attained age 
18 but not age 65, the highest age adjustment factor may not exceed 
twice the lowest age adjustment factor.
 (c) Phase-In Period.--The Secretary, in consultation with the NAIC, 
shall establish a schedule for the phase-in of age-adjusted community 
rates so as to minimize disruption of the insurance market.
 (d) Application.--A health plan shall ensure that the factors 
developed under this section are applied uniformly across each of the 
small group and individual markets.

SEC. 504. RISK ADJUSTMENT.

 (a) In General.--A health plan shall participate in a risk 
adjustment program developed by the State involved under standards 
established by the Secretary in consultation with the National 
Association of Insurance Commissioners. Such a risk adjustment program 
shall--
 (1) with respect to a plan offered within the small group 
 market; or
 (2) with respect to a plan offered within the individual 
 market,
provide for adjustments based on risk within the market in which the 
plan is marketed.
 (b) Process.--A program developed under subsection (a) shall 
include a process designed to share the risk associated with, or to 
equalize, high cost claims, claims of high cost individuals, costs of 
variations among carriers based on demographic factors associated with 
the individuals insured which correlate with such cost variations, to 
protect health plans from the disproportionate adverse risks of 
offering coverage to all applicants. Risk adjustment mechanisms under 
the program shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be prospective to 
minimize the uncertainty associated with the setting of premiums by 
health plans to maintain consumer choice from among multiple health 
plans based on rates that reflect the relative medical and 
administrative efficiencies of health plans.

SEC. 505. LIFETIME LIMITS.

 A health plan may not impose a lifetime limitation on the amount or 
provision of benefits under the plan.

SEC. 506. PATIENT'S RIGHT TO SELF-DETERMINATION.

 A health plan shall be considered to be an eligible organization 
under title XVIII of the Social Security Act for purposes of applying 
the rules under section 1866(f) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395cc(f)).

SEC. 507. AFFECT ON STATE LAW.

 (a) Preemption.--The requirements of this title do not preempt any 
State law unless such State law directly conflicts with such 
requirements. The provision of additional consumer protections under 
State law shall not be considered to directly conflict with such 
requirements. Such State consumer protection laws which are not 
preempted under this title include--
 (1) laws that limit the exclusions for preexisting medical 
 conditions to periods that are less than those provided for in 
 section 502;
 (2) laws that limit variations in premium rates beyond the 
 variations permitted under section 503; and
 (3) laws that would expand the small group market.
 (b) State Reform Measures.--Nothing in this title shall be 
construed as prohibiting a State from enacting health care reform 
measures that exceed the measures established under this title, 
including reforms that expand access to health care services, control 
health care costs, and enhance the quality of care.

SEC. 508. ASSOCIATION PLANS.

 With respect to health plans offered to small employers and 
individuals through associations or other intermediaries, such plans 
shall meet the requirements of this title.

 TITLE VI--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

SEC. 601. ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) In General.--A State shall prohibit the offering or issuance of 
any health plan in such State if such plan does not--
 (1) have in place a utilization review program that is 
 certified by the State as meeting the requirements of title 
 III;
 (2) comply with the standards developed under title IV;
 (3) have in place a credentialing program that meets the 
 requirements of section 405;
 (4) comply with the requirements of title V; and
 (5) meet any other requirements determined appropriate by 
 the Secretary.
 (b) Self-Insured Plans.--The Secretary of Labor shall develop 
health plan standards, consistent with this Act, that are applicable to 
self-insured plans. The Secretary of Labor may take corrective action 
to terminate or disqualify a self-insured plan that does not meet the 
standards developed under this subsection.

SEC. 602. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 (a) In General.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, this 
Act shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.
 (b) Standards.--The standards and programs required under this Act 
shall apply to health plans beginning on January 1, 1997.
 (c) Office for Consumer Information, Counseling and Assistance.--A 
State shall have in place the Office required under section 201 on 
January 1, 1997. The Secretary may award grants for the establishment 
of such Offices beginning on the date of enactment of this Act.
 (d) Other Requirements.--The requirements of titles I and V shall 
apply to health plans beginning on January 1, 1997.
 <all>
S 609 IS----2
S 609 IS----3
S 609 IS----4