S 1445 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1445
To amend the Safe Drinking Water Act to reduce human exposure to lead in
drinking water.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
July 10 (legislative day, JULY 8), 1991
Mr. LAUTENBERG (for himself, Mr. DURENBERGER, and Mr. LIEBERMAN) introduced
the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on
Environment and Public Works
A BILL
To amend the Safe Drinking Water Act to reduce human exposure to lead in
drinking water.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Lead in Drinking Water Reduction Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. LEAD CONTAMINATION IN DRINKING WATER.
 (a) National Public Drinking Water Regulations for Lead- Title XIV of the
 Public Health Service Act (Safe Drinking Water Act; 42 U.S.C. 300f and
 following) is amended by inserting `Subpart 1--In General' immediately
 before the section heading for section 1411 and by adding the following
 at the end thereof:
`SUBPART 2--SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO NATIONAL PRIMARY DRINKING WATER
REGULATIONS FOR LEAD
`Subpart 2--Special Provisions Relating to National Primary Drinking Water
Regulations for Lead
`Sec. 1418. Definitions.
`Sec. 1418A. General requirements.
`Sec. 1418B. Applicability of corrosion control treatment steps to small,
medium-size and large water systems.
`Sec. 1418C. Description of corrosion control treatment requirements.
`Sec. 1418D. Source water maximum contaminant level.
`Sec. 1418E. Lead service line replacement requirements.
`Sec. 1418F. Public education and supplemental monitoring requirements.
`Sec. 1418G. Monitoring requirements for lead in tap water.
`Sec. 1418H. Monitoring requirements for water quality parameters.
`Sec. 1418I. Monitoring requirements for lead in source water.
`Sec. 1418J. Analytical methods.
`Sec. 1418K. Reporting requirements.
`Sec. 1418L. Recordkeeping requirements.
`Sec. 1418M. Implementation requirements.
`Sec. 1418N. EPA review of implementation of NPDWR for lead.
`Sec. 1418O. Variances and exemptions.'.
`SEC. 1418. DEFINITIONS.
 `For purposes of this subpart--
 `(1) The term `corrosion inhibitor' means a substance capable of reducing
 the corrosivity of water toward metal plumbing materials, especially lead,
 by forming a protective film on the interior surface of those materials.
 `(2) The term `effective corrosion inhibitor residual' means a concentration
 sufficient to form a passivating film on the interior walls of a pipe.
 `(3) The term `first draw sample' means a one-liter sample of tap water,
 collected in accordance with section 1418G(b)(2), that has been standing
 in plumbing pipes at least 6 hours and is collected without flushing the tap.
 `(4) The term `large water system' means a water system that serves more
 than 50,000 persons.
 `(5) The term `lead service line' means a service line made of lead
 which connects the water main to the building inlet and any lead pigtail,
 gooseneck, or other fitting which is connected to such lead line.
 `(6) The term `medium-size water system' means a water system that serves
 greater than 3,300 and less than or equal to 50,000 persons.
 `(7) The term `optimal corrosion control treatment' means the corrosion
 control treatment that minimizes the lead concentrations at users' taps
 while insuring that the treatment does not cause (A) the water system to
 violate any national primary drinking water regulations or (B) significant
 adverse impacts on the environment, including treatment works and the
 water receiving the effluent of treatment works.
 `(8) The term `service line sample means a one-liter sample of water,
 collected in accordance with section 1418G(b)(3) that has been standing
 for at least 6 hours in a service line.
 `(9) The term `single family structure' means a building constructed as
 a single-family residence that is currently used as either a residence or
 a place of business.
 `(10) The term `small water system' means a water system that serves 3,300
 persons or fewer.
`SEC. 1418A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) APPLICABILITY AND EFFECTIVE DATES- (1) The requirements set forth in
 this subpart constitute the national primary drinking water regulation
 for lead for purposes of this part. Unless otherwise indicated, each of
 the provisions of this subpart applies to community water systems and
 noncommunity water systems (hereinafter in this subpart referred to as
 `water systems' or `systems').
 `(2) Except as otherwise expressly provided in this subpart, the requirements
 set forth in this subpart shall take effect 30 days after the enactment
 of this subpart.
 `(b) LEAD CONTAMINATION LIMIT FOR TAP WATER- The Congress hereby establishing
 a limit for lead in tap water (hereinafter in this subpart referred to
 as the `tap water lead limit'). The tapwater lead limit is exceeded if
 the concentration of lead in any tap water sample collected during any
 monitoring conducted in accordance with section 1418G is greater than 10
 parts per billion (ppb).
 `(c) MAXIMUM CONTAMINANT LEVEL GOAL- The maximum contaminant level goal
 (in mg/L) for lead in drinking water is zero.
 `(d) VIOLATION OF NATIONAL PRIMARY DRINKING WATER REGULATIONS- Failure
 to comply with the applicable requirements of this subpart, including
 requirements established by the State pursuant to this subpart, shall
 constitute a violation of the national primary drinking water regulations
 for lead.
 `(e) RELATIONSHIP TO PRIOR REGULATIONS-
 `(1) EPA LEAD REGULATIONS REPLACED- The requirements set forth in this
 subpart shall apply in lieu of the requirements with regard to lead in
 drinking water contained in regulations of the Administrator promulgated on
 May 6, 1991, except as otherwise provided in the first sentence of section
 1418J (relating to analytical methods). After the enactment of this section,
 the Administrator may promulgate, under this subpart and under subpart 1,
 regulations with regard to lead in drinking water but only to the extent that
 such regulations are more protective of human health than any corresponding
 requirements of this subpart.
 `(2) PRIOR MCL FOR LEAD- The maximum contaminant level for lead in effect
 for lead before May 6, 1991, shall be in effect immediately upon enactment
 of this subpart.
`SEC. 1418B. APPLICABILITY OF CORROSION CONTROL TREATMENT STEPS TO SMALL,
MEDIUM-SIZE AND LARGE WATER SYSTEMS.
 `(a) COMPLETION OF CORROSION CONTROL TREATMENT- Systems shall complete the
 applicable corrosion control treatment requirements described in section
 1418C by the deadlines established in this section.
 `(1) A large system (serving greater than 50,000 persons) shall complete
 the corrosion control treatment steps specified in subsection (d) of this
 section, unless it is deemed to have optimized corrosion control under
 paragraph (2) or (3) of subsection (b).
 `(2) A small system (serving greater than or equal to 3,300 persons) and
 a medium-sized system (serving greater than 3,300 persons and less than or
 equal to 50,000 persons) shall complete the corrosion control treatment steps
 specified in subsection (e) of this section, unless it is deemed to have
 optimized corrosion control under paragraph (1), (2) or (3) of subsection (b)
 `(b) SYSTEMS DEEMED TO HAVE OPTIMIZED CORROSION CONTROL- A system is deemed
 to have optimized corrosion control and is not required to complete the
 applicable corrosion control treatment steps identified in this section
 if the system satisfies 1 of the following criteria:
 `(1) A small or medium-sized water system is deemed to have optimized
 corrosion control if the system meets the tap water lead limit lead during
 each of 2 consecutive 6-month monitoring periods conducted in accordance
 with section 1418G.
 `(2) Any water system may be deemed by the State, after notice and
 opportunity for comment, to have optimized corrosion control treatment
 if the system demonstrates to the satisfaction of the State that it has
 conducted activities equivalent to the corrosion control steps applicable
 to such system under this section. If the State makes this determination,
 it shall provide the system with written notice explaining the basis
 for its decision and shall specify the water quality control parameters
 representing optimal corrosion control in accordance with section 1418C. A
 system shall provide the State with the following information in order to
 support a determination under this paragraph--
 `(A) the results of all test samples collected for each of the water
 quality parameters in section 1418C(c)(3);
 `(B) a report explaining the test methods used by the water system to
 evaluate the corrosion control treatments listed in section 1418C(c)(1),
 the results of all tests conducted, and the basis for the system's selection
 of optimal corrosion control treatment;
 `(C) a report explaining how corrosion control has been installed and how
 it is being maintained to insure minimal lead and copper concentrations
 at consumers' taps; and
 `(D) the results of tap water samples collected in accordance with section
 1418G at least once every 6 months for 1 year after corrosion control has
 been installed.
 `(3) Any water system is deemed to have optimized corrosion control if
 it submits results of tap water monitoring conducted in accordance with
 section 1418G and source water monitoring conducted in accordance with
 section 1418I that demonstrates for 2 consecutive 6-month monitoring periods
 that the difference between the highest tap water lead concentration and
 the highest source water lead concentration is not detectable.
 `(c) CESSATION OF CORROSION CONTROL- Any small or medium-sized water
 system that is required to complete the corrosion control steps due to its
 exceedance of the tap water lead limit may cease completing the treatment
 steps whenever the system meets such tap water lead limit during each
 of 2 consecutive monitoring periods conducted pursuant to section 1418G
 and submits the results to the State. If any such water system thereafter
 exceeds the tap water lead limit during any monitoring period, the system
 (or the State, as the case may be) shall recommence completion of the
 applicable treatment steps, beginning with the first treatment step which
 was not previously completed in its entirety. The State may require a
 system to repeat treatment steps previously completed by the system where
 the State determines that this is necessary to implement properly the
 treatment requirements of this section. The State shall notify the system
 in writing of such a determination and explain the basis for its decision.
 `(d) TREATMENT STEPS AND DEADLINES FOR LARGE SYSTEMS- Except as provided
 in paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (b) of this section, large systems
 shall complete the following corrosion control treatment steps by the
 indicated dates.
 `(1) STEP 1: The system shall conduct initial monitoring (sections
 1418G(d)(1) and 1418H(b)) within 6 months after enactment of this subpart.
 `(2) STEP 2: The system shall complete corrosion control studies (section
 1418C(c)) within 12 months after enactment of this subpart.
 `(3) STEP 3: The State shall designate optimal corrosion control treatment
 (section 1418C(d)) within 18 months after enactment of this subpart.
 `(4) STEP 4: The system shall install optimal corrosion control treatment
 (section 1418C(e)) within 24 months after enactment of this subpart.
 `(5) STEP 5: The system shall complete follow-up sampling (section 1418H(c))
 within 30 after enactment of this subpart.
 `(6) STEP 6: The State shall review installation of treatment and designate
 optimal water quality control parameters (section 1418C(f)) within 36
 months after enactment of this subpart.
 `(7) STEP 7: The system shall operate in compliance with the State specified
 optimal water quality control parameters (section 1418C(g)) and continue
 to conduct tap sampling (section 1418H(d)).
 `(e) TREATMENT STEPS AND DEADLINES FOR SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZE SYSTEMS-
 Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, small and medium-size
 systems shall complete the following corrosion control treatment steps
 (described in the referenced portions of sections 1418C, 1418G, and 1418H)
 by the indicated time periods.
 `(1) STEP 1: The system shall conduct initial tap sampling (section
 1418G(d)(1)) within 6 months after enactment of this subpart. A system
 exceeding the tap water lead limit shall recommend optimal corrosion
 control treatment (section 1418C(a)) within 6 months after it exceeds the
 tap water lead limit.
 `(2) STEP 2: Within 12 months after a system exceeds tap water lead limit
 the State may require the system to perform corrosion control studies
 (section 1418C(b)). If the State does not require the system to perform
 such studies, the State shall specify optimal corrosion control treatment
 (section 1418C(d)) within 12 months after such system exceeds the tap
 water lead limit.
 `(3) STEP 3: If the State requires a system to perform corrosion control
 studies under step 2, the system shall complete the studies (section
 1418C(c)) within 12 months after the State requires that such studies
 be conducted.
 `(4) STEP 4: If the system has performed corrosion control studies under
 step 2, the State shall designate optimal corrosion control treatment
 (section 1418C(d)) within 6 months after completion of step 3.
 `(5) STEP 5: The system shall install optimal corrosion control treatment
 (section 1418C(e)) within 12 months after the State designates such
 treatment.
 `(6) STEP 6: The system shall complete follow-up sampling (section
 1418H(c)) within 24 months after the State designates optimal corrosion
 control treatment.
 `(7) STEP 7: The State shall review the system's installation of treatment
 and designate optimal water quality control parameters (section 1418C(f))
 within 6 months after completion of step 6.
 `(8) STEP 8: The system shall operate in compliance with the State
 designated optimal water quality control parameters (section 1418C(g))
 and continue to conduct tap sampling (section 1418H(d)).
`SEC. 1418C. DESCRIPTION OF CORROSION CONTROL TREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.
 `Each system shall complete the corrosion control treatment requirements
 described below which are applicable to such system under section 1418B.
 `(a) SYSTEM RECOMMENDATION REGARDING CORROSION CONTROL TREATMENT- Based
 upon the results of lead tap monitoring and water quality parameter
 monitoring, small and medium-size water systems exceeding the tap water
 lead limit shall recommend installation of 1 or more of the corrosion
 control treatments listed in subsection (c)(1) of this section which the
 system believes constitutes optimal corrosion control for that system. The
 State may require the system to conduct additional water quality parameter
 monitoring in accordance with section 1418H(b) to assist the State in
 reviewing the system's recommendation.
 `(b) STATE DECISION TO REQUIRE STUDIES OF CORROSION CONTROL TREATMENT
 (APPLICABLE TO SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZE SYSTEMS)- The State may require
 any small or medium-size system that exceeds the tap water lead limit to
 perform corrosion control studies under subsection (c) of this section to
 identify optimal corrosion control treatment for the system.
 `(c) PERFORMANCE OF CORROSION CONTROL STUDIES-
 `(1) Any public water system performing corrosion control studies shall
 evaluate the effectiveness of each of the following treatments, and,
 if appropriate, combinations of the following treatments to identify the
 optimal corrosion control treatment for that system--
 `(A) alkalinity and pH adjustment;
 `(B) calcium hardness adjustment; and
 `(C) the addition of a phosphate or silicate based corrosion inhibitor at
 a concentration sufficient to maintain an effective residual concentration
 in all test tap samples.
 `(2) The water system shall evaluate each of the corrosion control treatments
 using either pipe rig/loop tests, metal coupon tests, partial-system tests,
 or analyses based on documented analogous treatments with other systems
 of similar size, water chemistry, and distribution system configuration.
 `(3) The water system shall measure the following water quality parameters
 in any tests conducted under this paragraph before and after evaluating
 the corrosion control treatments listed above--
 `(A) lead;
 `(B) copper;
 `(C) pH;
 `(D) alkalinity;
 `(E) calcium;
 `(F) conductivity;
 `(G) orthophosphate (when an inhibitor containing a phosphate compound
 is used);
 `(H) silicate (when an inhibitor containing a silicate compound is used); and
 `(I) water temperature.
 `(4) The water system shall identify all chemical or physical constraints
 that limit or prohibit the use of a particular corrosion control treatment
 and document such constraints with at least 1 of the following:
 `(A) data and documentation showing that a particular corrosion control
 treatment has adversely affected other water treatment processes when used
 by another water system with comparable water quality characteristics; and/or
 `(B) data and documentation demonstrating that the water system has
 previously attempted to evaluate a particular corrosion control treatment
 and has found that the treatment is ineffective or adversely affects other
 water quality treatment processes.
 `(5) The water system shall evaluate the effect of the chemicals used for
 corrosion control treatment on other water quality treatment processes.
 `(6) On the basis of an analysis of the data generated during each
 evaluation, the water system shall recommend to the State in writing the
 treatment option that the corrosion control studies indicate constitutes
 optimal corrosion control treatment for that system. The water system
 shall provide a rationale for its recommendation along with all supporting
 documentation specified in subsections (c)(1) through (5) of this section.
 `(d) STATE DESIGNATION OF OPTIMAL CORROSION CONTROL TREATMENT- (1) Based
 upon consideration of available information including, where applicable,
 studies performed under subsection (c) of this section and a system's
 recommended treatment alternative, the State shall, after notice and
 opportunity for comment, either approve the corrosion control treatment
 option recommended by the system, or designate alternative corrosion
 control treatment(s) from among those listed in subsection (c)(1) of this
 section. When designating optimal treatment the State shall consider the
 effects that additional corrosion control treatment will have on water
 quality parameters and on other water quality treatment processes.
 `(2) The State shall notify the system of its decision on optimal corrosion
 control treatment in writing and explain the basis for this determination. If
 the State requests additional information to aid its review, the water
 system shall provide the information.
 `(e) INSTALLATION OF OPTIMAL CORROSION CONTROL- Each system shall properly
 install and operate throughout its distribution system the optimal
 corrosion control treatment designated by the State under subsection (d)
 of this section.
 `(f) STATE REVIEW OF TREATMENT AND SPECIFICATION OF OPTIMAL WATER QUALITY
 CONTROL PARAMETERS- The State shall evaluate the results of all lead tap
 samples and water quality parameter samples submitted by the water system
 and determine whether the system has properly installed and operated the
 optimal corrosion control treatment designated by the State in subsection
 (d) of this section. Upon reviewing the results of tap water and water
 quality parameter monitoring by the system, both before and after the
 system installs optimal corrosion control treatment, the State shall,
 after notice and opportunity for comment, designate--
 `(1) a minimum value or a range of values for pH measured at each entry
 point to the distribution system;
 `(2) a minimum pH value, measured in all tap samples. Such value shall be
 equal to or greater than 7.0, unless the State determines that meeting a
 pH level of 7.0 is not technologically feasible or is not necessary for
 the system to optimize corrosion control;
 `(3) if a corrosion inhibitor is used, a minimum concentration or a range
 of concentrations for the inhibitor, measured at each entry point to the
 distribution system and in all tap samples, that the State determines is
 necessary to form a passivating film on the interior walls of the pipes
 of the distribution system;
 `(4) if alkalinity is adjusted as part of optimal corrosion control
 treatment, a minimum concentration or a range of concentrations for
 alkalinity, measured at each entry point to the distribution system and
 in all tap samples;
 `(5) if calcium carbonate stabilization is used as part of corrosion control,
 a minimum concentration or a range of concentrations for calcium, measured
 in all tap samples.
The values for the applicable water quality control parameters listed above
shall be those that the State determines to reflect optimal corrosion control
treatment for the system. The State may designate values for additional
water quality control parameters determined by the State to reflect optimal
corrosion control for the system. The State shall notify the system in
writing of these determinations and explain the basis for its decisions.
 `(g) CONTINUED OPERATION AND MONITORING- All systems shall maintain
 water quality parameter values at or above minimum values or within ranges
 designated by the State under subsection (f) of this section in each sample
 collected under section 1418H(d). If the water quality parameter value of
 any sample is below the minimum value or outside the range designated by
 the State, then the system is out of compliance with this subsection. As
 specified in section 1418H(d), the system may take a confirmation sample
 for any water quality parameter value no later than 3 days after the first
 sample. If a confirmation sample is taken, the result must be averaged with
 the first sampling result and the average must be used for any compliance
 determinations under this subsection. States have discretion to delete
 results of obvious sampling errors from this calculation.
 `(h) MODIFICATION OF STATE TREATMENT DECISIONS- Upon its own initiative or in
 response to a request by a water system or other interested party, a State
 may, after notice and opportunity for comment, modify its determination
 of the optimal corrosion control treatment under subsection (d) of this
 section or optimal water quality control parameters under subsection (f)
 of this section. A request for modification by a system or other interested
 party shall be in writing, explain why the modification is appropriate,
 and provide supporting documentation. The State may modify its determination
 where it concludes that such change is necessary to ensure that the system
 continues to optimize corrosion control treatment. A revised determination
 shall be made in writing, set forth the new treatment requirements, explain
 the basis for the State's decision, and provide an implementation schedule
 for completing the treatment modifications.
 ` (i) EPA REGULATIONS OR GUIDELINES- Within 6 months after the enactment
 of this subpart the Administrator shall issue regulations or guidelines
 to facilitate compliance with the requirements of this section.
`SEC. 1418D. SOURCE WATER MCL.
 `The Congress hereby establishes, by operation of law, to be effective 18
 months after the enactment of this subpart, a maximum contaminant level (MCL)
 for lead in source water which shall be considered exceeded whenever the
 concentration of lead in source water is greater than 5 parts per billion
 (ppb).
`SEC. 1418E. LEAD SERVICE LINE REPLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) BASIC REQUIREMENT- Public water systems that fail to meet the tap water
 lead limit in samples taken pursuant to section 1418G(d) after installing
 corrosion control shall replace lead service lines in accordance with the
 requirements of this section.
 `(b) REPLACEMENT SCHEDULE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A system shall replace lead services lines in its
 distribution system at an annual rate which will replace each year either
 20 percent of the lead service lines or 10 percent of the total service
 lines, whichever results in replacement of a greater number of lead
 service lines. The initial number of lead service lines is the number
 of lead lines in place at the time the replacement program begins. The
 system shall identify the initial number of lead and nonlead service lines
 in its distribution system based upon a materials evaluation, including
 the evaluation required under section 1418G(a). The first year of lead
 service line replacement shall begin on the date the tap water lead limit
 was exceeded in tap water sampling referenced in subsection (a) of this
 section. If the State fails to designate optimal corrosion control by the
 date required under section 1418B or if a system fails to install corrosion
 control treatment by the date required under section 1418B, the first year
 of lead service line replacement shall begin 6 months after the such date.
 `(2) EXTENSION OF SCHEDULE FOR CERTAIN SYSTEMS- Upon the application of a
 public water system with an especially large number of lead service lines
 in its distribution system, the State may, after notice and opportunity for
 comment, extend the schedule for lead service line replacement established
 under paragraph (1). Such extension shall provide for the replacement by
 the system of all lead service lines in its distribution system at the
 earliest feasible date. Such extension shall provide for replacement of
 an equal percentage of such lines in each year during the extension and
 shall terminate no later than the date specified in the following table:
 Total Number of Lead Service Lines
--Maximum Extension
to be replaced by System
--Period
More than 50,000
--3 Years
More than 100,000
--5 Years
More than 300,000
--10 Years
More than 450,000
--13 Years
 `(c) SERVICE LINES NOT CONTRIBUTING TO VIOLATION- A system is not required to
 replace an individual lead service line if the State determines, after notice
 and opportunity for comment, that the service line does not contribute to tap
 water lead concentrations in excess of 10 parts per billion (ppb). In such
 a case, the service line shall be treated by the system as a nonlead line.
 `(d) PORTION OF SERVICE LINE REPLACED- A water system shall replace the
 entire service line (up to the building inlet) unless it demonstrates to
 the satisfaction of the State under subsection (e) of this section that it
 controls less than the entire service line. In such cases, the system shall
 replace the portion of the line which the State determines is under the
 system's control. The system shall notify the user served by the line that
 the system will replace the portion of the service line under its control
 and shall offer to replace the building owner's portion of the line, but
 is not required to bear the cost of replacing the building owner's portion
 of the line. For buildings where only a portion of the lead service line
 is replaced, the water system shall inform each resident that the system
 will collect a first flush tap water sample after partial replacement of
 the service line is completed if the resident so desires. In cases where
 the resident accepts the offer, the system shall collect the sample and
 report the results to the resident within 14 days following partial lead
 service replacement.
 `(e) CONTROL- A water system is presumed to control the entire lead service
 line (up to the building inlet) unless the State determines, after notice
 and opportunity for comment, that it does not have any of following forms
 of control over the entire line (as defined by State statutes, municipal
 ordinances, public service contracts or other applicable legal authority):
 authority to set standards for construction, repair, or maintenance of
 the line, authority to replace, repair, or maintain the service line,
 or ownership of the service line. The State shall review the information
 supplied by the system and determine whether the system controls less than
 the entire service line and, in such cases, shall determine the extent of
 the system's control. The State's determination shall be in writing and
 explain the basis for its decision.
 `(f) SHORTER SCHEDULE- The State shall require a system to replace lead
 service lines on a shorter schedule than that required by this section,
 taking into account the number of lead service lines in the system, where
 such a shorter replacement schedule is feasible. The State shall, after
 notice and opportunity for comment, make this determination in writing
 and notify the system of its finding within 6 months after the system is
 triggered into lead service line replacement based on monitoring referenced
 in subsection (a) of this section.
 `(g) CESSATION OF SERVICE LINE REPLACEMENT- Any system may cease replacing
 lead service lines whenever the tap water samples collected pursuant
 to section 1418G(d)(1) meet the tap water lead limit during each of 2
 consecutive monitoring periods and the system submits the results to
 the State. If the tap water samples in any such water system thereafter
 exceed the tap water lead limit, the system shall recommence replacing
 lead service lines within 6 months of such exceedance.
 `(h) REPORTING BY SYSTEM- To demonstrate compliance with subsections
 (a) through (d) of this section, a system shall report to the State the
 information specified in section 1418K(e).
 `(i) VOLUNTARY LEAD PIPE REMOVAL- Each State shall, within 18 months of
 the date of enactment of this subpart, establish a program to encourage all
 public water systems in the State to provide a voluntary service of referring
 building owners in the system's service area to approved contractors to
 remove lead plumbing, fixtures, or solder from their buildings. Such programs
 shall also encourage public water systems to offer to fund such removal
 and to bill their water customers on their water bills, amortized over a
 significant period of time, to allow easy payment for such removal. The
 Administrator shall, within 6 months of the date of enactment of this Act,
 develop and distribute to each State and the public a model State program
 designed to achieve these goals.
`SEC. 1418F. PUBLIC EDUCATION AND SUPPLEMENTAL MONITORING REQUIREMENTS.
 `A water system that exceeds the tap water lead limit shall deliver
 the public education materials contained in subsections (a) and (b)
 of this section in accordance with the requirements in subsection (c)
 of this section.
 `(a) CONTENT OF WRITTEN MATERIALS- A water system shall include the following
 text in all of the printed materials it distributes through its lead public
 education program. Any additional information presented by a system shall
 be consistent with the information below and be in plain English that can
 be understood by laypersons:
`introduction
 `The drinking water supplied by [insert name of water supplier] has been
 tested at several locations in your community and found to be contaminated
 with the toxic chemical lead. Some homes in the community have lead levels
 above the Federal tap water lead limit of 10 parts per billion (ppb), or
 0.010 milligrams of lead per liter of water (mg/L). Other homes may have
 lead levels above the maximum contaminant level goal for lead established
 by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, which is no lead in
 drinking water.
 `Under Federal law we are required to have a program in place to minimize
 lead in your drinking water. This program includes corrosion control
 treatment (to decrease the level of lead drawn into water from lead in
 distribution pipes and from lead in home plumbing) and public education. We
 are also required to replace each lead service line that we control if
 the line contributes to lead concentrations of 10 parts per billion or
 more after we have completed the corrosion control treatment program. If
 you have any questions about how we are carrying out the requirements of
 Federal law please give us a call at [insert water system's phone number].
 `Although our lead control program will reduce lead in drinking water,
 because of contamination from home plumbing, it may not succeed in completely
 eliminating lead from drinking water or even in lowering lead contamination
 to the tap water lead limit. This brochure explains the simple additional
 steps you can take to protect you and your family by reducing your exposure
 to lead in drinking water.
`health effects of lead
 `Lead is an extremely dangerous and pervasive poison found in lead-based
 paint, air, soil, household dust, food, certain types of pottery, porcelain,
 pewter, and water. Lead can pose a significant risk to your health and
 especially to the health of your children.
 `Lead builds up in the body over many years and can cause damage to
 the brain, red blood cells, and kidneys. Lead probably causes cancer in
 humans. Lead appears to cause elevated blood pressure in adult men.
 `The greatest risk is to young children and pregnant women. Small amounts of
 lead can impair normal mental and physical development of young children
 and fetuses. This damage can reduce intelligence and cause behavioral
 disturbances. These effects appear to be irreversible.
 `There is no known safe level of lead exposure.
`lead in drinking water
 `Lead in drinking water can significantly increase a person's total lead
 exposure, particularly the exposure of infants who drink baby formulas
 and concentrated juices that are mixed with water. The EPA estimates that,
 on average, drinking water makes up about 20 percent of a person's total
 exposure to lead. In some cases the percentage can be much higher. Infants
 who drink baby formulas made from lead contaminated tap water have in some
 instances suffered acute lead poisoning.
 `Lead is unusual among drinking water contaminants in that it seldom
 occurs naturally in water supplies like rivers and lakes. Lead enters
 drinking water primarily as a result of the corrosion, or wearing away,
 of materials containing lead in the water distribution system and household
 plumbing. These materials include lead-based solder used to join copper pipe,
 brass, and chrome plated brass faucets, and in some cases, pipes made of
 lead that connect your house to the water main (service lines). In 1986,
 Congress banned the use of lead solder containing greater than 0.2 percent
 lead, and restricted the lead content of faucets, pipes and other plumbing
 materials to 8.0 percent. In 1991 Congress further tightened controls on
 lead content in faucets, pipes and other plumbing materials.
 `When water stands in lead pipes or plumbing systems containing lead for
 several hours or more, the lead may dissolve into your drinking water. This
 means the first water drawn from the tap in the morning, or later in the
 afternoon after returning from work or school, can contain fairly high
 levels of lead.
 `Federal law has set a tap water lead limit which is being exceeded in
 homes in your community. As a result of this exceedance, we are undertaking
 a program of corrosion control, public education, and [if necessary]
 lead service line replacement as required by Federal law to reduce lead
 levels in tap water. Installation of corrosion control [is required to
 occur/occurred] by [insert date]. Replacement of lead service lines [if
 necessary] [is required to occur/occurred] by [insert date]. Despite these
 measures lead levels [may] still exceed the tap water lead limit in homes
 in your community due to lead contamination in home plumbing. `steps you
 can take in the home to reduce exposure to lead in drinking water
 `To find out whether you need to take action in your own home, have your
 drinking water tested to determine if it contains excessive concentrations
 of lead. Testing the water is essential because you cannot see, taste,
 or smell lead in drinking water. Some local laboratories that can provide
 this service are listed at the end of this booklet. For more information on
 having your water tested, please call [insert phone number of water system].
 `If a water test indicates that the drinking water drawn from a tap in
 your home contains lead above 10 ppb, then you should take the following
 precautions. The EPA has set a goal of zero for lead contamination in
 drinking water so you should consider taking these steps even if the lead
 concentration in your drinking water is below 10ppb.
 `(1) Let the water run from the tap before using it for drinking or
 cooking any time the water in a faucet has gone unused for more than 6
 hours. The longer water resides in your home's plumbing the more lead it
 may contain. Flushing the tap means running the cold water faucet until the
 water gets noticeably colder, usually about 15-30 seconds. If your house
 has a lead service line to the water main, you may have to flush the water
 for a longer time, perhaps one minute, before drinking. Although toilet
 flushing or showering flushes water through a portion of your home's plumbing
 system, you still need to flush the water in each faucet before using it for
 drinking or cooking. Flushing tap water is a simple and inexpensive measure
 you can take to protect your family's health. It usually uses less than 1
 or 2 gallons of water and costs less than [insert a cost estimate based on
 flushing 2 times a day for 30 days] per month. To conserve water, fill a
 couple of bottles for drinking water after flushing the tap, and whenever
 possible use the first flush water to wash the dishes or water the plants.
 `If you live in a high-rise building, letting the water flow before using it
 may not work to lessen your risk from lead. The plumbing systems have more,
 and sometimes larger pipes than smaller buildings. Ask your landlord for help
 in locating the source of the lead and for advice on reducing the lead level.
 `(2) Try not to cook with, or drink water from the hot water tap. Hot water
 can dissolve more lead more quickly than cold water. If you need hot water,
 draw water from the cold tap and heat it on the stove.
 `(3) Remove loose lead solder and debris from the plumbing materials
 installed in newly constructed homes, or homes in which the plumbing has
 recently been replaced, by removing the faucet strainers from all taps
 and running the water from 3 to 5 minutes. Thereafter, periodically remove
 the strainers and flush out any debris that has accumulated over time.
 `(4) If your copper pipes are joined with lead solder that has been
 installed illegally since it was banned in 1986, notify the plumber who did
 the work and request that he or she replace the lead solder with lead-free
 solder. Lead solder looks dull gray, and when scratched with a key looks
 shiny. In addition, notify your State [insert name of department responsible
 for enforcing the Safe Drinking Water Act in your State] about the violation.
 `(5) Determine whether or not the service line that connects your home
 or apartment to the water main is made of lead. The best way to determine
 if your service line is made of lead is by contacting us at [insert phone
 number of water system] hiring a licensed plumber to inspect the line or
 contacting the plumbing contractor who installed the line. You can identify
 the plumbing contractor by checking the city's record of building permits
 which should be maintained in the files of the [insert name of department
 that issues building permits]. A licensed plumber can at the same time
 check to see if your home's plumbing contains lead solder, lead pipes,
 or pipe fittings that contain lead.
 `The public water system that delivers water to your home should also
 maintain records of the materials located in the distribution system. If the
 service line that connects your dwelling to the water main contributes to an
 exceedance of the Federal tap water lead limit after our corrosion control
 treatment program is in place, we are required to replace the line. If
 the line is only partially controlled by the [insert name of the city,
 county, or water system that controls the line], we are required to provide
 you with information on how to replace your portion of the service line,
 and offer to replace that portion of the line at your expense and take a
 follow-up tap water sample within 14 days of the replacement. Acceptable
 replacement alternatives include copper, steel, iron, and plastic pipes.
 `(6) Have an electrician check your wiring. If grounding wires from the
 electrical system are attached to your pipes, corrosion may be greater. Check
 with a licensed electrician or your local electrical code to determine
 if your wiring can be grounded elsewhere. DO NOT attempt to change the
 wiring yourself because improper grounding can cause electrical shock and
 fire hazards.
 `The steps described above will reduce the lead concentrations in your
 drinking water. However, if a water test indicates that the drinking water
 coming from your tap contains lead concentrations in excess of 10 ppb after
 flushing, or after we have completed our actions to minimize lead levels,
 then you may want to take the following additional measures.
 `(1) Purchase or lease a home treatment device. Home treatment devices are
 limited in that each unit treats only the water that flows from the faucet to
 which it is connected, and all of the devices require periodic maintenance
 and replacement. Devices such as reverse osmosis systems or distillers can
 effectively remove lead from your drinking water. Some activated carbon
 filters may reduce lead levels at the tap, however all lead reduction
 claims should be investigated. Be sure to check the actual performance of
 a specific home treatment device before and after installing the unit.
 `(2) Purchase bottled water for drinking and cooking.
 `In addition to exposure through drinking water, a child at play often comes
 into contact with sources of lead contamination--like dirt and dust--that
 rarely affect an adult. It is important to wash children's hands and toys
 often to reduce these sources of lead exposure.
 `You can consult a variety of sources for additional information. Your family
 doctor or pediatrician can perform a blood test for lead and provide you
 with more information about the health effects of lead. State and local
 government agencies that can be contacted include:
 `[insert the name of city or county department of public utilities]
 at [insert phone number] can provide you with information about your
 community's water supply, and a list of local laboratories that have been
 certified by EPA for testing water quality;
 `[insert the name of city or county department that issues building permits]
 at [insert phone number] can provide you with information about building
 permit records that should contain the names of plumbing contractors that
 plumbed your home; and
 `[insert the name of the State Department of Public Health] at [insert phone
 number] or the [insert the name of the city or county health department]
 at [insert phone number] can provide you with information about the health
 effects of lead and how you can have your child's blood tested.
 `The following is a list of some State approved laboratories in your area
 that you can call to have your water tested for lead. [Insert names and
 phone numbers of at least 2 laboratories].
 `(b) CONTENT OF BROADCAST MATERIALS- A water system shall include the
 following information in all public service announcements submitted under
 its lead public education program to television and radio stations for
 broadcasting:
 `Why should everyone want to know the facts about lead and drinking
 water? Because lead is an extremely dangerous poison that can enter drinking
 water and pose a significant risk to your health and the health of your
 children. Lead contamination can impair the intellectual development of
 young children. That's why I urge you to do what I did. I had my water
 tested for [insert free or $ per sample]. You can contact the [insert the
 name of the city or water system] for information on testing and on simple
 ways to reduce your exposure to lead in drinking water.
 `To have your water tested for lead, or to get more information about this
 public health concern, please call [insert the phone number of the city
 or water system].
 `(c) DELIVERY OF PUBLIC EDUCATION PROGRAM- (1) In communities where
 a significant proportion of the population speaks a language other
 than English, public education materials shall be communicated in the
 appropriate language(s). `(2) A community water system that fails to meet
 the tap water lead limit shall, within 60 days:
 `(A) insert notices in each customer's water utility bill containing the
 information in subsection (a), along with the following alert on the water
 bill itself in large print:
`SOME HOMES IN THIS COMMUNITY HAVE ELEVATED LEAD LEVELS IN THEIR DRINKING
WATER. LEAD CAN POSE A SIGNIFICANT RISK TO YOUR HEALTH AND TO THE HEALTH OF
YOUR CHILDREN. PLEASE READ THE ENCLOSED NOTICE FOR FURTHER INFORMATION.',
 `(B) submit the information in subsection (a) to the editorial departments
 of the major daily and weekly newspapers circulated throughout the community,
 `(C) deliver pamphlets and/or brochures that contain the public education
 materials in subsection (a) of this section relating to the health effects
 of lead and steps to be taken in the home to reduce exposure to lead in
 drinking water of this section to facilities and organizations, including
 the following: public and private schools and/or local school boards;
 city or county health department; women, infants, and children and/or
 Head Start Program(s) whenever available; public and private hospitals
 and/or clinics; pediatricians; family planning clinics; public libraries;
 and local welfare agencies, and
 `(D) submit the public service announcement in subsection (b) to at least
 5 of the radio and television stations with the largest audiences that
 broadcast to the community served by the water system.
 `(3) A community water system shall repeat the tasks contained in subsection
 (c)(2)(A), (B), and (C) every 12 months, and the tasks contained in
 subsection (c)(2)(D) every 6 months for as long as the system exceeds the
 tap water lead limit.
 `(4) Within 60 days after it exceeds the tap water lead limit, a noncommunity
 water system shall deliver the public education materials contained in
 subsection (a) of this section as follows:
 `(A) Post informational posters on lead in drinking water in a public
 place or common area in each of the buildings served by the system.
 `(B) Distribute informational pamphlets and/or brochures on lead in drinking
 water to each person served by the noncommunity water system.
 `(5) A noncommunity water system shall repeat the tasks contained in
 subsection (c)(4) of this section at least once during each calendar year
 in which the system exceeds the tap water lead limit.
 `(6) A water system may discontinue delivery of public education materials if
 the system has met the tap water lead limit during the most recent 6-month
 monitoring period conducted pursuant to section 1418G. Such a system
 shall recommence public education in accordance with this section if it
 subsequently exceeds the tap water lead limit during any monitoring period.
 `(d) SUPPLEMENTAL MONITORING AND NOTIFICATION OF RESULTS- A water system
 that fails to meet the tap water lead limit shall offer to sample the
 tap water of any customer who requests it. The system is not required to
 pay for collecting or analyzing the sample, nor is the system required to
 collect and analyze the sample itself.
 `(e) NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A water system which fails to comply with a water maximum
 contaminant level for lead or any other requirement under this subpart
 shall notify persons served by such system of such violation in the manner
 provided for public notification of violations of maximum contaminant levels
 and treatment techniques in regulations of the Administrator under this part.
 `(2) MANDATORY HEALTH EFFECTS LANGUAGE- When providing the information on
 potential adverse health effects in notices of violation, the water system
 shall include the language in subsection (a) relating to the health effects
 of lead.
`SEC. 1418G. MONITORING REQUIREMENTS FOR LEAD IN TAP WATER.
 `(a) SAMPLE SITE LOCATION- (1) By the applicable date for commencement
 of monitoring under subsection (d)(1) of this section, each water system
 shall complete a materials evaluation of its distribution system in order
 to identify a pool of targeted sampling sites that meets the requirements
 of this section, and which is sufficiently large to ensure that the water
 system can collect the number of lead tap samples required in subsection
 (c). All sites from which first draw samples are collected shall be selected
 from this pool of targeted sampling sites. Sampling sites may not include
 faucets that have point-of-use or point-of-entry treatment devices designed
 to remove inorganic contaminants.
 `(2) A water system shall use the information that it is required to collect
 under regulations promulgated by the Administrator under this part relating
 to special monitoring for corrosivity characteristics when conducting
 a materials evaluation. When an evaluation of the information collected
 pursuant to such regulations is insufficient to locate the requisite number
 of lead sampling sites that meet the targeting criteria in this subsection,
 the water system shall review each source of information listed below in
 order to identify a sufficient number of sampling sites and in addition,
 the system shall seek to collect such information where possible in the
 course of its normal operations (e.g. checking service line materials when
 reading water meters or performing maintenance activities):
 `(A) All plumbing codes, permits, and records in the files of the building
 department which indicate the plumbing materials that are installed within
 publicly and privately owned structures connected to the distribution system.
 `(B) All inspections and records of the distribution system that indicate
 the material composition of the service connections that connect a structure
 to the distribution system.
 `(C) All existing water quality information, which includes the results
 of all prior analyses of the system or individual structures connected to
 the system, indicating locations that may be particularly susceptible to
 high lead concentrations.
 `(3) The sampling sites selected for a community water system's sampling pool
 (`tier 1 sampling sites') shall consist of single family structures that (A)
 contain copper pipes with lead solder installed after 1982 or contain lead
 pipes; and/or (B) are served by a lead service line. When multiple-family
 residences comprise at least 20 percent of the structures served by a
 water system, the system may include these types of structures in its
 sampling pool.
 `(4) Any community water system with insufficient tier 1 sampling sites
 shall complete its sampling pool with `tier 2 sampling sites', consisting
 of buildings, including multiple-family residences that: (A) contain copper
 pipes with lead solder installed after 1982 or contain lead pipes; and/or
 (B) are served by a lead service line.
 `(5) Any community water system with insufficient tier 1 and tier 2
 sampling sites shall complete its sampling pool with `tier 3 sampling
 sites', consisting of single family structures that contain copper pipes
 with lead solder installed before 1983.
 `(6) The sampling sites selected for a noncommunity water system (`tier
 1 sampling sites') shall consist of buildings that: (A) contain copper
 pipes with lead solder installed after 1982 or contain lead pipes; and/or
 (B) are served by a lead service line.
 `(7) A noncommunity water system with insufficient tier 1 sites that meet
 the targeting criteria in paragraph (6) of subsection (a) shall complete
 its sampling pool with sampling sites that contain copper pipes with lead
 solder installed before 1983.
 `(8) Any water system whose sampling pool does not consist exclusively of
 tier 1 sites shall demonstrate in a letter submitted to the State under
 section 1418K(a)(2) why a review of the information listed in subsection
 (a)(2) was inadequate to locate a sufficient number of tier 1 sites. Any
 community water system which includes tier 3 sampling sites in its sampling
 pool shall demonstrate in such a letter why it was unable to locate a
 sufficient number of tier 1 and tier 2 sampling sites.
 `(9) Any water system whose distribution system contains lead service lines
 shall draw 50 percent of the samples it collects during each monitoring
 period from sites that contain lead pipes, or copper pipes with lead solder,
 and 50 percent of those samples from sites served by a lead service line. A
 water system that cannot identify a sufficient number of sampling sites
 served by a lead service line shall demonstrate in a letter submitted to
 the State why the system was unable to locate a sufficient number of such
 sites. Such a water system shall collect lead service line samples from
 all of the sites identified as being served by such lines.
 `(b) SAMPLE COLLECTION METHODS- (1) All tap samples for lead collected in
 accordance with this subpart (but not lead service line samples collected
 under section 1418E) shall be first draw samples.
 `(2) Each first-draw tap sample for lead shall be one liter in volume and
 have stood motionless in the plumbing system of each sampling site for
 at least 6 hours. First draw samples from residential housing shall be
 collected from the cold-water kitchen tap or bathroom sink tap. First-draw
 samples from a nonresidential building shall be collected at an interior
 tap from which water is typically drawn for consumption. First draw
 samples may be collected by the system or the system may allow residents to
 collect first draw samples after instructing the residents of the sampling
 procedures specified in this paragraph. If a system allows residents to
 perform sampling, the system may not challenge, based on alleged errors
 in sampling collection, the accuracy of sampling results.
 `(3) Each service line sample shall be 1 liter in volume and have stood
 motionless in the lead service line for at least 6 hours. Lead service
 line samples shall be collected in 1 of the following 3 ways:
 `(A) At the tap after flushing the volume of water between the tap and
 the lead service line. The volume of water shall be calculated based on
 the interior diameter and length of the pipe between the tap and the lead
 service line.
 `(B) Tapping directly into the lead service line.
 `(C) If the sampling site is a building constructed as a single-family
 residence, allowing the water to run until there is a significant change
 in temperature which would be indicative of water that has been standing
 in the lead service line.
 `(4) A water system shall collect each first draw tap sample from the same
 sampling site from which it collected a previous sample. If, for any reason,
 the water system cannot gain entry to a sampling site in order to collect
 a follow-up tap sample, the system may collect the follow-up tap sample
 from another sampling site in its sampling pool as long as the new site
 meets the same targeting criteria, and is within reasonable proximity of
 the original site.
 `(c) NUMBER OF SAMPLES- Water systems shall collect at least one sample
 during each monitoring period specified in subsection (d) from the number
 of sites listed in the first column below (`standard monitoring'). A
 system conducting reduced monitoring under subsection (d)(2) may collect
 one sample from the number of sites specified in the second column below
 during each monitoring period specified in subsection (d)(2).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 `System Size (# People Served) # of sites (Standard Monitoring) # of sites
 (Reduced Monitoring)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 100,000 100 50
 10,001-100,000 60 30
 3,301-10,000 40 20
 501-3,300 20 10
 101-500 10 5
 100 5 5
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 `(d) TIMING OF MONITORING-
 `(1) STANDARD MONITORING- Monitoring required under this section for lead
 concentrations in tap water shall commence 6 months after the enactment
 of this subpart and shall occur at 6-month intervals thereafter, except
 as provided in paragraph (2).
 `(2) REDUCED MONITORING- (A) Any water system that meets the tap water lead
 limit during each of 2 consecutive 6-month monitoring periods may reduce
 the number of samples in accordance with subsection (c) of this subsection,
 and reduce the frequency of sampling to once per year.
 `(B) Any water system that meets the tap water lead limit during 3
 consecutive years of monitoring may reduce the frequency of monitoring
 for lead from annually to once every 3 years.
 `(C) A water system that reduces the number and frequency of sampling
 shall collect these samples from sites included in the pool of targeted
 sampling sites identified in subsection (a). Systems sampling annually or
 less frequently shall conduct the lead tap sampling during the month of
 June, July, August, or September.
 `(D) Any water system subject to reduced monitoring that exceeds the tap
 water lead limit shall immediately resume sampling in accordance with
 subsection (d)(1) and collect the number of samples specified for standard
 monitoring under subsection (c).
 `(e) ADDITIONAL MONITORING BY SYSTEMS- The results of any monitoring
 conducted in addition to the minimum requirements of this section shall
 be considered by the system and the State in making any determinations
 under this subpart.
`SEC. 1418H. MONITORING REQUIREMENTS FOR WATER QUALITY PARAMETERS.
 `All large water systems and all small and medium-size systems that exceed
 the tap water lead limit shall monitor water quality parameters in addition
 to lead in accordance with this section.
 `(a) GENERAL REQUIREMENTS-
 `(1) SAMPLE COLLECTION METHODS- (A) Tap samples shall be representative of
 water quality throughout the distribution system taking into account the
 number of persons served, the different sources of water, the different
 treatment methods employed by the system, and seasonal variability. Tap
 sampling under this section is not required to be conducted at taps targeted
 for lead sampling under section 1418G(a).
 `(B) Samples collected at the entry point(s) to the distribution system
 shall be from locations representative of each source after treatment. If a
 system draws water from more than one source and the sources are combined
 before distribution, the system must sample at an entry point to the
 distribution system during periods of normal operating conditions (i.e.,
 when water is representative of all sources being used).
 `(2) NUMBER OF SAMPLES- (A) Systems shall collect 2 tap samples for
 applicable water quality parameters during each monitoring period specified
 under subsections (b) through (e) of this section from the following number
 of sites:
--# of Sites for Water
 System Size (# People Served)
--Quality Parameters
100,000
--25
10,001-100,000
--10
3,301-10,000
--3
501-3,300
--2
101-500
--1
100
--1
 `(B) Systems shall collect two samples for each applicable water quality
 parameter at each entry point to the distribution system during each
 monitoring period specified in subsection (b). During each monitoring
 period specified in subsections (c) through (e) of this section, systems
 shall collect one sample for each applicable water quality parameter at
 each entry point to the distribution system.
 `(b) INITIAL SAMPLING- All large water systems shall measure the applicable
 water quality parameters as specified below at taps and at each entry point
 to the distribution system during each 6-month monitoring period specified
 in section 1418G(d)(1). All small- and medium-size systems shall measure
 the applicable water quality parameters at the locations specified below
 during each 6-month monitoring period specified in section 1418G(d)(1)
 during which the system exceeds the tap water lead limit.
 `(1) At taps: pH; alkalinity; orthophosphate, when an inhibitor containing a
 phosphate compound is used; silica, when an inhibitor containing a silicate
 compound is used; calcium; conductivity; and water temperature.
 `(2) At each entry point to the distribution system: all of the applicable
 parameters listed in paragraph (1) above.
 `(c) MONITORING AFTER INSTALLATION OF CORROSION CONTROL- Any system which
 installs optimal corrosion control treatment pursuant to section 1418B(d)(4)
 or section 1418B(e)(5) shall measure the water quality parameters at the
 locations and frequencies specified below during each 6-month monitoring
 period following such installation.
 `(1) At taps, two samples for: pH; alkalinity; orthophosphate, when
 an inhibitor containing a phosphate compound is used; silica, when an
 inhibitor containing a silicate compound is used; calcium, when calcium
 carbonate stabilization is used as part of corrosion control.
 `(2) At each entry point to the distribution system, one sample every two
 weeks for: pH; when alkalinity is adjusted as part of optimal corrosion
 control, a reading of the dosage rate of the chemical used to adjust
 alkalinity, and the alkalinity concentration; and when a corrosion inhibitor
 is used as part of optimal corrosion control, a reading of the dosage rate
 of the inhibitor used, and the concentration of orthophosphate or silica
 (whichever is applicable).
 `(d) MONITORING AFTER STATE SPECIFIES WATER QUALITY PARAMETER VALUES
 FOR OPTIMAL CORROSION CONTROL- After the State specifies the values for
 applicable water quality control parameters reflecting optimal corrosion
 control treatment under section 1418C(f), all systems shall measure
 the applicable water quality parameters in accordance with subsection
 (c) of this section during each 6-month monitoring period after such
 specification. The system may take a confirmation sample for any water
 quality parameter value no later than 3 days after the first sample. If
 a confirmation sample is taken, the result must be averaged with the
 first sampling result and the average must be used for any compliance
 determinations under section 1418C(g). States have discretion to delete
 results of obvious sampling errors from this calculation.
 `(e) Reduced Monitoring- (1) Any water system that maintains the range of
 values for the water quality parameters reflecting optimal corrosion control
 treatment during each of two consecutive 6-month monitoring periods under
 subsection (d) of this section shall continue monitoring at the entry
 point(s) to the distribution system as specified in subsection (c)(2)
 of this section. Such system may collect two tap samples for applicable
 water quality parameters from the following reduced number of sites during
 each 6-month monitoring period.
`System Size
--Reduced # of Sites for
 (# of People Served)
-- Water Quality Parameters
>100,000
--10
10,001 to 100,000
--7
3,301 to 10,000
--3
501 to 3,300
--2
101 to 500
--1