HR 2909 SC
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2909
To amend the Clean Air Act.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 17, 1989
Mr. BRUCE introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Energy and Commerce
September 27, 1989
Additional sponsors: Mr. MADIGAN, Mrs. MARTIN of Illinois, Mr. LIPINSKI,
Mr. POSHARD, and Mr. Savage
A BILL
To amend the Clean Air Act.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Clean Fuels and Environmental Protection
 Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. AMENDMENT OF CLEAN AIR ACT.
 The Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following at the end thereof:
`TITLE IV--FOSSIL FUELS EMISSIONS CONTROL PROGRAM
`SEC. 401. PURPOSES; COVERAGE.
 `(a) PURPOSES- (1) The primary purpose of this title is to achieve
 a nationwide reduction from 1980 levels of 10,000,000 tons in annual
 emissions of sulfur dioxide from fossil fuel fired electric utility steam
 generating units which are not subject to, or operating in accordance with,
 standards of performance under section 111, and a nationwide reduction from
 1985 levels of 2,000,000 ton in annual emissions of oxides of nitrogen
 from those units, without causing or contributing to energy disruptions
 and while encouraging the continued use of all fossil fuels for electric
 generation. This purpose is in addition to the provisions of this Act
 under sections 109 and 110 regarding national ambient air quality standard
 attainment for such pollutants.
 `(2) It is also a primary purpose of this title to ensure, to the greatest
 extent possible, that high and low sulfur coal miners and other workers
 will not be subject to potential loss or shifts of employment through such
 reductions and that the costs of such reductions, because of the provisions
 of this title, will be reasonable and will not cause economic hardship for
 commercial, industrial, governmental, and residential ratepayers. Another
 primary purpose is to encourage and accelerate, to the greatest extent
 possible, the use of energy conservation and clean coal technology to help
 reduce emissions of both sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides.
 `(3) It is the intent of Congress that the provisions of this title shall
 be implemented consistent with the purposes of this subsection.
 `(b) CERTAIN UNITS NOT COVERED- (1) Nothing in this title shall be construed
 to require or, at the option of a State, to preclude any limitation on
 emissions from any sources other than electric utility steam generating
 units in carrying out the emission reduction program under this title and
 the other purposes set forth in subsection (a). Nothing in this title shall
 be construed to require any additional limitation on emissions from any
 stationary source which is subject to, and operating in accordance with,
 a standard of performance for sulfur dioxide emissions under section 111,
 except to the extent necessary to enforce emission reductions achieved
 through trades or credits allowed under any provision of this title for
 emissions reductions achieved by any such source.
 `(2) CERTAIN SOURCES NOT COVERED-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- A State plan under this title shall not allocate an emission
 reduction to a small utility powerplant where the Administrator finds at
 the application of, and demonstration by, the owners and operators thereof
 that the plant's costs of compliance, expressed in dollars per annual ton
 of emission reduction--
 `(i) would significantly exceed the statewide average for all fossil-fuel
 fired powerplants, with allocated emission reductions, of such costs,
 similarly expressed; or
 `(ii) would result in significant adverse competitive effects on the
 small utility.
The Administrator shall consult with, and utilize the expertise of, the
Secretary of Energy, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission in making
such finding.
 `(B) EXCEPTION- Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), the State plan may allocate
 a lesser emission reduction to a small utility powerplant for which the
 utility request such allocation, consistent with any criteria used by the
 State for allocating emission reductions among stationary sources.
 `(C) USE OF TERM- The term `small utility powerplant', when used in this
 paragraph, means one or more fossil-fueled steam generating units at a site
 with a total capacity of no more than 100 megawatts of electric output,
 owned by an electric utility whose total owned electric generating capacity
 is no more than 150 megawatts, as defined by rule by the Administrator
 within one year after enactment of this title.
 `(c) SCOPE OF TITLE- This title shall apply only to the 48 contiguous
 States in the continental United States and the District of Columbia.
 `(d) STUDY- The Administrator shall review the sulfur dioxide and nitrogen
 oxide emissions trends for categories of sources not subject to this title
 and forecast the trend in such emissions. Such study shall be completed
 and submitted to the Congress by July 1, 1995.
`SEC. 402. REDUCTIONS IN EMISSIONS OF SULFUR DIOXIDE FROM FOSSIL FUELS.
 `(a) PHASED SO2 REDUCTIONS- Consistent with the purposes expressed in
 section 401, the nationwide reduction in sulfur dioxide to be obtained
 under this title shall be achieved in 2 phases. The first phase shall
 begin on the date of enactment of this title and shall end 6 calendar years
 thereafter. The second phase shall begin at the end of the first phase and,
 subject to the provisions of section 409, end 4 calendar years thereafter.
 `(b) ALLOCATION OF FIRST PHASE SO2 REDUCTIONS- (1) In the first phase,
 the States subject to this title shall obtain such reductions from the
 fossil fuel fired electric utility steam generating units covered by this
 title as may be necessary to achieve total first phase reductions equal to
 one half of the nationwide reduction in actual annual emissions of sulfur
 dioxide referred to in section 401. The Administrator shall publish a
 notice allocating such total first phase reductions among all the States
 subject to this title. Such notice shall be published within 6 months after
 the enactment of this title. The allocation for each such State shall be
 a percentage of the total first phase reductions for all States subject
 to this title. The percentage shall be determined by dividing the excess
 emissions tonnage for the State (as computed under subparagraph (A)) by
 the national excess emissions tonnage (as computed under subparagraph (B)):
 `(A) STATE SO2 EMISSIONS IN EXCESS OF 1.2- The Administrator shall compute
 the total annual emissions of sulfur dioxide from fossil fuel fired electric
 utility steam generating units which are located in each State and which
 emitted sulfur dioxide at an average actual annual rate in excess of 1.2
 pounds per million Btu during calendar year 1980. The Administrator shall
 subtract from such total the total annual tonnage of sulfur dioxide which
 would have been emitted from such units if they emitted sulfur dioxide,
 during the same number of hours of operation, at a rate of 1.2 pounds
 per million Btu. The result of such computations for each State shall be
 referred to in this title as the `excess emissions tonnage' for that State.
 `(B) NATIONAL SO2 EMISSIONS IN EXCESS OF 1.2- The Administrator shall
 compute the total annual emissions of sulfur dioxide from fossil fuel
 fired electric utility steam generating units throughout the nation which
 emitted sulfur dioxide at an average actual annual rate in excess of 1.2
 pounds per million Btu during calendar year 1980. The Administrator shall
 subtract from such total the total annual tonnage of sulfur dioxide which
 would have been emitted from such units if they emitted sulfur dioxide,
 during the same number of hours of operation, at an annual rate of 1.2
 pounds per million Btu. The result of such computations shall be referred
 to in this title as the `national excess emissions tonnage'.
The Administrator shall utilize the most reliable information available to the
Federal Government in determining under this title the actual annual rate of
emissions during calendar year 1980. The notice published by the Administrator
shall identify such information. Such notice shall not constitute final
agency action for any purpose and shall not be subject to judicial review.
 `(2)(A) The Governor of any of the following States may provide the
 Administrator with a certification under this paragraph: Alabama, Ohio,
 Tennessee, Indiana, Georgia, Wisconsin, Illinois, Missouri, Maryland, West
 Virginia, Pennsylvania, Florida, and Kentucky. The first phase requirements
 applicable to any such State under section 403(a)(1) shall be deemed met
 and the State shall not be required to submit a State compliance plan for
 sulfur dioxide reductions for the first phase if the reductions in sulfur
 dioxide emissions obtained in the State pursuant to a certification under
 this paragraph are approximately equivalent to the share of total first
 phase reductions allocated to that State for the first phase (as reduced
 by a credit under paragraph (3) where applicable).
 `(B) A certification under this paragraph shall be submitted to the
 Administrator in such form and shall contain such information as the
 Administrator may prescribe. The certification shall be submitted within
 such period as the Administrator shall specify in the notice promulgated
 under paragraph (1) but not later than the date established for submission
 of a compliance plan. Before providing such certification, the Governor
 shall consult with the owners and operators of the affected electric
 utilities in the same manner as provided in section 403.
 `(C) A certification under this paragraph shall provide that (by the
 date specified in paragraph (1) for completion of the first phase) each
 coal fired electric utility steam generating unit in the State identified
 in the certification shall comply with an emissions standard for sulfur
 dioxide which is equivalent to the new source performance standards for
 sulfur dioxide for new fossil-fuel fired electric utility steam generating
 units constructed after September 18, 1978.
 `(D) Only powerplants which (i) have one or more units with a nameplate
 capacity of at least 500 megawatts, (ii) burn high sulfur coal, (iii)
 are among the highest emitters of sulfur dioxide by fuel and rate, (iv)
 are considered appropriate retrofit candidates based on capital cost and
 site and emergency considerations and (v) are not listed under paragraph
 (3) may be certified under this paragraph.
 `(E) The Administrator may reject any certification under this paragraph
 for failure to comply with the requirements of this paragraph. Unless
 rejected by the Administrator in writing within 60 days after submittal
 by the Governor, a certification under this paragraph shall be treated
 by operation of law as an approved and enforceable emission limitation
 for purposes of the applicable implementation plan for that State under
 title I and shall be treated as an order enforceable under sections 113,
 114, 116, 120, and 304 of this Act against the applicable utility and State.
 `(3) For purposes of helping to meet the allocation applicable in phase one
 for Indiana, Ohio, and Illinois, the Administrator shall issue an order as
 part of such allocation rule requiring the owner or operators of the Clifty
 Creek, Kyger Creek, and Joppa Powerplants (which provide by contract with
 the Secretary of Energy more than 75 percent of the energy generated by
 such powerplants on a regular basis to Federal facilities) to comply at
 all units thereof with an emissions standard for sulfur dioxide which is
 equivalent to the new source performance standards for sulfur dioxide for
 new fossil-fueled fired electric utility steam generating units constructed
 after September 18, 1978, except to the extent such owners and operators can
 show for any unit that such unit is not an appropriate retrofit candidate
 based on technical, site, and engineering considerations. The reasonable
 capital costs (as determined by the Secretary) of such compliance, subject to
 available appropriations, shall be borne solely by the Secretary of Energy
 and the Secretary may agree to also pay during the contract term a share
 of any increased operating and maintenance costs reasonably attributable
 to such order. The provisions of section 405 shall not be applicable to
 any such costs. The sulfur dioxide emission reductions achieved pursuant
 to an order under this paragraph in Indiana, Ohio, and Illinois shall be
 credited against the State share of the first phase reductions allocated
 to each such State.
 `(c) SECOND PHASE REDUCTIONS- In the second phase each State shall obtain
 all reductions remaining after completion of the first phase from the fossil
 fuel fired electric utility steam generating units covered by this title
 in that State necessary for the State to achieve a total reduction (taking
 into account both first and second phase reductions) equal to the excess
 emissions tonnage for the State concerned, as calculated under subsection
 (b)(1).
 `(d) MEASUREMENT OF SO2 REDUCTIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The reduction in annual emissions of sulfur dioxide to be
 obtained under this title shall be measured from the total actual annual
 emissions of sulfur dioxide from the units covered by this title during
 the calendar year 1980.
 `(2) REDUCTIONS BEFORE ENACTMENT- Any sulfur dioxide emission reduction
 achieved by any unit covered by this title in any State after January 1,
 1980, and before promulgation of the allocations under this title shall
 be credited toward the emissions reduction required to fulfill the State
 share of the first phase of sulfur dioxide emission reductions under this
 title if enforceable commitments are in effect in that State, as determined
 by the Administrator, for the continued maintenance of such reduction.
 `(3) STATEWIDE INCREASES BETWEEN 1980 AND 1985- For purposes of complying
 with the First and Second Phase requirements, if aggregate annual emissions
 of sulfur dioxide from units covered under this part increased in any State
 during the period beginning January 1, 1980, and ending December 31, 1985,
 the reduction in annual emissions of sulfur dioxide to be obtained under
 this part (as calculated under paragraph (1)) shall be measured from the
 total actual emissions of sulfur dioxide from the units covered by this
 part during the calendar year 1985. In addition, for purposes of complying
 with the Second Phase requirements, in any such State, the reduction in
 annual emissions of sulfur dioxide to be obtained under this part shall
 be calculated under subsection (b)(1) using `1985' wherever `1980' appears.
 `(e) ANNUAL SCHEDULES; COMPLIANCE WITH DEADLINES- For purposes of
 improving economy and efficiency, any State may, with the approval of the
 Administrator, establish annual schedules for achieving the State share of
 nationwide reductions in emissions required for each phase. Such annual
 schedules shall be consistent with the increments of progress required
 under section 403(b).
`SEC. 403. STATE COMPLIANCE PLANS FOR SULFUR DIOXIDE.
 `(a) SUBMISSION DEADLINES-
 `(1) FIRST PHASE OF SO2 REDUCTIONS- Not later than 18 months after
 publication of the notice allocating sulfur dioxide reductions to each
 State under section 402, each State required to reduce emissions of such
 air pollutant under this title shall submit to the Administrator a State
 compliance plan under this title, unless the Administrator has notified the
 State that a certification by the Governor under section 402 is accepted by
 the Administrator as satisfying the requirements of this paragraph. The plan
 shall establish emissions limitations, compliance schedules, and aggregate
 emission limits, and such other enforceable measures as may be necessary to
 achieve and maintain the State share of the first phase of sulfur dioxide
 emission reductions specified by section 402. The plan shall also provide
 necessary assurances (consistent with the requirements applicable to
 State implementation plans under section 110), that the State will have
 adequate personnel, funding, and authority to carry out and enforce the
 plan and that there has been adequate public participation. In preparing
 such plan, the State shall consider the measures which may be necessary
 to meet the sulfur dioxide emission reductions required under the second
 phase, and any such reductions obtained in the first phase which are in
 excess of the required reductions for the first phase shall be credited
 against the reductions required for the second phase.
 `(2) SECOND PHASE OF SULFUR DIOXIDE EMISSION REDUCTIONS- Within 24 months
 after enactment of this title, the Administrator shall, in accordance with
 the purposes of this title, propose a rule prescribing when each State
 shall submit to the Administrator a State compliance plan establishing
 emissions limitations, compliance schedules, aggregate emission limits,
 and such other enforceable measures as may be necessary to achieve the
 sulfur dioxide emission reductions required by section 181 to be obtained
 by each State for the second phase. The rule shall be promulgated within
 12 months after the date of its proposal.
 `(b) APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL- The Administrator shall approve or disapprove
 each State compliance plan under this title, in accordance with the same
 procedures as apply under this Act for approval of State implementation
 plans or plan revisions submitted under section 110. The Administrator
 shall approve the plan or plan revision if he determines that it contains
 provisions, including enforceable increments of progress, adequate to assure
 that the State share of emission reductions required under section 402
 will be achieved by the required deadline and that it otherwise meets the
 requirements of this title. If the Administrator disapproves a compliance
 plan, he shall notify the State of the reasons for such disapproval and the
 State may submit a revised plan satisfactory to the Administrator within 6
 months from the date of such notice. The Administrator shall consult with,
 and obtain the timely views of, the Secretary of Energy and the Federal
 Energy Regulatory Commission in approving or disapproving a plan or plan
 revision under this section, taking into consideration the applicable
 requirements of Federal energy laws. If the Administrator has not approved
 or disapproved a State plan or plan revision submitted under this section
 within the same period of time as is specified in section 110 with respect
 to State implementation plans, the plan or plan revision shall be treated as
 approved and in effect (unless the Administrator subsequently disapproves
 the plan by rule). It is the intent of Congress that each such plan shall,
 notwithstanding such time requirements for approval, not be disapproved
 without adequate opportunity for public participation as required by
 the Administrative Procedures Act. The requirements of such Act shall be
 paramount in the case of a conflict with such deadlines.
 `(c) PLAN PROVISIONS-
 `(1) FLEXIBLE MEANS OF COMPLIANCE- Each State compliance plan under this
 title may provide for compliance with the requirements of this section
 through any action which the State deems appropriate and which results
 in emission reductions from fossil fuel fired electric utility steam
 generating units not subject to, and operating in accordance with, standards
 of performance under section 111. Such action may, at the option of the
 State and subject to paragraph (2), include, but shall not be limited to,
 the use of technological systems of continuous emission reduction, clean
 coal projects, energy conservation programs, fossil fuel switching, coal
 switching, retirement, changes in utility dispatch designed to reduce
 emissions, precombustion cleaning of fuels, emissions trading, or any
 combination of these or any other enforceable means of compliance. Each plan
 shall give a priority to new and effective energy conservation programs
 where reductions in emissions can be identified with such programs. Each
 plan shall, to the greatest extent possible, consider the mix and source of
 generation serving ratepayers in the State, the location of the generation,
 and the extent of each utility's service area in the State and in other
 States. Reliability, interconnection of utilities, pooling arrangements in
 the State and in the applicable regional power pool, and the need to meet
 emergencies and normal shutdowns and other relevant factors shall also
 be recognized and adequately addressed in the plan. Each plan shall also
 contain utility commitments to provide significant financial incentives
 to encourage ratepayers to use, to the greatest extent possible, energy
 efficient appliances, lighting, and other energy efficient installations.
 `(2) CONSULTATION REGARDING UTILITIES SERVING RATEPAYERS IN THE STATE- In
 developing plan provisions under this title, the State shall consult with
 electric utilities within the State and shall give priority consideration
 to their experience and expertise in operating reliable systems, and take
 into consideration systemwide advantages and disadvantages of reduction
 proposals. The State shall make cost and employment impact information
 regarding the various control options available to the public for comment
 before adoption of the final plan and shall consider such information,
 together with any public comments, in developing the emissions control
 requirements to be included in the final plan. The State shall provide for
 the participation of the regulated electric utilities, the State public
 utility commissions, the nonregulated electric utilities, ratepayers,
 and others in the development of the plans.
 `(3) CONSULTATION REGARDING OTHER AFFECTED UTILITIES- To the extent utilities
 in the State affected by the plan are part of an electric utility system
 or holding company serving ratepayers in other States, the State shall
 consult with such other States in order to ensure that the plans of each
 State are coordinated to the greatest extent practicable to ensure system
 reliability, cost effective emission control, proper functioning of power
 dispatch systems, and ratepayer fairness.
 `(4) AGGREGATE LIMIT FOR UTILITY SYSTEMS- Each State compliance plan under
 this title shall, contain as an enforceable requirement an emission tonnage
 ceiling for the aggregate of all electric utility steam generating units in
 that State operated by a single electric utility company. In the case of an
 electric utility company which operates such units in more than one State,
 the State plan shall, to the greatest extent possible, contain an emissions
 tonnage ceiling for the aggregate of all such units in all such States. The
 Administrator shall periodically determine and certify to each of the States
 concerned the emissions reductions achieved by each such unit under the plan.
 `(5) CREDIT FOR REDUCTIONS ACHIEVED BY CERTAIN UNITS NOT COVERED BY
 THIS TITLE- In the case of any fossil fuel fired electric utility steam
 generating unit subject to, and operating in accordance with, standards of
 performance under section 111, any sulfur dioxide emission reduction achieved
 by such unit after 1980 and before enactment of this title shall be credited
 toward the emissions reduction required to be achieved under this title by
 the State in which such unit is located if such emission reduction is in
 excess of the emission reduction required for such unit under section 111
 and if State compliance plans (or certifications) under this title contain
 enforceable commitments for the continued maintenance of such reduction.
 `(6) NATIONAL ACID PRECIPITATION ASSESSMENT PROGRAM RESULTS- The State
 and the Administrator shall, in developing and approving any State plan
 (particularly a phase II plan), take into consideration to the greatest
 extent possible, the final assessment of the National Acid Precipitation
 Assessment Program and the State, at the time of submittal, and the
 Administrator, at the time of approval, shall explain the extent of such
 consideration.
 `(7) EXTENSIONS AND REVISIONS- Upon request of the Governor of any State,
 the Administrator may extend the time for submittal to the Administrator
 of any plan or certification for that State for an additional 4 months,
 unless he finds that such State has been dilatory. Plans approved under
 this title may be revised from time to time in accordance with this title
 and section 110 of this Act.
 `(8) AUDITING AND FINDINGS OF INADEQUACY- Each State compliance plan
 submitted under this title shall contain provisions requiring--
 `(A) the State biannually to quantify the then current level of emissions
 subject to limitation under this title and report its findings to the
 Administrator on a source-by-source basis; and
 `(B) the State to revise the plan whenever the Administrator finds on the
 basis of information available to him that the plan, even though previously
 approved, is substantially inadequate to comply with the requirements of
 this title or that there are significant changed circumstances.
The Administrator may make such findings by rule at any time on his own
initiative or on petition of any person.
 `(9) STATE AUTHORITY TO IMPOSE PENALTIES- Each State is required to include
 provisions in a plan submitted under this title pursuant to which civil
 penalties are imposed by the State on a per ton basis on emissions of
 sulfur dioxide or oxides of nitrogen from stationary sources which fail
 or refuse to comply, in whole or in part, with emissions limitations or
 other applicable requirements of the State compliance plan.
 `(d) DEFAULT-
 `(1) FAILURE BY STATE TO SUBMIT PLAN WHICH IS APPROVED- (A) If no
 State compliance plan or certification is submitted under this title
 within the applicable deadline for such plan or certification or if a
 plan or certification which has been submitted within such deadline has
 been disapproved and, in the case of the plan, amendments have not been
 submitted to the Administrator within 6 months after such disapproval,
 the provisions of section 176(a) of this Act shall apply to such State.
 `(B) If any emissions unit fails or refuses to comply with any emissions
 limitation or schedule or certification applicable to the unit under
 this title (including a limitation applicable under an emissions trading
 arrangement involving units in more than one State), the Administrator
 shall assess and collect a noncompliance penalty under this subsection
 from the unit concerned.
 `(2) COVERED SOURCES- This subsection applies to any fossil fuel fired
 electric utility steam generating unit which burns natural gas, petroleum,
 coal (including lignite), or any fuel (or combination thereof) derived
 from the foregoing for purposes of producing steam.
 `(3) AMOUNT OF PENALTY- (A) The amount of the noncompliance penalty imposed
 by this subsection shall be based on the number of pounds of sulfur dioxide
 emitted from the unit annually during the period beginning with the failure
 referred to in paragraph (1) by reason of which the penalty is imposed
 and ending with the date on which such failure is remedied. The number
 of pounds of a pollutant emitted by a unit shall be determined using the
 actual average annual rate of emissions for the unit concerned.
 `(B) In the case of a penalty imposed under paragraph (1)(B) for a unit
 which emits sulfur dioxide at an average annual rate of less than 2.0
 pounds per million Btu's, the penalty shall be equal to 30 cents for each
 pound of sulfur dioxide emitted during the applicable period in excess of
 the emissions limitation by reason of which the penalty is imposed and
 for a unit which emits sulfur dioxide at an average annual rate of 2.0
 pounds per million Btu's or more, the penalty shall be equal to 45 cents
 for each pound of sulfur dioxide emitted during the applicable period in
 excess of the emissions limitation by reason of which the penalty is imposed.
 `(4) LIABILITY FOR PENALTY- The penalty imposed by this subsection shall
 be paid by the person owning or operating the unit which emitted the
 pollutants on which such fee is imposed.
 `(5) ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION- Penalties under this subsection shall be
 assessed and collected under regulations promulgated by the Administrator
 and shall be deposited in the Treasury as miscellaneous receipts. Such
 regulations shall provide for the payment of the penalty not less frequently
 than monthly during any period for which the penalty is applicable. Sections
 113(c) (1) and (2) shall apply for purposes of enforcing this subsection.
 `(e) ENFORCEMENT- Each requirement of a State compliance plan approved
 under this section shall be treated, for purposes of sections 113, 114,
 116, 120, and 304, as a requirement of an applicable implementation plan.
`SEC. 404. EMISSION REDUCTION TRADING.
 `(a) TRADING UNDER STATE PLANS- State compliance plans under this title
 may provide for trading of emission reduction requirements among any of
 the following:
 `(1) Electric utility units within a State.
 `(2) Electric utility units in more than one State which participate in the
 same or contiguous power pool or which are owned or operated by a single
 electric utility or which are owned or operated by electric utilities which
 are part of the same holding company system (as defined in section 2(9)
 of the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935).
 `(3) Electric utility units within a State and other fossil fuel fired
 steam generating units within the State which are not less than 73 megawatts
 (heat input) in size.
 `(4) Electric utility units within a State and major stationary sources
 within the State with process emissions greater than 100 tons per year.
The Administrator (in consultation with the Secretary of Energy and the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission) shall promulgate any rule respecting such trading
deemed necessary by the Administrator, including, but not limited to, rules
regarding enforcement monitoring and the allocation among the States involved
in such trading of emission reduction credits toward each such State's share
of the emission reductions required under this title. Such rules shall ensure
that the total aggregate tonnage of emissions reduction (measured from the
1980 baseline) is no less than the total that would be achieved absent such
trading. Trading or reduction requirements shall require that actual reductions
of emissions are demonstrated as a result of the use of technological systems
of continuous emission reduction, clean coal projects, energy conservation
programs, fossil fuel switching, coal switching, retirement, changes in utility
dispatch designed to reduce emissions, or precombustion cleaning of fuels or
any other enforceable compliance measures. In the case of fossil fuel fired
steam generating units other than electric utility units and major sources of
process emissions, the emissions reduction credits allowed under this section
shall be based on a baseline which utilizes 1985 emissions from such units
and no credit shall be allowed for any cessation of operations or reduction
of operations by any such unit. This subsection shall not apply to fugitive
emissions. Whenever emission reduction trading involves units in more than 1
State, the Administrator shall determine and certify to the affected States
the total emission reductions achieved by each unit involved in the trade.
 `(b) RECORDKEEPING- The Administrator shall require the owner or operator
 of each fossil fuel fired steam generating unit, and each nonutility
 fossil fuel fired steam generating unit and each major source of process
 emissions which exceeds 73 megawatts (heat input) in size, to maintain,
 and make available to the Administrator and the public, such records as
 may be necessary to determine (1) total actual annual emissions of sulfur
 dioxide and oxides of nitrogen from the unit, (2) the hours of operation
 of the unit, and (3) the actual annual average rate of emissions of sulfur
 dioxide and oxides of nitrogen from the unit.
`SEC. 405. CLEAN FUELS EMISSION CONTROL FUND.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FUND- There is established in the Treasury of
 the United States a separate fund to be known as the `Clean Fuels Emission
 Reduction Equity Fund' (hereinafter in this section referred to as the
 `Fund'), consisting of such amounts as may be transferred to such Fund as
 provided in this section.
 `(b) MANAGEMENT OF THE FUND-
 `(1) TRANSFERS- The amounts appropriated by subsection (c) shall be
 transferred at least monthly from the general fund of the Treasury to the
 Fund on the basis of estimates made by the Secretary of the Treasury of
 the amounts referred to in subsection (c). Proper adjustments shall be
 made in the amount subsequently transferred to the extent prior estimates
 were in excess of, or less than, the amounts required to be transferred.
 `(2) REPORTS- The Secretary of the Treasury shall be the trustee of the Fund,
 and shall report to the Administrator and the Congress for each fiscal
 year ending on or after September 30, 1991, on the financial condition
 and the results of the operations of such Fund during such fiscal year
 and on its expected condition and operations during the next 5 fiscal
 years. Such report shall be public and may be printed as a House document
 of the session of the Congress to which the report is made.
 `(3) INVESTMENTS- It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Treasury
 to invest such portion of such Fund as is not, in his judgment, required
 to meet current withdrawals. Such investments shall be in public debt
 securities with maturities suitable for the needs of such Fund and bearing
 interest at rates determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, taking into
 consideration current market yields on outstanding marketable obligations of
 the United States of comparable maturities. The income on such investments
 shall be credited to, and form a part of, such Fund.
 `(4) REMAINING AMOUNTS- After all payments are made from the Fund as required
 by this title, any portion of the Fund not used to make such payments shall
 be transferred by the Secretary to miscellaneous receipts in the Treasury.
 `(c) TRANSFER OF FEES- There are hereby credited, out of any money in the
 Treasury not otherwise appropriated, to the Fund amounts determined by
 the Secretary of the Treasury to be equivalent to the amounts received
 in the Treasury from the fees under subsection (h) and from investments
 under subsection (b).
 `(d) USE OF THE FUND- Amounts in the Fund shall be available only for
 purposes of making payments to electric utilities in accordance with
 subsections (e) and (f).
 `(e) PAYMENTS DURING FIRST PHASE-
 `(1) AUTHORITY TO MAKE PAYMENTS- As soon as amounts are available in the
 Fund, subject to applicable appropriations, the Administrator shall agree
 from time to time to make payments from the Fund to the owners and operators
 of the electric utility steam generating units covered by a Governor's
 certification approved under section 402. The total amount of payments
 agreed upon and made under this paragraph shall be equal to a range of
 between $170 and $270 per kilowatt of nameplate capacity with respect to
 any eligible generation unit, except that such payments shall not exceed
 90 percent of the reasonable capital costs of meeting the requirement with
 respect to which the certification applies. In any case in which amounts
 available in the Fund are inadequate to cover all reasonable costs referred
 to in this paragraph, payments shall be allocated equitably among the
 qualified electric utilities which certify eligible units under paragraph
 (2). All payments under this subsection shall be for the benefit of the
 ratepayers of the eligible electric utility.
 `(2) ELIGIBILITY FOR PAYMENTS- An electric utility shall be eligible
 for payments under paragraph (1) only if the utility provides the
 Administrator with an appropriate certification, signed by a senior
 official with management responsibility, that such payments will be used for
 reasonable capital cost expenditures after the date of such certification
 for construction work in progress or on a reimbursable basis for the
 acquisition and installation of flue gas desulfurization equipment which
 achieves the same level of sulfur dioxide emission reduction as is required
 to be achieved under section 111 in the case of new fossil-fuel fired
 electric utility steam generating units constructed after September 18, 1978.
 `(f) PAYMENTS DURING SECOND PHASE-
 `(1) AUTHORITY TO MAKE PAYMENTS- During the second phase, subject to
 applicable appropriations, the owners and operators of any electric utility
 steam generating unit subject to emission control requirements under
 this title shall be eligible for reasonable payments from the Fund by the
 Administrator for new and adopted energy conservation measures that achieve
 energy savings, for the reasonable capital costs of installation of clean
 coal technology or other technology, or for any combination thereof. The
 total amount of payments made under this paragraph for the installation of
 technology any such unit during the second phase shall be not more than $170
 per ton of reduced sulfur dioxide or nitrogen oxide emissions at the unit,
 measured as the difference between the hourly rate of emissions in 1985, in
 the case of sulfur dioxide emissions, and the hourly rate of emission after
 the installation of controls sufficient to comply with the Phase II emission
 control requirements, multiplied by the number of hours of operation during
 any year in which the reduced emission occur through December 31, 2010,
 except that such payments for technology shall not exceed the following:
 `(A) 80 percent of the reasonable capital costs of meeting the requirement
 concerned in the case of clean coal technology, as determined by the
 Secretary of Energy.
 `(B) 70 percent of such costs in the case of other technology.
In the case of conservation, the reductions shall be calculated on the basis
of tons removed relative to the appropriate base year as determined by the
Administrator. In any case in which amounts in the Fund are inadequate
to cover all costs referred to in this subsection and subsection (e),
payments shall be allocated first among the qualified electric utilities
eligible under subsection (e)(1) and next to utilities eligible under this
subsection. Thereafter, in any case in which amounts in the Fund are inadequate
to cover all costs referred to in this paragraph, payments shall be allocated
equitably among the utilities eligible under this subsection. All payments
shall be for the benefit of the ratepayers of the applicable utility.
 `(2) ELIGIBILITY FOR PAYMENTS- An electric utility shall be eligible for
 payments under paragraph (1) only if the utility provides the Administrator
 with an appropriate certification, signed by a senior official with
 management responsibility, that such payments will be used for expenditures
 after the date of such certification for qualified energy conservation or
 for construction work in progress or on a reimbursable basis for one or
 more of the following:
 `(A) The acquisition and installation of flue gas desulfurization equipment
 which achieves the reduction in emission of sulfur dioxide required by
 section 111 in the case of new fossil-fuel fired electric utility steam
 generating units subject to that section and constructed after September
 18, 1978.
 `(B) The acquisition and installation of clean coal technology, as determined
 by the Secretary of Energy.
 `(C) The acquisition and installation of technology to control nitrogen
 oxide emissions.
 `(3) ENERGY CONSERVATION- The Administrator shall, by rule and with the
 participation of the Secretary of Energy, establish the energy conservation
 measures which shall be treated as qualifying for payment under this
 section. The Administrator with the participation of the Secretary of
 Energy, is authorized to review and establish by regulation reasonable
 means and methods to encourage, consistent with applicable Federal law,
 emission reductions through energy conservation.
 `(g) INTENT OF CONGRESS- It is the intent of Congress that all States that
 contribute through its ratepayers to the Fund shall, consistent with the
 specified requirements of subsections (e) and (f), benefit, to the greatest
 extent possible, through payments from the Fund.
 `(h) FEE ON ELECTRIC ENERGY GENERATION AND IMPORTATION- Within 1 year
 after the enactment of this title, the Administrator shall promulgate a
 rule requiring persons--
 `(1) emitting sulfur dioxide or nitrogen oxide in the generation of electric
 energy from fossil fuels, or
 `(2) importing electric energy into the United States
for sale or resale through or by an electric utility to pay a fee to the
Administrator. The rule shall require periodic collection of the fee by
the Administrator from the utility which sells or resells such electric
energy. The rule shall specify an effective date for the fee and shall
provide for collection and enforcement of the fee by the Administrator. The
Administrator shall, in the rule, establish the fee based on estimates of the
sums needed to meet the fund requirements of this section. The fee shall not
be less than 0.3 mill per kilowatt hour. The Administrator may, by notice,
adjust the fee to more than 0.3 mill per killowatt hour from time to time
as may be necessary to make the payments required by this title, except
that the fee may not at any time exceed 1.0 mill per kilowatt hour. The
Administrator shall regularly review and make public income and payment
statments regarding amounts collected pursuant to such fee. Beginning after
2 years after promulgation of the rule, the Administrator may adjust the
fee for any State utility based on the emissions of that State in 1985 of
both pollutants to provide that States with lower emissions have a lower
fee, taking into consideration the purpose of this section. No fee shall be
imposed after December 31, 2003. The rule shall provide for audits of all
payments and of the costs covered by such payments.
 `(i) EXPERTISE OF OTHER AGENCIES- In the development and promulgation
 of rules under this section and in the administration of this section,
 the Administrator shall consult with and utilize the expertise of the
 Secretary of Energy and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
 `(j) OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE- Persons receiving payments under this
 section shall operate and maintain the applicable technology.
`SEC. 406. EMISSIONS CAP FOR EXISTING PLANTS.
 `No State compliance plan for phase II may be approved under this title
 unless the plan provides that the aggregate annual statewide emissions
 of sulfur dioxide from all the fossil fuel fired electric utility steam
 generating units in the State not subject to any standard of performance
 in effect under section 111 shall be prohibited from increasing above the
 aggregate level of emissions of sulfur dioxide required to be achieved by
 such units as of the end of Phase II.
`SEC. 407. REDUCTION OF OXIDES OF NITROGEN.
 `(a) STUDY- The Administrator shall conduct a study of the cost effectiveness
 and net effects on air quality of obtaining a reduction (from 1985 levels) in
 emissions of 2 to 4 million tons of oxides of nitrogen from fossil fuel fired
 electric utility steam generating units and other sources, considering the
 effects of such air pollutant on ozone formation as well as acid deposition
 and the requirements of part D of this Act. The study shall take into
 consideration the results of the National Acid Precipitation Assessment
 Program. The study shall provide for public notice and an opportunity for
 public comment on proposed findings and conclusions of the study. The final
 study shall be based on scientific and relevant information available to
 the agency, including the public comments received and the Administrators
 response to such comments. The final study shall be completed and submitted
 to the Congress before December 31, 1992.
 `(b) ESTABLISHING A NOX-EMISSIONS RATE- Unless, based on the study under
 subsection (a), the Administrator finds that no net air quality benefits
 may be obtained from establishing limitations on emissions of oxides of
 nitrogen from fossil fuel fired electric utility steam generating units,
 the Administrator shall, by rule promulgated before December 31, 1994,
 establish emissions limitations of 2,000,000 tons in annual emissions of
 such pollutant for fossil fuel fired electric utility steam generating
 units using tangential and wall fired boilers which reflect the use of
 low NOx burners or another technology which can achieve the same level of
 emission reduction at similar cost and, in addition, establish, if possible,
 emission limitations for cyclone boilers and wet bottom boilers used by
 such units which reflect similar cost effectiveness. In establishing the
 rule, the Administrator shall consider the results of the study.
 `(c) STATE PLANS- If the Administrator promulgates a rule under subsection
 (b), he shall require each State to submit a State compliance plan to
 implement the emission limitations established in such rule. Each such plan,
 consistent with the provisions of this title, shall provide that fossil fuel
 fired electric utility steam generating units in the State shall comply with
 such emission limitations no later than the end of the second phase. In
 the alternative, the plan may establish any other emission limitations
 which will achieve equivalent total reductions in emissions by that date.
 `(d) ENFORCEMENT- Each requirement of a State plan approved under this
 section shall be treated, for purposes of sections 113, 114, 116, 120,
 and 304, as a requirement of an applicable implementation plan.
`SEC. 408. CONSERVATION.
 `It shall be a priority under this title to achieve the reductions in
 emissions required by this title through conservation of electricity or
 other energy. If the owner of any utility owning or operating any unit
 subject to the requirements of this title certifies to the Administrator
 and the State that a program encouraging or requiring the conservation of
 electricity or other energy will be implemented by such utility and that
 such program will result in a reduction in emissions of sulfur dioxide
 or oxides of nitrogen, then such owner or operator may comply with the
 requirements of this title by substituting such emissions reduction for a
 portion of the total emissions reductions required by this title, unless
 the Administrator determines that such substitutions will not achieve
 equivalent reduction in emissions as are required under this title.
`SEC. 409. EXTENSION FOR CLEAN COAL TECHNOLOGY PROJECTS IN PHASE TWO.
 `Any State having a plan approved under this part for phase two may extend
 the deadline required for compliance by any fossil fuel fired electric
 utility steam generating unit with any emission reduction requirement
 applicable under such plan for a period of not to exceed 36 months beyond
 the required deadline if the unit to which such requirement applies is
 subject to an enforceable commitment to install and utilize clean coal
 technology, as determined by the Administrator. Not more than one such
 extension may be granted. A State plan shall not be treated as failing
 to comply with the requirements of this part (notwithstanding the failure
 of plan provisions to assure compliance by the required deadline with the
 State share of emission reduction requirements) if such failure is solely
 attributable to an extension granted under this section. No extension may be
 granted if the utility has not committed to such technology at least 2 years
 prior to the deadline for phase two under this title. The Administrator,
 in consultation with the Secretary of Energy, shall prescribe by rule the
 form and reasonable content of any such commitment.
`SEC. 410. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
 `(a) RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REQUIREMENTS- Nothing in this title shall be
 construed to affect the requirements of section 110 (or of any applicable
 State implementation plan in effect in any State), except as provided in
 this title, or of any other provision of this Act, except that any person
 subject to any requirements under any other provision of this Act may also
 be subject to additional requirements under this title.
 `(b) USE OF TERMS- The terms `steam generating unit', `electric utility
 steam generating unit', and `fossil fuel' have the same meaning when used
 in this title as when used in regulations promulgated by the Administrator
 under section 111 and set forth in 40 CFR 60.41a.
 `(c) FORCE MAJEURE- In order to prevent unemployment of coal miners,
 nothing in this title or in any State plan submitted and approved under
 this title shall be considered by any person or court as triggering the
 provisions of any fossil fuel supply contract in effect as of March 31,
 1988, where such provisions permit the early termination of such contract
 on the basis of force majeure or any governmental regulatory action.
`TITLE V--CLEAN COAL TECHNOLOGIES
`SEC. 501. DEFINITIONS.
 `For purposes of this title:
 `(1) The term `clean coal technology' means any technology, including
 technologies applied at the precombustion, combustion, or postcombustion
 stage, at a new or existing facility which will achieve significant
 reductions in air emissions of sulfur dioxide or oxides of nitrogen
 associated with the utilization of coal in the generation of electricity
 which is not conventional technology.
 `(2) The term `coal' means anthracite, bituminous or subbituminous coal,
 lignite, or any fuel derivative thereof.
 `(3) The term `conventional technology' means any technology, including
 technologies applied at the precombustion, combustion, or postcombustion
 stage, which achieves a significant reduction in air emissions of sulfur
 dioxide or oxides of nitrogen associated with the utilization of coal
 in the generation of electricity or industrial process steam which is in
 widespread use at commercial scale on the date of enactment of this title.
 `(4) The term `high-sulfur coal' means coal with a heat value of ten
 million British thermal units per ton which has a sulfur content greater
 than 1 percent sulfur by weight or coal with an equivalent or greater
 sulfur content after adjustment for the heat value of the coal.
 `(5) The term `conservation' means any reduction in electric power
 consumption as a result of increases in the efficiency of energy use,
 production, or distribution.
 `(6) The term `renewable resource' means a resource which utilizes solar,
 wind, hydro, geothermal, biomass, or similar sources of energy and which
 is either used for electric power generation or will reduce the electric
 power requirements of a consumer, including by direct application.
`SEC. 502. CLEAN COAL TECHNOLOGY APPLICATION PROGRAM.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM- The Secretary of Energy shall establish a
 Clean Coal, and Climate Change Control Technology Application Program. During
 the 5-year period from fiscal year 1991 through fiscal year 1995, the
 Secretary of Energy is authorized to make grants to the owners or operators
 of fossil-fuel fired steam generating units for the installation and use
 of clean coal technology, conservation measures, or renewable resource
 technology, or any combination thereof.
 `(b) PURPOSES FOR WHICH GRANTS MAY BE USED- A grant under this section may
 be made only for the application of clean coal technology, conservation
 measures, or renewable resource technology, or any combination thereof,
 which--
 `(1) have not been adequately applied on a commercial scale at the time
 the grant is made; and
 `(2) have a reasonable likelihood of achieving continuous emission reduction
 of sulfur dioxide, oxides of nitrogen, or carbon dioxide, or any combination
 thereof, at equal or lower costs in terms of energy, economic, or nonair
 quality environmental impact then any system or equipment which has been
 adequately applied on a commercial scale.
 `(c) FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED IN MAKING GRANTS- In making grants under
 this section, the Secretary of Energy shall give priority to clean coal
 technology, conservation measures, or renewable resource technology, or any
 combination thereof, designed to be retrofitted, repowered, or applied to
 existing fossil-fuel fired stationary sources. Among projects with similar
 emission reduction potential, grants should be made to those which reduce
 emissions at the least cost per ton of pollutant removed. Consideration
 should be given to projects that apply technologies or measures applicable
 to the largest number of existing sources, especially existing sources that,
 because of their size and location, contribute to transboundary air pollution
 between the United States and Canada. Consideration also should be given
 to technologies that can be applied to facilities currently dependent on
 the use of high-sulfur coal.
 `(d) LIMITATION ON AMOUNT OF GRANTS- No grant made under this section
 shall cover more than 50 percent of the capital costs of the technology
 or measures to be installed pursuant to the grant.
 `(e) CRITERIA FOR THE REVIEW OF GRANT APPLICATIONS- The Secretary of Energy
 shall establish criteria for the selection of grant recipients. Such criteria
 shall assure that a significant amount of the funds granted shall be for
 conservation measures or renewable resource technologies or any combination
 thereof. He shall submit proposed criteria to the Administrator for review
 and comment. The Administrator shall have 30 days to complete such review
 and comment. The Secretary of Energy shall take into consideration such
 comment in promptly publicizing the criteria.
 `(f) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary for the 5-fiscal
 year period from fiscal year 1991 through fiscal year 1995. Subject to
 appropriation Acts, the Secretary shall also utilize funds otherwise
 appropriated for clean coal technology.'.