HR 1645 SC
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1645
To permit timber sales and related activities on National Forest System lands
during a 5-year period of study of the status of the Northern Spotted Owl,
and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
MARCH 23, 1989
Mr. ROBERT F. SMITH (for himself, Mr. YOUNG of Alaska, and Mr. DENNY SMITH)
introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the Committees
on Agriculture, Interior and Insular Affairs, and Merchant Marine and Fisheries
July 26, 1990
Additional sponsors: Mr. HERGER, Mr. CRAIG, Mr. GUNDERSON, Mr. DELLUMS,
Mr. SHUMWAY, Mrs. VUCANOVICH, Mr. NIELSON of Utah, Mr. LEWIS of California,
Mr. ROHRABACHER, and Mr. Donald E. Lukens
A BILL
To permit timber sales and related activities on National Forest System lands
during a 5-year period of study of the status of the Northern Spotted Owl,
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. FINDINGS.
 The Congress finds that--
 (1) approximately 92 percent of the habitat of the Northern Spotted Owl
 (Strix Occidentalis Caurina; hereafter in this Act referred to as the
 `spotted owl') is in old-growth and mature forests of Oregon, Washington,
 and California on lands administered by the United States Forest Service,
 the Bureau of Land Management, and the National Park Service;
 (2) some have advocated preservation of 3,000 to 4,500 acres of habitat
 (old-growth timber) for each breeding pair of spotted owls;
 (3) old-growth forests on National Forest System lands in Oregon and
 Washington annually provide about 5 billion board feet of timber to the
 Nation's economy;
 (4) of the 6.2 million acres of old-growth in the national forests of
 Oregon and Washington, 3.2 million acres are already off limits to logging
 (based on the currently available forest planning information), leaving only
 3 million acres of old-growth timber to help provide future timber supplies;
 (5) if the spotted owl was listed as an endangered species and associated
 protection efforts were put in place--
 (A) according to Forest Service data, up to 2.6 million acres of National
 Forest System land suitable for timber production in Oregon and Washington
 could be placed off-limits to logging activity, resulting in significant
 economic displacement in communities dependent on the forest products
 industry as well as adversely affecting the Nation's lumber supply;
 (B) removing that land from timber production would immediately reduce
 the annual national forest timber supply by 2.5 billion board feet (50
 percent of supply), with a timber supply reduction after 4 years of 1.2
 billion board feet (25 percent) in Oregon and Washington;
 (C) it is estimated that removing these Federal lands from timber production
 would immediately put 100,000 to 160,000 people out of work in Oregon and
 Washington because of cancelled timber sale contracts and reduced timber
 supply, plus additional losses in California and losses in States that
 supply products to the Northwest, and that in the long term, 34,000 jobs
 will be eliminated in Oregon and Washington;
 (D) the forest management plans developed pursuant to the Forest and
 Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 would require significant
 revision;
 (6) studies concluding that the spotted owl is a threatened or endangered
 species which are based in part on data collected by strapping transmitters,
 weighing approximately 20 grams, on the backs of juvenile and adult owls
 may be faulty and may have contributed to a higher mortality rate and a
 lower reproductive rate for young owls than originally expected;
 (7) additional studies should be undertaken using transmitters weighing
 approximately 8 grams and attached to tail feathers of owls to more
 accurately determine whether the spotted owl is threatened or endangered;
 (8) studies conducted to date have largely ignored surveying for the
 spotted owl in non-old-growth timber stands, and there are many indications
 that suggest that while the spotted owl may prefer old-growth, it is not
 dependent on it for survival; and
 (9) additional studies should be undertaken to determine the actual range
 and habitat requirements of the spotted owl.
SEC. 2. 5-YEAR EXEMPTION FOR TIMBER SALES AND RELATED ACTIVITIES.
 In order to protect the communities dependent on the supply of Federal timber
 from a premature decision on the status of the spotted owl and to allow
 sufficient time to collect reliable data on the threatened or endangered
 status of the spotted owl, during the 5-year period beginning on the date
 of enactment of this Act, section 7(a)(2) of the Endangered Species Act (16
 U.S.C. 1536(a)(2)) shall not apply with respect to the spotted owl to any
 timber sale (including its preparation and advertisement, construction of
 related roads, and other related activities) on National Forest System lands.
SEC. 3. STUDY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- In order to ensure that adequate studies are conducted
 and completed within 5 years to answer the questions that exist regarding
 the spotted owl and its relationship to the integrated needs of national
 forest and other Federal land management, the Secretary of Agriculture
 shall, in consultation and cooperation with other affected Federal and
 State agencies, determine--
 (1) current representative habitats occupied by individual spotted owls,
 including the extent of their use of non-old-growth timber stands and their
 extent in all Federal, State, and private lands of Oregon, Washington,
 and California; and
 (2) the habitat requirements and the extent of habitat suitable for the
 spotted owl.
 (b) REPORT- The Secretary of Agriculture shall prepare a report of the
 information collected under subsection (a) which shall be used in updating
 forest plans prepared pursuant to the Forest and Rangeland Renewable
 Resources Planning Act of 1974. The Secretary shall provide this report
 to other Federal agencies making decisions regarding the threatened and
 endangered status of the spotted owl.
 (c) SUBMISSION TO CONGRESS- The Secretary of Agriculture shall submit
 the report referred to in subsection (b) to the Committee on Agriculture
 of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural
 Resources of the Senate.