S 1224 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1224
To amend the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act to require new
standards for corporate average fuel economy, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
June 22 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. BRYAN (for himself, Mr. HOLLINGS, Mr. GORTON, and Mr. LIEBERMAN)
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the
Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
A BILL
To amend the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act to require new
standards for corporate average fuel economy, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be cited as the
 `Motor Vehicle Fuel Efficiency Act of 1989'.
FINDINGS
 SEC. 2. The Congress finds and declares the following:
 (1) Improved efficiency in the consumption of petroleum is vitally important,
 not only because the worldwide supply is finite, but becaue the increasing
 dependence of the United States on foreign oil is a threat to our national
 security and adversely affects the trade balance.
 (2) The light duty vehicle fleet is a significant user of oil, accounting
 for about 39 percent of United States oil consumption.
 (3) Improvements in vehicle fuel efficiency between 1973 and 1987 amounted
 to a savings of one million eight hundred thousand barrels of oil per
 day and a savings to drivers of close to $30,000,000,000. Conversely,
 the rollback of the corporate average fuel economy (CAFE) standard for
 the 1989 model year, from 27.5 miles per gallon to 26.5 miles per gallon,
 is expected to result in increased consumption of nine hundred million
 gallons of fuel over the life of the vehicles.
 (4) Emissions of carbon dioxide, including those from the light duty
 vehicle fleet, contribute substantially to increased retention of heat in
 the Earth's atmosphere and may cause long term global warming and disruption
 of climate-dependent activities.
 (5) The United States, with only 5 percent of the world's population, is
 responsible for 20 percent of world carbon dioxide emissions. United States
 carbon dioxide emissions from gasoline alone are greater than the carbon
 dioxide emissions from all sources in each of the following countries and
 areas of the world: Latin America, Japan, the Middle East, West Germany,
 South and Southeast Asia, the United Kingdom, Africa, and France.
 (6) The Transportation sector is responsible for 31 percent of carbon
 dioxide emissions in the United States. Each gallon of gasoline burned
 results in the emission of 19.7 pounds of carbon dioxide.
 (7) The rollback of the CAFE standard for the 1989 model year is projected
 to result in nine million tons of additional carbon dioxide emissions
 during the life of the vehicles involved.
 (8) Increased numbers of vehicles and vehicle miles traveled in the United
 States will necessitate a 3 percent annual increase in fuel efficiency
 merely to hold future carbon dioxide emissions at current levels. Therefore,
 substantial improvements in vehicle fuel efficiency will be needed to
 reduce these emissions.
 (9) CAFE standards and the successful response of automobile manufacturers
 to those standards have been very effective in increasing vehicle fuel
 efficiency, resulting in a doubling of the passenger car fleet fuel
 economy between 1975 and the present. However, current law does not require
 improvement above a standard of 27.5 miles per gallon which became effective
 in 1985.
 (10) Light trucks were an insignificant part of the passenger vehicle market
 when CAFE standards were enacted in 1975, and have not been subjected
 to strict, legislatively established, CAFE standards. As a result, there
 have been few major technological changes related to fuel efficiency in
 the standard size light trucks since 1982, and fuel economy in some light
 truck models has actually declined between 1982 and 1986. Light trucks
 have become increasingly popular for passenger use, and such vehicles now
 account for approximately one-third of new passenger vehicle sales.
 (11) The Office of Technology Assessment and the Department of Energy agree
 that increased fuel efficiency is possible utilizing currently available
 technology and without significant changes in the size mix or performance
 of the fleet. Using conventional technologies, it is estimated that the
 fuel economy of the entire new care fleet could range from thirty-three
 to thirty-eight miles per gallon by 1995.
 (12) Over the long term, by utilizing technology currently in production
 or in prototype, additional increases in fleet fuel economy beyond 1995
 estimates are achievable, from forty miles per gallon to as high as sixty
 miles per gallon in the next decade.
 (12) Gasoline prices currently are lower in real dollars then they have
 been since the early 1970's. Since there is at least some correlation
 between gasoline prices and consumer demand for fuel efficient vehicles,
 it is unlikely that the market alone will achieve significant improvement
 in fuel economy.
 (13) Increased CAFE standards are, therefore, both reasonable and necessary
 to ensure that improvements in fuel efficiency continue in furtherance
 of the dual goals of the Nation's energy security and decreased carbon
 dioxide emissions.
AVERAGE FUEL ECONOMY STANDARDS
 SEC. 3. (a) Section 502(a) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost
 Savings Act (15 U.S.C. 2002(a)) is amended by striking:
`1985 and thereafter
27.5.'
and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
`1985 through 1994
27.5
1995 and thereafter
As provided in accordance with section 514 of this Act.'.
 (b) Section 502(a)(4) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2002(a)(4)) is amended by striking `The Secretary' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `Except in the case of standards established by section
 514 and 515, the Secretary'.
LIGHT TRUCKS
 SEC. 4. Section 502(b) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2002(b)) is amended by inserting `and which ends before model
 year 1995' immediately after `after the date of enactment of this title'.
EXEMPTIONS FOR LIMITED PRODUCTION
 SEC. 5. Section 502(c)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings
 Act (15 U.S.C. 2002(c)(1)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `passenger' each place it appears;
 (2) by inserting `or subsection (b) or section 514 or 515' immediately
 before the period at the end of the first sentence; and
 (3) by inserting `subsection (b) or sections 514 and 515' immediately before
 `is more stringent'.
EMERGENCY VEHICLES
 SEC. 6. Section 502(g)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings
 Act (15 U.S.C. 2002(g)(1)) is amended by inserting `or section 514 or 515'
 immediately before the period at the end of the first sentence.
CONSULTATION
 SEC. 7. Section 502(i) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings
 Act (15 U.S.C. 2002(i) is amended by inserting `or sections 514 and 515'
 immediately before the period in the first sentence.
NOTIFICATION
 SEC. 8. Section 502(j) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings
 Act (15 U.S.C. 2002(j)) is amended by inserting `or sections 514 and 515'
 immediately before `or any modification'.
NEW STANDARDS
 SEC. 9. (a) Title V of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2001 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end of the following
 new sections:
`PASSENGER AUTOMOBILES
 `SEC. 514. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the average fuel
 economy for passenger automobiles manufactured by any manufacturer in model
 year 1995 and each model year thereafter shall not be less than the number of
 miles per gallon established for such model year pursuant to the following:
`Model year:
--
`1995 through 2000
For each such manufacturer, the average fuel economy required shall be an
amount determined by the Secretary to be equal to the average fuel economy
achieved by that manufacturer for passenger automobiles in model year 1988,
plus an amount equal to 20 percent (as measured in miles per gallon) of
such average fuel economy achieved for model year 1988; except that such
standard shall not be less than 27.5 miles per gallon and shall not exceed
forty miles per gallon.
`2001 and thereafter
For each such manufacturer, the average fuel economy required shall be an
amount determined by the Secretary to be equal to the average fuel economy
achieved by that manufacturer for passenger automobiles in model 1988, plus
an amount equal to 40 percent (as measured in miles per gallon) of such
average fuel economy achieved for model year 1988; unless such standard is
modified under section 516; except that such standard shall not be less than
27.5 miles per gallon and shall not exceed forty-five miles per gallon.
`AUTOMOBILES OTHER THAN PASSENGER AUTOMOBILES
 `SEC. 515. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, commencing with
 model year 1995 and each model year thereafter, the average fuel economy
 for passenger automobiles other than passenger automobiles manufactured by
 any manufacturer in any such model year shall not be less than the number of
 miles per gallon established for such model year pursuant to the following:
`Model year:
--
`1995 through 2000
For each such manufacturer, the average fuel economy required shall be an
amount determined by the Secretary to be equal to the average fuel economy
achieved by that manufacturer for light trucks in model year 1988, plus an
amount equal to 20 percent (as measured in miles per gallon) of such average
fuel economy achieved for model year 1988; except that such standard shall
not be less than twenty miles per gallon and shall not exceed thirty miles
per gallon.
`2001 and thereafter
For each such manufacturer, the average fuel economy required shall be an
amount determined by the Secretary to be equal to the average fuel economy
achieved by that manufacturer in model 1988, plus an amount equal to 40 percent
(as measured in miles per gallon) of such average fuel economy achieved
for model year 1988; unless such standard is modified under section 516;
except that such standard shall not be less than twenty miles per gallon
and shall not exceed thirty-five miles per gallon.
`MODIFICATIONS OF STANDARDS
 `SEC. 516. (a) Any time after the beginning of fiscal year 1995, any person
 may petition the Secretary to modify any average fuel economy standard
 established under this Act for model year 2001 and thereafter. In response
 to such a petition, the Secretary may increase or decrease such standard to
 the level which the Secretary determines is the maximum feasible average
 fuel economy for the relevant model year (taking into consideration the
 factors listed in section 502(e)), except that the Secretary shall not
 reduce any such standard below a standard equal to a 30 percent increase
 over the average fuel economy achieved by the manufacturer involved for
 the applicable type (or class) of vehicles for model year 1988. Any such
 petition shall be filed at least twelve months in advance of the model
 year to which it is applicable. Upon receipt of such a petition, the
 Secretary shall conduct a rulemaking proceeding, which shall be conducted
 in accordance with the following procedure:
 `(1) The Secretary--
 `(A) shall publish an advance notice of proposed rulemaking which specifies
 the type (or class) of vehicles to which the rule may apply;
 `(B) shall invite interested persons to submit, within sixty days after the
 date of publication of such advance notice, written presentations of data,
 views, and arguments in response to such notice; and
 `(C) may identify proposed or amended standards that may be prescribed.
 `(2) A proposed rule which prescribes an amended average fuel economy
 standard, or prescribes no amended standard, for a type (or class) of
 vehicles shall be published in the Federal Register. In prescribing any
 such proposed rule with respect to a standard, the Secretary shall consider
 the four factors listed in section 502(e) and shall determine the maximum
 improvement in energy efficiency or maximum reduction in energy use that
 is technologically feasible for each type (or class) of vehicles. If such
 standard is not designed to achieve such maximum improvement or maximum
 reduction, the Secretary shall state in the proposed rule the reasons
 therefor.
 `(3) After the publication of the proposed rulemaking, the Secretary shall
 afford interested persons an opportunity, during a period of not less than
 sixty days, to comment on matters relating to the proposed rule.
 `(4) A final rule prescribing an amended average fuel economy standard,
 or prescribing no amended standard, for a type (or class) of vehicles shall
 be published as soon as is practicable, but not less than one hundred and
 twenty days, after publication of the proposed rule in the Federal Register.
 `(b) In determining the maximum feasible average fuel economy during a
 rulemaking proceeding under this section, the Secretary shall evaluate
 the economic practicability of the standard, considering--
 `(1) the economic impact of the standard on the manufacturers and on the
 consumers of the vehicles subject to such standard;
 `(2) the savings in operating costs throughout the estimated average
 life of the vehicle in the type (or class) compared to any increase in
 the price of, or in the initial charges for, or maintenance expenses of,
 the vehicles which are likely to result from the imposition of the standard;
 `(3) the total projected amount of energy savings likely to result directly
 from the imposition of the standard;
 `(4) any lessening of the utility or the performance of the vehicles likely
 to result from the imposition of the standard;
 `(5) the impact of any lessening of competition or any change in foreign
 trade that is likely to result from the imposition of the standard;
 `(6) the need for reducing carbon dioxide emissions to mitigate the global
 greenhouse warming, as well as reducing other environmentally damaging
 energy-related pollutants;
 `(7) the need for national energy conservation; and
 `(8) other factors the Secretary considers relevant.'.
FUEL ECONOMY TESTING
 SEC. 10. (a) The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency
 shall conduct a study on the accuracy of fuel economy testing of passenger
 automobiles by the Administrator performed in accordance with procedures
 in effect as of the date of enactment of this Act, as compared to the
 actual performance of such automobiles when driven by average drivers
 under average driving conditions in the United States. In the course of
 such study, the Administrator shall, for each model type and year--
 (1) measure the fuel economy of a sampling of production passenger
 automobiles during the first month of manufacture for sale; and
 (2) repeat, over a period of years to be determined by the Secretary of
 Transportation, the measurements and calculations under section 503(d)(1) of
 the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act (15 U.S.C. 2003(d)(1)),
 for purposes of monitoring automobile performance in use to determine the
 extent, if any, of decline in fuel economy after such use.
 (b) The Administrator shall, within twelve months after the date of enactment
 of this Act and annually thereafter, submit to the Committee on Commerce,
 Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Energy and
 Commerce of the House of Representatives a report on the results of the
 study required by subsection (a) of this section. The report shall include--
 (1) a comparison between (A) fuel economy measured, for each model in the
 applicable model year, through testing procedures in effect as of the date
 of enactment of this Act and (B) fuel economy measured in accordance with
 subsection (a)(1) of this section;
 (2) a statement on any decline in fuel economy determined through repeat
 measurements and calculations under subsection (a)(2) of this section; and
 (3) any recommendations for legislative or other action.
 (c) To the maximum extent practicable, the Administrator shall, in carrying
 out measurements under subsection (a) (1) and (2) of this section, simulate
 average drivers and average driving conditions in the United States.
 (d) As used in this section, the term `production passenger automobile'
 means a passenger automobile manufactured for sale.
EXPLANATORY BOOKLET DISTRIBUTED BY SECRETARY OF ENERGY
 SEC. 11. (a)(1) Paragraph (1) of section 506(b) of the Motor Vehicle
 Information and Cost Savings Act (15 U.S.C. 2006(b)) is amended by adding
 at the end the following new sentence: `The Secretary of Energy shall
 distribute no less than one hundred booklets each year to each dealer
 and shall distribute as many in addition to one hundred booklets as are
 reasonably requested by dealers from time to time.'.
 (2) The amendment made by paragraph (1) of this subsection shall apply
 to the twelve-month period beginning on the first day of the first month
 after the date of enactment of this Act and corresponding twelve-month
 periods thereafter.
 (b) Section 506(e) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act
 (15 U.S.C. 2006(e)) is amended by striking `Federal Energy Administrator'
 and inserting in lieu thereof `Secretary of Energy'.
STUDY
 SEC. 12. (a) The Secretary of Transportation shall provide for a review
 to be undertaken by the National Academy of Sciences, in consultation
 with vehicle manufacturers, representatives of environmental and consumer
 groups, appropriate State and local officials, and representatives of
 labor, of the current state of research and development in light truck
 fuel economy and passenger automobile fuel economy and an assessment of
 the remaining potential for improving the fuel efficiency and reducing the
 energy consumption of passenger automobiles and light trucks. The assessment
 shall include all aspects of vehicle design, including engines, drive train,
 component parts, auto body, tires, and any other aspect contributing to
 the reduction of energy consumption. The National Academy shall, not later
 than two years after the date of enactment of this Act, submit a report
 to the Congress on the results of the review and assessment and in the
 report recommend research and development priorities that could result
 in the commercialization of fuel economy technology through the early
 years of the next century. The National Academy shall update the report
 every five years, beginning not later than seven years after the date of
 enactment of this Act, and shall submit each updated report to Congress.
 (b) As used in this section, `passenger automobile' and `light truck'
 have the meaning given those terms under section 501 of the Motor Vehicle
 Information and Cost Savings Act (15 U.S.C. 2001), as amended by this
 section 4 of this Act.
REPEATED VIOLATIONS OF AVERAGE FUEL ECONOMY STANDARD
 SEC. 13. (a) Section 508(b)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost
 Savings Act (15 U.S.C. 2008(b)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the
 following new subparagraph:
 `(C) Any civil penalty assessed under this subsection for a violation
 of section 507(a) (1) or (2) in model year 1995 or thereafter against a
 manufacturer shall be doubled if--
 `(i) the manufacturer violated section 507(a) (1) or (2) in the two model
 years immediately preceding the model year involved in the assessment; and
 `(ii) during each of such preceding years and the year involved in the
 assessment, the applicable average fuel economy standard exceeded the
 average fuel economy of the vehicles manufactured by such manufacturer by
 five-tenths of a mile per gallon or more.'.
 (b) Section 507(a)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings
 Act (15 U.S.C. 2007(a)(1)) is amended by inserting `including sections
 514 and 515,' immediately after `section 502(b)),'.