HR 3052 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3052
To provide for the restoration of natural resources damaged by oilspills
and hazardous substances.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 28, 1989
Mr. STUDDS introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to
the Committees on Merchant Marine and Fisheries, Ways and Means, Energy and
Commerce, and Public Works and Transportation
A BILL
To provide for the restoration of natural resources damaged by oilspills
and hazardous substances.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be cited as the
 `Natural Resources Restoration Act of 1989'.
FINDINGS
 SEC. 2. The recent series of oilspills from vessels in Alaska, Delaware,
 Texas, and Rhode Island have demonstrated the vulnerability of the marine
 environment to maritime disasters involving spills of oil or hazardous
 substances.
 (b) These types of spills risk severe short- and long-term damage to the
 fisheries, marine mammals, endangered species, and other living resources
 and their habitat that depend on a healthy marine environment.
 (c) Those who are responsible for such spills must bear full responsibility
 for restoring the marine environment and its living resources and for
 compensating those who have otherwise suffered losses.
 (d) The ability of Federal and State trustees to ensure that natural
 resources are fully restored depends upon their ability to assess the
 extent of the harm caused by such spills in order to recover from those
 who are responsible.
 (e) The current Federal rules governing the assessment of damages to
 natural resources seriously undervalue the worth of those resources and
 frustrate their full and complete restoration.
 (f) The current prohibition on the use of the Superfund to finance such
 assessments by Federal or State trustees seriously impedes their ability to
 conduct such assessments and allows those who are responsible for Superfund
 sites to escape responsibility for restoring the environment.
PURPOSE
 SEC. 3. The purpose of this Act is--
 (A) to authorize the use of the Superfund to finance the assessment by
 Federal and State natural trustees of damages to fisheries and wildlife
 generally, including marine mammals, endangered species, and other living
 resources, caused by spills of oil and hazardous substances; and
 (B) to require the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to
 promulgate regulations governing the assessment of damages to natural
 resources under the trusteeship of the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans
 and Atmosphere, the Director of the United States and Wildlife Service or
 the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency resulting from
 spills of oil or hazardous substances.
FINANCING DAMAGE ASSESSMENTS
 SEC. 4. Section 9507 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 9507)
 is amended in subsection (c)(1)(A)(ii) by striking `other than paragraphs
 (1) and (2) thereof,' and inserting in lieu thereof the following: `other
 than paragraph (2) thereof,'.
USE OF RECOVERED FUNDS
 SEC. 5. Notwithstanding any other law, sums recovered by the National
 Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the Director of the United States
 Fish and Wildlife Service, and other Federal and State natural resource
 trustees for damages to natural resources resulting from spills of oil
 or hazardous substances shall be retained by the trustee for use only to
 restore, replace, or acquire the equivalent of such natural resources.
REGULATIONS
 SEC. 6. Not later than two years after the date of enactment of this Act,
 the President, acting through the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and
 Atmosphere, and in consultation with the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency and the Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife
 Service, shall promulgate regulations governing the assessment of damages
 for injury to, destruction of, or loss of natural resources resulting
 from a release of oil or hazardous substances under the trusteeship of
 the Under Secretary, the Director or the Administrator.