[Congressional Bills 111th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]
[H.R. 1135 Introduced in House (IH)]

111th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 1135

 To amend title 49, United States Code, to provide for enhanced 
 motorcoach safety, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 February 23, 2009

 Mr. Shuster (for himself and Ms. Eddie Bernice Johnson of Texas) 
 introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on 
Transportation and Infrastructure, and in addition to the Committees on 
 Energy and Commerce, Ways and Means, and Small Business, for a period 
 to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for 
consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the 
 committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To amend title 49, United States Code, to provide for enhanced 
 motorcoach safety, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Bus Uniform 
Standards and Enhanced Safety Act of 2009'' or the ``BUSES Act of 
2009''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
 TITLE I--MOTORCOACH SAFETY

Sec. 101. Improved oversight of providers of motorcoach services and 
 other motor carriers of passengers.
Sec. 102. Motorcoach driver training.
Sec. 103. Review of requirements for commercial driver's license 
 passenger endorsement.
Sec. 104. Improved physical fitness oversight and commercial driver 
 medical certificates.
Sec. 105. Commercial motor vehicle safety inspection programs.
Sec. 106. Registration of motor carriers.
Sec. 107. Effective periods of registration.
Sec. 108. Duties of employers and employees.
Sec. 109. Required safety standards for motorcoaches.
TITLE II--CREDIT FOR COST OF MOTORCOACHES COMPLYING WITH FEDERAL SAFETY 
 REQUIREMENTS

Sec. 201. Credit for costs of motorcoaches complying with Federal 
 safety requirements.
 TITLE III--OTHER PROVISIONS

Sec. 301. Department of Transportation grants.
Sec. 302. Small business administration loans and loan guarantees.
Sec. 303. Authorization of appropriations.

 TITLE I--MOTORCOACH SAFETY

SEC. 101. IMPROVED OVERSIGHT OF PROVIDERS OF MOTORCOACH SERVICES AND 
 OTHER MOTOR CARRIERS OF PASSENGERS.

 (a) In General.--Section 31144 of title 49, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(h) Sustained Monitoring of Owners and Operators of Commercial 
Motor Vehicles Designed or Used To Transport Passengers.--
 ``(1) Safety monitoring.--Not later than 3 years after the 
 date of enactment of this subsection, the Secretary shall 
 require monitoring on a regular basis, through a comprehensive 
 safety analysis, of the safety performance of each owner or 
 operator of a commercial motor vehicle designed or used to 
 transport passengers.
 ``(2) Elements of monitoring and safety enforcement.--
 Regulations issued under paragraph (1) shall provide for the 
 following:
 ``(A) Monitoring of the safety performance of an 
 owner or operator of a commercial motor vehicle 
 designed or used to transport passengers in critical 
 safety categories, as defined in the regulation. 
 Monitoring activities shall include activities that can 
 be conducted either on-site at the offices of the owner 
 or operator or off-site.
 ``(B) Progressive interventions designed to correct 
 unsafe practices of an owner or operator of a 
 commercial motor vehicle designed or used to transport 
 passengers. In the event such practices are not 
 corrected, the interventions shall result in an 
 enforcement action and, if necessary, a final 
 determination that the owner or operator is not fit and 
 prohibited from operating as provided in subsection 
 (c)(2).
 ``(3) Enforcement strike forces.--In addition to the 
 enhanced monitoring and enforcement actions required by 
 paragraph (2), the Secretary may organize special enforcement 
 strike forces targeting owners or operators of commercial motor 
 vehicles designed or used to transport passengers, when and 
 where the Secretary considers appropriate.''.
 (b) Revision of Safety Fitness Determination Methodology.--Not 
later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
Secretary of Transportation shall revise the safety fitness 
determination methodology of the Department of Transportation 
established pursuant to section 31144 of title 49, United States Code, 
to ensure that such methodology meets the goals of Safety 
Recommendation H-99-6 of the National Transportation Safety Board, 
issued February 26, 1999.

SEC. 102. MOTORCOACH DRIVER TRAINING.

 The Secretary of Transportation shall prescribe regulations 
establishing minimum training requirements for drivers seeking a 
commercial driver's license passenger endorsement. The training shall 
include certification that a driver has met the requirements 
established by the Secretary. The training may be provided by an owner 
or operator of a commercial motor vehicle designed or used to transport 
passengers if the owner or operator has in effect a training program 
that meets or exceeds the minimum training requirements established by 
the Secretary.

SEC. 103. REVIEW OF REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S LICENSE 
 PASSENGER ENDORSEMENT.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall review and assess 
the current knowledge and skill testing requirements for a commercial 
driver's license passenger endorsement to determine if improvements are 
needed to ensure the safe operation of commercial motor vehicles 
designed or used to transport passengers.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 120 days after completion of the review 
and assessment under subsection (a), the Secretary shall submit to the 
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of 
Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation of the Senate a report on the review and assessment 
conducted under subsection (a), together with a description of plans to 
implement improvements.

SEC. 104. IMPROVED PHYSICAL FITNESS OVERSIGHT AND COMMERCIAL DRIVER 
 MEDICAL CERTIFICATES.

 (a) Examination Requirement for National Registry of Medical 
Examiners.--Section 31149(c)(1)(D) of title 49, United States Code, is 
amended to read as follows:
 ``(D) develop requirements applicable to a medical 
 examiner seeking to be listed in the national registry 
 established under this section, including--
 ``(i) as appropriate, specific courses and 
 materials that must be completed;
 ``(ii) a rigorous examination for which a 
 passing grade must be achieved; and
 ``(iii) at a minimum, self-certification 
 requirements to verify that the medical 
 examiner has completed specific training, 
 including refresher courses;''.
 (b) Additional Oversight of Licensing Authorities.--
 (1) In general.--Section 31149(c)(1) of title 49, United 
 States Code, is amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (E) by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in subparagraph (F) by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(G) each year, review the implementation of 
 commercial driver's license requirements of a minimum 
 of 10 States to assess the accuracy and validity of 
 physical examination reports and medical certificates 
 submitted by certified medical examiners.''.
 (2) Internal oversight policy.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of 
 Transportation shall establish an oversight policy and 
 process within the Department of Transportation for the 
 purposes of carrying out the requirement of section 
 31149(c)(1)(G) of title 49, United States Code, as 
 added by paragraph (1).
 (B) Effective date.--The requirement of section 
 31149(c)(1)(G) of such title, as added by paragraph 
 (1), shall take effect on the date that the oversight 
 policies and processes are established pursuant to 
 subparagraph (A).
 (c) Deadline for Establishment of National Registry of Medical 
Examiners.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary shall establish the national registry of medical 
examiners required by section 31149(d)(1) of such title.
 (d) Additional Function of Medical Review Board.--Section 
31149(a)(1) of title 49, United States Code, is amended to read as 
follows:
 ``(1) Establishment and function.--The Secretary shall 
 establish a Medical Review Board with the following functions:
 ``(A) Providing the Federal Motor Carrier Safety 
 Administration with medical advice and recommendations 
 on medical standards and guidelines for--
 ``(i) the physical qualifications of 
 operators of commercial motor vehicles;
 ``(ii) medical examiner education; and
 ``(iii) medical research.
 ``(B) Providing the Secretary with advice and 
 recommendations concerning the criteria to be used for 
 evaluating medical examiners for admission to the 
 national registry established under this section.''.

SEC. 105. COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY INSPECTION PROGRAMS.

 (a) Study.--The Secretary of Transportation shall conduct a study 
to review the regulations prescribed pursuant to section 31142(b) of 
title 49, United States Code, relating to commercial motor vehicle 
safety inspections.
 (b) Contents.--The study shall include--
 (1) an assessment of the risks associated with improperly 
 maintained or inspected commercial motor vehicles designed or 
 used to transport passengers;
 (2) an assessment of the effectiveness of the Government 
 standards for inspection of commercial motor vehicles designed 
 or used to transport passengers to mitigate the risks 
 identified in paragraph (1) and to ensure the safe and proper 
 operating condition of commercial motor vehicles subject to 
 section 31142 of title 49, United States Code;
 (3) an assessment of the effectiveness of at least 2 
 alternatives to the current standards prescribed pursuant to 
 section 31142 of title 49, United States Code; and
 (4) a comparison of the costs and benefits of the 
 alternatives and the current standards prescribed pursuant to 
 section 31142 of title 49, United States Code.
 (c) Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than one year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the 
 Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of 
 Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate a report on the results of the 
 study.
 (2) Contents.--The report shall include--
 (A) the findings and conclusions of the Secretary 
 with respect to the study;
 (B) any recommendation of the Secretary for 
 improving the commercial motor vehicle safety 
 inspection standards; and
 (C) any recommendations of the Secretary for 
 additional authority to improve commercial motor 
 vehicle safety inspections.

SEC. 106. REGISTRATION OF MOTOR CARRIERS.

 Section 13902(b) of title 49, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (2) through (8) as 
 paragraphs (3) through (9), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following:
 ``(2) Review of passenger carrier applications.--The 
 Secretary shall not register a motor carrier of passengers 
 under subsection (a)(1) until the application for registration 
 filed under that subsection is reviewed to ensure that the 
 applicant is willing and able to comply with the requirements 
 of that subsection. This review process shall include a 
 determination of whether the applicant is or has been related, 
 through common ownership, common management, or common familial 
 relationship to any other motor carrier of passengers within 3 
 years of the filing of the application for registration. If 
 following this review it is determined that the applicant has 
 failed to disclose such relationships with other such carriers, 
 the Secretary may withhold the registration.''.

SEC. 107. EFFECTIVE PERIODS OF REGISTRATION.

 Section 13905 of title 49, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by striking subsection (d)(1) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(1) In general.--On application of the registrant, the 
 Secretary may amend or revoke a registration. On complaint or 
 on the Secretary's own initiative and after notice and an 
 opportunity for a proceeding, the Secretary may--
 ``(A) suspend, amend, or revoke any part of the 
 registration of a motor carrier, broker, or freight 
 forwarder for willful failure to comply with this part, 
 an applicable regulation or order of the Secretary or 
 of the Board (including the accessibility requirements 
 established by the Secretary under subpart H of part 37 
 of title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, or such 
 successor regulations to those accessibility 
 requirements as the Secretary may issue, for 
 transportation provided by an over-the-road bus), or a 
 condition of its registration;
 ``(B) suspend, amend, or revoke any part of the 
 registration of a motor carrier, broker, or freight 
 forwarder--
 ``(i) for failure to pay a civil penalty 
 imposed under chapter 5, 51, 149, or 311 of 
 this title; or
 ``(ii) for failure to arrange and abide by 
 an acceptable payment plan for such civil 
 penalty, within 90 days of the time specified 
 by order of the Secretary for the payment of 
 such penalty; and
 ``(C) deny, suspend, amend, or revoke any part of a 
 registration of a motor carrier of passengers for 
 failure to disclose in its application for registration 
 a material fact relevant to its willingness and ability 
 to comply with this part, an applicable regulation or 
 order of the Secretary or of the Board, or a condition 
 of its registration.
 Subparagraph (B) shall not apply to any person who is unable to 
 pay a civil penalty because such person is a debtor in a case 
 under chapter 11 of title 11.''; and
 (2) in subsection (e) by inserting ``or if the Secretary 
 determines that the registrant has failed to disclose a 
 material fact in its application for registration in accordance 
 with subsection (d)(1)(C),'' after ``registrant,''.

SEC. 108. DUTIES OF EMPLOYERS AND EMPLOYEES.

 Section 31135 of title 49, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (d) as subsection (e); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (c) the following:
 ``(d) Motor Carriers of Passengers.--If the Secretary finds that 
common ownership, common management, or common familial relationship 
between 2 or more motor carriers of passengers is being used to enable 
any or all such motor carriers of passengers to avoid compliance, or 
mask or otherwise conceal noncompliance, with regulations on commercial 
motor vehicle safety prescribed under this subchapter, or an order of 
the Secretary issued under authority of such regulations, the Secretary 
may deny, suspend, amend, or revoke all or part of any such motor 
carrier's registration under section 13905.''.

SEC. 109. REQUIRED SAFETY STANDARDS FOR MOTORCOACHES.

 (a) Safety Standards for New Motorcoaches.--
 (1) Occupant protection systems.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 3 years after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of 
 Transportation shall prescribe standards for motorcoach 
 occupant protection systems that account for frontal 
 impact collisions, side impact collisions, rear impact 
 collisions, and rollovers. Such standards shall not 
 eliminate or lessen the occupant protection standards 
 currently in effect and shall--
 (i) be based on sound scientific research, 
 extensive testing, and analysis by the National 
 Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
 consistent with the recommendations of the 
 National Transportation Safety Board regarding 
 motorcoach occupant protection; and
 (ii) take into consideration the various 
 types of motorcoaches and the various uses and 
 configurations of the occupant compartment as 
 well as local, State, and Federal size and 
 weight limits and restrictions.
 (B) Contents.--Such standards may include seatbelts 
 or other occupant protection systems, passive or 
 otherwise, for passengers, including those in child 
 safety restraint systems.
 (C) Consultation.--Prior to promulgating such 
 standards, the Secretary shall consult with affected 
 parties, as appropriate, on the proceedings leading to 
 the promulgation of the standards required by this 
 subparagraph. Any communications concerning such 
 consultation shall be included in the public record of 
 the proceedings leading to the promulgation of such 
 standards and shall be subject to public comment.
 (2) Roof strength.--
 (A) Research and testing.--The Secretary shall 
 conduct research and testing on roof strength to 
 determine the method or methods that provide adequate 
 survival space for all seating positions.
 (B) Standards.--Not later than 3 years after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall 
 prescribe roof strength standards for motorcoaches 
 based on the results of such research and testing and 
 taking into account all motorcoach window dimensions 
 and highway size and weight restrictions.
 (3) Window glazing.--
 (A) Research and testing.--The Secretary shall 
 conduct research and testing on advanced window glazing 
 and securement to determine the best method or methods 
 for window glazing to prevent motorcoach occupant 
 protection ejection.
 (B) Standards.--Not later than 3 years after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall 
 revise window glazing standards for motorcoaches based 
 on the results of such research and testing and taking 
 into account all motorcoach window dimensions and 
 highway height and weight restrictions.
 (4) Fire prevention and mitigation.--
 (A) Research and testing.--The Secretary shall 
 conduct research and testing to determine the most 
 prevalent causes of motorcoach fires and the best 
 methods to prevent such fires and to mitigate the 
 effect of such fires, both inside and outside the 
 motorcoach.
 (B) Standards.--Not later than 3 years after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall 
 promulgate fire prevention and mitigation standards for 
 motorcoaches, based on the results of the Secretary's 
 research and testing, taking into account motorcoach 
 highway size and weight restrictions.
 (5) Emergency evacuation design.--
 (A) Research and testing.--The Secretary shall 
 conduct research and testing to determine any necessary 
 changes in motorcoach design standards, including 
 windows and doors, to improve motorcoach emergency 
 evacuation.
 (B) Standards.--Not later than 3 years after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall 
 promulgate motorcoach emergency evacuation design 
 standards, including--
 (i) window standards that enhance the use 
 of windows for emergency evacuation to the 
 maximum extent feasible, while not detracting 
 from the window glazing standards to be 
 promulgated under this subsection; and
 (ii) door standards, including design of 
 the wheelchair lift door for emergency 
 evacuation use. Such standards shall take into 
 account motorcoach highway size and weight 
 restrictions.
 (6) General provisions.--
 (A) Effect on state and local laws.--
 Notwithstanding any provision of chapter 301 of title 
 49, United States Code, a State or a political 
 subdivision of a State may not adopt or enforce a law 
 or regulation related to a motorcoach crash avoidance 
 and occupant protection system prior to the effective 
 date of the regulations promulgated pursuant to this 
 subsection.
 (B) Applicability of standards.--The standards 
 prescribed under paragraphs (1) through (5) shall 
 require motorcoaches manufactured after the last day of 
 3-year period beginning on the date on which such 
 standards are prescribed to be engineered and equipped 
 to meet such standards.
 (C) Limitation on statutory construction.--Nothing 
 in this subsection or in the regulations prescribed 
 pursuant to this subsection shall be construed as 
 indicating an intention by Congress to affect, change, 
 or modify in any way the liability, if any, of a 
 motorcoach manufacturer or motorcoach owner or operator 
 under applicable law to buses or motorcoaches, 
 manufactured and operated with or without passenger 
 seat belts or other passenger restraint systems, prior 
 to the effective date of the regulations promulgated 
 pursuant to this subsection.
 (b) Safety Standards for Existing Motorcoaches.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 3 years after the date of 
 enactment of this subsection, the Secretary shall prescribe 
 standards for motorcoaches that are manufactured before the 
 date that is 3 years after the date on which the standards 
 required under subsection (a) are prescribed, taking into 
 account the limitations posed by the need to retrofit existing 
 motorcoaches. Such standards shall have the same objectives as 
 the standards required under paragraphs (1) through (5) of 
 subsection (a), but may differ from such standards based on 
 what is technically feasible for existing motorcoaches.
 (2) Standards for component parts and equipment.--In lieu 
 of promulgating comprehensive standards for motorcoaches under 
 paragraph (1), the Secretary may develop standards for various 
 component parts and equipment of motorcoaches that would 
 increase occupant protection.
 (3) Effective date.--The effective date for the standards 
 prescribed pursuant to this subsection shall be the same as the 
 effective date for the standards prescribed pursuant to 
 subsection (a).
 (4) Certification.--The Secretary shall establish, by 
 regulation, a system whereby the motorcoaches to which the 
 standards prescribed under paragraph (1) apply shall be 
 certified as in compliance with such standards. Such 
 certification shall be carried out by the Secretary or by 
 private parties at the discretion and authorization of the 
 Secretary.
 (c) Compliance Timetables.--
 (1) Effective date.--The effective date of the standards 
 prescribed under subsections (a) and (b) shall be 3 years after 
 the date on which such final standards are promulgated. All 
 motorcoaches manufactured after such date shall comply with 
 such standards.
 (2) Phased in requirements.--
 (A) First phase.--Not later than 6 years after the 
 effective date of the standards prescribed under 
 subsections (a) and (b), a motorcoach owner or operator 
 shall ensure that at least 50 percent of the 
 motorcoaches used by the owner or operator comply with 
 either the standards prescribed under subsection (a) or 
 the standards prescribed under subsection (b), as 
 appropriate.
 (B) Second phase.--Not later than 12 years after 
 the effective date of the standards prescribed under 
 subsections (a) and (b), a motorcoach owner or operator 
 shall ensure that 100 percent of the motorcoaches used 
 by the owner or operator comply with either of such 
 standards.
 (3) State and local laws.--
 (A) Liability of motorcoach manufacturers and 
 owners and operators.--Nothing in this section shall be 
 construed to affect, change, or modify in any way the 
 liability, if any, of a motorcoach manufacturer or 
 motorcoach owner or operator under applicable law to 
 buses or motorcoaches unless such manufacturer or owner 
 or operator is shown not to be in compliance with the 
 timetables set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2).
 (B) Preemption.--Notwithstanding any provision of 
 chapter 301 of title 49, United States Code, a State or 
 a political subdivision of a State may not adopt or 
 enforce a law or regulation related to any of the 
 standards required by subsections (a) and (b) during 
 the time periods set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2).
 (d) Definition of Motorcoach.--In this section, the term 
``motorcoach'' means an over-the-road bus, characterized by an elevated 
passenger deck located over a baggage compartment.

TITLE II--CREDIT FOR COST OF MOTORCOACHES COMPLYING WITH FEDERAL SAFETY 
 REQUIREMENTS

SEC. 201. CREDIT FOR COSTS OF MOTORCOACHES COMPLYING WITH FEDERAL 
 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter 1 of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after section 45Q 
the following new section:

``SEC. 45R. CREDIT FOR COSTS OF MOTORCOACHES COMPLYING WITH FEDERAL 
 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.

 ``(a) In General.--For purposes of section 38, the qualified 
motorcoach safety credit determined under this subsection for any 
taxable year is an amount equal to 10 percent of the aggregate amount 
paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the taxable year for--
 ``(1) qualified new motorcoaches, and
 ``(2) such improvements to any existing motorcoach which is 
 used by the taxpayer as are necessary for such motorcoach to 
 satisfy the requirements prescribed under section 109(b) of the 
 Bus Uniform Standards and Enhanced Safety Act of 2009.
 ``(b) Limitation.--The credit determined under subsection (a) with 
respect to any motorcoach shall not exceed $45,000.
 ``(c) Qualified New and Existing Motorcoaches.--For purposes of 
this section--
 ``(1) Qualified motorcoach.--The term `qualified new 
 motorcoach' means any motorcoach--
 ``(A) the original use of which commences with the 
 taxpayer,
 ``(B) which is acquired for use or lease by the 
 taxpayer and not for resale,
 ``(C) which is property of a character subject to 
 an allowance for depreciation,
 ``(D) which is made by a manufacturer,
 ``(E) which is manufactured after the specified 
 effective date, and
 ``(F) which meets the requirements prescribed under 
 section 109(a) of the Bus Uniform Standards and 
 Enhanced Safety Act of 2009.
 ``(2) Existing motorcoach.--The term `existing motorcoach' 
 means any motorcoach--
 ``(A) which is property of a character subject to 
 an allowance for depreciation, and
 ``(B) which is manufactured on or before the 
 specified effective date.
 ``(d) Other Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this 
section--
 ``(1) Motorcoach.--The term `motorcoach' means any vehicle 
 to which the requirements prescribed under section 109(a) of 
 the Bus Uniform Standards and Enhanced Safety Act of 2009, 
 apply, or would apply if such vehicle were manufactured after 
 the specified effective date.
 ``(2) Specified effective date.--The term `specified 
 effective date' means the effective date described in section 
 109(c)(1) of the Bus Uniform Standards and Enhanced Safety Act 
 of 2009.
 ``(3) Basis reduction.--The basis of any property for which 
 a credit is determined under subsection (a) shall be reduced by 
 the amount of the credit so determined.
 ``(4) Recapture.--The Secretary shall, by regulations, 
 provide for recapturing the benefit of any credit determined 
 under subsection (a) with respect to any property which ceases 
 to be property eligible for such credit.
 ``(5) Property used outside united states, etc., not 
 qualified.--No credit shall be determined under subsection (a) 
 with respect to--
 ``(A) the portion of the cost of any property taken 
 into account under section 179, or
 ``(B) any property referred to in section 50(b).
 ``(6) Election not to take credit.--No credit shall be 
 determined under subsection (a) for any vehicle if the taxpayer 
 elects to not have this section apply to such vehicle.
 ``(e) Termination.--No credit shall be determined under this 
subsection for any taxable year ending after December 31, 2026.''.
 (b) Denial of Double Benefit.--Section 280C of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection:
 ``(g) Credit for Costs of Motorcoaches Complying With Federal 
Safety Requirements.--No deduction shall be allowed for that portion of 
the expenses otherwise allowable as a deduction for the taxable year 
which is equal to the amount of the credit determined for the taxable 
year under section 45R(a).''.
 (c) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 38(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is 
 amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (34), by 
 striking the period at the end of paragraph (35) and inserting 
 ``, plus'', and by adding at the end the following:
 ``(36) the qualified motorcoach safety credit determined 
 under section 45R(a).''.
 (2) Section 1016(a) of such Code is amended by striking 
 ``and'' at the end of paragraph (37), by striking the period at 
 the end of paragraph (38) and inserting ``, and'', and by 
 adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(38) to the extent provided in section 45R(d)(3).''.
 (3) Section 6501(m) of such Code is amended by inserting 
 ``45R(d)(6),'' after ``45H(g),''.
 (4) The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of 
 subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting 
 after the item relating to section 45Q the following new item:

``Sec. 45R. Credit for costs of motorcoaches complying with Federal 
 safety requirements.''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years ending after December 31, 2009.

 TITLE III--OTHER PROVISIONS

SEC. 301. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION GRANTS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Transportation shall develop and 
administer grants, not to exceed $20,000 per vehicle, for owners and 
operators of motorcoaches in order to assist with the cost of 
retrofitting motorcoaches for purposes of complying with the standards 
prescribed under section 109.
 (b) Eligibility.--To be eligible for a grant under subsection (a), 
a motorcoach owner or operator shall--
 (1) have a fleet of not more than 25 motorcoaches;
 (2) have total annual revenue of less than $5,000,000; and
 (3) demonstrate to the Secretary that--
 (A) the owner or operator has been in business as 
 an over-the-road charter bus owner or operator for not 
 less than 3 consecutive years; and
 (B) the owner or operator was unable to recover, 
 through allowed tax credits established by section 45R 
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by 
 section 201 of this Act, in a consecutive 2-year 
 period, the full cost of retrofitting motorcoaches in 
 order to comply with the applicable standards.
 (c) Grant Requirements.--A grant under this section shall be 
subject to all of the terms and conditions applicable to subrecipients 
who provide intercity bus transportation under section 5311(f) of title 
49, United States Code, and such other terms and conditions as the 
Secretary may prescribe.

SEC. 302. SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION LOANS AND LOAN GUARANTEES.

 Section 7(a) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 636(a)) is 
amended--
 (1) by redesignating the second paragraph (32), relating to 
 the increased veteran participation program, as paragraph (33); 
 and
 (2) by adding after paragraph (33) (as so redesignated) the 
 following:
 ``(34) Buses and motorcoaches.--In carrying out this 
 subsection with respect to the over-the-road charter bus 
 industry, the following shall apply:
 ``(A) The Administrator shall adopt underwriting 
 criteria specific to that industry.
 ``(B) The Administrator shall make available the 
 assistance under this subsection to members of that 
 industry to facilitate retrofitting of buses and 
 motorcoaches for occupant protection.
 ``(C) Multiple buses or motorcoaches shall be 
 treated as a single source of collateral.
 ``(D) A member of that industry who owns a single 
 bus or motorcoach shall be treated as eligible for such 
 assistance, without regard to whether the member 
 otherwise meets the applicable size standard for 
 eligibility.
 ``(E) The Administrator shall provide any applicant 
 who is a member of that industry with counseling and 
 advice regarding the other assistance programs of the 
 Administration that may be available to members of that 
 industry.''.

SEC. 303. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of 
Transportation such sums as may be necessary to carry out the 
authorities of the Secretary under this Act, including the amendments 
made by this Act.
 <all>