HR 3394 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3394
To provide for a comprehensive compensation and liability scheme for discharges
of oil, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
October 3, 1989
Mr. JONES of North Carolina (for himself, Mr. ANDERSON, Mr. ROE, Mr. DAVIS,
Mr. HAMMERSCHMIDT, Mr. WALKER, Mr. TAUZIN, Mr. NOWAK, Mr. STANGELAND,
Mr. SCHEUER, Ms. SCHNEIDER, Mr. YOUNG of Alaska, and Mr. STUDDS) introduced
the following bill; which was referred jointly to the Committees on Merchant
Marine and Fisheries, Public Works and Transportation, and Science, Space,
and Technology
A BILL
To provide for a comprehensive compensation and liability scheme for discharges
of oil, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Oil Pollution Act of 1989'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The contents of this Act are as follows:
Section 1. Short title and table of contents.
TITLE I--OIL POLLUTION LIABILITY AND COMPENSATION
Sec. 1001. Definitions.
Sec. 1002. Elements of liability.
Sec. 1003. Defenses to liability.
Sec. 1004. Limits on liability.
Sec. 1005. Interest.
Sec. 1006. Natural resources.
Sec. 1007. Recovery by foreign claimant.
Sec. 1008. Recovery by responsible party or cargo owner.
Sec. 1009. Contribution.
Sec. 1010. Indemnification agreements.
Sec. 1011. Consultation on removal actions.
Sec. 1012. Uses of the Fund.
Sec. 1013. Claims procedure.
Sec. 1014. Designation and advertisement.
Sec. 1015. Subrogation.
Sec. 1016. Financial responsibility.
Sec. 1017. Litigation, jurisdiction, and venue.
Sec. 1018. Relationship to other law.
Sec. 1019. State financial responsibility.
Sec. 1020. Effective date.
TITLE II--CONFORMING AMENDMENTS
Sec. 2001. Intervention on the High Seas Act.
Sec. 2002. Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
Sec. 2003. Deepwater Port Act.
Sec. 2004. Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act Amendments of 1978.
Sec. 2005. Effective date.
TITLE III--IMPLEMENTATION OF INTERNATIONAL CONVENTIONS
Sec. 3001. Definitions.
Sec. 3002. Applicability of conventions.
Sec. 3003. Recognition of International Fund.
Sec. 3004. Action in United States courts.
Sec. 3005. Contribution to International Fund.
Sec. 3006. Recognition of foreign judgments.
Sec. 3007. Convention financial responsibility.
Sec. 3008. Regulations.
TITLE IV--PREVENTION AND REMOVAL
Sec. 4001. Definitions.
Subtitle A--Prevention
Sec. 4101. Review of alcohol and drug abuse and other matters in issuing
licenses, certificates of registry, and merchant mariners' documents.
Sec. 4102. Term of certificates of registry and merchant mariners' documents.
Sec. 4103. Suspension and revocation of licenses, certificates of registry,
and merchant mariners' documents for alcohol and drug abuse.
Sec. 4104. Removal of master or individual in charge.
Sec. 4105. Access to National Driver Register.
Sec. 4106. Manning standards for foreign tank vessels.
Sec. 4107. Vessel traffic service systems.
Sec. 4108. State authority to require state pilotage for tankers.
Sec. 4109. Great Lakes pilotage.
Sec. 4110. Study on tanker navigation safety standards.
Sec. 4111. Dredge modification study.
Sec. 4112. Use of liners.
Subtitle B--Removal
Sec. 4201. Federal removal authority.
Sec. 4202. Contingency plans.
Sec. 4203. Strike teams.
Sec. 4204. Coast Guard vessel design.
Sec. 4205. Removal resource inventory.
Subtitle C--Miscellaneous
Sec. 4301. Increased penalties.
Sec. 4302. Deposit of certain penalties into Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund.
Sec. 4303. Hazardous substances.
TITLE V--PRINCE WILLIAM SOUND OIL SPILL REMOVAL
Sec. 5001. Short title.
Sec. 5002. Definitions.
Sec. 5003. Tank vessel requirements.
Sec. 5004. Vessel traffic service system.
Sec. 5005. Equipment and personnel requirements.
Sec. 5006. Use of local services.
Sec. 5007. Authority of State of Alaska.
Sec. 5008. Environmental assessments.
Sec. 5009. Report.
TITLE VI--MISCELLANEOUS
Sec. 6001. Statutory waivers.
Sec. 6002. Savings clause.
Sec. 6003. Qualified authorizing legislation.
TITLE VII--RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
Sec. 7001. Oil pollution research and development program.
TITLE VIII--PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALASKA OIL
Sec. 8001. Trans-Alaska Pipeline Fund.
Sec. 8002. Effective date.
TITLE I--OIL POLLUTION LIABILITY AND COMPENSATION
SEC. 1001. DEFINITIONS.
 For the purposes of this Act, the term--
 (1) `act of God' means an unanticipated grave natural disaster or other
 natural phenomenon of an exceptional, inevitable, and irresistible
 character the effects of which could not have been prevented or avoided
 by the exercise of due care or foresight;
 (2) `claim' means a request, made in writing for a sum certain, for
 compensation for damages or removal costs resulting from an incident;
 (3) `claimant' means any person who presents a claim for compensation
 under this Act;
 (4) `damages' means damages for injury to, destruction of, or loss of
 natural resources and damages for economic loss specified in section 1002(b)
 of this Act, and includes the cost of assessing these damages;
 (5) `discharge' means any emission (other than natural seepage), intentional
 or unintentional, and includes, but is not limited to, spilling, leaking,
 pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, or dumping;
 (6) `exclusive economic zone' means the zone established by Presidential
 Proclamation Numbered 5030, dated March 10, 1983;
 (7) `facility' means any structure, group of structures, equipment, or
 device (other than a vessel) which is used for one or more of the following
 purposes: exploring for, drilling for, producing, storing, handling,
 transferring, processing, or transporting oil. Such term includes any motor
 vehicle, rolling stock, or pipeline used for one or more of these purposes;
 (8) `foreign offshore unit' means a facility which is located, in whole or
 part, in the territorial sea of, or on or over the continental shelf of,
 a foreign country;
 (9) `Fund' means the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund, established by section
 9509 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986;
 (10) `gross ton' means tonnage measured in accordance with the provisions
 of the International Convention on Tonnage Measurement of Ships, 1969;
 (11) `guarantor' means any person, other than the responsible party,
 who provides evidence of financial responsibility for a responsible party
 under this Act;
 (12) `incident' means any occurrence or series of occurrences having the
 same origin, involving one or more vessels, facilities, or any combination
 thereof, resulting in the discharge or substantial threat of discharge
 of oil;
 (13) `Indian tribe' means any Indian tribe, band, nation, or other organized
 group or community, but not including any Alaska Native regional or village
 corporation, which is recognized as eligible for the special programs and
 services provided by the United States to Indians because of their status
 as Indians;
 (14) `lessee' means a person holding a leasehold interest in an oil or gas
 lease on lands beneath navigable waters (as such term is defined in section
 2(a) of the Submerged Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1301(a))) or on submerged lands
 of the Outer Continental Shelf, granted or maintained under applicable
 State law or the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act;
 (15) `mobile offshore drilling unit' means a vessel (other than a
 self-elevating lift vessel) capable of use as an offshore facility;
 (16) `national contingency plan' means the national contingency plan
 published under section 311(c) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1321(c)) or revised under section 105 of the Comprehensive
 Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (42 U.S.C. 9605);
 (17) `natural resources' includes land, fish, wildlife, biota, air, water,
 ground water, drinking water supplies, and other such resources belonging to,
 managed by, held in trust by, appertaining to, or otherwise controlled by
 the United States (including the resources of the exclusive economic zone),
 any State or local government or Indian tribe, or any foreign government;
 (18) `navigable waters' means the waters of the United States, including
 the territorial sea;
 (19) `offshore facility' means--
 (A) a facility (other than a self-elevating lift vessel) which is located,
 in whole or part, on lands beneath navigable waters (as the term is defined
 in section 2(a) of the Submerged Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1301(a))) or on the
 outer Continental Shelf (as defined in section 2 of the Outer Continental
 Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1331)); and
 (B) a deepwater port licensed under the Deepwater Port Act of 1974 (33
 U.S.C. 1501-1524);
 (20) `oil' means petroleum, including crude oil or any fraction or residue
 therefrom;
 (21) `onshore facility' means any facility (including motor vehicles
 and rolling stock) of any kind, any portion of which is located in, on,
 or under, any land within the United States other than submerged land;
 (22) `owner' means any person holding title to, or in the absence of title
 any other indicia of ownership (whether by lease, permit, contract, license,
 or other form of agreement), of a vessel or facility or of oil carried in
 bulk as cargo on a vessel; except that the term does not include a person
 who, without participating in the management or operation of a vessel or
 facility or in the transportation of the oil, holds indicia of ownership
 primarily to protect a security interest therein;
 (23) `person' means an individual, corporation, partnership, association,
 Federal agency, State, municipality, commission, or political subdivision
 of a State, or any interstate body;
 (24) `permittee' means a person holding an authorization, license, or
 permit for geological exploration issued under section 11 of the Outer
 Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1340) or applicable State law;
 (25) `public vessel' means a vessel owned or bareboat chartered and operated
 by the United States, or by a State or political subdivision thereof,
 or by a foreign nation, except when the vessel is engaged in commerce;
 (26) `remove' or `removal' refers to removal of oil from water and shorelines
 or the taking of other actions (including containment, dispersal, disposal,
 or other response actions) which may be necessary to minimize or mitigate
 damage to the public health or welfare, including damage to fish, shellfish,
 wildlife, and public and private property, shorelines, and beaches;
 (27) `removal costs' means costs of removal that are incurred after a
 discharge of oil has occurred, including all costs of completing removal
 and the costs to prevent, minimize, or mitigate oil pollution in any case
 in which there is a substantial threat of a discharge of oil, including
 costs incurred under subsections (c), (d), (e), and (l) of section 311 of
 the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, the Intervention on the High Seas
 Act, or section 18 of the Deepwater Port Act of 1974 (33 U.S.C. 1517);
 (28) `responsible party' means the following:
 (A) VESSELS- In the case of a vessel, any person owning, operating, or
 chartering by demise, the vessel.
 (B) FACILITIES- In the case of a facility (including a pipeline but not
 including any other offshore facility), any person owning or operating
 the facility, except a Federal agency, State, municipality, commission,
 or political subdivision of a State, or any interstate body, that, as the
 owner of an onshore facility, transfers possession and right to use the
 property to another person by lease, assignment, or permit.
 (C) OFFSHORE FACILITIES- In the case of an offshore facility (other than a
 pipeline or a deepwater port licensed under the Deepwater Port Act of 1974),
 the lessee or permittee of the area in which the facility is located or the
 holder of a right of use and easement granted under applicable State law or
 the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act for the area in which the facility is
 located (if the holder is a different person than the lessee or permittee).
 (D) DEEPWATER PORTS- In the case of a deepwater port licensed under the
 Deepwater Port Act of 1974, the licensee.
 (E) ABANDONMENT- In the case of an abandoned vessel, onshore facility,
 or offshore facility, the persons who would have been responsible parties
 immediately prior to the abandonment of the vessel or facility.
 (29) `Secretary' means the Secretary of the Department in which the Coast
 Guard is operating;
 (30) `tank vessel' means a vessel that is constructed or adapted to carry,
 or that carries, oil or hazardous material in bulk as cargo or cargo residue,
 and that--
 (A) is a vessel of the United States;
 (B) operates on the navigable waters of the United States; or
 (C) transfers oil or hazardous material in a port or place subject to the
 jurisdiction of the United States;
 (31) `territorial sea' means the belt of seas measured from the line
 of ordinary low water along that portion of the coast which is in direct
 contact with the open sea and the line marking the seaward limit of inland
 waters, and extending seaward a distance of 12 miles;
 (32) `United States' and `State' mean the several States of the United
 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam,
 American Samoa, the United States Virgin Islands, the Commonwealth of the
 Northern Marianas, and any other territory or possession over which the
 United States has jurisdiction; and
 (33) `vessel' has the meaning that term has in title 1, United States Code.
SEC. 1002. ELEMENTS OF LIABILITY.
 (a) LIABILITY-
 (1) JOINT, SEVERAL, AND STRICT LIABILITY- Notwithstanding another law
 and subject to the provisions of this Act, each responsible party for a
 vessel or a facility from which oil is discharged, or which poses the
 substantial threat of a discharge of oil, into or upon the navigable
 waters or adjoining shorelines or the exclusive economic zone is jointly,
 severally, and strictly liable for the removal costs and damages specified
 in subsection (b) that directly result from such incident.
 (2) SECONDARY LIABILITY- The owner of oil carried in bulk as cargo on
 a vessel shall be secondarily liable for removal costs and damages as
 provided in section 1004.
 (b) Covered Removal Costs and Damages-
 (1) REMOVAL COSTS- The removal costs referred to in subsection (a)--
 (A) are removal costs for removal actions taken by the United States,
 a State, or an Indian tribe which are not inconsistent with the national
 contingency plans; and
 (B) are removal costs for removal actions taken by any other person which
 are consistent with the national contingency plan.
 (2) DAMAGES- The damages referred to in subsection (a) are the following:
 (A) NATURAL RESOURCES- Damages for injury to, destruction of, or loss of
 natural resources, including the reasonable costs of assessing the injury,
 destruction, or loss, which shall be recoverable by a United States trustee,
 a State trustee, an Indian tribe trustee, or a foreign trustee.
 (B) REAL OR PERSONAL PROPERTY- Damages for injury to, or economic losses
 resulting from destruction of, real or personal property, which shall be
 recoverable by a claimant who owns or leases that property.
 (C) SUBSISTENCE USE- Damages for loss of subsistence use of natural
 resources, which shall be recoverable by any claimant who so uses natural
 resources which have been injured, destroyed, or lost.
 (D) REVENUES- Damages equal to the loss of taxes, royalties, rents, fees, or
 net profit shares due to the injury, destruction, or loss of real property,
 personal property, or natural resources, which shall be recoverable by the
 Government of the United States, a State, or a political subdivision thereof.
 (E) PROFITS AND EARNING CAPACITY- Damages equal to the loss of profits
 or impairment of earning capacity due to the injury, destruction, or loss
 of real property, personal property, or natural resources, which shall be
 recoverable by any claimant.
 (c) EXCLUDED DISCHARGES- This Act does not apply to any discharge--
 (1) permitted by a permit issued under Federal, State, or local law; or
 (2) from a public vessel.
 (d) LIABILITY OF THIRD PARTIES-
 (1) IN GENERAL-
 (A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), in any case in which the
 responsible party establishes that a discharge and the resulting removal
 costs and damages were caused solely by an act or omission of one or
 more third parties described in section 1003(a)(2) (or solely by such
 an act or omission in combination with an act of God or an act of war),
 the third party or parties shall be treated as the responsible party or
 parties for purposes of determining liability under this Act.
 (B) A third party is not liable for removal costs or damages, other
 than damages for personal injury or wrongful death, if the third party
 is retained or directed by the President under section 311(c)(1)(B)(i)
 or 311(c)(1)(B)(ii), respectively, of the Federal Water Pollution Control
 Act for a discharge of oil, unless the third party is grossly negligent
 or engages in willful misconduct.
 (2) Limitation applied-
 (A) OWNER OR OPERATOR OF VESSEL OR FACILITY- If such third party or parties
 are the owner or operator of a vessel or facility which caused the incident,
 the liability of the third party or parties shall be subject to the limits
 provided in section 1004 as applied with respect to the vessel or facility.
 (B) OTHER CASES- In any other case, the liability of such third party or
 parties shall not exceed the limitation which would have been applicable
 to the responsible party of the vessel or facility from which the discharge
 actually occurred if the responsible party were liable.
SEC. 1003. DEFENSES TO LIABILITY.
 (a) COMPLETE DEFENSES- Except when the responsible party has failed or
 refused to report the incident as required by law and the responsible
 party knows or has reason to know of the incident, there is no liability
 for any person under section 1002 if it is established that the incident--
 (1) resulted from an act of God, an act of war, hostilities, civil war,
 or insurrection; or
 (2) was solely caused by an act or omission of one or more persons other
 than--
 (A) a responsible party;
 (B) an employee or agent of a responsible party; or
 (C) one whose act or omission occurs in connection with a contractual
 relationship with a responsible party.
 (b) DEFENSES AS TO PARTICULAR CLAIMANTS- There is no liability under
 section 1002 to a claimant, to the extent that the incident is caused by
 the negligence of that claimant.
SEC. 1004. LIMITS ON LIABILITY.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the
 total of the liability of a responsible party under section 1002 and any
 removal costs incurred by, or on behalf of, the responsible party, with
 respect to each incident shall not exceed--
 (1) for a tank vessel, the greater of--
 (A) $1,200 per gross ton; or
 (B)(i) in the case of a vessel greater than 3,000 gross tons, $10,000,000; or
 (ii) in the case of a vessel of 3,000 gross tons or less, $2,000,000;
 (2) for any other vessel, $600 per gross ton or $500,000, whichever
 is greater;
 (3) for an offshore facility except a deepwater port, the total of all
 removal costs plus $75,000,000.
 (4) for any other facility including a deepwater port, $350,000,000.
 (b) DIVISION OF RESPONSIBILITY-
 (1) TANK VESSELS AND CARGO- For the purpose of determining the responsible
 party and applying the limits of liability under subsection (a), the
 liability for a tank vessel shall be distributed as follows:
 (A) OWNER OR OPERATOR- Except as provided in subparagraph (B)--
 (i) the owner or operator of a tank vessel shall be liable for the first
 50 percent of the applicable amount of liability under subsection (a)(1); and
 (ii) the owner of oil carried in bulk as cargo on the vessel is liable
 for the remainder of that amount of liability.
 (B) CARGO OWNER LIMIT- If the owner or operator of a tank vessel is not
 entitled to a limit of liability for an incident for a reason specified
 in subsection (c), the owner of oil carried in bulk as cargo on the vessel
 shall be liable for all amounts of liability not compensated by the owner
 or operator of the vessel, except that the liability of that cargo owner
 shall not exceed 50 percent of the applicable amount of liability under
 subsection (a).
 (2) MODU DISCHARGES ON OR ABOVE THE WATER-
 (A) TREATED FIRST AS A TANK VESSEL- For purposes of determining the
 responsible party and applying this Act, a mobile offshore drilling unit
 which is being used as an offshore facility is deemed to be a tank vessel
 with respect to the discharge, or the substantial threat of a discharge, of
 oil on or above the surface of the water, except as provided in subparagraph
 (B).
 (B) TREATED AS A FACILITY FOR EXCESS LIABILITY- To the extent that removal
 costs and damages from any incident described in subparagraph (A) exceed
 the amount for which a responsible party is liable (as that amount may be
 limited under subsection (a)(1)), the mobile offshore drilling unit is
 deemed to be an offshore facility. For purposes of applying subsection
 (a)(3), the amount specified in that subsection shall be reduced by the
 amount for which the responsible party is liable under subparagraph (A)
 of this paragraph.
 (c) Exceptions-
 (1) PROXIMATE CAUSE- Subsection (a) does not apply if the incident was
 proximately caused by--
 (A) gross negligence or willful misconduct of; or
 (B) the violation of an applicable Federal safety, construction, or
 operating regulation by,
the responsible party, or an agent or employee of the responsible party.
 (2) FAILURE OR REFUSAL OF RESPONSIBLE PARTY- Subsection (a) does not apply
 if the responsible party fails or refuses--
 (A) to report the incident as required by law and the responsible party
 knows or has reason to know of the incident;
 (B) to provide all reasonable cooperation and assistance requested by a
 responsible official in connection with removal activities; or
 (C) without sufficient cause, to comply with an order issued under section
 311(e) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
 (d) Adjusting Limits of Liability-
 (1) FACILITIES- Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary may establish by
 regulation, with respect to any class or category of onshore facility,
 a maximum limit of liability under this section of less than $350,000,000,
 but not less than $8,000,000, taking into account the size, storage capacity,
 oil throughput, proximity to sensitive areas, type of oil handled, history
 of discharges, and other factors relevant to risks posed by the class or
 category of facility.
 (2) DEEPWATER PORTS AND ASSOCIATED VESSELS-
 (A) STUDY- The Secretary shall conduct a study of the relative operational
 and environmental risks posed by the transportation of oil by vessel to
 deepwater ports (as defined in section 3 of the Deepwater Port Act of
 1974 (33 U.S.C. 1502)) versus the transportation of oil by vessel to other
 ports. The study shall include a review and analysis of offshore lightering
 practices used in connection with that transportation, an analysis of the
 volume of oil transported by vessel using those practices, and an analysis
 of the frequency and volume of oil discharges which occur in connection
 with the use of those practices.
 (B) REPORT- Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this
 Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the results of
 the study conducted under this subparagraph.
 (C) RULEMAKING PROCEEDING- If the Secretary determines, based on the results
 of the study conducted under this paragraph, that the use of deepwater
 ports in connection with the transportation of oil by vessel results in
 a lower operational or environmental risk than the use of other ports,
 the Secretary shall initiate, not later than the 180th day following the
 date of submission of the report to Congress under subparagraph (B), a
 rulemaking proceeding to lower the limits of liability under this section
 for vessels transporting oil to deepwater ports and for deepwater ports
 as the Secretary determines appropriate. With respect to deepwater ports,
 the Secretary may establish a maximum limit of liability of less than
 $350,000,000, but not less than $50,000,000, in accordance with paragraph
 (1).
 (3) PERIODIC REPORTS- The Secretary shall, within six months of the enactment
 of this Act, and from time to time thereafter, report to Congress on the
 desirability of adjusting the limits of liability specified in subsection
 (a) of this section.
SEC. 1005. INTEREST.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- The responsible party or his or her guarantor is liable
 to a claimant for interest on the amount paid in satisfaction of a claim
 under this Act for the period described in subsection (b).
 (b) PERIOD-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), the period for which
 interest shall be paid is the period beginning on the 30th day following the
 date on which the claim is presented to the responsible party or guarantor
 and ending on the date on which the claim is paid.
 (2) EXCLUSION OF PERIOD DUE TO OFFER BY GUARANTOR- If the guarantor offers
 to the claimant an amount equal to or greater than that finally paid in
 satisfaction of the claim, the period described in paragraph (1) does not
 include the period beginning on the date the offer is made and ending
 on the date the offer is accepted. If the offer is made within 60 days
 after the date upon which the claim is presented under section 1013(a),
 the period described in paragraph (1) does not include any period before
 the offer is accepted.
 (3) EXCLUSION OF PERIODS IN INTEREST OF JUSTICE- If in any period a claimant
 is not paid due to reasons beyond the control of the responsible party
 or because it would not serve the interest of justice, no interest shall
 accrue under this section during that period.
 (4) CALCULATION OF INTEREST- The interest paid under this section shall be
 calculated at the average of the highest rate for commercial and finance
 company paper of maturities of 180 days or less obtaining on each of the
 days included within the period for which interest must be paid to the
 claimant, as published in the Federal Reserve Bulletin.
 (5) INTEREST NOT SUBJECT TO LIABILITY LIMITS- Interest under this paragraph
 is in addition to damages for which claims may be asserted under section
 1002 and shall be paid without regard to any limitation of liability under
 section 1004. The payment of interest under this subsection by a guarantor
 is subject to section 1016(g).
SEC. 1006. NATURAL RESOURCES.
 (a) LIABILITY- In the case of an injury to, destruction of, or loss of
 natural resources under this section, liability shall be--
 (1) to the United States Government for natural resources belonging to,
 managed by, controlled by, or appertaining to the United States,
 (2) to any State for natural resources within the State or belonging to,
 managed by, controlled by, or appertaining to such State,
 (3) to any Indian tribe for natural resources belonging to, managed by,
 controlled by, or appertaining to such Indian tribe, and
 (4) in any case in which section 1007 applies, to the government of a
 foreign country for natural resources belonging to, managed by, controlled
 by, or appertaining to such country.
 (b) DESIGNATION OF TRUSTEES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The President, or the authorized representative of any State,
 Indian tribe, or foreign government, shall act on behalf of the public,
 Indian tribe, or foreign country as trustee of the natural resources to
 present a claim for and to recover damages to the natural resources.
 (2) FEDERAL TRUSTEES- The President shall designate the Federal officials
 who shall act on behalf of the public as trustees for natural resources
 under this Act.
 (3) STATE TRUSTEES- The Governor of each State shall designate State and
 local officials who may act on behalf of the public as trustee for natural
 resources under this Act and shall notify the President of the designation.
 (4) INDIAN TRIBE TRUSTEES- The governing body of any Indian tribe shall
 designate tribal officials who may act on behalf of the tribe or its
 members as trustee for natural resources under this Act and shall notify
 the President of the designation.
 (5) FOREIGN TRUSTEES- The head of any foreign government may designate the
 trustee who shall act on behalf of that government as trustee for natural
 resources under this Act.
 (c) FUNCTIONS OF TRUSTEES-
 (1) FEDERAL TRUSTEES- The officials designated under subsection (b)(2)--
 (A) shall assess damages for injury to, destruction of, or loss of natural
 resources for purposes of this Act for the natural resources under their
 trusteeship;
 (B) may, upon request of and reimbursement from a State or Indian tribe
 and at the Federal officials' discretion, assess damages for the natural
 resources under the State's or tribe's trusteeship; and
 (C) shall develop and implement a plan for the restoration, rehabilitation,
 replacement, or acquisition of the equivalent, of the natural resources
 under their trusteeship.
 (2) STATE TRUSTEES- The officials designated under subsection (b)(3)--
 (A) shall assess damages to natural resources for the purposes of this
 Act for the natural resources under their trusteeship; and
 (B) shall develop and implement a plan for the restoration, rehabilitation,
 replacement, or acquisition of the equivalent, of the natural resources
 under their trusteeship.
 (3) INDIAN TRIBE TRUSTEES- The officials designated under subsection (b)(4)--
 (A) shall assess damages to natural resources for the purposes of this
 Act for the natural resources under their trusteeship; and
 (B) shall develop and implement a plan for the restoration, rehabilitation,
 replacement, or acquisition of the equivalent, of the natural resources
 under their trusteeship.
 (4) FOREIGN TRUSTEES- The officials designated under subsection (b)(5)--
 (A) shall assess damages to natural resources for the purposes of this
 Act for the natural resources under their trusteeship; and
 (B) shall develop and implement a plan for the restoration, rehabilitation,
 replacement, or acquisition of the equivalent, of the natural resources
 under their trusteeship.
 (5) NOTICE AND OPPORTUNITY TO BE HEARD- Plans shall be developed
 and implemented under this section only after adequate public notice,
 opportunity for a hearing, and consideration of all public comment.
 (d) MEASURE OF DAMAGES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The measure of damages in any action under this section
 for injury to, destruction of, or loss of natural resources is--
 (A) the cost of restoring, rehabilitating, replacing, or acquiring the
 equivalent of, the damaged natural resources; plus
 (B) the diminution in value of those natural resources pending restoration.
 (2) DETERMINE COSTS WITH RESPECT TO PLANS- Costs shall be determined under
 paragraph (1) with respect to plans adopted under subsection (c).
 (3) NO DOUBLE RECOVERY- There shall be no double recovery under this Act
 for natural resource damages, including the costs of damage assessment
 or restoration, rehabilitation, replacement, or acquisition for the same
 incident and natural resource.
 (e) DAMAGE ASSESSMENT REGULATIONS-
 (1) REGULATIONS- Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this
 Act, the President shall promulgate regulations, consistent with subsection
 (d)(1), for the assessment of damages to natural resources arising out of
 an incident.
 (2) REBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION- Any determination or assessment of damages to
 natural resources for the purposes of this Act made under subsection (d)
 by a Federal, State, or Indian trustee in accordance with the regulations
 promulgated under paragraph (1) shall have the force and effect of a
 rebuttable presumption on behalf of the trustee in any administrative or
 judicial proceeding under this Act.
 (f) USE OF RECOVERED SUMS- Sums recovered under this Act by a Federal,
 State, Indian, or foreign trustee for damages to natural resources shall
 be retained by the trustee, without further appropriation, for use only to
 reimburse or pay costs incurred by the trustee under subsection (c) with
 respect to the damaged natural resources. Any amounts in excess of those
 required for these reimbursements and costs shall be deposited in the Fund.
 (g) CIVIL PENALTY-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Any responsible party liable under this section for damages
 resulting from a discharge of oil shall be subject to a civil penalty not
 to exceed the greater of $1,000,000 or 1/2 of the responsible party's
 liability under section 1002 if the discharge results in damages to
 natural resources which cannot be restored, rehabilitated, or replaced,
 and for which no equivalent can be acquired.
 (2) ASSESSMENT, SETTLEMENT, AND COLLECTION- The President or authorized
 representative of a State or Indian tribe, acting under this section as
 trustee, may request the Attorney General to bring an action in court to
 recover a civil penalty under this subsection. In determining the amount
 of a civil penalty under this subsection, the court shall consider the
 nature and extent of the damages to natural resources, the value of the
 natural resources, the degree of culpability of the person held liable for
 the discharge, and the nature and extent of efforts taken by the person to
 prevent and mitigate damages to natural resources and to restore damaged
 natural resources.
 (3) SEPARATE LIABILITY- Except as provided in section 3002, any liability
 for a civil penalty under this subsection shall be separate from and in
 addition to any liability for a discharge of oil under this section.
 (4) DEPOSIT INTO FUND- Sums received under this subsection shall be
 deposited in the Fund. Sums so deposited shall be available, without
 appropriation, for use by the relevant trustee, for the general enhancement
 of the ecosystem of which the destroyed natural resources were a part for
 restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical, and biological integrity
 of the ecosystem.
SEC. 1007. RECOVERY BY FOREIGN CLAIMANTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- A foreign claimant may only recover removal costs and
 damages under this Act in accordance with this section.
 (b) COVERED DISCHARGES- A foreign claimant may recover only if the discharge
 of oil was from--
 (1) a facility;
 (2) a vessel in the navigable waters; or
 (3) a tank vessel carrying oil originally received at the terminal of the
 pipeline constructed under the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act
 for transportation to a port in the United States, the incident having
 occurred prior to delivery to that port;
and resulted in the presence of oil in or on the territorial sea, internal
waters, or adjacent shoreline of a foreign country.
 (c) REQUIREMENTS- A foreign claimant may only recover if--
 (1) the claimant first seeks compensation under title III;
 (2) the claimant has not been otherwise compensated for the removal costs
 or damages; and
 (3) recovery is authorized by a treaty or executive agreement between the
 United States and the claimant's country, or the Secretary of State, in
 consultation with the Attorney General and other appropriate officials,
 has certified that the claimant's country provides a comparable remedy
 for United States claimants.
 (d) EXCEPTION FOR CANADIAN CLAIMANTS RESPECTING TRANS-ALASKA PIPELINE OIL-
 Subsection (c)(3) shall not apply with respect to recovery by a resident
 of Canada in the case of an incident described in subsection (b)(3).
 (e) DEFINITION OF FOREIGN CLAIMANT- For purposes of this section, the
 term `foreign claimant' means any person residing in a foreign country,
 the government of a foreign country (including a foreign trustee), or any
 agency or political subdivision thereof.
SEC. 1008. RECOVERY BY RESPONSIBLE PARTY OR CARGO OWNER.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The responsible party for a vessel or facility from which
 oil is discharged, or which posed the substantial threat of a discharge
 of oil, and the owner of oil carried in bulk as cargo on a vessel, may
 assert a claim for removal costs and damages under section 1002 only if
 the responsible party or the owner of the oil can show that--
 (1) the responsible party is entitled to a defense to liability under
 section 1003; or
 (2) the responsible party or the owner of the oil is entitled to a limitation
 of liability under section 1004.
 (b) EXTENT OF RECOVERY- A responsible party or owner of oil who is entitled
 to a limitation of liability may assert a claim under section 1002 only
 to the extent that the sum of the removal costs and damages incurred by
 the responsible party or the owner of oil plus the amounts paid by the
 responsible party or the owner, or by the guarantor on behalf of the
 responsible party or the owner for claims asserted under section 1002
 exceeds the amount to which the total of the liability under section 1002
 and removal costs and damages incurred by, or on behalf of, the responsible
 party or the owner of oil is limited under section 1004.
SEC. 1009. CONTRIBUTION.
 A person may bring an action for contribution against any other person
 who is liable or potentially liable under this Act. Such an action shall
 be brought in accordance with section 1013.
SEC. 1010. INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENTS.
 (a) AGREEMENTS NOT PROHIBITED- Nothing in this Act shall prohibit any
 agreement to insure, hold harmless, or indemnify a party to such agreement
 for any liability under this Act.
 (b) LIABILITY NOT TRANSFERRED- No indemnification, hold harmless,
 or similar agreement or conveyance shall be effective to transfer the
 liability imposed under this Act from a responsible party or from any
 person who may be liable for an incident under this Act to any other person.
 (c) RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER CAUSES OF ACTION- Nothing in this Act, including
 the provisions of subsection (b), shall bar a cause of action that a
 responsible party subject to liability under this Act, or a guarantor,
 has or would have, by reason of subrogation or otherwise, against any person.
SEC. 1011. CONSULTATION ON REMOVAL ACTIONS.
 The Secretary shall consult with the affected trustees designated under
 section 1006 on the appropriate removal action to be taken in connection
 with any discharge of oil. Removal with respect to any discharge shall be
 considered completed when so determined by the Secretary in consultation
 with the Governor or Governors of the affected State or States.
SEC. 1012. USES OF THE FUND.
 (a) USES GENERALLY- The Fund shall be directly available to the President
 for--
 (1) the payment of removal costs, and the costs of monitoring removal
 actions, incurred by Federal authorities;
 (2) the costs incurred by Federal, State, or Indian tribe trustees in
 carrying out their functions under section 1006 for assessing damages
 to natural resources and for developing and implementing plans for the
 restoration, rehabilitation, replacement, or acquisition of the equivalent
 of damaged resources;
 (3) the payment of obligations under subsection (d) of this section;
 (4) the payment of removal costs and damages resulting from the discharge,
 or substantial threat of discharge, of oil from a foreign offshore unit;
 (5) the payment of administrative, personnel, and enforcement costs and
 expenses--
 (A) reasonably necessary for and incidental to the implementation,
 administration, and enforcement of this Act, including sections 1004(d)(2),
 1006(e), 4107, 4110, 4111, 4112, 5009, and title VII of this Act;
 (B) reasonably necessary for international activities related to the
 purposes of this Act;
 (C) reasonably necessary for and incidental to the implementation,
 administration, and enforcement of section 311(c) of the Federal Water
 Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1321(c)); and
 (D) reasonably necessary for Federal expenses under section 311(j) of the
 Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1321(j));
 (6) the payment of contributions to the International Fund under title
 III of this Act; and
 (7) all otherwise uncompensated removal costs or damages in accordance
 with section 1013 of this Act.
 (b) DEFENSES TO LIABILITY FOR THE FUND- The Fund shall not be available
 to pay any claim for removal costs or damages to a particular claimant, to
 the extent that the incident or economic loss is caused by the negligence
 of that claimant.
 (c) FEDERAL AND STATE OFFICIALS WHO MAY OBLIGATE FROM THE FUND- The President
 may promulgate regulations designating one or more Federal officials who
 may obligate money in the Fund in accordance with subsection (a) of this
 section. The President shall designate the Commandant of the Coast Guard to
 be a Federal official who may obligate money in the Fund in accordance with
 subsection (a). The President also may delegate authority to obligate money
 in the Fund or to settle claims to officials of a State with an adequate
 program operating under a cooperative agreement with the Federal Government.
 (d) Obligation of the Fund by State Officials-
 (1) AUTHORITY- In accordance with regulations promulgated under this
 subsection, the Governor of each State, or any appropriate State official
 designated by the Governor, may obligate the Fund for payment in an amount
 not to exceed $250,000 for removal costs not inconsistent with the national
 contingency plan required for the immediate removal of a discharge, or
 threat of a discharge, of oil.
 (2) NOTIFICATION- A Governor or designee exercising the authority granted
 by this subsection shall notify the Secretary within 24 hours of any
 obligation of a payment from the Fund.
 (3) REGULATIONS- The President shall--
 (A) not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act,
 publish proposed regulations detailing the manner in which the authority
 to obligate the Fund and to enter into agreements under this subsection
 shall be exercised; and,
 (B) not later than 3 months after the close of the comment period for such
 proposed regulations, promulgate final regulations for that purpose.
 (e) RIGHTS OF SUBROGATION- Payment of any claim or obligation by the Fund
 under this Act shall be subject to the United States Government acquiring
 by subrogation of all rights of the claimant or State to recover from the
 responsible party.
 (f) AUDIT- The Comptroller General shall audit all payments, obligations,
 reimbursements, and other uses of the Fund, to assure that the Fund is
 being properly administered and that claims are being appropriately and
 expeditiously considered. The Comptroller General shall submit to Congress
 an interim report one year after the date of enactment of this Act. The
 Comptroller General shall thereafter audit the Fund as is appropriate. Each
 Federal agency shall cooperate with the Comptroller General in carrying
 out this subsection.
 (g) Period of Limitations for Claims-
 (1) REMOVAL COSTS- No claim may be presented under this section for recovery
 of removal costs unless the claim is presented within three years after
 the date of completion of all removal action.
 (2) DAMAGES- No claim may be presented under this section for recovery of
 damages unless the claim is presented within three years after the date
 on which the loss and its connection with the discharge in question were
 reasonably discoverable with the exercise of due care, or in the case of
 damages under section 1002(b)(2)(A), if later, the date on which final
 regulations are promulgated under section 1006(e).
 (h) LIMITATION ON PAYMENT FOR SAME COSTS- In any case in which the President
 has paid an amount from the Fund for any removal costs or damages specified
 under subsection (a), no other claim may be paid from the Fund for the
 same removal costs or damages.
 (i) Obligation in Accordance With Plan-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), amounts may be obligated
 from the Fund for the restoration, rehabilitation, or replacement, or
 acquisition of natural resources only in accordance with a plan adopted
 under section 1006(c).
 (2) EXCEPTION- Paragraph (1) shall not apply in a situation requiring action
 to avoid irreversible loss of natural resources or to prevent or reduce any
 continuing danger to natural resources or similar need for emergency action.
SEC. 1013. CLAIMS PROCEDURE.
 (a) PRESENTATION- Except as provided in subsection (b)--
 (1) all claims for removal costs or damages shall be presented first to
 the responsible party or guarantor of the source designated under section
 1014(a); and
 (2) where appropriate, to the owner of oil carried in bulk as cargo on
 a vessel.
 (b) PRESENTATION TO FUND- Claims for removal costs or damages may be
 presented first to the Fund--
 (1) where the Secretary has advertised or otherwise notified claimants in
 accordance with section 1014(c);
 (2) by a responsible party who may assert a claim under section 1008;
 (3) by the Governor of a State for removal costs incurred by that State; or
 (4) by a United States claimant in a case where a foreign offshore unit
 has discharged oil causing damage for which the Fund is liable under
 section 1012(a).
 (c) ELECTION- If a claim is presented in accordance with subsection (a) and--
 (1) each person to whom the claim is presented denies all liability for
 the claim, or
 (2) the claim is not settled by any person by payment within 90 days after
 the date upon which (A) the claim was presented, or (B) advertising was
 begun pursuant to section 1014(b), whichever is later,
the claimant may elect to commence an action in court against the responsible
party or guarantor or to present the claim to the Fund.
 (d) UNCOMPENSATED DAMAGES- If a claim is presented in accordance with
 this section and full and adequate compensation is unavailable, a claim
 for the uncompensated damages and removal costs may be presented to the Fund.
 (e) PROCEDURE FOR CLAIMS AGAINST THE FUND- The President shall promulgate,
 and may from time to time amend, regulations for the presentation, filing,
 processing, settlement, and adjudication of claims under this Act against
 the Fund.
SEC. 1014. DESIGNATION AND ADVERTISEMENT.
 (a) DESIGNATION OF SOURCE AND NOTIFICATION- When the Secretary receives
 information of an incident, the Secretary shall, where possible and
 appropriate, designate the source or sources of the discharge. If
 a designated source is a vessel or a facility, the Secretary shall
 immediately notify the responsible party and the guarantor, if known,
 of that designation.
 (b) ADVERTISEMENT BY THE RESPONSIBLE PARTY OR GUARANTOR- If a responsible
 party or guarantor fails to inform the Secretary, within 5 days after
 receiving notification of a designation under subsection (a), of his or
 her denial of the designation, such party or guarantor shall advertise
 the designation and the procedures by which claims may be presented, in
 accordance with regulations promulgated by the Secretary. Advertisement
 under the preceding sentence shall begin no later than 15 days after
 the date of the designation made under subsection (a). If advertisement
 is not otherwise made in accordance with this subsection, the Secretary
 shall promptly and at the expense of the responsible party or the guarantor
 involved, advertise the designation and the procedures by which claims may
 be presented to the responsible party or guarantor. Advertisement under
 this subsection shall continue for a period of no less than 30 days.
 (c) ADVERTISEMENT BY THE SECRETARY- If--
 (1) the responsible party and the guarantor both deny a designation within
 five days after receiving notification of a designation under subsection (a),
 (2) the source of the oil pollution was a public vessel, or
 (3) the Secretary is unable to designate the source or sources of the oil
 pollution under subsection (a),
the Secretary shall advertise or otherwise notify potential claimants of
the procedures by which claims may be presented to the Fund.
SEC. 1015. SUBROGATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Any person, including the Fund, who pays compensation
 pursuant to this Act to any claimant for removal costs or damages shall be
 subrogated to all rights, claims, and causes of action that the claimant
 has under this Act.
 (b) ACTIONS ON BEHALF OF THE FUND- At the request of the Secretary, the
 Attorney General shall commence an action on behalf of the Fund to recover
 any compensation paid by the Fund to any claimant pursuant to this Act, and
 all costs incurred by the Fund by reason of the claim, including interest
 (including prejudgment interest), administrative and adjudicative costs,
 and attorney's fees. Such an action may be commenced against any responsible
 party or (subject to section 1016) guarantor, or against any other person
 who is liable, pursuant to any law, to the compensated claimant or to the
 Fund, for the cost or damages for which the compensation was paid. Such
 an action shall be commenced against the responsible foreign government
 or other responsible party to recover any removal costs or damages paid
 from the Fund as the result of the discharge, or substantial threat of
 discharge, of oil from a foreign offshore unit.
SEC. 1016. FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
 (a) Vessels-
 (1) REQUIREMENT- The responsible party for--
 (A) any vessel over 300 gross tons (except a non-self-propelled vessel
 that does not carry oil as cargo or fuel) using any port or place in the
 United States or the navigable waters; or
 (B) any vessel using the waters of the exclusive economic zone to transship
 or lighter oil destined for a port or place subject to the jurisdiction
 of the United States;
shall establish and maintain, in accordance with regulations promulgated
by the Secretary, evidence of financial responsibility sufficient to meet
the maximum amount of liability to which, in the case of a tank vessel,
the responsible party could be subjected under section 1004(a)(1) or (d)
of this Act, or to which, in the case of any other vessel, the responsible
party could be subjected under section 1004(a)(2) or (d) of this Act, in a
case where the responsible party would be entitled to limit liability under
that section. If the responsible party owns or operates more than one vessel,
evidence of financial responsibility need be established only to meet the
maximum liability applicable to the largest of such vessels.
 (b) CARGO- An owner of oil carried in bulk as cargo on a vessel shall
 establish and maintain, in accordance with regulations promulgated by the
 Secretary, evidence of financial responsibility sufficient to meet the
 maximum amount of liability of that owner under section 1004(b)(1)(B).
 (c) SANCTIONS-
 (1) WITHHOLDING CLEARANCE- The Secretary of the Treasury shall withhold
 or revoke the clearance required by section 4197 of the Revised Statutes
 of the United States of any vessel subject to this subsection that does
 not have the evidence of financial responsibility required for the vessel
 and the oil carried in bulk as cargo on the vessel under this section.
 (2) DENYING ENTRY TO OR DETAINING VESSELS- The Secretary may (A) deny
 entry to any offshore facility or any port or place in the United States,
 or to the navigable waters, or (B) detain at such a facility or port or
 place, any vessel that, upon request, does not produce the evidence of
 financial responsibility required for the vessel and the oil carried in
 bulk as cargo on the vessel under this section or the regulations issued
 under this section.
 (3) SEIZURE OF VESSEL AND OIL- Any vessel and any oil carried in bulk as
 cargo on the vessel subject to the requirements of this section which is
 found in the navigable waters without the necessary evidence of financial
 responsibility for the vessel and the oil carried in bulk as cargo on a
 vessel shall be subject to seizure by the United States.
 (d) OFFSHORE FACILITIES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), each responsible party
 with respect to an offshore facility shall establish and maintain evidence
 of financial responsibility of $150,000,000 to meet the amount of liability
 to which the responsible party could be subjected under section 1004(a) in
 a case in which the responsible party would be entitled to limit liability
 under that section. In cases where a person is the responsible party for
 more than one facility subject to this subsection, evidence of financial
 responsibility need be established only to meet the maximum amount of
 liability applicable to the largest of those facilities.
 (2) DEEPWATER PORTS- Each responsible party with respect to a deepwater
 port shall establish and maintain evidence of financial responsibility
 sufficient to meet the maximum amount of liability to which the responsible
 party could be subjected under section 1004(a) of this Act in a case where
 the responsible party would be entitled to limit liability under that
 section. If the Secretary exercises the authority under section 1004(d)
 to lower the limit of liability for deepwater ports, the responsible
 party shall establish and maintain evidence of financial responsibility
 sufficient to meet the maximum amount of liability so established. In a
 case in which a person is the responsible party for more than one deepwater
 port, evidence of financial responsibility need be established only to
 meet the maximum liability applicable to the deepwater port having the
 greatest maximum liability.
 (e) METHODS OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY- Financial responsibility under
 this section may be established by any one, or by any combination, of the
 following methods which the Secretary determines to be acceptable: evidence
 of insurance, surety bond, guarantee, letter of credit, qualification as
 a self-insurer, or other evidence of financial responsibility. Any bond
 filed shall be issued by a bonding company authorized to do business in
 the United States. In promulgating requirements under this section, the
 Secretary may specify policy or other contractual terms, conditions, or
 defenses which are necessary, or which are unacceptable, in establishing
 evidence of financial responsibility to effectuate the purposes of this Act.
 (f) CLAIMS AGAINST GUARANTOR- Any claim for which liability may be
 established under section 1002 of this Act may be asserted directly
 against any guarantor providing evidence of financial responsibility
 for a responsible party liable under that section for removal costs and
 damages to which the claim pertains. In defending against such a claim, the
 guarantor may invoke (1) all rights and defenses which would be available
 to the responsible party under this Act, (2) any defense authorized by the
 Secretary in requirements promulgated by the Secretary under this section,
 and (3) the defense that the incident was caused by the willful misconduct
 of the responsible party. The guarantor may not invoke any other defense
 that might be available in proceedings brought by the responsible party
 against the guarantor.
 (g) LIMITATION ON GUARANTOR'S LIABILITY- Nothing in this Act shall impose
 liability with respect to an incident on any guarantor for damages or removal
 costs which exceed, in the aggregate, the amount of financial responsibility
 required under this Act which that guarantor has provided for a responsible
 party or the owner of oil carried in bulk as cargo on a vessel.
 (h) Civil Penalty-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Any person who, after notice and an opportunity for a
 hearing, is found to have failed to comply with the requirements of this
 section or the regulations issued under this section, or with a denial
 or detention order issued under subsection (c)(2) of this section, shall
 be liable to the United States for a civil penalty, not to exceed $25,000
 per day of violation. The amount of the civil penalty shall be assessed by
 the Secretary by written notice. In determining the amount of the penalty,
 the Secretary shall take into account the nature, circumstances, extent,
 and gravity of the violation, the degree of culpability, any history of
 prior violation, ability to pay, and such other matters as justice may
 require. The Secretary may compromise, modify, or remit, with or without
 conditions, any civil penalty which is subject to imposition or which has
 been imposed under this paragraph. If any person fails to pay an assessed
 civil penalty after it has become final, the Secretary may refer the matter
 to the Attorney General for collection.
 (2) JUDICIAL RELIEF- In addition to, or in lieu of, assessing a penalty under
 paragraph (1) of this subsection, the Secretary may request the Attorney
 General to secure such relief as necessary to compel compliance with
 this section, including, but not limited to, a judicial order terminating
 operations. The district courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction
 to grant any relief as the public interest and the equities of the case
 may require.
 (i) CONTINUATION OF REGULATIONS- Any regulation respecting financial
 responsibility, which has been issued pursuant to any provision of law
 repealed or superseded by this Act, and which is in effect on the date
 immediately preceding the effective date of this Act, shall be deemed
 and construed to be a regulation issued pursuant to this section. Such a
 regulation shall remain in full force and effect unless and until superseded
 by new regulations issued under this section.
 (j) UNIFIED CERTIFICATE- The Secretary may issue a single unified certificate
 of financial responsibility for purposes of this Act and any other law.
SEC. 1017. LITIGATION, JURISDICTION, AND VENUE.
 (a) REVIEW OF REGULATIONS- Review of any regulation promulgated under
 this Act may be had upon application by any interested person only in
 the Circuit Court of Appeals of the United States for the District of
 Columbia. Any application shall be made within 90 days from the date of
 promulgation of the regulations.
 (b) JURISDICTION- Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the
 United States district courts shall have original and exclusive jurisdiction
 over all causes of action arising under this Act (which shall be deemed
 to include actions under the International Convention on Civil Liability
 for Oil Pollution Damages, 1984, and the International Convention on the
 Establishment of an International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution
 Damage, 1984), without regard to the citizenship of the parties or the
 amount in controversy.
 (c) VENUE- Venue shall lie in any district in which the incident, injury,
 or damages occurred, or in which the defendant resides, may be found, has its
 principal office, or has appointed an agent for services of process. For the
 purposes of this section, the Fund and the International Fund established
 under article 2 of the International Convention on the Establishment of
 an International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution Damage, 1984,
 shall reside in the District of Columbia.
 (d) SAVINGS PROVISION- Nothing in this Act shall affect any action commenced
 before the date of enactment of this Act.
 (e) PERIOD OF LIMITATIONS-
 (1) DAMAGES- Except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (4), an action for
 damages under this Act shall be barred unless the action is brought within
 3 years after--
 (A) the date on which the loss and the connection of the loss with the
 discharge in question are reasonably discoverable with the exercise of
 due care, or
 (B) in the case of damages described in section 1002(b)(2)(A), the date
 on which regulations are issued under section 1006(e), if that date is
 later than the date referred to in subparagraph (A).
 (2) REMOVAL COSTS- Except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (4), an action
 for recovery of removal costs under this Act shall be barred unless the
 action is brought within 3 years after completion of the removal. An action
 may be commenced under section 1002 for recovery of removal costs at any
 time after such costs have been incurred.
 (3) ACTIONS FOR CONTRIBUTION- An action for contribution for any removal
 costs or damages shall be barred unless the action is brought within 3
 years after--
 (A) the date of judgment in any action under this Act for recovery of the
 removal costs or damages, or
 (B) the date of entry of a judicially approved settlement with respect to
 the removal costs or damages.
 (4) SUBROGATION- An action based on rights subrogated pursuant to this Act by
 reason of payment of a claim may not be commenced under this Act unless that
 action is commenced within 3 years after the date of payment of that claim.
SEC. 1018. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAW.
 (a) PREEMPTION-
 (1) ACTIONS PREEMPTED- Except as provided in this Act and the Solid Waste
 Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.), no action arising out of a discharge
 of oil, or a substantial threat of a discharge of oil, from a vessel or
 facility into or upon the navigable waters or adjoining shorelines or
 the exclusive economic zone (other than an action for personal injury or
 wrongful death), may be brought in any court of the United States or of
 any State or political subdivision thereof.
 (2) STATE FUNDS AND ACCOUNTS- Nothing in this Act or in sections 4611 and
 9509 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall affect the authority of any
 State (A) to establish or continue in effect an oil spill fund or account;
 or (B) to require any person to contribute to that fund or account.
 (b) NO PREEMPTION OF PENALTIES- Nothing in this Act or section 9509
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall affect the authority of the
 United States or any State or political subdivision thereof to impose,
 or to determine the amount of, any fine or penalty for any violation of
 law relating to an incident.
 (c) LIMITATION OF LIABILITY ACT- The Act of March 3, 1851, shall not apply
 to removal costs and damages that directly result from an incident involving
 the discharge or substantial threat of discharge of oil.
SEC. 1019. STATE FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
 Except as provided in this Act, a responsible party or an owner of oil
 carried in bulk as cargo on a vessel who establishes and maintains evidence
 of financial responsibility in accordance with this title shall not be
 required under any State or local law, rule, or regulation to establish
 or maintain any other evidence of financial responsibility in connection
 with liability for the discharge, or substantial threat of a discharge, of
 oil. Evidence of compliance with the financial responsibility requirements
 of this Act shall be accepted by a State in lieu of any other requirement of
 financial responsibility imposed by that State in connection with liability
 for the discharge of oil. A State may enforce, on the navigable waters
 of the State, the requirements for evidence of financial responsibility
 imposed under section 1016 of this Act.
SEC. 1020. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b), this Act shall apply
 with respect to an incident occurring after the date of the enactment of
 this Act.
 (b) PAYMENTS FROM FUND- Payments under section 1012(a) may not be made
 before the commencement date (as that term is defined in section 4611(f)(2)
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986).
TITLE II--CONFORMING AMENDMENTS
SEC. 2001. INTERVENTION ON THE HIGH SEAS ACT.
 Section 17 of the Intervention on the High Seas Act (33 U.S.C. 1486)
 is amended to read as follows:
 `SEC. 17. The Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund shall be available to the
 Secretary for actions taken under sections 5 and 7 of this Act.'.
SEC. 2002. FEDERAL WATER POLLUTION CONTROL ACT.
 Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1321)
 is amended as follows:
 (1) Subsection (c)(2) is amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (D) by inserting `safeguard against as well as' after
 `surveillance and notice designed to'; and
 (B) in subparagraph (H) by striking `reimbursed from the fund established
 under subsection (k) of this section for the reasonable costs incurred in
 such removal' and inserting `reimbursed, in the case of any discharges of
 oil from a vessel or facility, for the reasonable costs incurred for that
 removal, from the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund'.
 (2) Subsection (d) is amended by striking out the last sentence.
 (3) Subsection (e) is amended to read as follows:
 `(e)(1) In addition to any action taken by a State or local government,
 when the President determines that there may be an imminent and substantial
 threat to the public health or welfare of the United States, including
 fish, shellfish and wildlife, public and private property, shorelines,
 beaches, habitat, and other living and nonliving natural resources under
 the jurisdiction or control of the United States, because of an actual
 or threatened discharge of oil or a hazardous substance from a vessel or
 facility in violation of subsection (b) of this section, the President may--
 `(A) require the Attorney General to secure any relief from any person,
 including the owner or operator of the vessel or facility, as may be
 necessary to abate such endangerment; or
 `(B) after notice to the affected State, take any other action under this
 section, including issuing administrative orders, that may be necessary
 to protect the public health and welfare.
 `(2) If any person fails without sufficient cause to comply with an order
 under paragraph (1)(B), the President may request the Attorney General
 to bring an action in the appropriate district court of the United States
 to enforce the order, to assess civil penalties of no more than $25,000 a
 day for each violation, and to assess 3 times the removal costs or damages
 incurred by the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund as a result of the failure
 to comply.
 `(3) The district courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction to
 grant any relief under this subsection that the public interest and the
 equities of the case may require.'.
 (4) Subsections (f), (g), (h), and (i) of section 311 of the Federal Water
 Pollution Control Act shall not apply with respect to any incident for
 which liability is established under section 1002 of this Act.
 (5) Subsection (i) is amended by striking out `(1)' after `(i)' and striking
 out paragraphs (2) and (3).
 (6) Subsection (k) is repealed. Any amounts remaining in the revolving
 fund established under that subsection shall be deposited in the general
 fund of the Treasury. The Fund shall assume all liability incurred by
 the revolving fund established under section 311(k) of the Federal Water
 Pollution Control Act.
 (7) Subsection (l) is amended by striking out the second sentence.
 (8) Subsection (p) is repealed.
 (9) Section 311 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new subsection:
 `(s) The Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund shall be available to carry out
 subsections (c), (d), (i), and (l). Any amounts received by the United
 States under this section shall be deposited in the Oil Spill Liability
 Trust Fund.'.
SEC. 2003. DEEPWATER PORT ACT.
 The Deepwater Port Act of 1974 (33 U.S.C. 1501-1524) is amended as follows:
 (1) In section 4(c)(1) strike `section 18(l) of this Act;' and insert in
 lieu thereof `section 1016 of the Oil Pollution Act of 1989,';
 (2) Subsections (b), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (l), (n), and
 paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (m) of section 18 (33 U.S.C. 1517)
 are deleted.
 (3) Paragraph (3) of subsection (c) of section 18 is amended by striking
 `Deepwater Port Liability Fund established pursuant to subsection (f)
 of this section', and inserting `Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund'.
 (4) Subsections (c), (k), and (m) of section 18 are redesignated as
 subsections (b), (c), and (d) respectively, and paragraphs (3) and (4)
 of subsection (m) are redesignated as paragraphs (1) and (2), respectively.
 (5) Paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of section 19 is amended by striking
 the period at the end of the second sentence and inserting `except that
 discharges from a deepwater port or from a vessel within a deepwater port
 safety zone which are subject to the civil penalty provisions of section
 18(a)(2) of the Deepwater Port Act of 1974 shall not be subject to the
 penalty provisions of any other Federal law.'
 (6) Any amounts remaining in the Deepwater Port Liability Fund, established
 under section 18(f) of the Deepwater Port Act of 1974 (33 U.S.C. 1517(f)),
 shall be deposited in the Fund. The Fund shall assume all liability incurred
 by the Deepwater Port Liability Fund.
SEC. 2004. OUTER CONTINENTAL SHELF LANDS ACT AMENDMENTS OF 1978.
 Title III of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act Amendments of 1978 (43
 U.S.C. 1811-1824) is repealed. Any amounts remaining in the Offshore Oil
 Pollution Compensation Fund established under section 302 of that title
 (43 U.S.C. 1812) shall be deposited in the Fund. The Fund shall assume
 all liability incurred by the Offshore Oil Pollution Compensation Fund.
SEC. 2005. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 Sections 2001, 2002, 2003, and 2004 shall be effective on the commencement
 date (as that term is defined in section 4611(f)(2) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986).
TITLE III--IMPLEMENTATION OF INTERNATIONAL CONVENTIONS
SEC. 3001. DEFINITIONS.
 For the purposes of this title--
 (1) `ship', `owner', `oil', `pollution damage', and `incident' shall have
 the meanings provided in article I of the Civil Liability Convention;
 (2) `Civil Liability Convention' means the International Convention on
 Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage, 1984;
 (3) `financial responsibility' has the same meaning as `financial security'
 under the Civil Liability Convention;
 (4) `Fund Convention' means the International Convention on the Establishment
 of an International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution Damage, 1984; and
 (5) `International Fund' means the International Oil Pollution Compensation
 Fund, established under article 2 of the Fund Convention.
SEC. 3002. APPLICABILITY OF CONVENTIONS.
 (a) LIABILITY IN ACCORDANCE WITH CONVENTIONS- During any period in which
 the Civil Liability Convention and the Fund Convention are in force with
 respect to the United States, liability relating to pollution damage arising
 from an incident involving a ship shall be determined in accordance with
 the Civil Liability Convention and Fund Convention. Nothing in this title
 shall constitute a ratification of either the Civil Liability Convention
 or the Fund Convention.
 (b) JOINDER- With respect to any incident to which the Civil Liability
 Convention applies, the Fund shall, in any action brought under any law
 (including the law of any State or subdivision thereof) for recovery of
 any removal costs and damages, indemnify and defend any person referred
 to in Article III(4) of the Convention (or any guarantor thereof) with
 respect to any such costs and damages except for those costs and damages
 for which such person may be liable under such other law consistent with
 the Convention. To the extent that the Fund is required to indemnify and
 defend a person under this subsection, the action is deemed to be an action
 against the Fund under any such other law and the Fund shall be substituted
 as the party defendant in any judgment resulting therefrom.
SEC. 3003. RECOGNITION OF INTERNATIONAL FUND.
 The International Fund is recognized under the laws of the United States
 as a legal person, and shall have the capacity to acquire and dispose
 of real and personal property, and to institute and be party to legal
 proceedings. The Director of the International Fund is recognized as the
 legal representative of the International Fund. The Director shall be deemed
 to have appointed irrevocably the Secretary of State as the International
 Fund's agent for the service of process in any legal proceedings involving
 the International Fund within the United States. The International Fund
 and its assets shall be exempt from all direct taxation and payment of
 any customs duties in the United States.
SEC. 3004. ACTION IN UNITED STATES COURTS.
 (a) SERVICE OF PROCESS ON INTERNATIONAL FUND- In any action brought in a
 court in the United States against the owner of a ship or its guarantor
 under the Civil Liability Convention, the plaintiff or defendant, as
 the case may be, shall serve a copy of the complaint and any subsequent
 pleading therein upon the International Fund at the same time the complaint
 or other pleading is served upon the opposing parties.
 (b) INTERVENTION- The International Fund may intervene as a party as a
 matter of right in any action brought in a court in the United States against
 the owner of a ship or its guarantor under the Civil Liability Convention.
SEC. 3005. CONTRIBUTION TO INTERNATIONAL FUND.
 (a) PAYMENTS TO BE MADE FROM FUND- The amount of any contribution to the
 International Fund which is required to be made under article 10 of the
 Fund Convention by any person with respect to oil received in any port,
 terminal installation, or other installation located in the United States
 shall be paid to the International Fund from the Fund.
 (b) INFORMATION- The Secretary may, by regulation, require persons who are
 required to make contributions with respect to oil received in any port,
 terminal installation, or other installations in the United States under
 article 10 of the Fund Convention to provide all information relating to
 that oil as may be necessary to carry out subsection (a) of this section,
 Articles 10, 12, 13, 14, and 15 of the Fund Convention, and Article 29 of the
 Protocol of 1984 to Amend the International Convention on the Establishment
 of an International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution Damage, 1971.
SEC. 3006. RECOGNITION OF FOREIGN JUDGMENTS.
 Any final judgment of a court of any country which is a party to the
 Civil Liability Convention or to the Fund Convention in an action for
 compensation under either convention shall be recognized by any court of
 the United States having jurisdiction under this Act, when that judgment
 has become enforceable in that country and is no longer subject to ordinary
 form of review, except where--
 (1) the judgment was obtained by fraud, or
 (2) the defendant was not given reasonable notice and a fair opportunity
 to present its case.
SEC. 3007. CONVENTION FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
 (a) UNITED STATES DOCUMENTED SHIPS- The owner of a ship which is documented
 under the laws of the United States and which is subject to the Civil
 Liability Convention shall establish and maintain, in accordance
 with regulations promulgated by the Secretary, evidence of financial
 responsibility as required in Article VII of the Civil Liability Convention.
 (b) OTHER SHIPS- The owner of each ship (other than a ship to which
 subsection (a) applies or a ship which is a public vessel), which is
 subject to the Civil Liability Convention and which enters or leaves a
 port or terminal in the United States or uses an Outer Continental Shelf
 facility or an offshore facility that is or was licensed under the Deepwater
 Port Act of 1974 (33 U.S.C. 1501-1524), shall establish and maintain,
 in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Secretary, evidence of
 financial responsibility as required in Article VII of the Civil Liability
 Convention. Any ship which has on board a valid certificate issued in
 accordance with Article VII of the Civil Liability Convention shall be
 considered as having met the requirements of this subsection. Any ship
 carrying only oil as cargo, fuel, or residue, which has on board a valid
 certificate issued in accordance with Article VII of the Civil Liability
 Convention shall be considered as having met the requirements of section
 1016 of this Act.
 (c) AUTHORITY OF SECRETARY TO ISSUE- The Secretary is authorized to issue
 any certificate of financial responsibility which the United States may
 issue under the Civil Liability Convention.
 (d) WITHHOLDING CLEARANCE- The Secretary of the Treasury shall withhold or
 revoke the clearance required by section 4197 of the Revised Statutes of the
 United States of any ship which does not have a certificate demonstrating
 compliance with this section.
 (e) DENYING ENTRY AND DETAINING VESSELS- The Secretary may (1) deny entry
 to any facility or to any port or place in the United States, or (2) detain
 at the facility or port or place in the United States, any ship subject
 to this section which, upon request, does not produce the certificate
 demonstrating compliance with this section or regulations issued hereunder.
 (f) CIVIL PENALTY- Any person who, after notice and an opportunity for a
 hearing, is found to have violated this title, any regulation issued under
 this title, section 3005(b), or any denial or detention order issued under
 subsection (e) of this section shall be liable to the United States for a
 civil penalty, not to exceed $25,000 per day of violation. The amount of
 the civil penalty shall be assessed by the Secretary in accordance with
 the procedures set forth in section 1017 of this Act.
 (g) WAIVER OF SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY- The United States waives all defenses
 based on its status as a sovereign State with respect to any controversy
 arising under the Civil Liability Convention or the Fund Convention relating
 to any ship owned by the United States and used for commercial purposes.
SEC. 3008. REGULATIONS.
 The Secretary may prescribe the necessary regulations to carry out this
 Act and all obligations of the United States under the Civil Liability
 Convention, and the Fund Convention.
TITLE IV--PREVENTION AND REMOVAL
SEC. 4001. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this title, the term--
 (1) `tank barge' means a non-self-propelled vessel constructed or adapted
 to carry oil in bulk as cargo; and
 (2) `tanker' has the same meaning the term has in section 2101 of title 46,
 United States Code.
Subtitle A--Prevention
SEC. 4101. REVIEW OF ALCOHOL AND DRUG ABUSE AND OTHER MATTERS IN ISSUING
LICENSES, CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRY, AND MERCHANT MARINERS' DOCUMENTS.
 (a) LICENSES AND CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRY- Section 7101 of title 46,
 United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(g) The Secretary may not issue a license or certificate of registry under
 this section unless an individual applying for the license or certificate
 makes available to the Secretary, under section 206(b)(4) of the National
 Driver Register Act of 1982 (23 U.S.C. 401 note), all information contained
 in the National Driver Register regarding the motor vehicle driving record
 of that individual.
 `(h) The Secretary shall conduct a review of the criminal record of each
 individual who applies for a license under this section.'.
 (b) MERCHANT MARINERS' DOCUMENT- Section 7302 of title 46, United States
 Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(c) The Secretary may not issue a merchant mariner's document under this
 chapter unless the individual applying for the document makes available to
 the Secretary, under section 206(b)(4) of the National Driver Register Act of
 1982 (23 U.S.C. 401 note), all information contained in the National Driver
 Register regarding the motor vehicle driving record of that individual.'.
SEC. 4102. TERM OF CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRY AND MERCHANT MARINERS' DOCUMENTS.
 (a) CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRIES- Section 7107 of title 46, United States
 Code, is amended by striking `is not limited in duration.' and inserting
 `is valid for 5 years, and may be renewed for additional 5-year periods.'.
 (b) MERCHANT MARINERS' DOCUMENTS- Section 7302 of title 46, United States
 Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(d) A merchant mariner's document issued under this chapter is valid for
 5 years, and may be renewed for additional 5-year periods.'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) of this
 section are effective January 1, 1990.
 (d) TERMINATION OF EXISTING CERTIFICATES AND DOCUMENTS- A certificate of
 registry and a merchant mariner's document issued before January 1, 1990,
 shall terminate on the day it would have expired as if--
 (1) subsections (a) and (b) were in effect on the date it was issued; and
 (2) it was renewed at the end of each 5-year period under section 7107 or
 section 7302(d).
 (e) CRIMINAL RECORD REVIEW IN LICENSE RENEWALS- Section 7109 of title 46,
 United States Code, as amended by designating the existing text as subsection
 (a) and adding at the end the following:
 `(b) The Secretary shall conduct a review of the criminal record of each
 holder of a license issued under this part who applies for renewal of that
 license under this section.'.
SEC. 4103. SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES, CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRY,
AND MERCHANT MARINERS' DOCUMENTS FOR ALCOHOL AND DRUG ABUSE.
 (a) AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION IN NATIONAL DRIVER REGISTER-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 7702 of title 46, United States Code, is amended
 by adding at the end the following:
 `(c) The Secretary shall request an individual holding a license, certificate
 of registry, or merchant mariner's document to make available to the
 Secretary, under section 206(b)(4) of the National Driver Register Act of
 1982 (23 U.S.C. 401 note), all information contained in the National Driver
 Register regarding the motor vehicle driving record of that individual.
 `(d)(1) The Secretary shall temporarily suspend and take possession of
 the holder's license, certificate, or document if--
 `(A) that individual performs a sensitive function on a vessel as determined
 by the Secretary; and
 `(B) there is probable cause to believe that the holder--
 `(i) has performed the sensitive function while under the influence of,
 or while using, alcohol or a dangerous drug;
 `(ii) has been denied a motor vehicle license by a State for cause within
 the 5-year period immediately before the temporary suspension; or
 `(iii) has been convicted of an offense for which a license, certificate,
 or document may be suspended or revoked under section 7703(2) or (3)
 of this title.
 `(2) If a license, certificate, or document is temporarily suspended under
 this section, an expedited hearing under subsection (a) of this section
 shall be held within 15 days after the temporary suspension.'.
 (2) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 7704(a) of title 46, United States Code,
 is amended by striking `section' the first place it appears and inserting
 `part'.
 (b) BASES FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION- Section 7703 of title 46, United
 States Code, is amended to read as follows:
`Sec. 7703. Bases for suspension or revocation
 `A license, certificate of registry, or merchant mariner's document issued
 by the Secretary may be suspended or revoked if the holder--
 `(1) when acting under the authority of that license, certificate,
 or document--
 `(A) has violated or fails to comply with this subtitle, a regulation
 prescribed under this subtitle, or any other law or regulation intended
 to promote marine safety or to protect navigable waters; or
 `(B) has committed an act of incompetence, misconduct, or negligence;
 `(2) is convicted of an offense that would prevent the issuance or renewal
 of a license, certificate of registry, or merchant mariner's document; or
 `(3) is convicted of an offense described in section 205(a)(3)(A) or (B)
 of the National Driver Register Act of 1982 (23 U.S.C. 401 note) within
 the 5-year period immediately preceding the suspension or revocation.'.
 (c) TERMINATION OF REVOCATION- Section 7701(c) of title 46, United States
 Code, is amended to read as follows:
 `(c) When a license, certificate of registry, or merchant mariner's document
 has been revoked under this chapter, the former holder may be issued a new
 license, certificate of registry, or merchant mariner's document only after--
 `(1) the Secretary decides, under regulations prescribed by the Secretary,
 that the issuance is compatible with the requirement of good discipline
 and safety at sea; and
 `(2) the former holder provides satisfactory proof that the bases for
 revocation are no longer valid.'.
SEC. 4104. REMOVAL OF MASTER OR INDIVIDUAL IN CHARGE.
 Section 8101 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by adding at the
 end the following:
 `(i) Whenever the next 2 senior licensed officers on a vessel reasonably
 believe that the master or individual in charge of the vessel is under the
 influence of alcohol or a dangerous drug and is incapable of commanding
 the vessel, the next most senior licensed officer shall--
 `(1) temporarily relieve the master;
 `(2) temporarily take command of the vessel;
 `(3) immediately enter the details of the incident in the vessel log; and
 `(4) report those details to the Secretary--
 `(A) by the most expeditious means available; and
 `(B) in written form transmitted within 12 hours after the vessel arrives
 at its next port.'.
SEC. 4105. ACCESS TO NATIONAL DRIVER REGISTER.
 (a) AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION TO SECRETARY- Section 206(b) of the National
 Driver Register Act of 1982 (23 U.S.C. 401 note) is amended by adding at
 the end the following:
 `(6)(A) Any individual who holds or who has applied for a license or
 certificate of registry under section 7101 of title 46, United States
 Code, or merchant mariner's document under section 7302 of title 46, United
 States Code, shall request the chief driver licensing official of a State to
 transmit to the Secretary in accordance with subsection (a) of this section
 information regarding the motor vehicle driving record of the individual.
 `(B) The Secretary--
 `(i) shall make the information available to the individual for review
 and written comment before denying, suspending, or revoking the license,
 certificate of registry, or merchant mariner's document of the individual
 based on that information and before using that information in any action
 taken under chapter 77 of title 46, United States Code; and
 `(ii) may not otherwise divulge or use that information, except for the
 purposes of section 7101, 7302, or 7703 of title 46, United States Code.
 `(C) Information regarding the motor vehicle driving record of an
 individual may not be transmitted to the Secretary under this paragraph
 if the information was entered in the register more than five years before
 the date of the request for the information, unless the information relates
 to revocations or suspensions that are still in effect on the date of the
 request. Information submitted to the register by States under the Act
 of July 14, 1960 (74 Stat. 526), or under this Act are subject to access
 for the purpose of this paragraph during the transition to the register
 established under section 203(c) of this Act.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Chapter 75 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by adding at
 the end the following:
`Sec. 7505. Review of information in National Driver Register
 `The Secretary shall make information received from the National Driver
 Register under section 206(b)(6) of the National Driver Register Act
 of 1982 (23 U.S.C. 401 note) available to an individual for review and
 written comment before denying, suspending, revoking, or taking any
 other action relating to a license, certificate of registry, or merchant
 mariner's document authorized to be issued under this part, based on that
 information.'.
 (2) Section 2302(c) of title 46, United States Code, is amended by striking
 `intoxicated' and inserting in lieu thereof `under the influence of alcohol'.
 (c) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The analysis for chapter 75 of title 46, United
 States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:
`7505. Review of information in National Driver Register.'.
SEC. 4106. MANNING STANDARDS FOR FOREIGN TANK VESSELS.
 (a) STANDARDS FOR FOREIGN TANK VESSELS- Section 9101(a) of title 46,
 United States Code, is amended to read as follows:
 `(a)(1) The Secretary shall evaluate the manning, training, qualification,
 and watchkeeping standards of a foreign country that issues documentation
 for any vessel to which chapter 37 of this title applies--
 `(A) on a periodic basis; and
 `(B) after a casualty involving that vessel.
 `(2) After each evaluation made under paragraph (1) of this subsection,
 the Secretary shall determine whether--
 `(A) the foreign country has standards for licensing and certification
 of seamen that are at least equivalent to United States law or customary
 international law; and
 `(B) those standards are being enforced.
 `(3) If the Secretary determines under this subsection that a country
 has failed to maintain or enforce standards at least equivalent to United
 States law or customary international law, the Secretary shall prohibit
 vessels issued documentation by that country from entering the United States.
 `(4) The Secretary may allow provisional entry of a vessel prohibited from
 entering the United States under paragraph (3) of this subsection if--
 `(A) the owner or operator of the vessel establishes, to the satisfaction
 of the Secretary, that the vessel is not unsafe or a threat to the marine
 environment; or
 `(B) the entry is necessary for the safety of the vessel or individuals
 on the vessel.'.
 (b) TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Section 9(a) of the Ports and
 Waterways Safety Act (33 U.S.C. 1228(a)) is amended--
 (1) in the introductory paragraph, by striking `section 4417a of the
 Revised Statutes, as amended,' and inserting `chapter 37 of title 46,
 United States Code.';
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking `section 4417a of the Revised Statutes,
 as amended,' and inserting `chapter 37 of title 46, United States Code.';
 (3) in paragraph (5), by striking `section 4417a(11) of the Revised
 Statutes, as amended,' and inserting `section 9101 of title 46, United
 States Code.'; and
 (4) in paragraph (5), by striking `international standards that are accepted
 by the United States' and inserting `customary international law'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- Sections 9101(a)(3) and (4) of title 46, United
 States Code, and section 9(a) of the Ports and Waterways Safety Act (33
 U.S.C. 1228(a)) (as enacted by subsections (a) and (b) of this section)
 take effect on January 1, 1990.
SEC. 4107. VESSEL TRAFFIC SERVICE SYSTEMS.
 (a) MANDATORY VESSEL TRAFFIC SERVICE- The Ports and Waterways Safety Act (33
 U.S.C. 1221 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 4 the following:
`4a. VESSEL TRAFFIC SERVICES REQUIRED.
 `(a) The Secretary shall require appropriate vessels in the area of a
 vessel traffic service system to use or comply with that system.
 `(b) The Secretary may construct, operate, maintain, improve, or expand
 a vessel traffic service system in any port or channel of the United States.
 `(c) No appropriation shall be made for a project to construct, operate,
 maintain, improve, or expand a vessel traffic service system unless that
 construction, operation, maintenance, improvement, or expansion is approved
 by a resolution adopted by the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries
 of the House of Representatives and by the Committee on Commerce, Science,
 and Transportation of the Senate.
 `(d) For the purpose of assisting the committees in their consideration
 of a resolution under subsection (c), the Secretary shall transmit to
 Congress a report on the proposed construction, operation, maintenance,
 improvement, or expansion of a vessel traffic service system, including
 all relevant data and costs.'.
 (b) REPEAL- Section 4(a)(2) of the Ports and Waterways Safety Act (33
 U.S.C. 1223) is repealed.
 (c) DIRECTION OF VESSEL MOVEMENT-
 (1) STUDY- The Secretary shall conduct a study--
 (A) of whether the Secretary should be given additional authority to
 direct the movement of vessels upon navigable waters and should exercise
 such authority; and
 (B) to determine and prioritize the United States ports and channels that
 are in need of new, expanded, or improved vessel traffic service systems
 by evaluating--
 (i) the nature, volume, and frequency of vessel traffic;
 (ii) the risks of collisions, spills, and damages associated with that
 traffic;
 (iii) the impact of installation, expansion, or improvement of a vessel
 traffic service system; and
 (iv) all other relevant costs and data.
 (2) REPORT- Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of
 this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the results
 of the study conducted under paragraph (1) together with recommendations
 for implementing the results of that study. A report submitted under this
 paragraph is deemed to be a report transmitted under section 4a of the
 Ports and Waterways Safety Act (33 U.S.C. 1221 et seq.).
SEC. 4108. STATE AUTHORITY TO REQUIRE STATE PILOTAGE FOR TANKERS.
 (a) STATE PILOT AUTHORITY- Section 8501(d) of title 46, United States Code,
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(d) A State may not adopt a regulation or provision that requires
 a coastwise vessel, other than a tanker having a Federal pilot whose
 license is not endorsed for pilotage in that State's waters, to take a
 pilot licensed or authorized by the laws of a State if the vessel--
 `(1) is propelled by machinery and subject to inspection under part B of
 this subtitle; or
 `(2) is subject to inspection under chapter 37 of this title.'.
 (b) PILOT CHARGES PROHIBITED- Section 8502(d) of title 46, United States
 Code, is amended to read as follows:
 `(d) Except in the case of a tanker for which a State pilot is authorized
 under this chapter, a State or political subdivision of a State may not
 levy pilot charges on a vessel lawfully piloted by a Federal pilot required
 under this section.'.
SEC. 4109. GREAT LAKES PILOTAGE.
 (a) INDIVIDUALS WHO MAY SERVE AS PILOT ON UNDESIGNATED GREAT LAKE WATERS-
 Section 9302(b) of title 46, United States Code, is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(b) A member of the complement of a vessel may serve for the route being
 navigated as the pilot required on waters not designated by the President,
 if the member is--
 `(1) a citizen of the United States and holds a license issued under
 section 7101(c) of this title; or
 `(2) a citizen or national of Canada and has a license issued under
 provisions of Canadian law equivalent to section 7101(c) of this title.'.
 (b) EXEMPTED VESSELS- Section 9302(d)(1) of title 46, United States Code,
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(1) except for a vessel to which chapter 37 applies, the Secretary notifies
 the master that a registered pilot is not available; or'.
 (c) PILOTAGE- Section 9303(f) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `A vessel is liable in rem for charges for pilotage services under this
 subsection and any costs of collection.'.
 (d) PENALTIES- Section 9308 is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a) by striking `$500' and inserting `$25,000'; and
 (2) in subsections (b) and (c) by striking `$500' and inserting `$10,000'.
SEC. 4110. STUDY ON TANKER NAVIGATION SAFETY STANDARDS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Not later than one year after the date of enactment of
 this Act, the Secretary shall conduct a study to determine whether existing
 laws and regulations are adequate to ensure the safe navigation of vessels
 transporting oil and hazardous substances on the navigable waters and the
 exclusive economic zone.
 (b) STUDY- In conducting the study required under subsection (a), the
 Secretary shall--
 (1) determine appropriate crew sizes on tankers;
 (2) evaluate the adequacy of qualifications and training of crewmembers;
 (3) evaluate the ability of crewmembers on a tanker to take emergency
 actions to prevent or remove a discharge of oil or hazardous substance
 from the tanker;
 (4) evaluate the adequacy of navigation equipment and systems on tankers
 (including sonar, electronic chart display, and satellite technology);
 (5) evaluate the adequacy of navigation procedures, including with respect
 to speed, daylight, presence of ice, tides, weather, and other conditions;
 (6) evaluate whether areas of the navigable waters and the exclusive economic
 zone should be designated as zones where the movement of tankers should
 be limited or prohibited, in particular, areas where oil and gas leasing,
 exploration, or development are being prohibited by legislative action; and
 (7) evaluate vessel design and construction criteria to reduce the likelihood
 of a discharge, including criteria for--
 (A) tank capacity;
 (B) tanker tonnage;
 (C) tank barge tonnage;
 (D) double hulls and double bottoms on tankers and tank barges, by--
 (i) comparing worldwide the operating and environmental safety records of
 tankers equipped with double hulls or double bottoms and the records of
 tankers without these features;
 (ii) comparing the operating and environmental safety records of tank
 barges operating on the navigable waters of the United States and equipped
 with double hulls or double bottoms and the records of tank barges without
 these features;
 (iii) assessing the costs and benefits to owners and operators of tankers
 and tank barges of double hulls or double bottoms on some or all new
 tankers and new tank barges engaged solely in the coastwise trade; and
 (iv) evaluating the extent to which requiring double hulls and double
 bottoms will prevent serious oil pollution incidents in bays, sounds,
 harbors, and other near-shore areas of special environmental importance; and
 (v) consulting with naval architects, tanker and tank barge operators,
 salvors, environmental protection organizations, economists, States, and
 communities along tanker and tank barge routes, and any other persons the
 Secretary considers appropriate;
 (E) the vacuum method of tanker design or similar technology;
 (F) overfill and tank pressure monitoring devices; and
 (G) other vessel features;
 (8) evaluate whether inspection standards are adequate, including standards
 for vessel plate gauging;
 (9) review and incorporate the results of past studies, including studies
 conducted by the Coast Guard and the Office of Technology Assessment;
 (10) evaluate the use of computer simulator courses for training bridge
 officers and pilots of vessels transporting oil or hazardous substances
 on the navigable waters and the exclusive economic zone, and determine
 the feasibility and practicality of mandating such training; and
 (11) evaluate and test a program of remote alcohol testing for masters
 and pilots aboard tankers carrying significant quantities of oil.
 (c) REPORT- Not later than one year after the date of enactment of this
 Act, the Secretary shall transmit to Congress a report on the results of
 the study conducted under subsection (a), including recommendations for
 implementing the results of that study.
SEC. 4111. DREDGE MODIFICATION STUDY.
 (a) STUDY- The Secretary of the Army shall conduct a study and demonstration
 to determine the feasibility of modifying dredges to make them usable in
 removing discharges of oil and hazardous substances.
 (b) REPORT- Not later than one year after the date of enactment of this
 Act, the Secretary of the Army shall submit to Congress a report on the
 results of the study conducted under subsection (a) and recommendations
 for implementing the results of that study.
SEC. 4112. USE OF LINERS.
 (a) STUDY- The President shall conduct a study to determine whether liners
 or other secondary means of containment should be used to prevent leaking
 or to aid in leak detection at onshore facilities used for the bulk storage
 of oil and located near navigable waters.
 (b) REPORT- Not later than one year after the date of enactment of this
 Act, the President shall submit to Congress a report on the results of the
 study conducted under subsection (a) and recommendations to implement the
 results of the study.
 (c) IMPLEMENTATION- Not later than six months after the date the report
 required under subsection (b) is submitted to Congress, the President
 shall implement the recommendations contained in the report.
Subtitle B--Removal
SEC. 4201. FEDERAL REMOVAL AUTHORITY.
 (a) REMOVAL- Paragraph (1) of section 311(c) of the Federal Water Pollution
 Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1321(c)(1)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(c)(1)(A) The President shall ensure an effective and immediate removal
 of a discharge of oil or hazardous substance--
 `(i) into or on the navigable waters;
 `(ii) on the adjoining shorelines to these navigable waters;
 `(iii) on the waters of the exclusive economic zone; or
 `(iv) that may affect natural resources belonging to, appertaining to,
 or under the exclusive management authority of the United States.
in accordance with the National Contingency Plan, and any other contingency
plan prepared under subsection (j).
 `(B) In carrying out subparagraph (A), the President may--
 `(i) remove or arrange for the removal of a discharge, or the threat of
 a discharge, of oil or hazardous substance at any time;
 `(ii) direct all Federal, State, responsible party, and private actions
 to remove a discharge, or the threat of a discharge, of oil or a hazardous
 substance; and
 `(iii) monitor all removal actions.
 `(C) When the President retains or directs a person (other than a responsible
 party) under the authority of subparagraph (B)(i) or (ii), other than for
 removal of a hazardous substance, that person is not liable for removal costs
 or damages, other than for personal injury or wrongful death, arising from
 his or her removal activities conducted in accordance with the direction of
 the President, except in the case of gross negligence or willful misconduct.
 `(D) Each responsible party shall act in accordance with the National
 Contingency Plan, the applicable contingency plans required under subsection
 (j), and as otherwise directed by the President.
 `(E) Nothing in this paragraph affects the liability of a responsible
 party under the Oil Pollution Act of 1989.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Section 311(a) (33 U.S.C. 1321(a)) is amended--
 (1) by striking paragraph (8) and inserting the following:
 `(8) `remove' or `removal' refers to--
 `(A) the removal of oil or hazardous substances from water and shoreline;
 `(B) containment, dispersal, disposal, or other response actions; and
 `(C) the taking of other actions necessary to minimize or mitigate damage
 to the public health or welfare, including fish, shellfish, wildlife,
 and public and private property, shorelines, and beaches.'.
 (2) in paragraph (16) by striking the period and inserting in lieu thereof
 a semicolon;
 (3) in paragraph (17) by striking the period and inserting in lieu thereof
 `; and'; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following:
 `(18) `exclusive economic zone' means the zone established by the
 Presidential Proclamation Number 5030, dated March 10, 1983; and
 `(19) `responsible party' means an owner or operator in violation of
 subsection (b) of this section.'.
SEC. 4202. CONTINGENCY PLANS.
 Section 311(j) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1321(j))
 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2), by striking `paragraph (1) of'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
 `(3) LOCAL CONTINGENCY PLANS- (A) Not later than six months after the
 date of enactment of the Oil Pollution Act of 1989, the President shall
 designate areas for which new or improved local contingency plans must
 be prepared to respond to a discharge, or threat of discharge, of oil or
 a hazardous substance. The President shall specify the Federal, State,
 and local officials required to prepare these plans. These plans shall be
 prepared in consultation with affected parties.
 `(B) In determining the areas to be designated under this paragraph, the
 President shall consult with State and local officials, and the public,
 and shall consider--
 `(i) the likelihood of a discharge;
 `(ii) the likelihood that the discharge would result in severe economic
 or environmental damage; and
 `(iii) the adequacy of any existing local contingency plans.
 `(C) Each contingency plan prepared under this paragraph shall include--
 `(i) a general description of the area subject to the plan, including
 the identification of specific areas of special economic or environmental
 importance that might be damaged by a discharge;
 `(ii) a detailed description of the responsibilities of the responsible
 party, and Federal, State, and local agencies, for moving a discharge,
 or the threat of a discharge;
 `(iii) a list of equipment and personnel available to the responsible party,
 and Federal, State, and local agencies, to ensure an effective and immediate
 removal of a discharge, or threat of a discharge; and
 `(iv) any other information the President may require.
 `(D) Not later than six months after the designation of areas under
 subparagraph (A), the persons identified shall prepare and submit to the
 President the contingency plan required by this paragraph. The President
 shall promptly review each plan and require amendments to any plan that
 does not meet the requirements of this paragraph.
 `(E) Contingency plans required under this paragraph shall be reviewed
 periodically by the President and updated.
 `(F) The President may provide technical assistance in the preparation of
 a contingency plan under this paragraph.
 `(4) TANK VESSEL AND FACILITY CONTINGENCY PLANS- (A) Not later than 18
 months after the date of the enactment of the Oil Pollution Act of 1989,
 the President shall require the owners or operators of the following vessels
 and facilities to prepare a contingency plan for the vessel and facility:
 `(i) A tank vessel, as defined under section 2101 of title 46, United
 States Code.
 `(ii) An offshore or onshore facility that, because of its location,
 could reasonably discharge into or on the navigable waters, the adjoining
 shorelines, or the exclusive economic zone.
 `(B) The contingency plans required by this paragraph shall--
 `(i) be consistent, and ensure compliance by the owner or operator, with the
 requirements of the National Contingency Plan and any local contingency plan;
 `(ii) be submitted on a timely basis to the President;
 `(iii) be available for review by appropriate Federal, State, and local
 officials, and the public;
 `(iv) identify the individual having full authority to implement a removal
 action and require immediate communications between that individual and
 the appropriate Federal official and the persons identified in clause (vi);
 `(v) describe the specific actions that will be taken to immediately remove
 a discharge, including the most serious potential discharge from the vessel
 or facility involved;
 `(vi) identify and ensure, by contract with a private organization or
 otherwise, the availability of personnel and equipment necessary to
 implement a removal action under clauses (iv) and (v) of this subparagraph;
 `(vii) include a program of personnel training, equipment testing, and
 periodic unannounced drills sufficient to ensure the effectiveness of the
 contingency plan;
 `(viii) describe the conditions under which dispersants might be used,
 including the procedures to be followed for obtaining approval for
 dispersant use;
 `(ix) include provisions for the safe disposal of any contaminated materials
 or oil or hazardous substance recovered during the removal; and
 `(x) be updated periodically.
 `(C) Beginning one year after the issuance of regulations implementing this
 paragraph, a vessel or facility for which the preparation of a contingency
 plan is required, may not handle, store, or transport oil unless--
 `(i) the owner or operator has submitted a contingency plan in accordance
 with this paragraph;
 `(ii) the contingency plan has not been rejected by the President; and
 `(iii) the vessel or facility is operating in compliance with the
 contingency plan.
 `(D) The President shall promptly review the contingency plans submitted
 under this paragraph and shall reject, or require amendments to, any plan
 that does not meet the requirements of subparagraph (B) of this paragraph.
 `(E) The President may provide by regulation that the requirements of this
 paragraph have been met by a class of vessels or facilities under other law.
 `(5) Not later than one year after the date of enactment of the Oil
 Pollution Act of 1989, the President shall require--
 `(A) periodic inspection of containment booms, skimmers, vessels, and
 other major equipment used to remove discharges of oil or a hazardous
 substance; and
 `(B) vessels operating on the navigable waters and carrying oil or a
 hazardous substance in bulk as cargo to carry appropriate removal equipment
 that employs the best technology economically feasible and that is compatible
 with the safe operation of the vessel.
 `(4) The President, acting through the Secretary of the department in
 which the Coast Guard is operating, shall periodically conduct drills of
 removal capability in major port areas under local contingency plans and
 relevant vessel and facility contingency plans. The drills shall include
 participation by Federal, State, and local agencies, the owners and operators
 of vessels and facilities in the area, and private industry. The Secretary
 shall publish annual reports on these drills including an assessment of
 the effectiveness of the plans and a list of amendments that were made to
 the ineffective contingency plans.'.
SEC. 4203. STRIKE TEAMS.
 Section 311(c)(2)(C) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1321(c)(2)(C)) is amended to read as follows--
 `(C) establishment and maintenance of a Federal strike force including at
 least 7 regional strike teams with personnel who are trained, equipped,
 and available on a continual basis to provide necessary services to carry
 out the plan and any contingency plans required under subsection (j) of this
 section. In establishing these teams, the President shall consider existing
 Federal, State, local, and private sector resources that are available
 and that may be used to immediately and effectively remove a discharge;'.
SEC. 4204. COAST GUARD VESSEL DESIGN.
 The Secretary shall ensure that vessels designed and constructed to
 replace Coast Guard buoy tenders are equipped with oil skimming systems
 that are readily available, operable, and complement the primary mission
 of servicing aids to navigation.
SEC. 4205. REMOVAL RESOURCE INVENTORY.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT OF COMPUTER LISTING- Not later than 1 year after the
 date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall (in consultation
 with State officials responsible for removal of oil from the navigable
 waters, adjoining shorelines, and the exclusive economic zone) establish,
 maintain, and annually revise a comprehensive nationwide computer listing
 of emergency removal resources which are available to and appropriate for
 use in removing discharges and substantial threats of discharges of oil.
 (b) CONTENTS OF COMPUTER LISTING- The computer listing established under
 this section shall include--
 (1) a continually updated description of all Federal, State, local, and
 private emergency removal resources which are available for use, including--
 (A) the locations and capabilities of the resources;
 (B) specification of the suitability of each resource for use in rivers,
 harbors, open ocean, and calm waters; and
 (C) specification of the suitability of each resource for use in fresh
 water and in salt water;
 (2) a nationwide listing of persons having emergency removal resources
 available for sale or lease, including--
 (A) each person's address, telephone number, and hours of business; and
 (B) a description of the types and capabilities of their resources;
 (3) a listing of the names, telephone numbers, and areas of expertise
 of persons residing in the vicinity of areas covered by the National
 Contingency Plan who are experts in--
 (A) removing discharges or the substantial threats of discharges of oil; or
 (B) the effects of such discharges or threats.
 (c) INTERNATIONAL INVENTORY- The President shall take such actions as
 may be necessary to encourage appropriate international organizations to
 establish an international inventory of emergency removal resources.
Subtitle C--Miscellaneous
SEC. 4301. INCREASED PENALTIES.
 (a) NOTICE TO STATE AND FAILURE TO REPORT- Section 311(b)(5) of the Federal
 Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1321(b)(5)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting after the first sentence the following: `The Federal
 agency shall immediately notify the appropriate State agency of any State
 which is, or may reasonably be expected to be, affected by the discharge
 of oil or a hazardous substance.'; and
 (2) by striking `fined not more than $10,000, or imprisoned for not more than
 one year, or both' and inserting `fined in accordance with the applicable
 provisions of title 18 of the United States Code, or imprisoned for not
 more than 3 years (or not more than 5 years in the case of a second or
 subsequent conviction), or both'.
 (b) ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY FOR DISCHARGE- Section 311(b)(6)(A) of the
 Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1321(b)(6)(A)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `, or by the Administrator,' after `Secretary of the
 department in which the Coast Guard is operating' each place it appears;
 (2) by striking `$5,000 for each offense' each place it appears and
 inserting in lieu thereof `$25,000 for each day of such offense';
 (3) in each of the fifth, sixth, and eighth sentences, by inserting `or
 the Administrator, as appropriate' after `such Secretary'; and
 (4) in the seventh sentence by inserting `or the Administrator, as
 appropriate,' after `such Secretary'.
 (c) PENALTY IN CIVIL ACTION FOR DISCHARGE- Section 311(b)(6)(B) of the
 Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1321(b)(6)(B)) is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence by inserting `or the Secretary of the department
 in which the Coast Guard is operating' after `The Administrator';
 (2) by striking `$50,000' and inserting `$1,000 for each barrel of oil
 or hazardous substance that was discharged, or $5,000,000, whichever is
 less'; and
 (3) by striking `$250,000' and inserting `$5,000 for each barrel of oil
 or hazardous substance that was discharged'.
 (d) NATIONAL CONTINGENCY PLAN- Section 311(j)(2) of the Federal Water
 Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1321(j)(2)) is amended by striking `$5,000'
 and inserting `$25,000'.
 (e) NEGLIGENT OPERATIONS- Section 2302 of title 46, United States Code,
 is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b), by striking `shall be fined not more than $5,000,
 imprisoned for not more than one year, or both.', and inserting `commits
 a class A misdemeanor.'; and
 (2) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1) by striking `, shall be';
 (B) in paragraph (1) by inserting `is' before `liable'; and
 (C) by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows:
 `(2) commits a class A misdemeanor.'.
 (f) INSPECTIONS- Section 3318 of title 46, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b) by striking `shall be fined not more than $10,000,
 imprisoned for not more than 5 years, or both.', and inserting `commits
 a class D felony.';
 (2) in subsection (c) by striking `shall be fined not more than $5,000,
 imprisoned for not more than 5 years, or both.', and inserting `commits
 a class D felony.';
 (3) in subsection (d) by striking `shall be fined not more than $5,000,
 imprisoned for not more than 5 years, or both.', and inserting `commits
 a class D felony.';
 (4) in subsection (e) by striking `shall be fined not more than $10,000,
 imprisoned for not more than 2 years, or both.', and inserting `commits
 a class A misdemeanor.'; and
 (5) in subsection (f) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking
 `shall be fined not less than $1,000 but not more than $10,000, and
 imprisoned for not less than 2 years but not more than 5 years,', and
 inserting `commits a class D felony.'.
 (g) CARRIAGE OF LIQUID BULK DANGEROUS CARGOES- Section 3718 of title 46,
 United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b), by striking `shall be fined not more than $50,000,
 imprisoned for not more than 5 years, or both.', and inserting `commits
 a class D felony.'; and
 (2) in subsection (c), by striking `shall be fined not more than $100,000,
 imprisoned for not more than 10 years, or both.', and inserting `commits
 a class C felony.'.
 (h) LOAD LINES- Section 5116 of title 46, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (d), by striking `shall be fined not more than $10,000,
 imprisoned for not more than one year, or both.', and inserting `commits
 a class A misdemeanor.'; and
 (2) in subsection (e), by striking `shall be fined not more than $10,000,
 imprisoned for not more than 2 years, or both.' and inserting `commits a
 class A misdemeanor.'.
 (i) COMPLEMENT OF INSPECTED VESSELS- Section 8101 of title 46, United
 States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (e), by striking `$50' and inserting `$1,000';
 (2) in subsection (f), by striking `$100, or, for a deficiency of a licensed
 individual, a penalty of $500.' and inserting `$10,000.'; and
 (3) in subsection (g), by striking `$500.' and inserting `$10,000.'.
 (j) WATCHES- Section 8104 of title 46, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (i), by striking `$100.' and inserting `$10,000.'; and
 (2) in subsection (j), by striking `$500.' and inserting `$10,000.'.
 (k) COASTWISE PILOTAGE- Section 8502 of title 46, United States Code,
 is amended--
 (1) in subsection (e), by striking `$500.' and inserting `$10,000.'; and
 (2) in subsection (f), by striking `$500.' and inserting `$10,000.'.
 (l) FOREIGN COMMERCE PILOTAGE- Section 8503(e) of title 46, United States
 Code, is amended by striking `shall be fined not more than $50,000,
 imprisoned for not more than five years, or both.' and inserting `commits
 a class D felony.'.
 (m) CREW REQUIREMENTS- Section 8702(e) of title 46, United States Code,
 is amended by striking `$500.' and inserting `$10,000.'.
 (n) PORTS AND WATERWAYS SAFETY ACT- Section 13(b) of the Port and Waterways
 Safety Act (33 U.S.C. 1232(b)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking `shall be fined not more than $50,000
 for each violation or imprisoned for not more than five years, or both.',
 and inserting `commits a class D felony.'; and
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking `shall, in lieu of the penalties prescribed
 in paragraph (1), be fined not more than $100,000, or imprisoned for not
 more than 10 years, or both.', and inserting `commits a class C felony.'.
 (o) VESSEL NAVIGATION- Section 4 of the Act of April 28, 1908 (33
 U.S.C. 1236), is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b), by striking `$500.' and inserting `$5,000.';
 (2) in subsection (c), by striking `$500,' and inserting `$5,000.'; and
 (3) in subsection (d), by striking `$250.' and inserting `$2,500.'.
 (p) INTERVENTION ON THE HIGH SEAS ACT- Section 12(a) of the Intervention
 of the High Seas Act (33 U.S.C. 1481(a)) is amended--
 (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking `Any person who'
 and inserting `A person commits a class A misdemeanor if that person'; and
 (2) in paragraph (3), by striking `, shall be fined not more than $10,000
 or imprisoned not more than one year, or both'.
 (q) DEEPWATER PORT ACT OF 1974-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 15(a) of the Deepwater Port Act of 1974 (33
 U.S.C. 1514(a)) is amended by striking `shall on conviction be fined not
 more than $25,000 for each day of violation or imprisoned for not more
 than 1 year, or both.' and inserting `commits a class A misdemeanor for
 each day of violation.'.
 (2) FAILURE TO NOTIFY- Section 18(b) of the Deepwater Port Act of 1974
 (33 U.S.C. 1517(b)) is amended by striking `shall, upon conviction,
 be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned for not more than 1 year,
 or both.' and inserting `commits a class A misdemeanor.'.
 (r) ACT TO PREVENT POLLUTION FROM SHIPS- Section 9(a) of the Act to Prevent
 Pollution from Ships (33 U.S.C. 1908(a)) is amended by striking `shall,
 for each violation, be fined not more than $50,000 or be imprisoned for
 not more than 5 years, or both.', and inserting `commits a class D felony.'.
SEC. 4302. DEPOSIT OF CERTAIN PENALTIES INTO OIL SPILL LIABILITY TRUST FUND.
 Section 311(b)(6) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1321(b)(6)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `(F) Amounts recovered by the Federal Government for penalties assessed under
 this subsection as the result of a discharge of oil shall be deposited in
 the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund created by section 9509 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986.'.
SEC. 4303. HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES.
 Nothing in this title affects or modifies, in any way, the obligations
 or liabilities of any person under other Federal or State law, including
 common law, with respect to the discharge or release of hazardous substances,
 pollutants or contaminants, as defined under section 101 of the Comprehensive
 Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (42 U.S.C. 9601).
TITLE V--PRINCE WILLIAM SOUND OIL SPILL REMOVAL
SEC. 5001. SHORT TITLE.
 This title may be cited as the `Prince William Sound Oil Spill Removal
 Act of 1989'.
SEC. 5002. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this title--
 (1) `Arctic waters' means the navigable waters of the United States in the
 State of Alaska and the waters of the exclusive economic zone established
 by Presidential Proclamation Number 5030, dated March 10, 1983, adjacent
 to the State of Alaska.
 (2) `Prince William Sound' means all State and Federal waters within Prince
 William Sound, Alaska, including the approach to Hinchenbrook Entrance
 out to and encompassing Seal Rocks.
 (3) `Tank vessel' has the same meaning given that term in section 2101 of
 title 46, United States Code, except that it does not include an escort
 vessel or any other vessel used to remove an unlawful discharge of oil.
SEC. 5003. TANK VESSEL REQUIREMENTS.
 Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this title, the
 Secretary shall require under section 3703(a)(3) of title 46, United
 States Code--
 (1) tank vessels transporting oil from the Trans-Alaska Pipeline within
 designated areas of Prince William Sound to be escorted by at least one
 towing vessel (as defined under section 2101 of title 46, United States
 Code) or other vessels considered appropriate by the Secretary; and
 (2) in addition to the requirements of section 8502 of title 46, United
 States Code, the use of a pilot licensed by the State of Alaska who is
 operating under a Federal license for all tank vessels navigating between
 the Port of Valdez, Alaska, and a point in Prince William Sound south of
 Bligh Reef.
SEC. 5004. VESSEL TRAFFIC SERVICE SYSTEM.
 (a) PLAN- Not later than 4 months after the date of enactment of this Act,
 the Secretary shall prepare a plan to modify the surveillance coverage
 for vessels in Prince William Sound. The plan shall include options for
 construction of new radar sites to cover all of the vessel traffic service
 system within Prince William Sound, a review of existing vessel surveillance
 programs to ensure constant contact with vessel traffic when necessary,
 a review of radar maintenance policies to ensure that the vessel traffic
 service system is maintained at or above a 99.9 percent availability
 standard, and any proposals using other technology that will provide the
 same operational and availability standards.
 (b) IMPLEMENTATION- The Secretary shall implement the plan required under
 subsection (a) not later than 1 year after its preparation.
SEC. 5005. EQUIPMENT AND PERSONNEL REQUIREMENTS.
 Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this title, the
 Secretary, under section 311(j) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1321(j)), shall require--
 (1) prepositioned oil spill containment and removal equipment in the Port
 of Valdez, the city of Cordova, and other locations within the geographic
 boundaries of Prince William Sound, including escort vessels with skimming
 capability, barges to receive recovered oil, heavy duty sea boom, pumping,
 transferring, lightering equipment, and other appropriate removal equipment
 for the protection of the environment, including fish hatcheries;
 (2) the establishment of an oil spill removal organization at Cordova,
 Tatitlek, Valdez, Chenega, or other appropriate locations in Prince William
 Sound consisting of trained personnel in sufficient numbers to immediately
 remove a discharge of 200,000 barrels of oil;
 (3) tank vessels operating in Prince William Sound to have on board
 appropriate equipment or materials sufficient to remove quickly a discharge
 of oil and to minimize the damage to the environment from that oil;
 (4) training in oil removal techniques for local residents and individuals
 engaged in the cultivation or production of fish or fish products in Prince
 William Sound; and
 (5) practice exercises not less than two times per year which test the
 capacity of the equipment and personnel required under this section. That
 equipment shall undergo periodic testing and certification as required by
 the Secretary.
SEC. 5006. USE OF LOCAL SERVICES.
 In carrying out this title, the Secretary shall--
 (1) consult with local residents and local landowners of the Prince William
 Sound area; and
 (2) ensure the use, to the maximum extent feasible, of the services,
 equipment, and facilities of locally based contractors who have oil
 discharge removal expertise.
SEC. 5007. AUTHORITY OF STATE OF ALASKA.
 Nothing in this title shall be construed as changing, diminishing, or
 affecting in any way the authority of the State of Alaska, or any political
 subdivision thereof, to regulate tank vessels or to provide for oil spill
 contingency planning in State waters.
SEC. 5008. ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENTS.
 (a) NOAA EXPENDITURES- From sums appropriated for this purpose, the
 Under Secretary for Oceans and Atmosphere of the Department of Commerce
 shall expend no less than $5,000,000 in each of fiscal years 1990, 1991,
 and 1992, to conduct living marine resource damage assessments in Arctic
 waters from the discharge of oil that occurred as a result of the grounding
 of the EXXON VALDEZ in Prince William Sound.
 (b) RECOVERED SUMS- The Under Secretary for Oceans and Atmosphere shall,
 whenever possible, recover the sums expended under subsection (a) of this
 section from the owner or operator of the EXXON VALDEZ. These sums shall
 be credited to the appropriations of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
 Administration.
 (c) CRITERIA- In carrying out this section, the Under Secretary for Oceans
 and Atmosphere shall--
 (1) consult with local residents and significant local landowners of the
 Prince William Sound area;
 (2) coordinate assessment and monitoring work with the State of Alaska
 and the Prince William Sound Science and Technology Institute through the
 establishment of an appropriate working group; and
 (3) to the extent practicable, use local services and expertise.
SEC. 5009. REPORT.
 Not later than 4 months after the date of enactment of this title, after
 providing for a 60-day public comment period, the Secretary shall report
 to Congress on--
 (1) a list of oil pollution exercises conducted in the Port of Valdez and
 Prince William Sound during the operating of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline; and
 (2) any other matters the Secretary considers important regarding oil
 spills in Arctic waters, including faster approval by State and Federal
 agencies of oil spill removal technology.
TITLE VI--MISCELLANEOUS
SEC. 6001. STATUTORY WAIVERS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 2113 of title 46, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(a)' before `If the'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 `(b)(1) Notwithstanding another law, the Secretary may waive the application
 of parts B, C, F (except section 8103), and H of this subtitle, if the
 Secretary determines that the waiver is needed in a crisis concerning--
 `(A) a discharge, or threat of a discharge, of oil or a hazardous
 substance; or
 `(B) the national defense, as determined by the Secretary of Defense.
 `(2) A waiver may be issued under this section on the Secretary's own
 initiative or on request of the head of another department, agency, or
 instrumentality of the United States Government.
 `(3) A waiver issued under this section shall--
 `(A) state the reason for the waiver;
 `(B) be for a specified period, not to exceed 1 year, and may not be renewed;
 `(C) state which requirements of law are being waived; and
 `(D) terminate when qualified individuals or vessels are available.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- The Act of December 27, 1950 (46
 App. U.S.C. chapter 1 note) is repealed.
SEC. 6002. SAVINGS CLAUSE.
 This Act does not affect--
 (1) admiralty and maritime law; or
 (2) the jurisdiction of the district courts of the United States with
 respect to civil actions under admiralty and maritime jurisdiction, saving to
 suitors in all cases all other remedies to which they are otherwise entitled.
SEC. 6003. QUALIFIED AUTHORIZING LEGISLATION.
 This Act shall be considered to be qualified authorizing legislation for
 purposes of section 4611(f)(2)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
TITLE VII--RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
SEC. 7001. OIL POLLUTION RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM.
 (a) INTERAGENCY COORDINATING COMMITTEE ON OIL POLLUTION RESEARCH-
 (1) ESTABLISHMENT- There is established an Interagency Coordinating Committee
 on Oil Pollution Research (hereafter in this section referred to as the
 `Interagency Committee').
 (2) PURPOSES- The Interagency Committee shall coordinate a comprehensive
 program of oil pollution research, development, and demonstration among
 the Federal agencies, in cooperation and coordination with industry,
 universities, research institutions, State governments, and other nations,
 as appropriate, and shall foster cost-effective research mechanisms,
 including the joint funding of research.
 (3) MEMBERSHIP- The Interagency Committee shall include representatives from
 the Department of Commerce (including the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
 Administration and the National Institute of Standards and Technology),
 the Department of Energy, the Department of the Interior (including the
 Minerals Management Service and the United States Fish and Wildlife Service),
 the Department of Transportation (including the United States Coast Guard
 and the Maritime Administration), the Department of Defense (including the
 Army Corps of Engineers and the Navy), the Environmental Protection Agency,
 and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, as well as such
 other Federal agencies as the President may designate. The President shall
 designate a chairman of the Interagency Committee from among its members.
 (4) OIL POLLUTION RESEARCH PLAN- (A) Within 120 days after the date of
 enactment of this Act, the Interagency Committee shall submit to Congress a
 plan for the implementation of the research aspects of the oil pollution
 research and development program established pursuant to subsection
 (b). The research plan shall--
 (i) identify agency roles and responsibilities;
 (ii) assess the current status of knowledge on oil pollution technologies
 and effects;
 (iii) identify significant research gaps and priorities;
 (iv) review responses to oil discharges over the past 20 years, identify
 major technological deficiencies in those responses, and establish research
 priorities to address those deficiencies;
 (v) estimate the resources needed to conduct the oil pollution research and
 development program established pursuant to subsection (b), timetables for
 completing research tasks, and, to the extent feasible, expected industry,
 university, research institution, State government, and foreign nation
 participation, as appropriate, in the research and development program
 including joint funding mechanisms; and
 (vi) identify a lead agency for carrying out effects research under
 subsection (b)(4).
 (B) The agency which is represented by the Chairman of the Interagency
 Committee shall contract with the National Academy of Sciences to--
 (i) provide advice and guidance in the preparation and development of the
 research plan; and
 (ii) assess the adequacy of the plan as submitted, and submit a report to
 Congress on the conclusions of such assessment.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology shall provide the
Interagency Committee with advice and guidance on issues relating to quality
assurance and standards and measurements relating to its activities under
this section.
 (b) OIL POLLUTION RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM-
 (1) ESTABLISHMENT- The Interagency Committee shall coordinate the
 establishment, by the agencies represented on the Interagency Committee,
 of a program for conducting oil pollution research and development, as
 provided in this subsection.
 (2) INNOVATIVE OIL POLLUTION TECHNOLOGY- The program established under this
 subsection shall provide for research, development, and demonstration of
 new or improved technologies which are effective in preventing or mitigating
 oil discharges and which protect the environment, including--
 (A) development of improved designs for vessels and facilities, and improved
 operational practices;
 (B) research, development, and demonstration of improved technologies
 to measure the ullage of a vessel, prevent discharges from tank vents,
 prevent discharges during lightering and bunkering operations, contain
 discharges on the deck of a vessel, and otherwise contain discharges of
 oil from vessels and facilities;
 (C) research, development, and demonstration of new or improved systems
 of mechanical, chemical, biological, and other methods (including the use
 of dispersants, solvents, and bioremediation) for the recovery, removal,
 and disposal of oil, including that which has migrated into substrate
 environments;
 (D) research, in consultation with the National Response Team, to improve
 industry's and government's ability to quickly and effectively remove
 an oil discharge, including research to improve information systems for
 decisionmaking;
 (E) development of technologies and methods to protect public health and
 safety from oil discharges, including the population directly exposed to
 an oil discharge;
 (F) development of technologies, methods, and standards for protecting
 removal personnel, including training, adequate supervision, protective
 equipment, maximum exposure limits, and decontamination procedures;
 (G) research and development of methods to restore and rehabilitate natural
 resources damaged by oil discharges;
 (H) a demonstration to evaluate the relative effectiveness and environmental
 impacts of bioremediation technologies, including comparisons between
 bioremediation techniques that rely on the introduction of microorganisms
 and those that rely on the enhancement of indigenous microorganisms; and
 (I) research on the environmental effects of the use of technologies to
 prevent or mitigate oil discharges.
 (3) OIL POLLUTION TECHNOLOGY EVALUATION- The program established under
 this subsection shall provide for oil pollution prevention and mitigation
 technology evaluation, including--
 (A) the evaluation and testing of technologies developed independently of
 the research and development program established under this subsection;
 (B) the establishment, where appropriate, of standards and testing protocols
 traceable to national standards to measure the performance of oil pollution
 prevention or mitigation technologies; and
 (C) the use, where appropriate, of controlled field testing to evaluate
 real-world application of oil discharge prevention or mitigation
 technologies.
 (4) OIL POLLUTION EFFECTS RESEARCH- The program established under this
 subsection shall provide for research on the environmental effects of oil
 discharges, including--
 (A) the development of improved models and capabilities for predicting
 the effects of oil discharges and the fate and transport of such oil;
 (B) the development of methods, including economic methods, to assess
 damages to natural resources resulting from oil discharges;
 (C) the identification and mapping of environmentally sensitive areas at
 particular risk to oil discharges;
 (D) the collection of environmental baseline data in such areas for the
 determination of potential effects of oil discharges, including data on
 chronic oil discharges; and
 (E) the development of plans for long-term monitoring of environmental
 effects in those areas, to be implemented in the event of a major oil
 discharge.
 (5) SPECIAL STUDIES- (A) As part of the program established under this
 subsection, the Secretary of Commerce, in consultation with the Administrator
 of the Environmental Protection Agency, shall undertake--
 (i) a 10-year comprehensive monitoring and research program to determine the
 long-term environmental effects, including effects on the diverse marine
 and estuarine habitats and living marine resources, of the oil discharges
 by the EXXON VALDEZ into Prince William Sound and the Gulf of Alaska; and
 (ii) a 5-year comprehensive monitoring and research program to determine
 the environmental effects of the oil discharges by the WORLD PRODIGY into
 Narragansett Bay, by the RACHEL B into the Houston Ship Channel, and by
 the PRESIDENTE RIVERA into the Delaware River.
 (B) The monitoring and research program under subparagraph (A)(i) shall
 include consideration of methods and technologies for preventing, removing,
 and mitigating the effects of oil discharges in arctic and subarctic
 marine environments. The results of the program shall be applied to the
 development of improved methods (including contingency planning) for
 protecting arctic and subarctic marine and estuarine environments from
 all risks of oil transportation, including oil discharges.
 (C) The Secretary of Commerce may recoup the costs of the monitoring and
 research program under subparagraph (A)(i) from the owners and operators
 of the EXXON VALDEZ, to the extent that these costs are directly related
 to the oil discharges by the EXXON VALDEZ into Prince William Sound and
 the Gulf of Alaska.
 (6) MARINE SIMULATION RESEARCH- The program established under this
 subsection shall include research on the greater use and application of
 geographic and vessel response simulation models, including the development
 of additional data bases and updating of existing data bases using, among
 others, the resources of the National Maritime Research Center. It shall
 include research and vessel simulations for--
 (A) contingency plan evaluation and amendment;
 (B) removal and strike team training;
 (C) tank vessel personnel training; and
 (D) those geographic areas where there is a significant likelihood of a
 major oil spill.
 (c) GRANTS- In carrying out the research and development program established
 under subsection (b), the agencies represented on the Interagency Committee
 may enter into contracts and cooperative agreements and make grants to
 universities, research institutions, and other persons.
 (d) INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION- In accordance with the research plan submitted
 under subsection (a)(4), the Interagency Committee shall coordinate and
 cooperate with other nations and foreign research entities in conducting
 oil pollution research and development and demonstration activities,
 including controlled field tests of oil discharges.
 (e) ANNUAL REPORTS- The Chairman of the Interagency Committee shall submit
 to Congress at the close of each fiscal year a report on the activities
 carried out under subsections (a) through (e) of this section in the
 preceding fiscal year, and on activities proposed to be carried out under
 subsections (a) through (e) of this section in the current fiscal year.
 (f) REGIONAL RESEARCH CENTERS- (1) As part of the program established
 under subsection (b), a minimum of six regional research centers shall be
 established through competitive grants to universities or other research
 institutions, or groups of universities or research institutions.
 (2) The responsibilities of each regional research center established under
 this subsection shall include the design and implementation of a program
 for addressing one or more of the various aspects of oil pollution research
 and development, including prevention, removal, mitigation, and the effects
 of discharged oil on the environment. Such research and development program
 shall, as appropriate, include the following elements:
 (A) Projections and improved understanding of potential patterns and
 timing of a given discharge's dispersal, taking into account the size
 and rate of the discharge, time of year, weather and ocean flows, and
 circulation patterns.
 (B) Projections and improved understanding of the effects of unique
 meteorology of the region on the concentration and distribution in the
 environment of oil pollution.
 (C) Examination of the regionally specific impact of discharges on coastal
 waters and coastline areas of the region, including subregional variations.
 (D) Assessment of the physiochemical interactions between discharged oil
 and water, and of the distribution of oil pollution in water and sediment
 at various temperatures, and other conditions.
 (E) Research on the effects of oil on flora and fauna, including the
 effects of location, dynamics, and type of oil discharged.
 (F) The design of protocols to be followed to quantify ground water
 contamination associated with discharges, including an assessment of the
 potential impact on drinking water supplies.
 (3) At least one of the regional research centers established under this
 subsection shall represent and be located in each of the following 6
 regions of the United States:
 (A) The tropical and subtropical coastal environments of Florida and the
 coastal environment of the Gulf Coast.
 (B) Atlantic temperate coastal environments.
 (C) Pacific temperate coastal environments.
 (D) The Alaskan coastline and other Arctic and subarctic environments.
 (E) The Great Lakes.
 (F) Inland waters.
 (4) Any university or other research institution, or group of universities
 or research institutions, may apply to the Interagency Committee for a
 grant under this subsection. Such application shall be in such form and
 contain such information as the Chairman may require.
 (5) The Interagency Committee shall select grant recipients under this
 subsection and shall designate the appropriate agency represented on the
 Interagency Committee to administer each grant. The grant recipients shall
 be selected on the basis of the following criteria:
 (A) There is available to the applicant for carrying out this subsection
 demonstrated research resources.
 (B) The applicant shall demonstrate the capability of providing leadership
 in making national and regional research and development contributions to
 preventing, removing, mitigating, and assessing the environmental effects
 of oil discharges, as appropriate.
 (C) The applicant shall demonstrate the ability and willingness to support
 ongoing oil discharge prevention, removal, mitigation, and environmental
 effects research and development activities, as appropriate, with budgeted
 institutional funds of at least $100,000 per year.
 (D) The applicant shall have an interdisciplinary staff with demonstrated
 expertise in oil pollution prevention, removal, mitigation, and environment
 effects research and development, as appropriate.
 (E) The projects which the applicant proposes to carry out under the
 grant are necessary and appropriate and would further the objectives of
 the research and development program established under subsection (b).
 (6) Grants provided under this subsection shall provide not more than 80
 percent of the costs of establishing and operating the regional research
 center and related research and development activities carried out by the
 grant recipient.
 (7) No funds made available to carry out this subsection may be used for
 the acquisition of real property (including buildings) or construction of
 any building.
 (8) The Interagency Committee shall allocate funds made available to carry
 out this subsection equitably among the regional research centers. The
 Interagency Committee, in awarding grants for the regional research centers,
 shall attempt to achieve a national balance among the various aspects of
 oil pollution research and development, including prevention, removal,
 mitigation, and the effects of discharged oil on the environment.
 (9) Each regional research center shall coordinate its oil pollution
 prevention, removal, mitigation, and environmental effects research and
 development activities, as appropriate, with the Interagency Committee
 and the agencies represented on the Interagency Committee.
 (10) The applicant shall disseminate results of oil pollution prevention,
 removal, mitigation, and environmental effects research and development,
 as appropriate, through technology transfer, training, and other educational
 programs.
 (g) FUNDING- Not to exceed $28,000,000 of amounts in the Fund shall be
 available annually, without fiscal year limitation, to carry out this
 section. For each of fiscal years 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, and 1994,
 $1,000,000 of such amount shall be available for each regional center
 established under subsection (f).
TITLE VIII--PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALASKA OIL
SEC. 8001. TRANS-ALASKA PIPELINE FUND.
 (a) CAUSE OF ACCIDENT- Section 204(a)(1) of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline
 Authorization Act (43 U.S.C. 1653(a)(1)) is amended by striking `caused by'
 in the first sentence and inserting in lieu thereof `caused solely by'.
 (b) MISCELLANEOUS- Section 204(b) of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization
 Act (43 U.S.C. 1653(b)) is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence, by inserting after `any area' the following:
 `in the State of Alaska';
 (2) in the first sentence, by inserting after `any activities' the following:
 `related to the trans-Alaska oil pipeline';
 (3) by inserting after `other Federal' the following: `or State'; and
 (4) by inserting at the end the following new sentence: `This subsection
 shall not apply to removal costs covered by the Oil Pollution Act of 1989'.
 (c) REPEAL- (1) Subsection (c) of section 204 of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline
 Authorization Act (43 U.S.C. 1653(c)) is repealed. The repeal made by the
 preceding sentence does not affect the applicability of that subsection to
 claims arising from incidents occurring before the date of the enactment
 of this Act. The repeal of paragraphs (4), (6), and (8) of that subsection
 shall only become effective upon the payment by the Board of Trustees of the
 Trans-Alaska Pipeline Liability Fund of all claims and the establishment
 of credits for contributors to that Fund, as provided in subsection (d)
 of this section.
 (2) Effective as of January 1, 1989, for purposes of claims under section
 204(c) of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act (43 U.S.C. 1653(c))
 arising from incidents occurring before the date of enactment of this Act--
 (A) the term `damages', as used in that section, shall include, but not be
 limited to, the loss of taxes, revenues, fees, royalties, rents, or other
 revenues incurred by a political subdivision of a State due to injury,
 destruction, or loss of real property, personal property, or natural
 resources, or diminished economic activity due to a discharge; and
 (B) the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Liability Fund shall pay a valid claim under
 that section, including the first $14,000,000 of such a claim referred to
 in paragraph (3) of that section, if the owner or operator of a vessel has
 not paid any such claim within 90 days after such claim has been submitted
 to such owner or operator. Upon payment of any claim, the Trans-Alaska
 Pipeline Liability Fund shall be subrogated under applicable State and
 Federal laws to all rights of any person entitled to recover under this
 subsection, subject to the limit of liability of the owner and operator.
 (d) DISPOSITION OF FUND STUDY- After the settlement of all claims described
 in subsection (c) of this section and the completion of all actions, if any,
 by the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Liability Fund for recovery of amounts paid on
 such claims, the President shall conduct a study and make a recommendation
 to Congress on the final disposition of the unexpended balance in that Fund.
 (e) TUCKER ACT CLAIMS- This section shall not be construed to affect the
 rights and remedies of contributors to the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Liability
 Fund under the Tucker Act (28 U.S.C. 1491).
 (f) OFFICERS OR TRUSTEES-
 (1) LIABILITY- No present or former officer or trustee of the Trans-Alaska
 Pipeline Liability Fund shall be subject to any liability incurred by
 that Fund or by the present or former officers or trustees of that Fund,
 other than liability for gross negligence or willful misconduct.
 (2) INDEMNIFICATION- (A) Subject to subparagraph (B), each officer and
 each trustee of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Liability Fund--
 (i) shall be indemnified by that Fund against all claims and liabilities
 to which he or she has or shall become subject by reason of serving or
 having served as an officer or trustee, or by reason of any action taken,
 omitted, or neglected by him or her as an officer or trustee; and
 (ii) shall be reimbursed for all legal expenses reasonably incurred in
 connection with any claim or liability.
 (B) No officer or trustee shall be indemnified against, or be reimbursed
 for, any expenses incurred in connection with, any claim or liability
 arising out of his or her gross negligence or willful misconduct.
SEC. 8002. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 This title shall be effective on the commencement date (as that term is
 defined in section 4611(f)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.