S 771 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 771
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to disallow deductions for
costs in connection with oil and hazardous substances cleanup unless the
requirements of all applicable Federal laws concerning such cleanup are met,
and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
April 13 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. REID introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to disallow deductions for
costs in connection with oil and hazardous substances cleanup unless the
requirements of all applicable Federal laws concerning such cleanup are met,
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SEC. 100. SHORT TITLE.
 This title may be cited as the `Oilspill Bill'.
SEC. 101. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
 (a) FINDINGS-
 (1) oil and hazardous substance discharges cause environmental damage
 which can last for many years, affect entire ecosystems, local communities,
 and individual citizens;
 (2) discharges damage publicly owned and valuable resources, especially
 in river, wetland, and marine ecosystems;
 (3) between 9,000 and 12,000 oil discharges are reported each year that
 pollute or threaten to pollute United States waters;
 (4) parties causing discharges often do not clean them up, only partially
 clean them up, or respond to spills very slowly, causing additional damage;
 therefore increased incentives are needed for responsible parties to
 cleanup discharges;
 (5) when cleanup by responsible parties is not satisfactory, public funds
 and agencies must do the cleanup. Between 1972 and 1987, the Coast Guard
 recovered only $72,000,000 of the $144,000,000 of public funds spent to
 cleanup discharges;
 (6) the cost of oil and hazardous substances discharge cleanup are deductible
 for Federal tax purposes. Therefore, ordinary taxpayers subsidize these
 costs;
 (7) detecting, monitoring, and evaluating discharges are an additional
 big public expense;
 (8) citizens suffering economic losses from major discharges are unlikely to
 receive full compensation, particularly for cumulative and long-term effects;
 (9) oilspill funds are authorized and maintained at inadequate levels for
 cleanup and restoration of a major oil discharge; and
 (10) the Federal Government has the authority to determine that oil
 discharges are cleaned up and damage compensated satisfactorily, according to
 provisions of the National Contingency Plan, Clean Water Act, and Superfund.
 (b) PURPOSES- The purposes of this Act are to establish that--
 (1) the public should not pay for discharges of hazardous substances and
 oil, either directly through cleanup costs or indirectly through Federal
 tax deductions for parties causing discharges;
 (2) those injured economically by oil and hazardous substance discharges
 be fully compensated for their losses;
 (3) all ecological damages, short term and long term, caused by discharges
 be mitigated, to maintain the integrity and productivity of these ecosystems
 for all Americans;
 (4) persons and companies paying for cleanup and compensation receive a
 Federal tax deduction for the cost of cleanup only if their cleanup meets
 Federal standards;
 (5) revenues accruing to the Treasury from deductions due to inadequate
 cleanup be dedicated to the Clean Water Act Fund for oil discharges and
 to the Superfund for spills of hazardous substances; and
 (6) responsible agencies will report to Congress annually on cleanup costs
 and revenues accruing to the Treasury through the provisions of this Act.
SEC. 102. DEFINITIONS.
 (a) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this Act the term--
 (1) `discharge' shall have the meaning provided in section 311(a)(1)
 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and the meaning of `release'
 found in section 9601(22) of title 42, United States Code;
 (2) `oil' shall have the meaning provided in section 311(a)(1) of the
 Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1321(a)(1));
 (3) `hazardous substance' shall have the meaning provided in section 9601(14)
 of title 42, United States Code;
 (4) `Secretary' means the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate;
SEC. 103. DISALLOWANCE OF COSTS FOR CLEANUP OF OIL OR HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE
DISCHARGES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subtitle A, chapter 1B, part IX, is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 280I. DISALLOWANCE OF COSTS FOR CLEANUP OF OIL OR HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE
DISCHARGES.
 `(a) DISALLOWANCE OF DEDUCTION- Except as otherwise provided in this section,
 no deduction shall be allowed for any applicable oil or hazardous substances
 cleanup costs.
 `(b) EXCEPTIONS FOR MEETING FEDERAL CLEANUP STANDARDS-
 (1) Subsection (a) shall not apply if the Secretary receives certification
 from the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency or his
 delegate, or the Commandant of the Coast Guard or his delegate, whoever
 is appropriate, that the taxpayer has made a good faith effort to comply
 with requirements of the following Federal laws--
 `(A) section 311(b)(4) and section 311(c) of the Clean Water Act for oil
 discharges; and
 `(B) section 121 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation,
 and Liability Act for hazardous substances discharges.
 `(2) Subsection (a) shall not apply if the taxpayer can prove that a
 discharge was caused solely by (A) an act of God, (B) an act of war,
 (C) negligence on the part of the United States Government, (D) an act or
 omission of a third party without regard to whether any such act or omission
 was or was not negligent, or any combination of the foregoing clauses.
 `(c) APPLICABLE OIL OR HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES CLEANUP COSTS- For purposes
 of this section--
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The term `applicable oil or hazardous substances cleanup
 costs' means any costs paid or incurred (whether or not in the taxable
 year in which the discharge occurs) in connection with the cleanup of any
 oil or hazardous substances discharged by the taxpayer.
 `(2) CERTAIN COSTS INCLUDED- The term `applicable oil or hazardous substances
 cleanup costs' includes, but is not limited to--
 `(A) any legal expenses arising directly or indirectly from a discharge
 of oil or hazardous substances;
 `(B) any payments or restitution to any person arising out of such
 discharge; and
 `(C) any costs required by any applicable Federal law or regulation.
 `(d) ITEMIZATION OF COSTS- The costs shall be separately stated in such
 manner as the Secretary may prescribe on a form accompanying the return
 of tax for the taxable year in which such costs were paid or incurred.'.
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for subtitle A, chapter 1B,
 part IX, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`Sec. 280I. Disallowance of costs for cleanup of oil and hazardous substance
discharges.'.
SEC. 104. PROHIBITION AGAINST OFFSET BY NET OPERATING LOSS DEDUCTION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 172 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, is
 amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection--
 `(n) PROHIBITION AGAINST OFFSET BY NET OPERATING LOSS DEDUCTION- Deductions
 lost in section 280I(a) may not be offset by the provisions of this
 section.'.
SEC. 105. DISTRIBUTION OF LOST DEDUCTION TO EXISTING TRUST FUNDS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- There is established in the Treasury of the United States an
 account, consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated to the account
 as provided in subsection (b).
 (b) TRANSFER TO ACCOUNT- There is hereby appropriated to the account for
 each fiscal year an amount equal to the amount which the Secretary or his
 delegate determines to be the increase in revenues for such fiscal year
 by reason of the amendments made by section 103. The amounts appropriated
 by the preceding sentence shall be transferred to the account from the
 general fund of the Treasury in the manner provided under section 9601 of
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (c) EXPENDITURES FROM ACCOUNT- Amounts in the account established under
 subsection (a) shall be available, as provided in appropriation Acts, only--
 (1) in the case of amounts attributable to any oil discharge, for making
 expenditures for the purposes described in section 311(k) of the Federal
 Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1321(k)), or
 (2) in the case of any other amounts, for transfer to the Hazardous Substance
 Superfund established under section 9507 of the Internal Revenue Act of 1986.
SEC. 106. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 The provisions of this Act are effective for all discharges occurring
 after March 23, 1989, in taxable years ending after such date.
SEC. 107. STUDY AND REPORT.
 (a) STUDY OF REVENUE LOSS- Not later than 6 months after the date of
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary or his delegate shall submit to the
 House Committee on Ways and Means and the Senate Committee on Finance an
 estimate of the decrease of Federal revenues during the period beginning
 January 1, 1970, and ending December 31, 1988, by reason of the allowance
 of applicable cleanup costs (within the meaning of section 280I of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986).
 (b) ANNUAL REPORT TO CONGRESS- The Secretary or his delegate shall make
 an annual report to the House Committee on Ways and Means and the Senate
 Committee on Finance a report detailing the amount expended on environmental
 cleanup costs and the amount accruing to the Treasury under section 103.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (b) shall take effect
 12 months after the study in subsection (a) is submitted to Congress.