S 1843 IS1S
(Star Print)
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1843
To amend the Federal Water Pollution Control Act to improve and enforce
compliance programs.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
October 22 (legislative day, SEPTEMBER 19), 1991
Mr. LAUTENBERG (for himself and Mr. MOYNIHAN) introduced the following
bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Environment and
Public Works
A BILL
To amend the Federal Water Pollution Control Act to improve and enforce
compliance programs.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Clean Water Enforcement and Compliance
 Improvement Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Congress finds that--
 (1) a significant number of persons who have been issued permits under
 section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1342)
 are in violation of such permits;
 (2) current enforcement programs of the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency and the States fail to address violations of such permits
 in a timely and effective manner;
 (3) often violations of such permits continue for a considerable period
 of time, yielding significant economic benefits for the violator and thus
 penalizing similar facilities which act lawfully;
 (4) penalties assessed and collected by the Administrator from violators of
 such permits are often less than the economic benefit gained by the violator;
 (5) swift and timely enforcement by the Administrator and the States of
 violations of such permits is necessary to increase levels of compliance
 with such permits; and
 (6) actions of private citizens have been effective in enforcing such
 permits and directing funds to environmental mitigation projects.
 (b) FINDING WITH RESPECT TO HARM CAUSED BY VIOLATIONS- Section 101 of the
 Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251) is amended by adding
 at the end the following new subsection:
 `(h) FINDING WITH RESPECT TO HARM CAUSED BY VIOLATIONS- Congress finds
 that a discharge which results in a violation of this Act, including a
 violation of a regulation, standard, limitation, requirement, or order
 issued pursuant to this Act, interferes with the restoration and maintenance
 of the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the water system
 into which the discharge occurs (including any downstream waters) and,
 therefore, harms users of such water system.'.
SEC. 3. VIOLATIONS OF REQUIREMENTS OF LOCAL CONTROL AUTHORITIES.
 Section 307(d) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1317)
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(d) VIOLATIONS- After the effective date of any effluent standard or
 prohibition, pretreatment standard or requirement, or local limit promulgated
 under this section, it shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of any
 source to operate any source in violation of any such effluent standard
 or prohibition, pretreatment standard or requirement, or local limit.'.
SEC. 4. INSPECTIONS, MONITORING, AND PROVIDING INFORMATION.
 Section 308(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1318(a))
 is amended--
 (1) by striking `the owner or operator of any point source' each place it
 appears in the subsection and inserting `a person subject to a requirement
 of this Act'; and
 (2) in subparagraph (A) of paragraph (4)--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of clause (iv);
 (B) by redesignating clause (v) as clause (vi); and
 (C) by inserting after clause (iv) the following new clause:`(v) submit to
 periodic inspections at such intervals as the Administrator shall prescribe
 by regulation (by not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment
 of the Clean Water Enforcement and Compliance Improvement Act of 1991), and'.
SEC. 5. PENALTIES.
 (a) CRIMINAL PENALTIES RELATING TO THE ENFORCEMENT OF LOCAL PRETREATMENT
 REQUIREMENTS- Section 309(c)(3)(A) of the Federal Water Pollution Control
 Act (33 U.S.C. 1319(c)(3)(A)) is amended by inserting after `Army or by a
 State,' the following: `or who knowingly violates any requirement imposed
 in a pretreatment program approved under section 402(a)(3) or 402(b)(8)
 of this Act,'.
 (b) TREATMENT OF SINGLE OPERATIONAL UPSETS-
 (1) CRIMINAL PENALTIES- Section 309(c) of such Act (33 U.S.C. 1319(c))
 is amended by striking paragraph (5) and redesignating paragraphs (6) and
 (7) as paragraphs (5) and (6), respectively.
 (2) CIVIL PENALTIES- Section 309(d) of such Act (33 U.S.C. 1319(d)) is
 amended by striking the last sentence.
 (c) AMOUNTS OF ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 309(g)(3) of such Act (33 U.S.C. 1319(g)(3))
 is amended by striking the last sentence.
 (2) AMOUNTS- Section 309(g)(2) of such Act (33 U.S.C. 1319(g)(2)(B))
 is amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (A)--
 (i) by inserting `(or an adjusted amount determined pursuant to subsection
 (k))' after `$10,000'; and
 (ii) by inserting `(or an adjusted amount determined pursuant to subsection
 (k))' after `$25,000'; and
 (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking the first sentence and inserting the
 following new sentences: `The amount of a class II civil penalty under
 paragraph (1) may not exceed $10,000 per day (or an adjusted amount
 determined pursuant to subsection (k)), and except as provided in the
 following sentence, the maximum amount of any such civil penalty under this
 subparagraph shall not exceed $200,000 (or an adjusted amount determined
 pursuant to subsection (k)). The maximum amount of any such civil penalty
 (as described in the preceding sentence) shall not apply in any case where
 the Administrator (or the Secretary, as the case may be), in consultation
 with the Attorney General, determines that a greater amount is appropriate
 for the violation. A determination under the preceding sentence that the
 amount of the penalty for a violation shall exceed $200,000 shall not be
 subject to judicial review.'.
 (d) USE OF CIVIL PENALTIES FOR MITIGATION PROJECTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 309(d) of such Act (33 U.S.C. 1319(d)) is amended
 by inserting after the second sentence the following new sentence: `The
 court may, in the court's discretion, order that a civil penalty be used
 for carrying out mitigation projects which are consistent with the purposes
 of this Act and which enhance the public health or environment.'.
 (2) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 505(a) of such Act (33 U.S.C. 1365(a))
 is amended by inserting before the period at the end of the last sentence
 the following: `, including ordering the use of a civil penalty for carrying
 out mitigation projects in accordance with such section 309(d)'.
 (e) LIMITATION ON DEFENSES- Section 309(g)(1) of such Act (33
 U.S.C. 1319(g)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the following new
 sentence: `In a proceeding to assess or review a penalty under this
 subsection, the adequacy of consultation between the Administrator or the
 Secretary, as the case may be, and the State shall not be a defense to
 assessment or enforcement of such penalty.'.
 (f) RECOVERY OF ECONOMIC BENEFIT- Section 309 of such Act (33 U.S.C. 1319)
 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(h) RECOVERY OF ECONOMIC BENEFIT- Notwithstanding any other provision of
 this section, any civil penalty assessed and collected under this section
 must be in an amount which is not less than the amount of the economic
 benefit or savings (if any) resulting from the violation for which the
 penalty is assessed plus interest as determined under section 3717(a)
 of title 31, United States Code, accruing from the date of the violation.'.
 (g) LIMITATION ON COMPROMISES- Section 309 of such Act (33 U.S.C. 1319)
 is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(i) LIMITATION ON COMPROMISES OF CIVIL PENALTIES- Notwithstanding any other
 provision of this section, the amount of a civil penalty assessed under
 this section may not be compromised below the amount determined by adding--
 `(1) the minimum amount required for recovery of economic benefit under
 subsection (h), to
 `(2) 50 percent of the difference between the amount of the civil penalty
 assessed and such minimum amount.'.
 (h) MINIMUM AMOUNT FOR SERIOUS VIOLATIONS- Section 309 of such Act (33
 U.S.C. 1319) is further amended by adding at the end the following new
 subsection:
 `(j) MINIMUM CIVIL PENALTIES FOR CERTAIN SERIOUS VIOLATIONS AND FOR
 SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIERS-
 `(1) SERIOUS VIOLATIONS- Notwithstanding any other provision of this section
 (except as provided in paragraph (2)), the minimum civil penalty which
 may be assessed and collected under this subsection from a person--
 `(A) for a discharge from a point source of a hazardous pollutant which
 exceeds any applicable effluent limitation established by or under this
 Act by 20 percent or more, or
 `(B) for a discharge from a point source of a pollutant (other than a
 hazardous pollutant) which exceeds any applicable effluent limitation
 established by or under this Act by 40 percent or more,
shall be $1,000 (or an adjusted amount determined pursuant to subsection
(k)) for the first such violation in a 180-day period.
 `(2) SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIERS- Notwithstanding any other provision of this
 section, the minimum civil penalty which may be assessed and collected
 under this subsection from a person--
 `(A) for the second or more discharge in a 180-day period from a point
 source of a hazardous pollutant which exceeds any applicable effluent
 limitation established by or under this Act by 20 percent or more;
 `(B) for the second or more discharge in a 180-day period from a point
 source of a pollutant (other than a hazardous pollutant) which exceeds
 any applicable effluent limitation established by or under this Act by 40
 percent or more;
 `(C) for the fourth or more discharge in a 180-day period from a point
 source of any pollutant which exceeds by any amount the applicable effluent
 limitation established by or under this Act; or
 `(D) for not filing in a 180-day period 2 or more reports in accordance
 with section 402(r)(1),
shall be $5,000 (or an adjusted amount determined pursuant to subsection
(k)) for each such violation.
 `(3) INSPECTIONS FOR SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIERS- The Administrator shall
 classify any person described in paragraph (2) as a significant noncomplier
 and shall conduct an inspection described in section 402(q) of this Act
 of the facility at which the violations were committed. Such inspections
 shall be conducted at least once in the 180-day period following the date
 of the most recent violation which resulted in such person being classified
 as a significant noncomplier.
 `(4) ANNUAL REPORTING- The Administrator shall transmit to Congress and to
 the Governors of the States, and shall publish in the Federal Register,
 on an annual basis, a list of all persons classified as significant
 noncompliers under paragraph (3) in the preceding calendar year and the
 violations which resulted in such classifications.
 `(5) LIMITATION ON COMPROMISES- Notwithstanding any other provision of
 this section, the amount of a civil penalty established pursuant to this
 subsection may not be compromised.
 `(6) HAZARDOUS POLLUTANT DEFINED- For purposes of this subsection, the term
 `hazardous pollutant' has the same meaning as given the term `hazardous
 substance' under subsection (c)(7) of this section.'.
 (i) ADJUSTMENT FOR INFLATION- Section 309 of such Act (33 U.S.C. 1319)
 is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(k) ADJUSTMENT FOR INFLATION- (1) Any maximum amount of any class I or
 class II civil penalty described in subsection (g)(2) and any minimum
 amount of a civil penalty described in subsection (j) shall be adjusted
 for inflation by the Administrator by regulation pursuant to this subsection.
 `(2) Not later than December 1, 1995, and every 5 years thereafter, the
 Administrator shall, pursuant to paragraph (3), prescribe by regulation,
 and publish in the Federal Register, a schedule containing the adjusted
 amount for each penalty described in paragraph (1), applicable to violations
 that occur on or after January 1 of the calendar year immediately following
 the date of publication of the regulations.
 `(3) The adjusted amount for each penalty described in paragraph (1) shall
 be determined by increasing the amount of such penalty by a cost-of-living
 adjustment for the preceding 5 years. Any increase determined under this
 paragraph shall be rounded--
 `(A) in the case of a penalty of an amount greater than $1,000, but less
 than or equal to $10,000, to the nearest multiple of $1,000;
 `(B) in the case of a penalty of an amount greater than $10,000, but less
 than or equal to $100,000, to the nearest multiple of $5,000;
 `(C) in the case of a penalty of an amount greater than $100,000, but less
 than or equal to $200,000, to the nearest multiple of $10,000; and
 `(D) in the case of a penalty of an amount greater than $200,000, to the
 nearest multiple of $25,000.
 `(4) For the purposes of this subsection:
 `(A) The term `Consumer Price Index' means the Consumer Price Index for
 All Urban Consumers published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the
 Department of Labor.
 `(B) The term `cost of living adjustment for the preceding 5 years' means--
 `(i) with respect to an initial adjustment for inflation under this
 subsection, the percentage by which the Consumer Price Index for the month
 of June preceding the date of the initial adjustment exceeds the Consumer
 Price Index for the month of June in the calendar year is 5 years before
 the date of the initial adjustment; and
 `(ii) with respect to any subsequent adjustment for inflation under this
 subsection, the percentage by which the Consumer Price Index for the
 month of June preceding the date of the adjustment exceeds the Consumer
 Price Index for the month of June preceding the month of the date of the
 immediately preceding adjustment for inflation.'.
SEC. 6. NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION PERMITS.
 (a) JUDICIAL REVIEW OF RULINGS ON APPLICATIONS FOR STATE PERMITS- Section
 402(b)(3) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1342(b)(3))
 is amended by inserting `and to insure that any person who is or may be
 adversely affected by such ruling has the right to judicial review of such
 ruling' before the semicolon at the end.
 (b) GRANTING OF AUTHORITY TO POTWS FOR INSPECTIONS AND PENALTIES- Section
 402(b) of such Act (33 U.S.C. 1342(b)) is further amended by adding at
 the end the following new paragraph:
 `(13) To ensure that the State will grant to publicly owned treatment works
 in the State, not later than 3 years after the date of the enactment of this
 paragraph, authority, power, and responsibility to conduct inspections under
 subsection (q) of this section and to assess and collect civil penalties
 and civil administrative penalties under paragraph (7) of this subsection.'.
 (c) INSPECTIONS- Section 402 of such Act (33 U.S.C. 1342) is amended by
 adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(q) INSPECTION-
 `(1) GENERAL RULE- Each permit for a discharge into the navigable waters
 or introduction of pollutants into a publicly owned treatment works issued
 under this section shall include conditions under which the effluent being
 discharged will be subject to random inspections in accordance with this
 subsection by the Administrator or the State, in the case of a State permit
 program under this section.
 `(2) MINIMUM STANDARDS- The Administrator shall establish minimum standards
 for inspections under this subsection. Such standards shall require,
 at a minimum, the following:
 `(A) A representative sampling by the Administrator or the State, in the case
 of a State permit program under this section, of the permitted facility and
 the effluent being discharged. To the extent possible, such representative
 sampling shall be taken at the same time and from the same effluent discharge
 as is a sampling taken to carry out a permit requirement under this section.
 `(B) An analysis of all samples collected by the Administrator or the
 State under subparagraph (A) by a Federal or State owned and operated
 laboratory or a State approved laboratory, other than one that is being
 used by the permittee or that is directly or indirectly owned, operated,
 or managed by the permittee.
 `(C) An evaluation of the maintenance record of any treatment equipment
 of the permittee.
 `(D) An evaluation of the sampling techniques used by the permittee.
 `(E) A random check of discharge monitoring reports of the permittee for
 the purpose of determining whether or not such reports are consistent with
 the applicable analyses conducted under subparagraph (B) with respect to
 the representative sampling conducted by the Administrator or the State
 under subparagraph (A).
 `(F) An inspection of the sample storage facilities and techniques of
 the permittee.'.
 (d) REPORTING- Section 402 of such Act (33 U.S.C. 1342) is further amended
 by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(r) REPORTING-
 `(1) GENERAL RULE- Each person holding a permit issued under this section
 that the Administrator determines to be a major industrial or municipal
 discharger of pollutants into the navigable waters shall prepare and
 submit to the Administrator a monthly discharge monitoring report. Any
 other person holding a permit issued under this section shall prepare and
 submit to the Administrator quarterly discharge monitoring reports or more
 frequent discharge monitoring reports if the Administrator requires. Such
 reports shall contain, at a minimum, such information as the Administrator
 shall require by regulation.
 `(2) SIGNATURE- All reports filed under paragraph (1) must be signed by
 the highest ranking official having day-to-day managerial and operational
 responsibility for the facility at which the discharge occurs or, in the
 absence of such person, of another responsible high ranking official at
 such facility. Such highest ranking official shall be responsible for the
 accuracy of all information contained in such reports; except that such
 highest ranking official may file with the Administrator amendments to
 any such report if the report was signed in the absence of the highest
 ranking official by another high ranking official and if such amendments
 are filed within 7 days of the return of the highest ranking official.'.
 (e) APPLICABILITY- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 permits issued before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this Act;
 except that--
 (1) with respect to permits issued before such date of enactment to a major
 industrial or municipal discharger, such amendments shall take effect on
 the last day of the 1-year period beginning on such date of enactment; and
 (2) with respect to all other permits issued before such date of enactment,
 such amendments shall take effect on the last day of the 2-year period
 beginning on such date of enactment.
SEC. 7. EXPIRED STATE PERMITS.
 Section 402(d) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1342(d))
 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(5) EXPIRED STATE PERMITS- In any case in which--
 `(A) a permit issued by a State for a discharge has expired,
 `(B) the permittee has submitted in a timely manner an application to the
 State for a new permit for the discharge, and
 `(C) the State has not acted on the application before the last day of
 the 18-month period beginning on the date the permit expired,
the Administrator may issue a permit for the discharge under subsection (a).'.
SEC. 8. COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE.
 Section 302(b)(2)(B) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1312(b)(2)(B)) is amended by adding at the end the following new
 sentence: `The Administrator may only issue a permit pursuant to this
 subparagraph for a period exceeding 2 years if the Administrator makes
 the findings described in clauses (i) and (ii) of this subparagraph on
 the basis of a public hearing.'.
SEC. 9. CITIZENS SUITS.
 (a) PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS AND LOCAL LIMITS- Section 505(f)(4) of such Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1365(f)(4)) is amended by striking `or pretreatment standards'
 and inserting `, pretreatment standard, pretreatment requirement, or
 local limit'.
 (b) DEFINITION OF CITIZEN- Section 505(g) of such Act (33 U.S.C. 1365(g))
 is amended by inserting before the period at the end the following: `,
 including a person who uses the water downstream from a discharge, or
 would use such water if it were not polluted, during the period that the
 discharge exceeds an effluent standard or limitation issued under this Act'.
SEC. 10. ISSUANCE OF SUBPENAS.
 Section 509(a)(1) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1369(a)(1)) is amended by striking `obtaining information under
 section 305 of this Act, or carrying out section 507(e) of this Act,'
 and inserting `carrying out this Act,'.