[Congressional Bills 104th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 31 Introduced in House (IH)]

104th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 31

To enhance the supervision and regulation of the derivatives activities 
 of financial institutions, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 January 4, 1995

Mr. Gonzalez (for himself, Mr. Kanjorski, and Mr. Mfume) introduced the 
 following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Banking and 
 Financial Services

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

To enhance the supervision and regulation of the derivatives activities 
 of financial institutions, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Derivatives Safety 
and Soundness Supervision Act of 1995''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Definitions.
 TITLE I--ENHANCED SUPERVISION OF DERIVATIVES ACTIVITIES

Sec. 101. Increased agency oversight of financial institution 
 activities involving derivative financial 
 instruments.
Sec. 102. Disclosure of amounts, nature, and terms of derivative 
 financial instruments in financial 
 institution call reports.
Sec. 103. Training for examiners and assistant examiners.
Sec. 104. State liaisons.
 TITLE II--SUPERVISORY IMPROVEMENTS

Sec. 201. Unsafe or unsound practices.
Sec. 202. Confidential emergency management reporting.
Sec. 203. Internal controls.
Sec. 204. Foreign bank supervision.
 TITLE III--FINANCIAL INSTITUTION INSOLVENCY REFORMS

Sec. 301. Treatment of certain swap agreements by conservators or 
 receivers of insured depository 
 institutions.
Sec. 302. Authority of the corporation with respect to failed and 
 failing institutions.
Sec. 303. Amendments relating to transfers of qualified financial 
 contracts.
Sec. 304. Clarifying amendment relating to master agreements.
Sec. 305. Technical amendments relating to qualified financial 
 contracts.
 TITLE IV--INTERNATIONAL REGULATORY COOPERATION

Sec. 401. Study of international regulation and supervision of 
 derivatives activities of financial 
 institutions.
Sec. 402. International negotiations.
 TITLE V--GAO STUDY

Sec. 501. Study of speculation and margin and collateral requirements 
 with respect to derivatives activities of 
 financial institutions.

SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.

 For purposes of this Act the following definitions shall apply:
 (1) Active end-user.--The term ``active end-user'' means 
 any financial institution which buys or sells a significant 
 amount of derivative financial instruments, or conducts 
 transactions in a wide variety of derivative financial 
 instruments.
 (2) Appropriate federal banking agency.--The term 
 ``appropriate Federal banking agency'' has the same meaning as 
 in section 3(q) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
 (3) Appropriate federal regulatory agency.--The term 
 ``appropriate Federal regulatory agency'' means--
 (A) any appropriate Federal banking agency, in the 
 case of any insured depository institution or other 
 entity described in section 3(q) of the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Act;
 (B) the National Credit Union Administration, in 
 the case of any insured credit union;
 (C) the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise 
 Oversight of the Department of Housing and Urban 
 Development, in the case of any financial institution 
 which is subject to the oversight of such office;
 (D) the Federal Housing Finance Board, in the case 
 of any Federal home loan bank or the Office of Finance 
 of the Federal home loan banks;
 (E) the Director of the Office of Thrift 
 Supervision, in the case of any affiliate of any 
 savings association or savings and loan holding company 
 for which there is no other appropriate Federal banking 
 agency;
 (F) the Securities and Exchange Commission, in the 
 case of any financial institution described in clause 
 (v), (vi), or (vii) of paragraph (7)(A);
 (G) the Secretary of the Treasury, in the case of 
 any insurance company;
 (H) the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, in 
 the case of any financial institution described in 
 clause (viii) of paragraph (7)(A); and
 (I) the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
 System, in the case of any financial institution which 
 is not described in any other subparagraph of this 
 paragraph.
 (4) Depository institution.--The term ``depository 
 institution''--
 (A) has the same meaning as in section 3(c) of the 
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act; and
 (B) includes any Federal credit union and any State 
 credit union (as such terms are defined in section 101 
 of the Federal Credit Union Act).
 (5) Derivatives activities.--The term ``derivatives 
 activities'' means any activity in which a financial 
 institution is engaged as a dealer in derivative financial 
 instruments or as an active end-user.
 (6) Derivative financial instrument.--The term ``derivative 
 financial instrument'' means any qualified financial contract 
 (as defined in section 11(e)(8)(D) of the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Act), and any other instrument, which the appropriate 
 Federal regulatory agency determines to be a derivative 
 financial instrument.
 (7) Financial institution.--The term ``financial 
 institution''--
 (A) means--
 (i) any depository institution;
 (ii) any entity described in section 3(q) 
 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act which is 
 not a depository institution;
 (iii) any institution which is subject to 
 the oversight of the Office of Federal Housing 
 Enterprise Oversight of the Department of 
 Housing and Urban Development; and
 (iv) any Federal home loan bank and the 
 Office of Finance of the Federal home loan 
 banks;
 (v) any broker, dealer, government 
 securities broker, government securities 
 dealer, municipal securities broker, or 
 municipal securities dealer (as such terms are 
 defined in the Securities Exchange Act of 
 1934);
 (vi) any investment company (as defined in 
 section 3(a) of the Investment Company Act of 
 1940);
 (vii) any investment adviser (as defined in 
 section 202(a)(11) of the Investment Advisers 
 Act of 1940);
 (viii) any futures commission merchant, 
 floor broker, commodity trading advisor, or 
 commodity pool operator (as defined in section 
 1a of the Commodity Exchange Act); and
 (ix) any insurance company; and
 (B) includes any affiliate of a depository 
 institution (which is not otherwise described in 
 subparagraph (A)) the derivatives activities of which 
 are determined by the appropriate Federal regulatory 
 agency to pose a potential risk to the safety and 
 soundness of such depository institution.
 (8) Insured credit union.--The term ``insured credit 
 union'' has the same meaning as in section 101(7) of the 
 Federal Credit Union Act.
 (9) Insured depository institution.--The term ``insured 
 depository institution''--
 (A) has the same meaning as in section 3(c)(2) of the 
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act; and
 (B) includes an insured credit union.

 TITLE I--ENHANCED SUPERVISION OF DERIVATIVES ACTIVITIES

SEC. 101. INCREASED AGENCY OVERSIGHT OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTION 
 ACTIVITIES INVOLVING DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS.

 (a) Establishment of Regulatory Standards.--The appropriate Federal 
regulatory agencies shall establish, in consultation with each other 
such agency, substantially similar standards relating to capital, 
accounting, disclosure, risk management, and suitability, for the 
supervision by such agencies of financial institutions engaged in 
derivatives activities.
 (b) Factors Required to Be Considered in Establishing Standards.--
 (1) In general.--In establishing standards pursuant to 
 subsection (a), the appropriate Federal regulatory agencies 
 shall consider the need to require the following:
 (A) Capital requirements (with particular attention 
 to a leverage ratio where appropriate) to guard 
 generally against risks at financial institutions, 
 including added risks that may be posed by derivatives 
 activities.
 (B) Comprehensive risk management systems that--
 (i) are commensurate in scope, size, and 
 complexity to the levels of activities and 
 risks assumed by financial institutions;
 (ii) include limits and controls with 
 respect to any level of risk regarding 
 counterparty credit, concentration, and other 
 relevant market factors;
 (iii) ensure that market factors affecting 
 risk exposures are adequately measured, 
 monitored, and controlled; and
 (iv) adequately control potential losses 
 and undue risks arising from system 
 deficiencies.
 (C) To the extent practicable, joint regulatory 
 examinations by the appropriate Federal banking 
 agencies of financial institutions which engage in 
 derivatives activities.
 (D) The prudent use of collateral by counterparties 
 to derivatives transactions.
 (E) Appropriate parameters, models, and simulations 
 for the purpose of evaluating a financial institution's 
 exposure to derivatives activities and relevant 
 economic scenarios and further specifics regarding 
 stress tests.
 (F) Appropriate credit risk reserves in connection 
 with derivatives activities.
 (G) Protection against legal risk, including 
 foreign legal risk.
 (H) Assurance that, consistent with safe and sound 
 banking practices, a financial institution does not 
 recommend or engage in derivatives activities which are 
 inappropriate for a customer of the institution.
 (I) Effective senior management supervision and 
 oversight by the board of directors of a financial 
 institution to ensure that derivatives activities are 
 conducted in a safe and sound manner and are consistent 
 with the board of director's overall risk management 
 philosophy and the institution's business strategy.
 (2) Reports to banking committees.--During the 5-year 
 period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, 
 section 37(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act shall apply 
 with respect to the standards adopted, prescribed, or issued by 
 any appropriate Federal regulatory agency pursuant to this Act 
 in the same manner such section applies with respect to 
 accounting and capital standards used by appropriate Federal 
 banking agencies.
 (c) Coordination With Section 37 of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Act.--No provision of this section shall be construed as authorizing 
the establishment of any standard which is inconsistent with the 
requirements of section 37 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.

SEC. 102. DISCLOSURE OF AMOUNTS, NATURE, AND TERMS OF DERIVATIVE 
 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS IN FINANCIAL INSTITUTION CALL 
 REPORTS.

 (a) Insured Depository Institutions.--The Federal Deposit Insurance 
Act (12 U.S.C. 1811 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new section:

``SEC. 44. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS FOR DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL 
 INSTRUMENTS.

 ``(a) Information Required To Be Included in Call Reports.--Each 
appropriate Federal banking agency shall consider, and may require, 
disclosures in any report of condition made by any insured depository 
institution in accordance with section 7(a) with respect to any period 
beginning after December 31, 1995, of the following information:
 ``(1) Quantitative information with respect to all 
 derivative financial instruments.--
 ``(A) Gross notional value.--The gross notional 
 value of each class of derivative financial 
 instruments.
 ``(B) Revenue, gains, and losses.--All revenue, 
 gains, and losses of the institution attributable to 
 each class of derivative financial instruments.
 ``(C) Exposure under bilateral netting contract.--
 The net current credit exposure of the institution 
 under legally enforceable bilateral arrangements with 
 respect to each class of derivative financial 
 instruments.
 ``(2) Terms to maturity.--Information on the remaining term 
 to maturity of each class of derivative financial instruments.
 ``(3) Quantitative information with respect to derivative 
 financial instruments held for trading purposes.--
 ``(A) Average fair value balances.--The average 
 maximum and minimum fair value balances of the insured 
 depository institution with respect to each class of 
 derivative financial instruments used by the 
 institution for trading purposes.
 ``(B) Revenue, gains, and losses.--All revenue, 
 gains, and losses of the institution attributable to 
 trading account operations with respect to each class 
 of derivative financial instruments.
 ``(4) Additional information.--Any additional information 
 that any appropriate Federal banking agency may consider to be 
 appropriate.
 ``(b) Separate Reporting for Exchange and OTC Trading.--To the 
maximum extent possible, information reported pursuant to subsection 
(a) with respect to transactions which are conducted on an exchange, 
and each class of derivative financial instruments which are the 
subjects of such transactions, shall be provided separately from 
information relating to transactions which are conducted over the 
counter, and the classes of derivative financial instruments which are 
the subjects of such transactions.
 ``(c) Qualitative Reporting Requirements.--The Federal banking 
agencies shall take such action as may be appropriate to encourage 
insured depository institutions to publicly report the following 
information with such frequency as the agencies determine to be 
appropriate:
 ``(1) Nature of derivative financial instruments.--A 
 description of--
 ``(A) the purposes for which each class of 
 derivative financial instruments has been acquired by 
 the institution, including the specific objectives of 
 the institution; and
 ``(B) the overall operating and investment 
 strategies of the institution which provide the context 
 for acquiring or taking any such holding, position, or 
 other interest in any derivative financial instrument.
 ``(2) Accounting policies.--A description of the accounting 
 policy and principles and the methodologies used by the 
 institution to determine the value of the various classes of 
 derivative financial instruments.
 ``(d) Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the terms `active 
end-user' and `derivative financial instrument' have the same meanings 
as in section 2 of the Derivatives Safety and Soundness Supervision Act 
of 1995.''.
 (b) Insured Credit Unions.--Section 202(a) of the Federal Credit 
Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1782(a)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new paragraph:
 ``(8) Derivative financial instruments.--
 ``(A) In general.--The reports of condition made by 
 insured credit unions under this section shall include 
 all the information with respect to derivative 
 financial instruments which is required, under section 
 44 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, to be included 
 in reports of condition made by insured depository 
 institutions (as defined in section 3 of such Act).
 ``(B) Applicability of section 44 of the federal 
 deposit insurance act.--Section 44 of the Federal 
 Deposit Insurance Act shall apply with respect to 
 insured credit unions and the Board in the same manner 
 such section applies to insured depository institutions 
 and Federal banking agencies (as such terms are defined 
 in section 3 of such Act) and shall be enforceable by 
 the Board with respect to insured credit unions under 
 this Act.''.
 (c) Other Financial Institutions.--
 (1) In general.--Each appropriate Federal regulatory agency 
 of any financial institution which is not an insured depository 
 institution or an insured credit union shall consider 
 requiring, and may require, such institution to file a 
 quarterly report, with such institution's appropriate Federal 
 regulatory agency, containing comparable information with 
 respect to derivative financial instruments which is required, 
 under section 44 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, to be 
 included in reports of condition made by insured depository 
 institutions (as defined in section 3 of such Act).
 (2) Applicability of section 44 of the federal deposit 
 insurance act.--Section 44 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act 
 shall apply with respect to financial institutions and 
 appropriate Federal regulatory agencies described in paragraph 
 (1) in the same manner such section applies to insured 
 depository institutions and Federal banking agencies (as such 
 terms are defined in section 3 of such Act) and shall be 
 enforceable by such agencies with respect to such financial 
 institutions under any other law which provides such agency 
 with administrative enforcement authority over such 
 institution.

SEC. 103. TRAINING FOR EXAMINERS AND ASSISTANT EXAMINERS.

 (a) In General.--The Financial Institutions Examination Council 
shall sponsor training programs concerning derivatives activities for 
examiners and assistant examiners employed by any agency represented on 
such council.
 (b) Enrollment.--Under such conditions as the Financial 
Institutions Examination Council may establish, training programs 
sponsored by the council pursuant to subsection (a) shall be open to 
enrollment by employees of State bank supervisors (as defined in 
section 3(r) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act) and employees of the 
Federal Housing Finance Board and the Office of Federal Housing 
Enterprise Oversight of the Department of Housing and Urban 
Development.
 (c) Risk Management Training.--The risk management training 
provided under section 1009A of the Federal Financial Institutions 
Examination Council Act of 1978 shall include risk management 
techniques related to derivatives activities, except that the cost of 
providing training with respect to such activities to employees of 
financial institutions shall be paid by the institutions.

SEC. 104. STATE LIAISONS.

 (a) In General.--To encourage the application of uniform 
examination principles and standards by State and Federal agencies with 
respect to derivatives activities of financial institutions, the 
appropriate Federal regulatory agencies shall establish a liaison 
committee composed of 5 representatives of State agencies which 
supervise financial institutions which shall meet at least twice a year 
with such Federal agencies.
 (b) Travel Expenses.--Each member of the liaison committee 
established pursuant to subsection (a) shall receive travel expenses, 
including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 
5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.

 TITLE II--SUPERVISORY IMPROVEMENTS

SEC. 201. UNSAFE OR UNSOUND PRACTICES.

 (a) Effective Management Oversight.--No financial institution may 
engage in derivatives activities without a written management plan 
approved by the board of directors of the institution which--
 (1) ensures that such activities are--
 (A) conducted with appropriate oversight of the 
 directors and the senior executive officers (as defined 
 pursuant to section 32(f) of the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Act) of the institution;
 (B) conducted in a safe and sound manner; and
 (C) consistent with the overall risk management 
 philosophy and the business strategy of the management 
 of the institution; and
 (2) establishes prudential standards for the management of 
 the risks involved in such activities and a framework for 
 internal controls with respect to such activities.
 (b) Requirement for Directors.--No financial institution may act as 
a dealer in derivative financial instruments or as an active end-user 
unless the board of directors of such institution is informed of the 
risks associated with the derivatives activities of the financial 
institution and the total current credit exposure of the institution 
with respect to any such activities.
 (c) Enforcement.--Any failure to comply with the provisions of this 
section, and the failure of any institution-affiliated party (as 
defined in section 3(u) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act) engaged 
in derivatives activities to have adequate technical expertise with 
respect to such activities, may be treated by the appropriate Federal 
regulatory agency as an unsafe or unsound practice in conducting the 
business of the institution involved.

SEC. 202. CONFIDENTIAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT REPORTING.

 (a) In General.--Before the end of the 1-year period beginning on 
the date of the enactment of this Act, the appropriate Federal 
regulatory agencies shall develop the means to obtain all necessary 
information relating to any derivatives activity or any class of 
derivative financial instruments, whenever the appropriate Federal 
regulatory agency determines such information is needed, from any 
financial institution which is a dealer in derivative financial 
instruments or is an active end-user if the agency determines that the 
agency needs such information as a result of adverse market conditions 
or other emergency situation (as defined by the agency).
 (b) Accessibility of Information.--Each financial institution 
referred to in subsection (a) shall--
 (1) obtain such information and make and keep such records 
 as the appropriate Federal regulatory agency may require by 
 regulation for purposes of such paragraph; and
 (2) promptly provide to the appropriate Federal regulatory 
 agency any information requested by the agency pursuant to such 
 paragraph.
 (c) Confidentiality of Information Provided.--No information 
provided to or obtained by an appropriate Federal regulatory agency 
pursuant to subsection (a) with respect to any financial institution 
may be provided to any person or entity other than another Federal 
regulatory agency with jurisdiction over the financial institution 
without the prior written approval of the agency.

SEC. 203. INTERNAL CONTROLS.

 Section 39(a)(1)(A) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 
1831p-1(a)(1)(A)) is amended by striking ``internal controls'' and 
inserting ``internal controls (including internal controls for 
activities involving derivative financial instruments (as defined in 
section 44(d)))''.

SEC. 204. FOREIGN BANK SUPERVISION.

 (a) Standards for Approval.--Section 7(d)(2)(A) of the 
International Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3105(d)(2)(A)) is amended 
by inserting before the semicolon the following: ``, including, in the 
case of a foreign bank engaged in derivatives activities (as defined in 
section 2(5) of the Derivatives Safety and Soundness Supervision Act of 
1995), comprehensive supervision and regulation of such activities.''.
 (b) Factor for Consideration.--Section 7(d) of the International 
Banking Act of 1978 (12 U.S.C. 3105(d)) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new paragraph:
 ``(6) Factor for consideration.--In making any 
 determination under paragraph (2), the Board shall consider 
 whether the home country of a foreign bank maintains 
 comprehensive supervision and regulation of derivatives 
 activities (as defined in section 2(5) of the Derivatives 
 Safety and Soundness Supervision Act of 1995), including, where 
 appropriate, capital and disclosure standards, which are not 
 less stringent than United States standards.''.

 TITLE III--FINANCIAL INSTITUTION INSOLVENCY REFORMS

SEC. 301. TREATMENT OF CERTAIN SWAP AGREEMENTS BY CONSERVATORS OR 
 RECEIVERS OF INSURED DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS.

 Section 11(e)(8)(D)(vi)(I) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 
U.S.C. 1821(e)(8)(D)(vi)(I)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``purchased'' each place such term appears; 
 and
 (2) by inserting ``, equity derivative, equity or equity 
 index swap, equity or equity index option, bond option, spot 
 foreign exchange transaction'' after ``currency option''.

SEC. 302. AUTHORITY OF THE CORPORATION WITH RESPECT TO FAILED AND 
 FAILING INSTITUTIONS.

 Section 11(e)(8) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 
1821(e)(8)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (E)--
 (A) by striking ``paragraph (12) of this 
 subsection''; and
 (B) by striking ``subsection (d)(9)'' and inserting 
 ``subsections (d)(9), (e)(10), and (n)(4)(I)''; and
 (2) by adding the following new subparagraphs:
 ``(F) Clarification.--No provision of law shall be 
 construed as limiting the right or power of the 
 Corporation, or authorizing any court or agency to 
 limit or delay, in any manner, the right or power of 
 the Corporation, to transfer any qualified financial 
 contract in accordance with paragraphs (9) and (10) or 
 to liquidate any such contract.
 ``(G) Undercapitalized insured depository 
 institutions.--The Corporation, in consultation with 
 the appropriate Federal banking agencies, shall 
 prescribe regulations requiring more detailed 
 recordkeeping with respect to qualified financial 
 contracts (including market valuations) by insured 
 depository institutions that are undercapitalized (as 
 defined in section 38).''.

SEC. 303. AMENDMENTS RELATING TO TRANSFERS OF QUALIFIED FINANCIAL 
 CONTRACTS.

 Section 11(e)(10) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 
1821(e)(10)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A)--
 (A) by striking ``conservator or'' each place such 
 term appears'';
 (B) by striking ``use such conservator's or 
 receiver's best efforts to''; and
 (C) by striking ``12:00, noon (local time)'' and 
 inserting ``5:00 p.m. (Eastern time)'';
 (2) by redesignating subparagraph (B) as subparagraph (E); 
 and
 (3) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following new 
 subparagraphs:
 ``(B) Certain rights not enforceable.--
 ``(i) In general.--A person who is a party 
 to a qualified financial contract with an 
 insured depository institution may not exercise 
 any right such person has to net or close out 
 such contract under paragraph (8)(A) or section 
 403 or 404 of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 solely by 
 reason of the appointment of a receiver for the 
 depository institution (or the insolvency or 
 financial condition of the institution for 
 which the receiver is been appointed) until the 
 earlier of--
 ``(I) 5:00 p.m. (Eastern time) of 
 the business day following the date of 
 the appointment of the receiver; or
 ``(II) the time the person receives 
 notice that the contract has been 
 transferred pursuant to paragraph 
 (9)(A).
 ``(ii) Notice to last-known address.--For 
 purposes of this subparagraph, the Corporation 
 as receiver of an insured depository 
 institution shall be deemed to have notified a 
 person who is a party to a qualified financial 
 contract with such depository institution if 
 the Corporation has sent notice to the last 
 address of such person shown on the books and 
 records of the depository institution with 
 respect to such contract in the manner provided 
 for in the contract or by other means 
 reasonably calculated to reach such person by 
 the time specified in clause (i)(I).
 ``(iii) Exception to right of contracting 
 party to net or close out contracts.--A person 
 who is a party to a qualified financial 
 contract with an insured depository institution 
 may not exercise any right such person has to 
 net or close out a contract under paragraph 
 (8)(E) or section 403 or 404 of Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991, 
 solely by reason of the appointment of a 
 conservator for the depository institution.
 ``(C) Treatment of bridge banks.--A bridge bank 
 shall not be treated as a depository institution in 
 default for purposes of this paragraph.
 ``(D) Treatment of certain conservatorships.--An 
 institution organized by the Corporation for which a 
 conservator is appointed--
 ``(i) immediately upon the organization of 
 the institution; or
 ``(ii) at the time of a purchase and 
 assumption transaction between such institution 
 and a failed depository institution for which 
 the Corporation has been appointed receiver,
 shall not be treated as a depository institution in 
 default for purposes of this paragraph.''.

SEC. 304. CLARIFYING AMENDMENT RELATING TO MASTER AGREEMENTS.

 Section 11(e)(8)(D)(vii) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 
U.S.C. 1821(e)(8)(D)(vii)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(vii) Treatment of master agreement as 1 
 agreement.--Any master agreement for any 
 contract or agreement described in any 
 preceding clause of this subparagraph, together 
 with all supplements to such master agreement, 
 shall be treated as a single agreement and a 
 single qualified financial contract.''.

SEC. 305. TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS RELATING TO QUALIFIED FINANCIAL 
 CONTRACTS.

 (a) Definition of Qualified Financial Contract.--Section 
11(e)(8)(D) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 
1821(e)(8)(D)) is amended--
 (1) in clause (i), by inserting ``spot contract,'' after 
 ``swap agreement,'';
 (2) in clause (iv), by striking ``(24)'' and inserting 
 ``(25)''; and
 (3) in clause (v), by striking ``101(41)'' and inserting 
 ``101(47)''.
 (b) Limitation on Rights of Counterparties in Event of Default Due 
to Appointment of a Conservator.--Section 11(e)(8)(E)(i) of the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1821(e)(8)(E)(i)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``paragraph (12)'' and inserting 
 ``paragraph (10)''; and
 (2) by striking ``subsection (d)(9)'' and inserting 
 ``subsections (d)(9) and (n)(4)(I)''.
 (c) Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 
1991.--Sections 403(a) and 404(a) of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 (12 U.S.C. 4403(a), 4404(a)) are 
each amended by inserting ``other than paragraph (8)(E) and 
(10)(B)(iii) of section 11(e) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act'' 
after ``other provisions of law''.

 TITLE IV--INTERNATIONAL REGULATORY COOPERATION

SEC. 401. STUDY OF INTERNATIONAL REGULATION AND SUPERVISION OF 
 DERIVATIVES ACTIVITIES OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS.

 (a) In General.--Before the end of the 30-day period beginning on 
the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury 
shall request a meeting with the appropriate representatives of the 
other major industrialized countries to plan a study to examine the 
adequacy of the international regulation and supervision of derivatives 
activities of financial institutions.
 (b) Goals of Study.--The goals of the study as proposed by the 
Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to subsection (a) with respect to 
derivatives activities of financial institutions shall be as follows:
 (1) To foster a greater understanding of the manner in 
 which derivative financial instruments affect the stability of 
 the world's financial systems and markets.
 (2) To examine the adequacy of international regulation and 
 supervision of derivative financial activities.
 (3) To make recommendations for improving the international 
 regulation and supervision of derivative financial activities.
 (4) To foster greater cooperation between all regulatory 
 agencies with jurisdiction over derivatives activities.
 (5) To make recommendations for action by the financial 
 regulators in the respective countries that would facilitate 
 the safe and sound conduct of entities involved in derivative 
 financial activities.
 (6) To evaluate the feasibility of establishing a single 
 governing body to regulate international derivative financial 
 activities.
 (c) Issues to Study.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall propose 
that the study with respect to derivatives activities of financial 
institutions include the following factors:
 (1) Identification of the manner in which derivative 
 financial instruments affect the stability of the world's 
 financial systems and markets.
 (2) Identification of the various regulatory entities and 
 mechanisms that are used to regulate and supervise derivative 
 financial activities around the world.
 (3) Analysis of the adequacy of the cooperation between the 
 various regulatory entities and mechanisms referred to in 
 paragraph (2).
 (4) Identification of problems that inhibit the safe and 
 sound conduct of worldwide derivatives activities.
 (5) Analysis of the extent to which derivative financial 
 activities in countries other than the major industrialized 
 countries affect the safety and soundness of the world's 
 financial systems and markets.
 (6) Identification of uniform accounting and public 
 reporting standards for derivative financial instruments.
 (7) Evaluation of the feasibility of establishing a single 
 governing body to regulate international derivatives 
 activities.
 (d) Utilization of Information and Resources.--The Secretary of the 
Treasury shall propose that, in conducting the study under this section 
with respect to derivatives activities of financial institutions, the 
major industrialized countries should--
 (1) gather information from a wide variety of sources 
 including government agencies, central banks, market 
 participants, and the consumers of the derivative financial 
 instruments;
 (2) to the extent feasible, obtain and use information from 
 the International Monetary Fund, the Bank for International 
 Settlements, and other multilateral organizations; and
 (3) utilize all available information and conclusions from 
 studies conducted by any multilateral organization, central 
 bank, or any group consisting of representatives of major 
 industrialized countries.

SEC. 402. INTERNATIONAL NEGOTIATIONS.

 The Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System and the Comptroller of the Currency shall encourage central 
banks, and regulatory authorities of the other industrialized countries 
to work toward maintaining and, where appropriate, adopting comparable 
supervisory standards and regulations, particularly capital standards, 
for financial institutions engaged in derivatives activities.

 TITLE V--GAO STUDY

SEC. 501. STUDY OF SPECULATION AND MARGIN AND COLLATERAL REQUIREMENTS 
 WITH RESPECT TO DERIVATIVES ACTIVITIES OF FINANCIAL 
 INSTITUTIONS.

 (a) Study Required.--
 (1) In general.--The Comptroller General of the United 
 States shall conduct a study of the speculative uses of 
 derivative financial instruments by financial institutions and 
 the feasibility of imposing margin and collateral requirements 
 on speculative transactions engaged in by financial 
 institutions which involve derivative financial instruments.
 (2) Report.--The Comptroller General shall submit a report 
 on the study conducted pursuant to paragraph (1) to the 
 Congress before the end of the 18-month period beginning on the 
 date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Issues Involving Speculative Transactions Involving Derivative 
Financial Instruments.--In conducting the study under subsection 
(a)(1), the Comptroller General shall--
 (1) define the term ``speculation'' as such term is used in 
 connection with derivative financial instruments;
 (2) determine the extent to which financial institutions 
 use the various classes of derivative financial instruments to 
 engage in speculation for the institution's own trading 
 account; and
 (3) determine the extent to which financial institutions 
 engage in derivatives activities involving the various classes 
 of derivative financial instruments with speculators.
 (c) Issues Involving Margin and Collateral Requirements.--In 
conducting the study under subsection (a)(1), the Comptroller General 
shall--
 (1) determine which classes of derivative financial 
 instruments are subject to margin and collateral requirements 
 and the amount and purpose of the margin and collateral 
 requirement;
 (2) determine the extent to which the transactions of 
 financial institutions which involve any class of derivative 
 financial instruments are conducted over the counter and 
 evaluate the feasibility of imposing margin and collateral 
 requirements on such transactions;
 (3) evaluate the feasibility of imposing margin and 
 collateral requirements on any class of derivative financial 
 instruments which were acquired or taken for speculative 
 purposes; and
 (4) evaluate the competitive impact of imposing margin and 
 collateral requirements on the various classes of derivative 
 financial instruments which were acquired or taken for 
 speculative purposes.
 <all>
HR 31 IH----2
HR 31 IH----3