HR 2918 IH1S
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2918
`Collective Bargaining Protection Act'
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 16, 1991
Mr. RIDGE (for himself, Mr. HOUGHTON, Ms. SNOWE, and Mr. REGULA) introduced
the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Education and Labor
A BILL
`Collective Bargaining Protection Act'
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Collective Bargaining Protection Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. RESTRICTION ON HIRING OF REPLACEMENT WORKERS DURING ECONOMIC STRIKES.
 Section 8(a) of the National Labor Relations Act (29 U.S.C. 158 (a))
 is amended--
 (1) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting
 `or,' and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(6)(i) to offer, or to grant, the status of a permanent replacement
 employee to an individual for performing bargaining unit work for the
 employer during an economic strike between the employer and the labor
 organization that is acting as the collective bargaining representative
 involved in the strike for a 12-week period beginning on the date of the
 hiring of the first such individual; or
 `(ii) to offer, or grant, an individual any employment preference based on
 the fact that such individual performed bargaining unit work, or indicated
 a willingness to perform such work, during an economic strike over an
 individual who--
 `(A) was an employee of the employer at the commencement of the strike;
 `(B) in connection with such strike has exercised the right to join,
 to assist, or to engage in other concerted activities for the purpose
 of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection through labor
 organization that is acting as the collective bargaining representative
 involved in the strike; and
 `(C) is working for, or has unconditionally offered to return to work for,
 the employer.'.
SEC. 3. PREVENTION OF DISCRIMINATION DURING AND AT THE CONCLUSION OF RAILWAY
LABOR DISPUTES.
 Paragraph Fourth of section 2 of the Railway Labor Act (45 U.S.C. 152)
 is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(a)' after `Fourth'; and
 (2) by adding at the end of the following:
 `(b) No carrier, or officer or agent of the carrier shall--
 `(1) offer, or grant, the status of a permanent replacement employee to an
 individual for performing work in craft or class for the carrier during
 a dispute involving the craft or class for a 12-week period beginning on
 the date of the hiring of the first such individual; or
 `(2) otherwise offer, or grant, an individual any employment preference
 based on the fact that such individual was employed, or indicated a
 willingness to be employed, during a dispute over an individual who--
 `(A) was an employee of the carrier at the commencement of the dispute;
 `(B) has exercised the right to join, to organize, to assist in organizing,
 or to bargain collectively through the labor organization involved in the
 dispute; and
 `(C) is working for, or has unconditionally offered to return to work for,
 the carrier.'.
SEC. 4. PREVENTION OF UNFAIR LABOR PRACTICES
 Section 10 of the National Labor Relations Act (29 U.S.C. 160) is amended
 by adding the at the end the following:
 `(n) Whenever it is charged that any person has engaged in an unfair labor
 practice under subsection (a) or (b) of section 8 and such charge has been
 filed before an employer hires a replacement employee, the preliminary
 investigation of such charge shall be given priority over all other cases
 except cases of like character in the office where it is filed or to which it
 is referred. If, after such investigation, the officer or regional director
 to whom the matter was referred has reasonable cause to believe such charge
 is true, such officer or director shall endeavor to issue a complaint
 before the expiration of the 12-week period referred to in section 8(a)(6).'.