B37 2-13-89 [OC's]
S 406 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 406
To authorize competitive oil and gas leasing and development on the Coastal
Plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in a manner consistent with
protection of the environment, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
February 9 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. JOHNSTON (for himself and Mr. MCCLURE) introduced the following bill; which
was read twice and referred to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
A BILL
To authorize competitive oil and gas leasing and development on the Coastal
Plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in a manner consistent with
protection of the environment, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be cited as the
 `Arctic Coastal Plain Competitive Oil and Gas Leasing Act'.
TITLE I--STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
 SEC. 101. PURPOSE AND POLICY- The Congress hereby declares that it is the
 purpose and policy of this Act--
 (a) to authorize competitive oil and gas leasing and development to
 proceed on the Coastal Plain in a manner consistent with protection of
 the environment, maintenance of fish and wildlife and their habitat,
 and the interests of the area's subsistence users; and
 (b) to provide a new source of funding for the Land and Water Conservation
 Fund, Migratory Bird Conservation Fund and other fish and wildlife management
 programs, and for the acquisition, protection, creation, and restoration
 of wetlands, and for other purposes.
 SEC. 102. DEFINITIONS- When used in this Act--
 (a) the term `Coastal Plain' means that area identified as such in the map
 entitled `Arctic National Wildlife Refuge', dated August 1980, as referenced
 in section 1002(b) of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act
 of 1980 (16 U.S.C. 3142(b)(1)) comprising approximately one million five
 hundred and forty-nine thousand acres; and
 (b) the term `Secretary' means the Secretary of the Interior or the
 Secretary's designee.
TITLE II--COASTAL PLAIN COMPETITIVE LEASING PROGRAM
 SEC. 201. LEASING PROGRAM FOR LANDS WITHIN THE COASTAL PLAIN- (a) The
 Congress hereby authorizes and directs the Secretary of the Interior and
 other appropriate Federal officers and agencies to take such actions as
 are necessary to establish and implement a competitive oil and gas leasing
 program that will result in an environmentally sound program for the
 exploration, development, and production of the oil and gas resources of
 the Coastal Plain. Activities pursuant to such program shall be undertaken--
 (1) in accordance with the development requirements set out in title III
 of this Act; and
 (2) in a manner to ensure the receipt of fair market value by the public
 for the mineral resources to be leased.
 (b) This Act shall be the sole authority for leasing on the Coastal Plain.
 SEC. 202. RULES AND REGULATIONS- (a) The Secretary shall prescribe such
 rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes
 and provisions of this Act, including rules and regulations relating to
 protection of the environment of the Coastal Plain, as required by title
 III of this Act. Such rules and regulations shall be promulgated within
 nine months after the date of enactment of this Act and shall, as of their
 effective date, apply to all operations conducted under a lease issued or
 maintained under the provisions of this Act.
 (b) In the formulation and promulgation of rules and regulations under
 this Act, the Secretary shall request and give due consideration to the
 views of appropriate officials of the State of Alaska and the Government of
 Canada. The Secretary shall also consult with the Environmental Protection
 Agency and the Army Corps of Engineers in developing rules and regulations
 relating to the environment.
 (c) The Secretary shall periodically review and, if appropriate, revise
 the rules and regulations issued under subsection (a) of this section to
 reflect any significant biological, environmental, or engineering data
 which come to the Secretary's attention.
 SEC. 203. LEASE SALES- (a) Lands may be leased pursuant to the provisions
 of this Act to any person qualified to obtain a lease for deposits of oil
 and gas under the Mineral Leasing Act, as amended (30 U.S.C. 181).
 (b) The Secretary shall, by regulation, establish procedures for--
 (1) receipt and consideration of sealed nominations for any area in the
 Coastal Plain for inclusion in, or exclusion from, a lease sale;
 (2) public notice of and comment on designation of areas to be included in,
 or excluded from, a lease sale;
 (3) review by the State of Alaska and local governments in Alaska which
 may be impacted by the proposed leasing; and
 (4) periodic consultation with the State of Alaska and local governments
 in Alaska, oil and gas lessees, and representatives of other individuals
 or organizations engaged in activity in or on the Coastal Plain including
 those involved in subsistence uses and recreational activities.
 (c) The Secretary shall, by regulation, provide for lease sales of lands on
 the Coastal Plain. When lease sales are to be held, they shall occur after
 the nomination process provided for in subsection (b) of this section. For
 the first lease sale, the Secretary shall, consistent with the requirements
 set forth in title III of this Act, offer for lease those acres receiving
 the greatest number of nominations, but not to exceed a total of three
 hundred thousand acres. If the total acreage nominated is less than three
 hundred thousand acres, he shall include in such sale any other acreage
 which he believes has the highest resource potential, but in no event shall
 more than three hundred thousand acres of the Coastal Plain be offered in
 such sale. Thereafter, no more than three hundred thousand acres of the
 Coastal Plain may be leased in any one lease sale. The initial lease sale
 shall be held within eighteen months of the issuance of final regulations
 by the Secretary. The second lease sale shall be held thirty-six months
 after the initial sale, with additional sales conducted every twenty-four
 months thereafter so long as sufficient interest in development exists to
 warrant, in the Secretary's judgment, the conduct of such sales.
 (d) Areas of the Coastal Plain deemed by the Secretary to be of particular
 environmental sensitivity may be excluded from leasing by the Secretary. The
 Secretary shall notify the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of
 the United States Senate and the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs
 of the United States House of Representatives ninety days in advance of
 excluding any such areas from leasing. If the Secretary later determines
 that exploration, development, or production will result in no significant
 adverse effect on fish and wildlife, their habitat, and the environment,
 the Secretary shall, consistent with the provisions of subsection (c)
 of this section, offer such lands for leasing.
 SEC. 204. GRANT OF LEASES BY THE SECRETARY- (a) The Secretary is authorized
 to grant to the highest responsible qualified bidder by sealed competitive
 bid any lands to be leased on the Coastal Plain upon payment by the lessee
 of such bonus as may be accepted by the Secretary and of such royalty as
 may be fixed in the lease, which shall be not less than 12 1/2 per centum
 in amount or value of the production removed or sold from the lease.
 (b) The Secretary shall not accept a bid for a lease if the Secretary
 finds, after notice and hearing, that the bidder is not meeting diligent
 development requirements on any other Federal mineral lease.
 SEC. 205. LEASE TERMS AND CONDITIONS- An oil and gas lease issued pursuant
 to this section shall--
 (a) be for a tract consisting of a compact area not to exceed two thousand
 five hundred and sixty acres;
 (b) be for an initial period of ten years and as long thereafter as oil
 or gas is produced in paying quantities or drilling or well reworking
 operations as approved by the Secretary are operated thereon;
 (c) require the payment of royalty as provided for in section 205 of
 this Act;
 (d) require approval of an exploration plan, as provided for in section
 207 of this Act;
 (e) require approval of a development and production plan, as required in
 section 207 of this Act;
 (f) require posting of bond required by section 208 of this Act;
 (g) provide for the suspension of the lease during the initial lease term
 or thereafter pursuant to section 209 of this Act;
 (h) provide for the cancellation of the lease during the initial lease
 term or thereafter pursuant to section 210 of this Act;
 (i) contain the terms and conditions relating to protection of fish and
 wildlife, their habitat, and the environment, as required by title III of
 this Act; and
 (j) contain such rental and other provisions as the Secretary may prescribe
 at the time of offering the area for lease.
EXPLORATION AND DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION PLANS
 SEC. 206. (a) EXPLORATION PLANS- All exploration activities pursuant
 to any lease issued or maintained under this Act shall be conducted in
 accordance with an approved exploration plan or an approved revision of
 such plan. Prior to commencing exploration pursuant to any oil and gas
 lease issued or maintained under this Act, the holder thereof shall submit
 an exploration plan to the Secretary for approval. Such plan may apply to
 more than one lease held by a lessee in any region of the Coastal Plain,
 or by a group of lessees acting under a unitization, pooling, or drilling
 agreement, and shall be approved by the Secretary if he finds that such
 plan is consistent with the provisions of this Act and other applicable law.
 (b) OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION PLANS- All development and
 production pursuant to a lease issued or maintained pursuant to this
 Act shall be conducted in accordance with an approved development and
 production plan. Prior to commencing development or production pursuant
 to any oil and gas lease issued or maintained under this Act, the holder
 thereof shall submit a development and production plan to the Secretary for
 approval. Such plan may apply to more than one lease held by a lessee in
 any region of the Coastal Plain, or by a group of lessees acting under a
 unitization, pooling, or drilling agreement, and shall be approved by the
 Secretary if he finds that such plan is consistent with the provisions of
 this Act and other applicable law.
 (c) REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO EXPLORATION PLANS AND DEVELOPMENT AND
 PRODUCTION PLANS- Exploration plans and development and production plans
 shall include where applicable--
 (1) the names and legal addresses of the following persons: the operator,
 contractors, subcontractors, and the owners or lessees other than the
 operator;
 (2) a map or maps showing: (A) the location of a point of reference
 selected by the operator within the area covered by the plan of operations
 showing, in relation to that point, existing and proposed access routes or
 roads within the area, the boundaries of proposed surface disturbance and
 location of all survey lines; (B) the location of proposed drilling sites,
 wellsite layout, and all surface facilities; (C) sources of construction
 materials within the area including but not limited to gravel; and (D)
 the location of ancillary facilities including but not limited to camps,
 sanitary facilities, water supply, disposal facilities, pipelines, fuel
 storage facilities, storage facilities, base of operations, and airstrips. A
 point of reference selected by the operator within the area of operations
 shall be marked with a ground monument;
 (3) a description of: (A) all surface and ancillary facilities, including but
 not limited to camps, sanitary facilities, water supply, disposal facilities,
 pipelines, fuel storage facilities, storage facilities, base of operations,
 and airstrips; and (B) the major equipment to be used in the operations,
 including but not limited to equipment and methods for the transport of
 all waters used in or produced by operations, and of the proposed method
 of transporting such equipment within the area covered by the plan of
 operations including to and from the site;
 (4) an estimated schedule for any phase of operations of which review by
 the Secretary is sought and the anticipated date of operation completion;
 (5) the nature and extent of proposed operations;
 (6) plans for reclamation, including--
 (A) the anticipated reclamation work to be performed;
 (B) a proposed schedule of reclamation activities to be performed; and
 (C) a detailed estimated of reclamation costs;
 (7) methods for disposal of all wastes and hazardous and toxic substances;
 (8) an affidavit stating that the operations planned will be in compliance
 with all applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations;
 (9) contingency plans in case of spills, leaks, or other accidents; and
 (10) such additional information as may be required by the Secretary to
 ensure that the proposed activities are consistent with this Act, as well
 as other applicable Federal and State environmental laws.
 (d) PROCEDURES FOR PLAN APPROVAL- (1) After an exploration or development
 and production plan is submitted for approval, the Secretary shall promptly
 publish notice of the submission and availability of the text of the proposed
 plan in the Federal Register and a newpaper of general circulation in the
 State of Alaska and provide an opportunity for written public comment.
 (2) Within one hundred and twenty days after receiving an exploration or
 development and production plan, the Secretary shall determine, after taking
 into account any comment received under paragraph (1) of this subsection,
 whether the activities proposed in the plan are consistent with this Act and
 other applicable provisions of Federal and State law. If that determination
 is in the affirmative, the Secretary shall return the plan along with a
 statement of any modifications necessary for its approval. The Secretary,
 as a condition of approving any plan under this section--
 (A) may require modifications to the plan that he considers necessary or
 appropriate to make it consistent with this Act and other applicable law. The
 Secretary shall assess reasonable fees or charges for the reimbursement
 of all necessary and reasonable research, administrative, monitoring,
 enforcement, and reporting costs associated with reviewing the plan and
 monitoring its implementation; and
 (B) shall require such periodic reports regarding the carrying out of the
 drilling and related activities as may be necessary or appropriate for
 purposes of determining the extent to which the plan is being complied with
 and the effectiveness of the plan in ensuring that the drilling and related
 activities are consistent with this Act and other applicable provisions
 of Federal and State law.
 (e) MODIFICATION OF PLANS- If at any time while activities are being
 carried out under a plan approved under this section, the Secretary, on the
 basis of available information, determines that the continuation of any
 particular activity under the plan is likely to result in a significant
 adverse effect on fish or wildlife, their habitat, or the environment,
 the Secretary, after consultation with the lessee shall--
 (1) make modifications to part or all of the plan as necessary or appropriate
 to avoid the significant adverse effect;
 (2) temporarily suspend part of all the drilling or related activity under
 the plan for such time as the Secretary considers necessary or appropriate
 to avoid such significant adverse effect; or
 (3) terminate and cancel the plan where actions under paragraphs (1) or
 (2) will not avoid the significant adverse effect.
BONDING REQUIREMENTS
 SEC. 207. (a) REQUIREMENT FOR PERFORMANCE BOND- After approval of an
 exploration or development and production plan, the lessee shall be
 required to file with the Secretary a suitable performance bond. The bond
 shall be conditioned upon compliance with all the terms and conditions of
 the lease and all applicable laws. Such performance bond is in addition
 to and not in lieu of any bond or security deposit required by other
 regulatory authorities. The lessee may file either a surety bond, or
 a personal bond consisting of cash or negotiable Treasury bonds of the
 United States. When negotiable Treasury bonds serve as the personal bond,
 they shall be accompanied by a proper conveyance to the Secretary of full
 authority to sell such securities in case of a default in the performance
 of the terms and conditions of the lease.
 (b) AMOUNT OF PERFORMANCE BOND- The performance bond shall be in an amount--
 (1) to be determined by the Secretary to provide for reclamation of
 the lease site in accordance with an approved or revised exploration or
 development and production plan; plus
 (2) an amount set by the Secretary consistent with the type of operations
 proposed, to provide the means for rapid and effective cleanup, and to
 minimize damages resulting from an oil spill, the escape of gas, refuse
 domestic wastewater, hazardous or toxic substances, or fire caused by oil
 and gas activities. This amount shall not exceed $500,000 for geophysical
 surveys, and shall not exceed a blanket bond of $1,000,000.00 for all
 exploration activities and an additional $1,500,000.00 for all development
 and production activities on the Coastal Plain.
 (c) ADJUSTMENT OF BOND TO CONFORM TO REVISED PLAN- In the event that an
 approved exploration or development and production plan is revised, the
 Secretary may adjust the amount of the bond to conform to such modified plan.
 (d) DURATION OF BOND- The responsibility and liability of the lessee and
 its surety under the bond or security deposit shall continue until such
 time as the Secretary determines that there has been compliance with the
 terms and conditions of the lease and all applicable law.
 (e) TERMINATION OF LIABILITY- Within sixty days after determining that
 there has been compliance with the terms and conditions of the lease and
 all applicable laws, the Secretary shall notify the lessee that the period
 of liability under the bond or security deposit has been terminated.
 SEC. 208. LEASE SUSPENSION- The Secretary may direct or assent to the
 suspension of operations and production under any lease granted under the
 terms of this Act: (1) in the interest of conservation of the resource;
 (2) where there is not available system to transport the resource; or (3)
 where there is a threat of significant adverse effect upon fish or wildlife,
 their habitat or the environment. If such a suspension is directed or
 assented to by the Secretary, any payment of rental prescribed by such
 lease shall be suspended during such period of suspension of operations
 and production, and the term of the lease shall be extended by adding any
 such suspension period thereto.
LEASE CANCELLATION
 SEC. 209. (a) CANCELLATION OF NONPRODUCING LEASE- Whenever the owner of a
 nonproducing lease fails to comply with any of the provisions of this act,
 or of any applicable provision of Federal or State environmental law,
 or of the lease, or of any regulation issued under this Act, such lease
 may be cancelled by the Secretary if such default continues for the period
 of thirty days after mailing of notice by registered letter to the lease
 owner at the lease owner's record post office address.
 (b) CANCELLATION OF PRODUCING LEASE- Whenever the owner of any producing
 lease fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Act, or of any
 applicable provision of Federal or State environmental law, or of the lease,
 or of any regulation issued under this Act, such lease may be forfeited
 and cancelled by any appropriate proceeding brought by the Secretary in
 any United States district court having jurisdiction under the provisions
 of this Act.
 (c) ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS- (1) In addition to the authority for lease
 cancellation provided for by subsections (a) and (b) of this section,
 any lease may be canceled at any time, if the Secretary determines, after
 a hearing, that--
 (A) continued activity pursuant to such lease is likely to result in
 a significant adverse effect to fish or wildlife, their habitat, or the
 environment, or is likely to result in serious harm or damage to human life,
 to property, or to the national security or defense; and
 (B) the likelihood of a significant adverse effect will not disappear
 within a reasonable period of time or the threat of harm or damage will
 not disappear or decrease to any acceptable extent within a reasonable
 period of time.
 (2) Such cancellation shall not occur unless and until operations under such
 lease or permit shall have been under suspension, or temporary prohibition,
 by the Secretary, with due extension of any lease term continuously for
 a period of five years, or for a lesser period upon request of the lessee.
 (3) Cancellation under this subsection shall entitle the lessee to receive
 such compensation as the lessee demonstrates to the Secretary to be equal
 to the excess, if any, over the lessee's revenues from the lease (plus
 interest thereon from the date of receipt to the date of reimbursement)
 of all consideration paid for the lease and all direct expenditures made by
 the lessee after the date of issuance of such lease and in connection with
 exploration or development, or both, pursuant to the lease (plus interest
 on such consideration and such expenditures from date of payment to date
 of reimbursement).
 SEC. 210. ASSIGNMENT OR SUBLETTING OF LEASES- No lease issued under the
 authority of this Act shall be assigned or sublet, except with the consent
 of the Secretary.
 SEC. 211. RELINQUISHMENT- The lessee may, at the discretion of the Secretary,
 be permitted at any time to make written relinquishment of all rights
 under any lease issued pursuant to this Act. The Secretary shall accept
 the relinquishment by the lessee of any lease issued under this Act where
 there has not been surface disturbance on the lands covered by the lease.
 SEC. 212. UNITIZATION- For the purpose of conserving the natural resources
 of any oil or gas pool, field, or like area, or any part thereof and in
 order to avoid the unnecessary duplication of facilities, to protect the
 environment of the Coastal Plain, and to protect correlative rights, the
 Secretary shall require to the greatest extent practicable, that lessees
 unite with each other in collectively adopting and operating under a
 cooperative or unit plan of development for operation of such pool, field,
 or like area, or any part thereof.
 SEC. 213. OIL AND GAS INFORMATION- (a)(1) Any lessee or permittee conducting
 any exploration for, or development or production of, oil or gas pursuant
 to this Act shall provide the Secretary access to all data and information
 (including processed, analyzed, and interpreted information) obtained
 from such activity and shall provide copies of such data and information
 as the Secretary may request. Such data and information shall be provided
 in accordance with regulations which the Secretary shall prescribe.
 (2) If interpreted information provided pursuant to paragraph (1) of
 this subsection is provided in good faith by the lessee or permittee,
 such lessee or permittee shall not be responsible for any consequence of
 the use or of reliance upon such interpreted information.
 (3) Whenever any data or information is provided to the Secretary, pursuant
 to paragraph (1) of this subsection--
 (A) by a lessee or permittee, in the form and manner of processing which
 is utilized by such lessee or permittee in the normal conduct of business,
 the Secretary shall pay the reasonable cost of reproducing such data and
 information; and
 (B) by a lessee or permittee, in such other form and manner of processing
 as the Secretary may request, the Secretary shall pay the reasonable cost
 of processing and reproducing such data and information.
 (b) The Secretary shall prescribe regulations to--
 (1) assure that the confidentiality of privileged or proprietary information
 received by the Secretary under this section will be maintained; and
 (2) set forth the time periods and conditions which shall be applicable
 to the release of such information.
REMEDIES AND PENALTIES
 SEC. 214. (a) GENERAL- Except as provided in section 215 of this Act,
 the district courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction of cases
 and controversies arising out of, or in connection with, any lease issued
 under this Act. Proceedings may be instituted in the judicial district in
 which any defendant resides or may be found, or in the judicial district
 in which the Coastal Plain is located.
 (b) ACTIONS FOR RELIEF- At the request of the Secretary, the Attorney General
 or a United States Attorney shall institute a civil action in the district
 court of the United States for the district in which any defendant resides
 or may be found, or in the judicial district in which the Coastal Plain is
 located, for a temporary restraining order, injunction, or other appropriate
 remedy to enforce any provision of this Act, any regulation or order issued
 under this Act, or any term of a lease issued pursuant to this Act.
 (c) CIVIL PENALTIES- If any person fails to comply with any provision
 of this Act, or any term of a lease issued pursuant to this Act, or any
 regulation or order issued under this Act, after notice of such failure
 and expiration of any reasonable period allowed for corrective action, such
 person shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than $10,000 for each
 day of the continuance of such failure. The Secretary may assess, collect
 and compromise any such penalty. No penalty shall be assessed until the
 person charged with a violation has been given an opportunity for a hearing.
 (d) CRIMINAL PENALTIES- Any person who knowingly and willfully: (1)
 violates any provision of this Act, any term of a lease issued pursuant to
 this Act, or any regulation or order issued under the authority of this
 Act designed to protect health, safety, or the environment or conserve
 natural resources; (2) makes any false statement, representation, or
 certification in any application, record, report, or other document filed
 or required to be maintained under this Act; (3) falsifies, tampers with,
 or renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method of record required
 to be maintained under this Act; or (4) reveals any data or information
 required to be kept confidential by this Act, shall, upon conviction, be
 punished by a fine of not more than $100,000, or by imprisonment for not
 more than ten years, or both. Each day that a violation under clause (1)
 of this subsection continues, or each day that any monitoring device or data
 recorder remains inoperative or inaccurate because of any activity described
 in clause (3) of this subsection, shall constitute a separate violation.
 (e) LIABILITY OF CORPORATE OFFICERS AND AGENTS FOR VIOLATIONS BY CORPORATION-
 Whenever a corporation or other entity is subject to prosecution under
 subsection (d) of this section, any officer or agent of such corporation
 or entity who knowingly and willfully authorized, ordered, or carried out
 the proscribed activity shall be subject to the same fines or imprisonment,
 or both, as provided for under subsection (d) of this section.
 (f) CONCURRENT AND CUMULATIVE NATURE OF PENALTIES- The remedies and
 penalties prescribed in this Act shall be concurrent and cumulative and
 the exercise of one shall not preclude the exercise of the others. Further,
 the remedies and penalties prescribed in this Act shall be in addition to
 any other remedies and penalties afforded by any other law or regulation.
 (g) REMOVAL COSTS AND LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES- Notwithstanding any other
 provision of law, if any area of the Coastal Plain has been or is
 being polluted by discharges of oil or hazardous or toxic substances
 from exploration, development, or production of oil or gas or related
 activities, conducted by, or on behalf of, a responsible party, and if
 the pollution has damaged or is damaging fish or wildlife, their habitat,
 or the environment of the Coastal Plain, or if such pollution is causing
 a substantial threat of damaging those fish or wildlife, their habitat,
 or the environment of the Coastal Plain, the responsible party shall be
 jointly, severally, and strictly liable for the removal costs and damages
 specified in this subsection that arise directly out of or directly result
 from pollution that has damaged, or is damaging or is causing substantial
 threat of damaging fish or wildlife, their habitat, or the environment of
 the Coastal Plain. The Secretary shall make a determination with respect to
 such liability after notice to the responsible party and an opportunity for
 hearing. Upon failure of the responsible party adequately to control and
 remove the pollutant or threat, the Secretary, in cooperation with other
 Federal, State, or local agencies, or in cooperation with the responsible
 party, or both, shall have the right to accomplish the control and removal
 at the expense of the responsible party. Funds contained in the Coastal
 Plain Liability and Reclamation Fund, provided for by section 402 of this
 Act, may be used to accomplish such control and removal until such time as
 sufficient funds can be recovered from the responsible party. The removal
 costs and damages referred to in this subsection are the following--
 (1) all necessary removal costs as determined by the Secretary;
 (2) damages for injury to, destruction of, loss of, and reclamation of
 natural resources, including the reasonable costs of assessing such injury,
 destruction, loss, or reclamation; and
 (3) damages for economic loss resulting from injury to, or destruction of,
 real or personal property or natural resources, and loss of subsistence
 use of natural resources by local residents.
 SEC. 215. EXPEDITED JUDICIAL REVIEW- Any complaint filed seeking judicial
 review of an action of the Secretary in promulgating any regulation under
 this Act may be filed only in the United States Court of Appeals for the
 District of Columbia, and such complaint shall be filed within ninety days
 from the date of such promulgation, or after such date if such complaint
 is based solely on grounds arising after such ninetieth day, in which case
 the complaint must be filed within ninety days after the complainant knew or
 reasonably should have known of the grounds for the complaint. Any complaint
 seeking judicial review of any other actions of the Secretary under this
 Act may be filed in any appropriate district court of the United States,
 and such complaint must be filed within ninety days from the date of the
 action being challenged, or after such date if such complaint is based
 solely on grounds arising after such ninetieth day, in which case the
 complaint must be filed within ninety days after the complainant knew or
 reasonably should have known of the grounds for the complaint.
 SEC. 216. ANNUAL REPORT TO CONGRESS- On March 1 of each year following
 the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall
 prepare and submit to the Congress an annual report on the leasing program
 authorized by this Act.
 SEC. 217. PROPERTY INTERESTS OF THE INUPIAT ESKIMO PEOPLE- The prohibitions
 and limitations contained in section 1003 of Alaska National Interest
 Lands Conservation Act of 1980 (16 U.S.C. 3143), insofar as they have
 application to the subsurface property interests owned by the Inupiat
 Eskimo people within and adjacent to the Coastal Plain, are repealed. No
 surface disturbance in support of oil or gas development or production
 involving such subsurface property interests shall be authorized prior to
 publication of final regulations issued pursuant to this Act which establish
 environmental stipulations, terms, and conditions for oil and gas leasing
 on the Coastal Plain. The substantive provisions of such environmental
 stipulations, terms, and conditions shall apply to the development of all
 subsurface property interests owned by the Inupiat Eskimo people within
 and adjacent to the Coastal Plain.
TITLE III--COASTAL PLAIN DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
 SEC. 301. NO SIGNIFICANT ADVERSE EFFECT STANDARD TO GOVERN AUTHORIZED
 COASTAL PLAIN ACTIVITIES- The Secretary shall administer the provisions
 of this Act through regulations, lease terms, conditions, restrictions,
 prohibitions, stipulations, and other provisions that ensure the oil and
 gas exploration, development, and production activities on the Coastal
 Plain will result in no significant adverse effect on fish and wildlife,
 their habitat, and the environment, and that shall require the application
 of the best commercially available technology for oil and gas exploration,
 development, and production, on all new exploration, development, and
 production operations, and whenever practicable, on existing operations.
 SEC. 302. SADLEROCHIT SPRING SPECIAL AREA- (a)(1) The Sadlerochit Spring
 area, comprising approximately four thousand acres as depicted on the map
 referenced in section 102 of this Act, is hereby designated to be a Special
 Area. Such Special Area shall be managed so as to protect and preserve
 the area's unique and diverse character including its fish, wildlife,
 and subsistence resource values.
 (2) Pursuant to subsection (d) of section 203 of this Act, the Secretary
 may exclude the Sadlerochit Spring Special Area from leasing.
 (3) In the event that the Secretary leases the Sadlerochit Spring Special
 Area, or any part thereof, for purposes of oil and gas exploration,
 development, production, and related activities, there shall be no surface
 occupancy of the lands comprising the Special Area.
 (b) The Secretary is authorized to designate other areas of the Coastal
 Plain as Special Areas if the Secretary determines that they are of unique
 character and interest so as to require such special protection. The
 Secretary shall notify the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of
 the United States Senate and the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs
 of the United States House of Representatives of the Secretary's intent to
 designate such areas ninety days in advance of making such designations. Any
 such areas designated as Special Areas shall be managed in accordance with
 the standards set forth in subsection (a) of this section.
 SEC. 303. FACILITY CONSOLIDATION PLANNING- (a) The Secretary shall, after
 providing for public notice and comment, prepare and update periodically a
 plan to govern, guide, and direct the siting and construction of facilities
 for the exploration, development, production, and transportation of Coastal
 Plain oil and gas resources. This plan shall have the following objectives--
 (1) avoiding unnecessary duplication of facilities and activities;
 (2) encouraging consolidation of common facilities and activities;
 (3) locating or confining facilities and activities to areas which will
 minimize impact on fish and wildlife, their habitat, and the environment;
 (4) utilizing existing facilities wherever practicable; and
 (5) enhancing compatibility between wildlife values and development
 activities.
 (b) The plan prepared under this section shall supplement any comprehensive
 conservation plan prepared pursuant to the requirements of section 304(g) of
 the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act of 1980 (94 Stat. 2394).
 SEC. 304. RIGHTS-OF-WAY ACROSS THE COASTAL PLAIN- Notwithstanding title XI of
 the Alaska National Interests Lands Conservation Act of 1980 (16 U.S.C. 3161
 et seq.), the Secretary is authorized to grant under section 28 of the
 Mineral Leasing Act (30 U.S.C. 185) rights-of-way and easements across the
 Coastal Plain for the transportation of oil and gas under such terms and
 conditions as may be necessary so as not to result in a significant adverse
 effect on the fish and wildlife, their habitat, and the environment of the
 Coastal Plain. Such terms and conditions shall include requirements that
 facilities be sited or modified so as to avoid unnecessary duplication of
 roads and pipelines. The comprehensive oil and gas leasing and development
 regulations issued pursuant to this Act shall include provisions regarding
 the granting of rights-of-way across the Coastal Plain.
ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS
 SEC. 305. (a) RESPONSIBILITY OF THE SECRETARY- The Secretary shall diligently
 enforce all regulations, lease terms, conditions, restrictions, prohibitions,
 and stipulations promulgated pursuant to this Act.
 (b) RESPONSIBILITIES OF HOLDERS OF LEASE- It shall be the responsibility
 of any holder of a lease under this Act to--
 (1) maintain all operations within such lease area in compliance with
 regulations intended to protect persons and property on, and fish and
 wildlife, their habitat, and the environment of, the Coastal Plain; and
 (2) allow prompt access at the site of any operations subject to regulation
 under this Act to any appropriate Federal or State inspector, and to provide
 such documents and records which are pertinent to occupational or public
 health, safety, or environmental protection, as may be requested.
 (c) ONSITE INSPECTION OF FACILITIES- The Secretary shall promulgate
 regulations to provide for--
 (1) scheduled onsite inspection by the Secretary, at least twice a year,
 of each facility on the Coastal Plain which is subject to any environmental
 or safety regulation promulgated pursuant to this Act or such provisions
 contained in any lease issued pursuant to this Act to assure compliance
 with such environmental or safety regulations; and
 (2) periodic onsite inspection by the Secretary at least once a year without
 advance notice to the operator of such facility to assure compliance with
 all environmental or safety regulations.
TITLE IV--LAND RECLAMATION AND RECLAMATION LIABILITY FUND
 SEC. 401. LAND RECLAMATION- The holder of a lease or leases on lands within
 the Coastal Plain shall be fully responsible and liable for the reclamation
 of lands within the Coastal Plain and any other Federal lands adversely
 affected in connection with exploration, development, or transportation
 activities on a lease within the Coastal Plain. The holder of a lease
 shall also be responsible for conducting any land reclamation required as
 a result of activities conducted on the lease by any of the lease holder's
 subcontractors or agents. The holder of a lease may not delegate or convey,
 by contract or otherwise, this responsibility and liability to another
 party without the express written approval of the Secretary.
 SEC. 402. STANDARD TO GOVERN LAND RECLAMATION- The standard to
 govern the reclamation of lands required to be reclaimed under this
 Act, following their temporary disturbance or upon the conclusion of
 their use or prolonged commercial production of oil and gas and related
 activities, shall be reclamation and restoration to a condition as closely
 approximating the original condition of such lands as is feasible using
 the best commercially-available technology. Reclamation of lands shall
 be conducted in a manner that will not itself impair or cause significant
 adverse effects on fish or wildlife, their habitat, or the environment.
 SEC. 403. COASTAL PLAIN LIABILITY AND RECLAMATION FUND- (a) Within six
 months of a commercial discovery within the Coastal Plain, the Coastal
 Plain Liability and Reclamation Fund (the `Reclamation Fund') is hereby
 directed to be established as a non-profit corporate entity under the laws
 of Alaska that may sue and be sued in its own name. The Reclamation Fund
 shall be established and administered by the holder of the trans-Alaska
 pipeline right-of-way under regulations prescribed by the Secretary. The
 Reclamation Fund shall be subject to an annual audit by the Comptroller
 General, and a copy of the audit shall be submitted to the Congress.
 (b) The operator of the trans-Alaska pipeline shall collect from the owner
 of any commercially-produced crude oil or natural gas liquids from the
 Coastal Plain at the time and point where such crude oil first enters the
 trans-Alaska pipeline a fee of five cents per barrel. The collection of the
 fee shall cease when $50,000,000 has been accumulated in the Reclamation
 Fund, and it shall be resumed at any time that the accumulation of revenue
 in the Reclamation Fund falls below $45,000,000.
 (c) All revenues collected under subsection (b) shall be paid into the
 Reclamation Fund. The reasonable costs of administration of the Reclamation
 Fund shall be paid from the revenues in the Reclamation Fund. All sums
 not needed for administration of the Reclamation Fund or making authorized
 payments out of the Fund shall be invested prudently in income-producing
 securities approved by the Secretary. Income from such securities shall
 be added to the principal of the Reclamation Fund.
 (d) The revenues in the Reclamation Fund shall be available, with the
 approval of the Secretary, for the following purposes--
 (1) to compensate promptly any person or entity, public or private, for
 any damages caused by oil and gas exploration, development and production
 activities on or in the vicinity of the Coastal Plain;
 (2) to reclaim any area of the Coastal Plain not reclaimed in accordance
 with the standard set forth in section 402 of this Act, by the operator
 or the holder of a lease or leases;
 (3) up to $5,000,000.00 annually to reclaim and restore any area of
 the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge or other North Slope Federal lands
 previously disturbed by development activities and not properly reclaimed
 and restored by the party conducting the development;
 (4) up to $2,000,000 annually to the Director of the Fish and Wildlife
 Service to monitor and conduct research on fish and wildlife species which
 utilize the land and water resources of the Coastal Plain; and
 (5) to reclaim at the conclusion of the period of exploration, development
 and production, any area of the Coastal Plain and related lands which have
 not been properly reclaimed by the operator or lease holder.
 (e) The United States shall have legal recourse against any party or
 entity who is responsible for the reclamation of any area within the
 Coastal Plain, to recover any funds expended under paragraphs (1), (2),
 (3) and (5) of this subsection due to a failure by the responsible party
 to reclaim such area as required by this Act: Provided, That such right
 of recovery shall not be available against any Alaska Natives conducting
 traditional subsistence use activities. Any funds so recovered shall be
 deposited in the Reclamation Fund.
 (f) Any moneys remaining in the Reclamation Fund fifty years after the
 period of active oil and gas exploration, development, production and
 reclamation has been concluded in the Coastal Plain shall be paid into
 the Migratory Bird Conservation Fund.
TITLE V--DISPOSITION OF OIL AND GAS REVENUES
 SEC. 501. DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES- Notwithstanding any other provision
 of law, all revenues received from competitive bids, sales, bonuses,
 royalties, rents, fees, interest charges or other income derived from
 the leasing of oil and gas resources within the Arctic National Refuge,
 Alaska shall be distributed as follows:
 (a) 50 per centum to the State of Alaska;
 (b) 25 per centum deposited into the Land and Water Conservation Fund;
 (c) 15 per centum to the Secretary to be used, under such terms and
 conditions as the Secretary may prescribe, for the acquisition, protection,
 creation, and restoration of wetlands in the United States; and
 (d) 10 per centum to miscellaneous receipts in the Treasury.
 SEC. 502. LAND AND WATER CONSERVATION FUND- (a)(1) Moneys deposited into the
 Land and Water Conservation Fund (`the Fund') pursuant to section 501 shall
 be credited to a special account within the Fund. In addition, beginning
 the first full fiscal year after funds are credited to the special account,
 there shall also be credited to the special account an amount equal to the
 average annual appropriation from the Fund for the five years preceding the
 date of the initial crediting of funds pursuant to section 501(b). These
 funds shall be derived from those moneys comprising the authorized but
 unappropriated balance of the Fund.
 (2) Not more than 25 per centum of the funds deposited into the special
 account shall be available for State purposes pursuant to section 6 of
 the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act (16 U.S.C. 460l-8). The balance
 of the funds in the special account shall be available, without further
 appropriation, for Federal purposes as provided in section 7 of that Act
 (16 U.S.C. 460l-9) and shall be allocated in accordance with this section.
 (b)(1) At the time of the submission of the President's budget, each
 Federal land managing agency eligible to receive moneys from the Fund
 shall provide the Committee on Appropriations of the United States House
 of Representatives and the United States Senate with a list, in descending
 order of priority, of land acquisition projects which have been authorized
 by law (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `priority list').
 (2) The priority lists shall be prepared by the Directors of the Bureau
 of Land Management, National Park Service, Fish and Wildlife Service,
 Department of the Interior, and the Chief of the Forest Service, United
 States Department of Agriculture, and shall reflect their best professional
 judgment regarding the land acquisition priorities of such bureau or agency.
 (3) In preparing such lists the following factors shall be considered:
 the amount of money anticipated to be made available in any one year; the
 availability of land appraisal and other information necessary to complete
 the acquisition in a timely manner; the potential adverse impacts on the
 park, wilderness, wildlife refuge or other such unit which might result
 if the acquisition is not undertaken; and such other factors as the land
 managers deem appropriate.
 (c)(1) The Appropriations Committees shall allocate the funds from the
 special account in accordance with the priority lists submitted pursuant to
 this section unless such lists are specifically modified in appropriations
 Acts or reports accompanying such Acts.
 (2) The Secretary of the Treasury shall notify the Appropriations Committees
 of the Congress on an annual basis as to the amounts available for allocation
 within the special account.
 (3) In allocating funds from the special account among land managing
 agencies, the Appropriations Committee shall ensure that each agency
 receives a fair and equitable share in accordance with land acquisition
 needs, congressional directives, and historical patterns of distribution
 of the fund: Provided, That no agency shall receive more than 50 per centum
 of the funds available from the special account in any one year.
 (d) In the event that the Appropriations Committees fail to allocate the
 funds from the special account, the Secretary of the Treasury is authorized
 and directed to make such funds directly available to the land managing
 agencies to be used solely for land acquisition projects on the respective
 priority lists in accordance with the following formula:
 (1) 45 per centum to the Fish and Wildlife Service;
 (2) 40 per centum to the National Park Service;
 (3) 10 per centum to the Forest Service; and
 (4) 5 per centum to the Bureau of Land Management.
 SEC. 503. JUDICIAL REVIEW AND NON-SEVERABILITY- (a) Notwithstanding the
 provisions of section 215 of this Act, any legal action, including an
 action for declaratory judgment, to challenge the determination made
 in section 501(a) of this Act of the State of Alaska's share of oil and
 gas revenues shall be assigned for hearing and completed at the earliest
 possible date, shall, to the greatest extent practicable, take precedence
 over all other matters pending on the docket of the court at that time,
 and shall be expedited in every way by such court. Any such action shall
 be brought within ninety days of enactment of this Act in an appropriate
 United States district court. Such action shall be barred unless a complaint
 is filed within the time specified. Any review of an interlocutory or final
 judgment, decree, or order of the United States district court in such action
 may be had only upon direct appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States.
 (b) Nothing in this section shall be construed to grant causes of action
 to any person or to waive any defenses which may be available to the
 United States.
 (c) If any action is brought in accordance with subsection (a), no lease
 sale shall occur under section 203 of this Act until a final nonappealable
 decision has been issued in any such action.
 (d) If the revenue sharing provision of section 501(a) of this Act is held
 invalid, the remainder of this Act shall be void.