S 582 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 582
To notify workers who are at risk of occupational disease in order to establish
a system for identifying and preventing illness and death of such workers,
and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
March 15 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. METZENBAUM (for himself, Mr. KENNEDY, Mr. PELL, Mr. DODD, Mr. SIMON,
Mr. HARKIN, Mr. ADAMS, Ms. MIKULSKI, Mr. MITCHELL, Mr. DASCHLE, Mr. GORE,
Mr. INOUYE, Mr. MOYNIHAN, Mr. RIEGLE, Mr. CRANSTON, Mr. WIRTH, Mr. BURDICK,
Mr. KERRY, Mr. LAUTENBERG, Mr. SARBANES, and Mr. CONRAD) introduced the
following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Labor
and Human Resources
A BILL
To notify workers who are at risk of occupational disease in order to establish
a system for identifying and preventing illness and death of such workers,
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `High Risk Occupational
 Disease Notification and Prevention Act'.
 (b) Table of Contents-
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Findings and purpose.
Sec. 3. Definitions.
Sec. 4. Risk Assessment Board.
Sec. 5. Employee notification and counseling.
Sec. 6. Means of employee notification.
Sec. 7. Occupational and environmental health centers.
Sec. 8. Research, training, and education.
Sec. 9. Employee medical monitoring; discrimination against employees;
confidentiality.
Sec. 10. Enforcement authority.
Sec. 11. Reports to Congress.
Sec. 12. Subjects of Federal agency studies.
Sec. 13. Regulations.
Sec. 14. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 15. Effective date.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
 (a) FINDINGS- Congress finds that--
 (1) during the past 2 decades, considerable scientific progress has been
 made in--
 (A) the identification of hazardous substances, agents, and processes;
 (B) the identification of medical problems associated with exposure to
 such substances, agents, and processes; and
 (C) the diagnosis and treatment of diseases related to such exposure;
 (2) progress also has been made in controlling the exposure of individuals
 to such substances, agents, and processes;
 (3) despite the progress described in paragraphs (1) and (2), there are
 significant gaps in efforts to promote the health and safety of individuals
 exposed to such substances, agents, and processes;
 (4) potentially harmful substances, physical agents, and processes are in
 wide industrial and commercial use in the United States;
 (5) a significant number of workers suffer disability or death or both wholly
 or partially as a result of being exposed to occupational health hazards;
 (6) diseases caused by exposure to occupational health hazards constitute
 a substantial burden on interstate commerce and have an adverse effect on
 the public welfare;
 (7) workers have a basic and fundamental right to know that they have been
 exposed to an occupational health hazard and are at risk of contracting
 an occupational disease;
 (8) there is a period of time between exposure and the onset of disease
 when it often is possible to intervene medically in the biological process
 of disease either to prevent or, by early detection, successfully treat
 many disease conditions;
 (9) social and family services that reinforce health-promoting behavior
 can reduce the risk of contracting an occupational disease;
 (10) by means of established epidemiological, clinical, and toxicological
 studies, it is possible to define and identify specific worker populations
 at risk of contracting occupational diseases;
 (11) there is no established national program for identifying, notifying,
 counseling, and medically monitoring worker populations at risk of
 occupational diseases;
 (12) there is a lack of adequately trained professionals, as well as
 appropriately staffed and equipped health facilities, to recognize and
 diagnose occupational diseases;
 (13) there is a need for increased research to identify and monitor worker
 populations at risk of occupational diseases; and
 (14) through prevention and early detection of occupational disease the
 staggering costs of medical treatment and care in the United States can
 be substantially reduced.
 (b) PURPOSE- It is the purpose of this Act--
 (1) to establish a Federal program to notify individual employees within
 populations at risk of occupationally induced disease that they are at
 risk because of exposure to an occupational health hazard, and to counsel
 them appropriately;
 (2) to authorize and direct the certification of health facilities that
 have a primary purpose of educating, training, and advising physicians,
 nurses, and other professionals in local communities throughout the United
 States to recognize, diagnose, and treat occupational disease;
 (3) to expand Federal research and education efforts to improve means
 of identifying and monitoring worker populations at risk of occupational
 disease; and
 (4) to establish a set of protections prohibiting discrimination against
 employees on the basis of identification and notification of occupational
 disease risk.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 Except as otherwise provided in this Act, for the purpose of this Act:
 (1) BOARD- The term `Board' means the Risk Assessment Board established
 under section 4(a).
 (2) COMMERCE- The term `commerce' means trade, traffic, commerce,
 transportation, or communication among the several States, or between a
 State and any place outside thereof, or within the District of Columbia,
 or a possession of the United States (other than the Trust Territory of
 the Pacific Islands), or between points in the same State but through a
 point outside thereof.
 (3) EMPLOYEE- The term `employee' means--
 (A) an employee of an employer who is employed in a business of the employer
 that affects commerce; or
 (B) a former employee who--
 (i) was formerly employed by an employer in a business of the employer
 that at the time of employment affected commerce; and
 (ii) as to whom any Federal agency maintains records pertaining to work
 history, or the employer maintains personnel records, medical records,
 or exposure records.
 (4) EMPLOYER- The term `employer' means a person engaged in a business
 affecting commerce who has employees, including the United States or any
 State or political subdivision of a State.
 (5) HAZARD COMMUNICATION STANDARD- The term `hazard communication standard'
 means the standard contained in section 1910.1200 of title 29 of the Code
 of Federal Regulations in effect on January 1, 1987.
 (6) INSTITUTE- The term `Institute' means the National Institute for
 Occupational Safety and Health.
 (7) MEDICAL MONITORING- The term `medical monitoring' means periodic
 examinations or laboratory tests to diagnose or aid in the diagnosis of
 a disease that has been the subject of a notice.
 (8) OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH HAZARD- The term `occupational health hazard' means
 a chemical, physical, or biological agent, generated by or integral to the
 work process and found in the workplace, or an industrial or commercial
 process found in the workplace, for which there is statistically significant
 evidence (based on clinical or epidemiologic study conducted in accordance
 with established scientific principles) that chronic health effects have
 occurred in persons exposed to such agent or process. The term includes a
 chemical that is a carcinogen, toxic or highly toxic agent, reproductive
 toxin (including an agent that may cause a miscarriage or birth defect),
 irritant, corrosive, sensitizer, hepatotoxin, nephrotoxin, neurotoxin,
 an agent that acts on the hematopoietic system, and an agent that damages
 a lung, skin, eye, or mucous membrane.
 (9) PERSON- The term `person' means one or more individuals, partnerships,
 associations, corporations, business trusts, legal representatives, or
 any organized group of persons.
 (10) POPULATION AT RISK OF DISEASE- The term `population at risk of disease'
 means a class or category of employees--
 (A) exposed to an occupational health hazard under working conditions
 (such as concentrations of exposure, or durations of exposure, or both)
 comparable to the clinical or epidemiologic data referred to in paragraph
 (8); and
 (B) identified and designated as a population at risk of disease by the
 Board pursuant to section 4(c).
 (11) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Health and
 Human Services.
SEC. 4. RISK ASSESSMENT BOARD.
 (a) Establishment-
 (1) IN GENERAL- There is established within the Department of Health and
 Human Services, the Risk Assessment Board.
 (2) MEMBERSHIP-
 (A) IN GENERAL- The Board shall consist of seven members. Each member shall
 be appointed by the Secretary from a list of three nominees provided by the
 National Academy of Sciences. In making appointments under this paragraph,
 the Secretary may request additional lists.
 (B) PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE EMPLOYEES- Four members of the Board shall be
 career or commissioned Public Health Service employees.
 (C) NON-PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE EMPLOYEES- Three members of the Board shall
 be appointed from among individuals who are not career or commissioned
 Public Health Service employees.
 (D) SPECIALISTS- The Board shall include two physicians specializing in
 occupational medicine, an epidemiologist, a toxicologist, an industrial
 hygienist, an occupational health nurse, and an occupational biostatistician.
 (3) TERM OF OFFICE-
 (A) PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE MEMBERS- The terms of members appointed under
 paragraph (2)(B) shall be 5 years, except that of the members first
 appointed--
 (i) 1 member shall be appointed for 2 years;
 (ii) 1 member shall be appointed for 3 years;
 (iii) 1 member shall be appointed for 4 years; and
 (iv) 1 member shall be appointed for 5 years.
 (B) OTHER MEMBERS- The terms of members appointed under paragraph (2)(C)
 shall be 5 years, except that of the members first appointed--
 (i) 1 member shall be appointed for 1 year;
 (ii) 1 member shall be appointed for 3 years; and
 (iii) 1 member shall be appointed for 5 years.
 (4) CHAIRMAN- The Secretary shall designate 1 member to serve as Chairman
 of the Board.
 (5) VACANCIES- Any member appointed to fill a vacancy in the Board that
 occurs prior to the expiration of a term shall be appointed to serve for
 the remainder of that term.
 (6) REPORTING- The Board shall report to the Secretary through the Director
 of the Institute.
 (7) STAFF- The Secretary shall provide full-time staff personnel necessary
 to carry out the functions of the Board.
 (8) COMPENSATION- Section 5316 of title 5, United States Code, is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `Members, Risk Assessment Board, Department of Health and Human Services
 (7).'.
 (b) INDEPENDENCE OF BOARD- In the exercise of its functions, powers, and
 duties, the Board shall be independent of the Secretary and the other
 offices and officers of the Department unless otherwise specifically
 provided in this Act.
 (c) Functions of Board-
 (1) In general-
 (A) DUTIES- The Board shall--
 (i) review pertinent medical and other scientific studies and reports
 concerning the incidence of disease associated with exposure to occupational
 health hazards;
 (ii) identify and designate from the review, and from field assessments
 where appropriate, those populations at risk of disease that should
 receive notification pursuant to this Act, including the size, nature,
 and composition of the populations to be notified;
 (iii) develop an appropriate form and method of notification that will be
 used by the Secretary, or agents of the Secretary described under section 6,
 to notify the designated populations at risk of disease; and
 (iv) determine the appropriate type (if any) of medical monitoring or
 beneficial health counseling, or both, for the disease associated with
 the risk, which shall be described in the notification under section 5(b)(6).
 (B) PANEL OF EXPERTS- The Board may appoint an expert or a panel of experts
 on the particular disease that is the subject of the notice. The report
 of such expert or panel on the Board's recommendation shall be included
 in the hearing record.
 (C) INFORMATION REQUESTS- The Board, consistent with section 552a of
 title 5, United States Code, may request information from any Federal
 agency or other government or private organization for the purpose of
 obtaining studies and reports conducted or initiated with respect to
 actual or potential occupational health hazards. The information shall be
 furnished consistent with provisions for Federal access set forth under
 the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 651 et seq.) and
 the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 (30 U.S.C. 801 et seq.),
 and regulations promulgated pursuant to such Acts.
 (2) IDENTIFICATION OF POPULATIONS AT RISK OF DISEASE- In identifying
 populations at risk of disease, the Board shall consider the following
 factors based on the best available scientific evidence--
 (A) the extent of clinical and epidemiologic evidence that specific
 substances, agents, or processes may be a causal factor in the etiology
 of chronic illnesses or long-latency diseases among employees exposed
 to such substances, agents, or processes in specific working conditions
 (such as concentration of exposure, or durations of exposure, or both);
 (B) the extent of supporting evidence from clinical, epidemiologic, or
 toxicologic studies that specific substances, agents, or processes may
 be a causal factor in the etiology of chronic illnesses or long-latency
 diseases among individuals exposed to such substances, agents, or processes;
 (C) the employees involved in particular industrial classifications and
 job categories who are or have been exposed to such substances, agents, or
 processes under working conditions (such as concentrations, or durations,
 or both) that may be a causal factor in the etiology of the illnesses
 or diseases;
 (D) the extent of the increased risk of illness or disease created by
 occupational health hazards alone or in combination with such factors as
 smoking and diet; and
 (E) other medical, health, and epidemiological factors, including
 consistency of association, specificity of association, strength of
 association, dose-response relationships, biological plausibility, temporal
 relationships, statistical significance, and the health consequences of
 notifying or failing to notify a population at risk.
 (3) Designation of identified populations for notification-
 (A) DESIGNATION- In designating populations at risk of disease for
 notification, the Board shall consider the extent to which particular
 populations may derive health benefits from receipt of notification. The
 Board shall undertake as its first priority to designate populations likely
 to benefit from medical monitoring or health counseling.
 (B) POSSIBLE FACTORS- In making the designation required by this paragraph,
 the Board may consider--
 (i) exposures for which there exists a permanent standard promulgated
 under section 6(b)(5) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970
 (29 U.S.C. 655(b)(5));
 (ii) the extent of medical monitoring already available to employee
 populations covered by the permanent standards;
 (iii) the need to notify former employees as well as current employees; and
 (iv) the extent to which notification may prevent miscarriages and birth
 defects.
 (C) NOTIFICATION- The Board, in making determinations, and the Institute,
 in giving or coordinating notification, shall notify as many employees
 at risk of disease as appropriations and the best available scientific
 evidence permit. The Secretary shall include a detailed explanation of
 the reasons for the notification determinations in the report submitted
 pursuant to section 11(b).
 (4) DETERMINATION- If the Board determines that a class or category of
 employees is a population at risk of disease to be notified pursuant to
 this Act, the Board shall--
 (A) make such a determination pursuant to subsection (d); and
 (B) within 10 days of making such a determination, transmit to the Secretary
 the classes or categories of employees to be notified under section 5.
 (d) Procedures-
 (1) NOTICE OF PROPOSED DETERMINATION- For each population designated for
 notification, the Board shall issue a notice of proposed determination.
 (2) CONTENTS OF NOTICE- The notice required by paragraph (1) shall--
 (A) be published in the Federal Register,
 (B) set forth which classes or categories of employees are being considered
 for inclusion as an employee population to be notified, and a concise
 statement of the basis for their inclusion and the contents of the proposed
 notice as specified in section 5(b) (other than subparagraphs (C) and (F)
 of section 5(b)(6));
 (C) provide for the public to submit written views on the proposed
 determination within 60 days of the notice; and
 (D) provide for a hearing within 45 days of the notice at which the public
 may express views on the proposed determination of the Board.
 (3) FINAL DETERMINATION- The Board shall issue a final determination within
 60 days after the hearing based on the record developed pursuant to paragraph
 (2). The final determination shall be deemed to be a final agency action.
 (4) EXTENSION- The Board may, in exceptional circumstances and for good
 cause shown, extend the time between the issuance of the notice described
 in paragraph (2), and the issuance of a final determination under paragraph
 (3), except that the extension may not exceed 150 days for the total period
 of time beginning with the issuance of the notice.
 (5) ACTION- Any aggrieved person may bring a civil action for mandamus in
 the appropriate United States district court if the final agency action
 is not completed within 105 days or 150 days, as the case may be.
 (e) BOARD AGENDA- Within 6 months after the Board is appointed and every
 6 months thereafter, the Board shall publish in the Federal Register an
 agenda listing the chemical, physical, or biological agents and industrial
 or commercial processes that are under review by the Board or that the
 Board anticipates may, within the ensuing 6 months, be reviewed by the
 Board to decide whether to issue a notice of proposed determination. For
 each item on the agenda, the Board shall, if available, identify (1)
 the population to be evaluated with respect to the agent or process, and
 (2) the name and telephone number of a knowledgeable agency official. The
 Board may at any time publish a supplement to an agenda adding agents or
 processes that the Board anticipates will be subject to review prior to
 the next regularly scheduled publication of an agenda.
 (f) BOARD REVIEW- With respect to a final determination by the Board,
 not later than 5 years after the initial issuance of notification and not
 later than each 5 years thereafter, the Board shall review--
 (1) new scientific data relevant to the determination in order to assess
 the appropriateness and accuracy of the notice; and
 (2) the appropriateness of medical monitoring practices under section 9.
SEC. 5. EMPLOYEE NOTIFICATION AND COUNSELING.
 (a) NOTIFICATION OF POPULATION AT RISK- On a determination by the Board
 that a given class or category of employees is a population at risk of
 disease to be notified pursuant to this Act, the Secretary shall make every
 reasonable effort to ensure that each individual within such population is
 notified of the risk. The Secretary, through the Institute, shall direct
 the notification required by this section.
 (b) CONTENTS OF NOTIFICATION- The notification shall include:
 (1) HAZARD- An identification of the occupational health hazard, including
 the name, composition, and properties of known chemical agents.
 (2) DISEASES- The disease or diseases associated with exposure to the
 occupational health hazard, and the fact that such association pertains
 to classes or categories of employees.
 (3) EXTENT OF THE RISK- The extent of the risk of such disease or diseases
 for the population at risk compared to the population at large.
 (4) LATENCY PERIODS- Any known latency periods from the time of exposure
 to the time of clinical manifestation of a disease.
 (5) POSSIBLE CONTRIBUTING FACTORS- Any known information concerning the
 extent of increased risk of illness or disease associated with exposure
 to the occupational health hazard in combination with exposure to
 nonoccupational factors.
 (6) COUNSELING- Counseling information appropriate to the nature of the
 risk, including--
 (A) the advisability of initiating a personal medical monitoring program;
 (B) the most appropriate type or types of medical monitoring or beneficial
 health counseling or both for the disease associated with the risk;
 (C) the name and address of the nearest occupational and environmental
 health center certified under this Act;
 (D) the protections for notified employees, as established under section 9;
 (E) employer responsibilities with respect to medical monitoring for
 notified employees, as established under section 9; and
 (F) the telephone number of the hot line established under subsection (c).
 (c) TELEPHONE INFORMATION- The Institute shall establish a toll-free long
 distance telephone `hot line' for employees notified under this section
 or their personal physicians, for the purpose of providing additional
 medical and scientific information concerning the nature of the risk and
 its associated disease.
 (d) DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION- The Institute, after consultation with
 the Board, shall prepare and distribute other medical and health promotion
 material and information on any risk subject to notification under this
 section and its associated disease as the Institute and the Board consider
 appropriate.
 (e) ACCESS TO INFORMATION- In carrying out the notification responsibilities
 under this section, the Secretary, consistent with section 552a of title 5,
 United States Code, may request information from--
 (1) any Federal agency, or State or political subdivision of a State,
 solely for the purpose of obtaining names, addresses, and work histories
 of employees subject to notification under this section;
 (2) any employer insofar as Federal access already is provided for under
 the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 651 et seq.) and
 the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 (30 U.S.C. 801 et seq.),
 and regulations promulgated pursuant to such Acts; and
 (3) any employer insofar as such information is maintained by such employer
 under a Federal or State law concerning occupational safety and health
 matters.
 (f) LIABILITY- The United States or any agency or employee thereof (including
 any employer or government acting pursuant to section 6) shall not be
 subjected to suit or judicial or nonjudicial proceedings of any kind that
 seek monetary damages with respect to or arising out of any act or omission
 performed pursuant to this Act, including the failure to perform any act
 or omission pursuant to this Act. This subsection shall not apply to--
 (1) an employee of the United States for any act or omission that is a
 knowing and deliberate violation of a provision of the Act to the extent
 that Federal law otherwise authorizes a suit against that individual for
 monetary damages; and
 (2) an employer or government acting pursuant to section 6, for any act or
 omission that is a knowing or reckless violation of a provision of the Act.
 (g) Judicial Review-
 (1) PETITION- Any person adversely affected or aggrieved by a determination
 of the Board under this Act is entitled to judicial review of the
 determination in the United States Court of Appeals wherein such person
 resides or has the principal place of business of the person or in the
 United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia circuit on
 a petition filed in such court. A person may be adversely affected or
 aggrieved by one or more of the following Board determinations:
 (A) The determination that an agent or process is or is not an occupational
 health hazard.
 (B) The determination of the class or category of employees that is a
 population at risk of disease.
 (C) The determination as to what constitutes appropriate medical monitoring
 or beneficial counseling for the designated population at risk.
Any petition filed pursuant to this section shall be filed within 30 days
after such determination by the Board. On the filing of a petition, the
Secretary shall certify the hearing record.
 (2) REVIEW- The court shall review the determination of the Board based
 on the hearing record.
 (3) JUDICIAL ACTION- The court shall set aside the determination of the
 Board if the determination is found to be--
 (A) arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of discretion;
 (B) contrary to constitutional right, power, privilege, or immunity;
 (C) in excess of statutory jurisdiction, authority, or limitations;
 (D) without observance of procedure required by law; or
 (E) unsupported by substantial evidence on the record.
 (4) STAY- The commencement of proceedings under this subsection shall not
 operate as a stay of the requirement on the Secretary to notify employees
 unless the court specifically orders a stay based on a determination by the
 court that the complaining party is highly likely to succeed on the merits.
SEC. 6. MEANS OF EMPLOYEE NOTIFICATION.
 (a) RESPONSIBILITY OF SECRETARY- Except as otherwise provided in this
 section, the Secretary shall be responsible for notifying employees at
 risk of disease, as determined by the Board.
 (b) Cooperation With Private Employers and State and Local Governments-
 (1) IN GENERAL- In carrying out notification responsibilities under
 subsection (a), the Secretary is encouraged to cooperate to the extent
 practicable with private employers and State and local governments.
 (2) Certification of private employers or state or local governments-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Upon request by a private employer or a State or local
 government, the Secretary may certify the private employer or State
 or local government to conduct notification of its current or former
 employees, or both, who are members of populations determined to be at
 risk. Such certification shall require inclusion in the notification of
 the information described in section 5(b) and shall be in accordance with
 regulations issued by the Secretary.
 (B) ADMINISTRATION- No private employer or State or local government
 certified under this paragraph may receive payment for the cost of such
 notification from the United States, or have a right of access to Federal
 records for the purposes of carrying out the notification.
 (C) FORM OF NOTIFICATION- The form of notification adopted by a private
 employer or State or local government shall conform, to the maximum
 extent practicable, to a model notification form issued by the Board under
 section 4(c).
 (c) EMPLOYEES NOT CURRENTLY EXPOSED-
 (1) IN GENERAL- In the case of former employees and employees for whom
 no exposure to the occupational health hazard occurred in the course of
 employment with their current employer as of the time the notice was issued,
 the notification shall be transmitted to each employee in the designated
 population at risk of disease who was exposed to the occupational health
 hazard within 30 years prior to the date of notification.
 (2) INDIVIDUAL NOTIFICATION- Notification shall be on an individual basis,
 except that if individual notification is not reasonably possible, the
 notifying entity shall make use of public service announcements and other
 means of notification appropriate to reach the population at risk.
 (d) EMPLOYEES CURRENTLY EXPOSED-
 (1) IN GENERAL- In the case of employees for whom any exposure to the
 occupational health hazard occurred in the course of current employment,
 notification shall be transmitted to individual employees wherever
 reasonably possible.
 (2) LIMITING RULE- If individual notification is not reasonably possible,
 the notifying entity shall make use of public service announcements
 and other means of notification appropriate to reach the population at
 risk. Such means may include working with employers to post prominently
 notices as specified in section 5(b).
 (e) VARIANCES-
 (1) APPLICATION FOR VARIANCE- Within 30 days after the Board issues a final
 determination identifying a population at risk of disease for notification,
 an employer who employs or has employed employees within that population
 may apply to the Institute for a determination exempting the employer's
 employees from the population at risk, if the employer believes that,
 as a result of significant mitigating factors, the employer's employees
 are not members of a population at risk of disease. The application of
 the employer shall describe in detail the basis for the application.
 (2) HEARING- If the Institute concludes that any application raises an
 issue of material fact that is subject to reasonable dispute, the Institute,
 within 30 days after the receipt of an application, shall--
 (A) publish a notice so stating in the Federal Register; and
 (B) schedule a hearing on the disputed issues.
All applications for a variance with respect to any one population at risk
shall be consolidated in a single hearing.
 (3) EXEMPTION- During the pendency of any application before the Institute,
 the Secretary shall be exempted from the notification requirements of
 the final determination adopted by the Board with respect to any parties
 seeking a variance. Each such hearing before the Institute shall be
 completed within 60 days of the notice of hearing.
 (4) DECISION ON VARIANCE- Within 30 days after the close of the hearing, or,
 where no hearing is held, within 30 days of the receipt of an application,
 the Institute shall issue a decision granting a variance to any employer
 who has demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that the employees
 of the employer should not be included within the population at risk of
 disease. The Institute shall deny a variance to all other employers. In
 determining whether a variance should be granted as to any specific employee
 or group of employees to be notified, the Institute shall evaluate whether
 there are significant mitigating factors for such employee or employees,
 including work practices, health and safety programs, engineering controls,
 or other factors that are fundamentally different from the factors evidenced
 by the data relied on by the Board, that substantially eliminate the risk
 of developing the occupational disease under examination.
 (5) LIMITATION- No employer who has not applied for a variance may avail
 itself of any decision by the Institute granting a variance to some other
 employer. Determinations by the Board may not be challenged in any action
 brought pursuant to this subsection.
SEC. 7. OCCUPATIONAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH CENTERS.
 (a) SELECTION FROM AMONG EXISTING FACILITIES-
 (1) ESTABLISHMENT AND CERTIFICATION- Within 90 days after the effective
 date of this Act, the Secretary shall establish and certify 10 health
 centers. The Secretary shall select the 10 health centers from among the
 educational resource centers of the National Institute for Occupational
 Safety and Health and similar facilities of the National Institute for
 Environmental Health Sciences, the National Cancer Institute, and other
 private or governmental organizations designated by the Secretary. At
 a later date, the Secretary may establish and certify additional health
 centers from among the health care facilities described in this paragraph.
 (2) BASIS FOR SELECTION- In carrying out paragraph (1), the Secretary shall
 base selection on ability and experience in the recognition, diagnosis,
 and treatment of occupationally related diseases, capacity to offer training
 to physicians, nurses, and other professionals, and geographical proximity
 for designated populations.
 (b) FUNCTIONS OF CENTERS- A center shall--
 (1) provide education, training, and technical assistance to personal
 physicians and other professionals who serve employees notified under
 section 5; and
 (2) be capable, in the event that adequate facilities are not otherwise
 reasonably available, of providing diagnosis, treatment, and medical
 monitoring for employees notified under section 5.
SEC. 8. RESEARCH, TRAINING, AND EDUCATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) IMPROVED METHODS OF MONITORING AND IDENTIFICATION- The Institute shall
 conduct or provide for research, training, and education designed to improve
 the means of identifying employees exposed to occupational health hazards
 and improve medical assistance to such employees. The research, training,
 and education shall include--
 (A) studying the etiology, and development of occupationally related
 diseases, and the development of disabilities resulting from such diseases;
 (B) developing means of medical monitoring of employees exposed to
 occupational health hazards;
 (C) examining the types of medical treatment of workers exposed to
 occupational health hazards, and means of medical intervention to prevent
 the deterioration of the health and functional capacity of employees
 disabled by occupational diseases;
 (D) studying and developing medical treatment and allied health services
 to be made available to employees exposed to occupational health hazards; and
 (E) sponsoring epidemiological, clinical, and laboratory research to
 identify and define additional employee populations at risk of disease.
 (2) AUTHORITY TO EMPLOY EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS- In carrying out activities
 under this section, the Institute is authorized to engage the services of
 experts and consultants, as the Institute considers necessary.
 (b) EDUCATION- Part F of title VII of the Public Health Service Act is
 amended by inserting after section 788 (42 U.S.C. 295g-8) the following
 new section:
`SEC. 788A. GRANTS AND CONTRACTS FOR TRAINING AND CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT IN
OCCUPATIONAL MEDICINE.
 `(a) Existing Programs-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may make grants to, and enter into contracts
 with, schools of medicine and schools of nursing in which occupational
 medicine or occupational health programs exist on the date of enactment
 of this section to assist such programs in meeting the costs of carrying
 out projects to--
 `(A) provide continuing education for faculty in departments of internal
 medicine and family medicine or in schools of nursing in order to enable
 such faculty to provide instruction in the diagnosis and treatment of
 occupational diseases;
 `(B) develop, publish, and disseminate curricula and training materials
 concerning occupational medicine or health for use in undergraduate medical
 or nursing training; or
 `(C) establish, for residents in graduate medical education programs
 in internal medicine, family medicine, and other specialties with a
 primary care focus, or in graduate nursing programs in schools of nursing,
 training programs in occupational medicine or health consisting of clinical
 training, for periods of between 1 and 4 months, in settings such as
 medical facilities, union offices, and industrial worksites.
 `(2) PREFERENCES- In making grants and entering into contracts under
 this subsection, the Secretary shall give preference to applicants that
 demonstrate--
 `(A) the ability to recruit a significant number of participants to
 participate in the project to be carried out under the grant or contract
 (in the case of a project described in subparagraph (A) or (C) of paragraph
 (1)); and
 `(B) expertise and experience in the provision of continuing education
 in occupational medicine or health (in the case of a project described in
 subparagraph (A) of such paragraph) or the provision of residency training
 in occupational medicine or health (in the case of a project described in
 subparagraph (C) of such paragraph).
 `(b) New Programs-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary may make grants to, and enter into contracts
 with, schools of medicine and schools of nursing in which, on the date
 of enactment of this section, there do not exist training programs in
 occupational medicine or health. The purpose of grants and contracts under
 this subsection shall be to provide support for projects to provide training
 in occupational medicine or health for faculty who are certified in internal
 medicine or family medicine by the appropriate national medical specialty
 board or faculty who have similar qualifications in professional nursing.
 `(2) PROJECT REQUIREMENTS- Each project for which a grant or contract is
 made under this subsection shall--
 `(A) be based in a graduate medical education program in internal medicine
 or family medicine or in graduate programs in a school of nursing;
 `(B) have an arrangement with an accredited training program in occupational
 medicine or health for the provision of training in occupational medicine
 or health to the faculty selected by the recipient of the grant or contract
 under this subsection; and
 `(C) have a plan for the use of the faculty receiving training with a
 grant or contract under this section to provide education and training in
 occupational medicine or health to other individuals.
 `(c) MINIMUM NUMBER OF SCHOOLS- The Secretary shall, during the period
 October 1, 1989, through September 30, 1992, make grants to, and enter
 into contracts with, not less than 10 schools of medicine or schools of
 nursing under subsections (a) and (b).
 `(d) AVAILABILITY OF CERTAIN FUNDS- Amounts described in section 14(b)(2)
 of the High Risk Occupational Disease Notification and Prevention Act
 shall be available to carry out this section.
 `(e) DEFINITIONS- For the purpose of this section:
 `(1) GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION PROGRAM- The term `graduate medical
 education program' has the same meaning as in section 789(b)(4)(A).
 `(2) SCHOOL OF NURSING- The term `school of nursing' has the same meaning
 as in section 853(2).'.
SEC. 9. EMPLOYEE MEDICAL MONITORING; DISCRIMINATION AGAINST EMPLOYEES;
CONFIDENTIALITY.
 (a) Employee Medical Monitoring-
 (1) IN GENERAL- For any employee who is a member of a population that is
 determined by the Board to be at risk of disease, the medical monitoring
 recommended by the Board as a result of exposure to the occupational health
 hazard shall be provided or made available by the current employer at no
 additional cost to the employee if any part of such exposure occurred in the
 course of the employee's employment by that employer. If the benefits are
 made available through an existing employer health plan, the employee may
 be required to meet deductibles or copayments generally required under the
 existing employer health plan. Any such current employer shall be required
 to provide monitoring only for employees who--
 (A) are notified individually under section 5; or
 (B) the employer knows or has reason to know are members of the population
 at risk, as determined by the Board.
 (2) Special rules for medical monitoring-
 (A) MONITORING RECOMMENDED BY BOARD- The medical monitoring required under
 this Act shall be limited to the monitoring recommended by the Board.
 (B) MEANS- The means of providing such medical monitoring shall be left
 to the employer's judgment consistent with sound medical practices.
 (C) SPECIAL SMALL BUSINESS LIMITATION- An employer with 50 or fewer
 employees may not be required to pay more than an amount of $250 for
 medical monitoring for any employee in any year. Such amount shall be
 adjusted annually after 1989 based on the Consumer Price Index for medical
 care services maintained by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
 (b) Benefit Reduction Prohibited-
 (1) IN GENERAL- If, following a determination by the Board under this Act,
 the employee's physician medically determines that an employee who is a
 member of a population at risk shows evidence of the development of the
 disease described in the notice or other symptoms or conditions increasing
 the likelihood of incidence of such disease, the employee shall have the
 option of being transferred to a less hazardous or nonexposed job. If
 within 10 working days after the employee has exercised the option
 and transmitted to the employer a copy of the initial determination,
 the employer's medical representative has not requested independent
 reconsideration of such determination, the employee shall be removed to a
 less hazardous or nonexposed job and shall maintain earnings, seniority,
 and other employment rights and benefits as though the employee had not been
 removed from the former job. In providing such alternative job assignment,
 the employer shall not be required to violate the terms of any applicable
 collective bargaining agreement, and shall not be required to displace,
 lay off, or terminate any other employee.
 (2) INDEPENDENT RECONSIDERATION- If the employer's medical representative
 requests independent reconsideration of the initial medical determination
 under paragraph (1), the employee's physician and the employer's medical
 representative shall, within 14 working days of the transmittal of the
 initial determination, submit the matter to another mutually acceptable
 physician for a final medical determination, which shall be made within
 21 working days of the transmittal of the initial determination unless
 otherwise agreed by the parties. If the two medical representatives
 have been unable to agree on another physician within 14 working days,
 the Secretary or the Secretary's local designee for such purpose shall
 immediately, at the request of the employee or the employee's physician,
 appoint a qualified independent physician who shall make a final medical
 determination within the 21-working day period specified in this paragraph,
 unless otherwise agreed by the parties. The employer shall bear all costs
 related to the procedure set forth in this paragraph.
 (3) EMPLOYEES SUBJECT TO MEDICAL REMOVAL- An employer shall be required
 to provide medical removal protection only for employees who--
 (A) are notified individually under section 5; or
 (B) the employer knows or has reason to know are members of the population
 at risk, as determined by the Board.
 (4) Special rules for medical removal-
 (A) COURSE OF EMPLOYMENT- An employer shall be required to provide such
 protection only if any part of the employee's exposure to the occupational
 health hazard occurred in the course of the employee's employment by
 that employer.
 (B) LESS HAZARDOUS JOB AVAILABLE- The medical removal protection described
 in this subsection shall be provided for as long as a less hazardous
 or nonexposed job is available. The availability of such a job shall
 depend on the employee's skills, qualifications, and aptitudes and the
 job's requirements. Where such job is not available, the medical removal
 protection shall be provided for a period not to exceed 12 months.
 (C) FOLLOWUP MEDICAL SURVEILLANCE- The employer may condition the provision
 of medical removal protection on the employee's participation in followup
 medical surveillance for the occupational health effects in question based
 on the procedure set forth in this subsection.
 (D) REDUCTION FOR COMPENSATION- The employer's obligation to provide medical
 removal protection shall be reduced to the extent that the employee receives
 compensation for earnings lost during the period of removal, or receives
 income from employment with another employer made possible by virtue of
 the employee's removal.
 (E) ALTERNATIVE EMPLOYMENT- An employee who is receiving medical removal
 protection and for whom no less hazardous or nonexposed job is available must
 undertake reasonable good faith efforts to obtain alternative employment.
 (5) SPECIAL SMALL BUSINESS LIMITATIONS- An employer shall not be required
 to provide medical removal protection for employees if the employer--
 (A) has--
 (i) during calendar years 1989 and 1990, 100 or fewer employees at the
 time medical removal protection is requested; or
 (ii) during subsequent calendar years, 50 or fewer employees at the time
 medical removal protection is requested; and
 (B) made or is in the process of making a reasonable good faith effort to
 eliminate the occupational health hazard that is the basis for the medical
 removal decision.
 (c) Discrimination Prohibited-
 (1) IN GENERAL- No employer or other person shall discharge or in any
 manner discriminate against any employee, or applicant for employment,
 on the basis that the employee or applicant is or has been a member of a
 population that has been determined by the Board to be at risk of disease.
 (2) REQUIRED EXPOSURE- The subsection shall not apply if the position that
 the applicant seeks requires exposure to the occupational health hazard
 that is the subject of the notice.
 (3) REMOVAL TO LESS HAZARDOUS JOB- If it is medically determined pursuant
 to subsection (b) that an employee should be removed to a less hazardous
 or nonexposed job, an employer may effect such a removal without violating
 this subsection so long as the employee maintains the earnings, seniority,
 and other employment rights and benefits, as though the employee had not
 been removed from the former job.
 (4) ALTERNATIVE JOB ASSIGNMENT- An employer with 100 or fewer employees
 for years 1989 through 1990, and thereafter an employer with 50 or fewer
 employees, may transfer an employee who is or has been a member of a
 population at risk to another job without violating this subsection
 so long as the new job has earnings, seniority, and other employment
 rights and benefits as comparable as possible to the job from which the
 employee has been removed. In providing such alternative job assignment,
 the employer shall not violate the terms of any applicable collective
 bargaining agreement.
 (d) LIMITATIONS FOR AGRICULTURAL WORKERS- Provisions of this Act relating
 to medical removal protection shall not apply to any seasonal agricultural
 worker employed by an employer for less than 6 months of continuous
 employment. The Secretary, using existing authorization, shall provide
 that in the case of seasonal agricultural workers employed by an employer
 for less than 6 months of continuous employment, the medical monitoring
 recommended by the Board is provided through the Migrant Health Program
 of the Bureau of Health Care Delivery and Assistance of the Department of
 Health and Human Services using funds appropriated under section 14. An
 amount not to exceed $1,000,000 for each fiscal year, from funds authorized
 to be appropriated by this Act, shall be set aside, if necessary, to carry
 out the preceding sentence.
 (e) CONFIDENTIALITY- The records of the identity, diagnosis, prognosis,
 or treatment of any individual employee that are maintained in connection
 with the performance of any function authorized by this Act shall be
 confidential and may not be disclosed unless--
 (1) authorized by another provision of this Act and necessary to carry
 out such provision; or
 (2) on the written consent of such employee or the personally designated
 representative of the employee.
SEC. 10. ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
 (a) RECORDKEEPING- The Secretary shall require such recordkeeping by the
 Institute or by employers acting pursuant to section 6 as is necessary to
 monitor the numbers, types, and results of notification under this Act.
 (b) Actions by the Secretary-
 (1) INJUNCTIVE RELIEF- Whenever the Secretary determines that an employer
 has engaged, is engaged, or is about to engage in an act or practice
 constituting a violation of this Act or any rule or regulation promulgated
 under this Act, other than a violation of section 9, the Secretary may
 bring an action in the appropriate United States district court to enjoin
 such acts or practices. On a proper showing, an injunction or permanent
 or temporary restraining order shall be granted without bond.
 (2) CIVIL PENALTY- The Secretary may bring an action in the appropriate
 United States District Court against an employer acting pursuant to
 section 6 for any act or omission that is a knowing or reckless violation
 of a provision of this Act or any rule or regulation promulgated under
 this Act. Any employer who violates this Act (or a rule or regulation
 promulgated under this Act) as set forth in the preceding sentence shall
 be assessed a civil penalty of not more than $10,000 for each violation.
 (c) REVIEW OF EMPLOYEE COMPLAINTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL-
 (A) APPLICATION FOR REVIEW- Any employee who is aggrieved by a violation
 of section 9 may, within 6 months after such violation occurs, apply to
 the Secretary of Labor for a review of such alleged violation.
 (B) INVESTIGATION- On receipt of such application, the Secretary of
 Labor shall cause such investigation to be made as the Secretary of Labor
 considers appropriate.
 (C) ACTION- If, after such investigation, the Secretary of Labor determines
 that a reasonable cause exists to believe that a violation has occurred,
 the Secretary of Labor shall bring an action in any appropriate United
 States district court. In any such action, the United States district
 court shall have jurisdiction for cause shown to restrain violations
 of section 9, and to order all appropriate relief under subsection (d)
 or (e). In any action brought by the Secretary of Labor pursuant to this
 subsection, an employer shall be given a reasonable opportunity to prove by
 a preponderance of the evidence that an individual who received notification
 pursuant to section 5 is not a member of a population at risk, except that
 a determination by the Board that has not been set aside under section 5(g)
 may not be challenged in any such action.
 (D) DEFENSE- It shall be a defense to any action brought to enforce rights
 under section 9(a) that--
 (i) an employee who received individual notification failed to assert the
 rights of the employee under section 9(a) within 1 year after receiving
 such notification, except for good cause shown; or
 (ii) an employee who did not receive individual notification but had
 reason to know that the employee was a member of a population at risk who
 is entitled to rights under section 9(a) neglected or omitted to assert
 the rights based on the lapse of at least 1 year, and circumstances are
 sufficient to cause prejudice to the adverse party.
 (2) DETERMINATION BY SECRETARY- Within 90 days of the receipt of the
 application filed under this subsection, the Secretary of Labor shall
 notify the complainant of the determination of the Secretary of Labor
 under paragraph (1). If the Secretary of Labor finds that there was not
 reasonable cause to believe that a violation occurred, the Secretary shall
 issue an order denying the application and informing the applicant of the
 rights of the applicant under paragraph (3).
 (3) Appeal-
 (A) DENIAL OF APPLICATION- Any person adversely affected or aggrieved by
 a determination of the Secretary of Labor under paragraph (2) is entitled
 to judicial review of the determination in the appropriate United States
 District Court on a petition filed in such court within 30 days after
 such determination by the Secretary of Labor. The court may set aside the
 determination by the Secretary of Labor under paragraph (2) only if the
 determination is found to be--
 (i) arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of discretion;
 (ii) contrary to constitutional right, power, privilege, or immunity;
 (iii) in excess of statutory jurisdiction, authority, or limitations;
 (iv) without observance of procedure required by law; or
 (v) unsupported by substantial evidence on the record.
If the court sets aside the determination of the Secretary of Labor under
paragraph (2), the employee may bring an action of the type authorized by
paragraph (1)(C).
 (B) MEMBER OF THE POPULATION AT RISK RULE- In any action brought by an
 aggrieved person under subparagraph (A), the aggrieved person shall be given
 a reasonable opportunity to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that
 an individual who did not receive notification is a member of a population
 at risk, except that a determination by the Board that has not been set
 aside under section 5(g) may not be challenged in any such action.
 (C) FAILURE TO ACT WITHIN 90 DAYS- If the Secretary of Labor has not acted
 within 90 days pursuant to paragraph (2), an applicant may bring a civil
 action for mandamus in the appropriate United States District Court.
 (d) REINSTATEMENT AND OTHER RELIEF- Any employee who is injured in
 violation of section 9 shall be restored to his or her employment and
 shall be compensated for--
 (1) any lost wages (including fringe benefits and seniority);
 (2) costs associated with medical monitoring that are incurred up to the
 time when the discrimination is fully remedied; and
 (3) costs associated with bringing the allegation of violation.
 (e) CIVIL PENALTIES- Any person that violates section 9 shall be liable
 for a civil penalty of not more than $10,000 for each violation.
 (f) EXCLUSIVITY OF REMEDY- Except as otherwise expressly provided in this
 Act, remedies provided in this Act shall be exclusive remedies with respect
 to any acts or omissions taken pursuant to or alleged to be in violation
 of this Act.
 (g) EFFECT ON OTHER LAWS-
 (1) ADMISSABILITY OF TESTIMONY AND EVIDENCE- No testimony, whether oral
 or written, and no documents or physical evidence of any type that would
 prove, tend to prove, or that is offered in an attempt to prove--
 (A) that the Board has made a finding or determination that an employee
 or an employee population is or is not a member of or is or is not a
 population at risk of disease as determined under this Act;
 (B) that an employee or employee population is or is not to receive (or
 has or has not received) notification under this Act; or
 (C) that medical evaluation or monitoring or removal is or is not to be
 initiated (or has or has not been initiated) under this Act;
shall be admissible in or considered in connection with or form the basis
of a ruling in any civil, criminal, administrative, or other judicial or
quasi-judicial proceeding of any type, whether brought under Federal or
State law other than a claim brought pursuant to section 5(f), 5(g), 10(b),
or 10(c). The admission or reliance on any such testimony, documents, or
physical evidence shall automatically constitute reversible error.
 (2) Mental or emotional distress claims-
 (A) PROHIBITION- No person shall bring any tort or workers' compensation
 claim based on mental or emotional harm, fear of disease, or stress resulting
 directly or indirectly from any report, finding, notice, medical evaluation
 decision, or monitoring decision made under this Act, from any other action
 taken under this Act, or from any failure to take an action required by
 this Act.
 (B) APPLICABILITY- The prohibition set forth in subparagraph (A) applies
 whether the person seeking to bring such a claim--
 (i) has been directly subject to such a report, finding, notice, medical
 evaluation decision, monitoring decision, other action, or failure to take
 required action; or
 (ii) has learned about such a report, finding, notice, medical evaluation
 decision, monitoring decision, other action, or failure to take any required
 action that directly affected another person.
 (3) CONSTRUCTION RULE- Nothing in this Act shall preclude the admission
 into evidence of--
 (A) the results of any medical evaluation or monitoring;
 (B) any medical and other scientific studies and reports concerning the
 incidence of disease associated with exposure to occupational health
 hazards; or
 (C) any data related to exposure to occupational health hazards for
 individual employees,
in connection with any claim for compensation, loss or damage brought under
State or Federal law. Notification pursuant to this Act shall not be relevant
in determining whether such a claim is timely under any applicable statute
of limitations.
 (h) PROHIBITION ON ACTIONS AGAINST PHYSICIANS FOR GOOD FAITH DETERMINATIONS
 UNDER SECTION 9(b)- No action may be brought for any claim based on a good
 faith determination made by a physician under section 9(b).
SEC. 11. REPORTS TO CONGRESS.
 (a) HAZARD COMMUNICATION STANDARD REPORT- The Secretary of Labor shall
 report to Congress annually, not later than January 15 of each year,
 regarding implementation and enforcement of the hazard communication
 standard. The report shall include detailed information on--
 (1) monitoring and enforcement; significant areas of noncompliance; and
 penalties assessed and steps taken to correct the noncompliance;
 (2) efforts to evaluate the hazard communication standard;
 (3) efforts to assist employers to comply with the hazard communication
 standard;
 (4) efforts to educate employees to their rights under the hazard
 communication standard; and
 (5) efforts to comply with Federal court decisions requiring or encouraging
 an expanded scope for the hazard communication standard.
 (b) OCCUPATIONAL DISEASE NOTIFICATION REPORT- The Secretary shall report
 to Congress annually, not later than January 15 of each year, regarding
 implementation and enforcement of notification under this Act. The report
 shall include detailed information on--
 (1) numbers, types and results of notifications carried out pursuant to
 sections 5 and 6;
 (2) research efforts carried out pursuant to section 8;
 (3) training and education efforts for employees, personal physicians,
 nurses, and other professionals carried out pursuant to sections 7 and 8;
 (4) enforcement efforts carried out pursuant to section 10; and
 (5) efforts to assist employers under this Act.
SEC. 12. SUBJECTS OF FEDERAL AGENCY STUDIES.
 (a) NOTIFICATION REQUIRED- Each Federal agency that conducts epidemiologic
 studies on occupational disease initiated after the effective date of this
 Act shall establish procedures for notifying the subjects of such studies
 of the findings of such study. If the findings are that the subjects
 are at risk of disease, the notification shall include the information
 specified in section 5(b), except that required by subparagraphs (D), (E),
 and (F) of section 5(b)(6). No notice under this section shall impose any
 liabilities or create any rights under section 9.
 (b) METHOD OF NOTICE- All occupational epidemiologic studies conducted
 by a Federal agency initiated after the effective date of this Act shall
 include in the study design specific methods for notifying living subjects
 or their immediate family members that they are part of a population at
 risk of disease.
SEC. 13. REGULATIONS.
 The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to
 carry out this Act.
SEC. 14. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- There are authorized to be appropriated $25,000,000 for
 each of the fiscal years 1990 through 1992 to carry out this Act and section
 788A of the Public Health Service Act (as added by section 8(b) of this Act).
 (b) Set-Aside-
 (1) RESEARCH, TRAINING, AND EDUCATION- Of the total amount appropriated under
 subsection (a) for a fiscal year, at least $4,000,000 shall be available
 to carry out section 8 of this Act and section 788A of the Public Health
 Service Act.
 (2) EDUCATION- Of the total amount available under paragraph (1) for a
 fiscal year, at least $1,000,000 shall be available to carry out section
 788A of the Public Health Service Act.
SEC. 15. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as may be otherwise provided in this Act, this Act
 and the amendments made by this Act shall become effective January 1, 1990,
 or 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, whichever occurs first.
 (b) BOARD- The Board shall be appointed within 60 days after the effective
 date of this Act.
 (c) REGULATIONS- The Secretary shall issue regulations necessary to
 administer the Act within 120 days after the effective date of this Act.
S 582 IS----2
S 582 IS----3
S 582 IS----4
S 582 IS----5disease, the notification shall include