HR 2663 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2663
To amend the Clean Air Act to require the offset of certain greenhouse gas
emissions, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
JUNE 18, 1991
Mr. COOPER (for himself, Mr. SYNAR, Mr. STUDDS, Mr. MARKEY, and Mr. BOEHLERT)
introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Energy
and Commerce
A BILL
To amend the Clean Air Act to require the offset of certain greenhouse gas
emissions, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE
 This Act may be cited as the `CO2 Offsets Policy Efficiency Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 The Congress find that:
 (1) The United States has 5 percent of the world's population and yet
 consumes more than 20 percent of the world's fossil fuels and emits more than
 20 percent of the world's CO2 derived from the combustion of fossil fuels.
 (2) The United States consumes fossil fuels on a per capita basis at four
 times the worldwide average and more than twice the per capita average in
 many other highly industrialized countries.
 (3) High rates of energy consumption in the United States contribute to urban
 smog, acid rain, oil spills, and other environmental pollution problems.
 (4) Creating administrative mechanisms which require fossil fuel users
 to take account of the environmental consequences of their actions will
 balance the continued use of these critical energy resources with reductions
 in the environmental damages that they cause.
 (5) Administrative mechanisms that facilitate CO2 offset transactions will
 create incentives for technological innovation reducing further society's
 energy and environmental costs.
 (6) By providing incentives for energy users to use energy more efficiently,
 the United States can improve its economic productivity, enhance its
 international competitiveness, reduce its trade deficit and reduce its
 dependence on foreign oil.
 (7) Establishing a CO2 offsets policy would encourage electric utilities to
 consider their emissions of CO2 when making future demand and supply-side
 decisions to meet their future capacity requirements.
 (8) A Federal policy to take advantage of opportunities to offset greenhouse
 gas emissions would ensure that the United States can reduce its emissions
 of greenhouse gases while continuing to utilize coal, its most abundant
 domestic energy resource, which is essential to the Nation's long-range
 energy, economic, and national security.
 (9) A Federal CO2 offset policy offers the opportunity for the United
 States to begin to address the global climate change with the least-cost,
 market-based strategy which allows every industry the flexibility to
 choose the technology and displacement methods most appropriate for its
 individual circumstance.
SEC. 3. CONTROL OF GREENHOUSE GASES.
 The Clean Air Act is amended by adding the following new title at the
 end thereof:
`TITLE VII--CONTROL OF GREENHOUSE GASES
`SEC. 701. DEFINITIONS.
 `As used in this title--
 `(1) The term `major CO2 source' means any stationary source of CO2 which
 emits or has the potential to emit 100,000 tons or more per year of CO2.
 `(2) The term `new major CO2 source' means any major CO2 source the
 construction or modification of which commences on or after a date eighteen
 months after the enactment of this title.
 `(3) The terms `commence', `modification' and `construction' shall have
 the same meaning as such terms have when used in section 111, except that
 the term `modification' shall also include any major CO2 source which is
 repowered on or after January 1, 1995 or any existing utility CO2 source
 which, on or after January 1, 2005, will have been in operation for a
 period of not less than 65 years.
 `(4) The term `permitting authority' means the authority established under
 this title to issue operating permits for major CO2 sources.
`SEC. 702. OFFSET CREDITS REQUIREMENT.
 `(a) CO2 OFFSET REQUIREMENT- No new major CO2 source may operate during
 any period after the date 36 months after the date of enactment of this
 title unless the owner or operator of the source has obtained, and is
 in compliance with, a permit issued under this title. Such permit shall
 require the owner or operator to demonstrate to the permitting authority
 possession of certified CO2 credits equal to the CO2 emissions expected to
 occur between the commencement of operations of the source and December 31
 of the year in which operations begin. The permit shall, for each subsequent
 calendar year, require the owner or operator to deposit by December 31 of
 such year sufficient certified CO2 credits into the National CO2 Offset
 Bank established under section 705 to compensate for that year's CO2
 emissions. All new major CO2 sources shall obtain certified CO2 credits
 only in the manner described in section 703.
 `(b) TREES- A new major CO2 source that uses as a fuel trees that are
 replaced through replanting and that have not been grown as a CO2 offset
 under section 703(b)(2) of this Act is not required to obtain CO2 credits
 for the CO2 emissions from the combustion of such trees.
 `(c) Violations-
 `(1) EXCESS EMISSIONS PENALTY- The owner or operator of any new major
 CO2 source subject to this title that emits CO2, as measured pursuant to
 regulations promulgated under section 704 of this Act, for any calendar
 year in excess of the CO2 offset credits the owner or operator deposited
 for the source for that calendar year shall be liable for the payment of
 an excess emissions penalty. That penalty shall be calculated on the basis
 of the number of tons emitted in excess of the source's CO2 offset credits
 the owner or operator deposited for the source for that year multiplied
 by $250. Any such penalty shall be due and payable without demand to the
 Administrator as provided in regulations to be issued by the Administrator
 by no later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this title. Any
 such payment shall be deposited in the United States Treasury pursuant to
 31 U.S.C. 3302. Any penalty due and payable under this subsection shall
 not diminish the liability of the source's owner or operator for any fine,
 penalty or assessment against the unit for the same violation under any
 other section of this Act.
 `(2) EXCESS EMISSIONS OFFSET- The owner or operator of any new major CO2
 source that emits CO2 during any calendar year in excess of the certified
 CO2 credits deposited by the source shall be liable to offset the excess
 emissions by an equal tonnage amount in the following calendar year.
 `(3) PENALTY ADJUSTMENT- The Administrator shall, by regulation, adjust
 the penalty specified in paragraph (1) for inflation, based on the Consumer
 Price Index, on the date of enactment of this title and annually thereafter.
 `(4) PROHIBITION- It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any new
 major CO2 source liable for a penalty and offset under this subsection to
 fail to pay the penalty under paragraph (1) or to offset excess emissions
 as required by paragraph (2).
`SEC. 703. CERTIFICATION OF OFFSETS
 `(a) EPA REGULATIONS- The Administrator shall, not later than 18 months after
 the date of enactment of this title, promulgate regulations establishing
 procedures for the certification of CO2 offset credits. Such regulations
 shall authorize a permitting authority to certify as a CO2 offset credit
 any CO2 reduction if the person providing such reduction or the person
 purchasing such offset credit establishes to the satisfaction of the
 permitting authority that such reduction complies with the requirements
 of regulations under subsection (b). In the event that the permitting
 authority is a State agency operating under an EPA-approved program in
 accordance with section 704(b), the Administrator shall retain for the
 90 day period following the receipt of such certification the authority
 to review such State certifications prior to deposit in the National CO2
 Offset Bank established under section 705.
 `(b) ELIGIBLE CO2 OFFSET CREDITS-
 `(1) FUEL SWITCHING- The Administrator shall, not later than 18 months after
 the date of enactment of this title, promulgate regulations concerning the
 certification, on an annual basis, of CO2 emission reductions by sources
 subject to the requirements of title IV of this Act, to the extent such
 reductions occur from switching to less carbon intensive fuels following the
 enactment of this paragraph. Such regulations shall establish procedures for
 calculating fuel use, in mmBtus, and the number of pounds of CO2 emitted per
 mmBtu for the fuel or, in the case of a mix of fuels, the weighted average
 amount of CO2 emitted per mmBtu, for the year in which the switch occurs
 and for the year preceding the switch in fuels. For purposes of determining
 the CO2 emitted per mmBtu for each fuel or mix of fuels, such regulations
 shall take into account the application of technological controls which
 reduce the amount of CO2 emitted from the combustion of such fuels. For
 purposes of this paragraph, the calculation of the number of pounds of
 CO2 emitted per mmBtu for the year prior to the year in which the switch
 occurs shall not exceed the average amount emitted during the five year
 period preceding the switch in fuels. CO2 offset credits may be awarded
 under this paragraph only for reductions measured by (A) calculating the
 difference between the number of pounds of CO2 per mmBtu of the fuel or,
 in the case of a mix of fuels, the weighted average amount of CO2 per mmBtu,
 in the year prior to the switch and in the year in which the switch occurs,
 and (B) multiplying the amount in subparagraph (A) by the total number
 of mmBtus consumed by the source in the year in which the switch occurs,
 divided by 2000.
 `(2) FORESTS- The Administrator shall, in consultation with the Secretary
 of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior, promulgate regulations
 not later than 30 months after the date of enactment of this title
 establishing regional average annual per acre CO2 fixation rates by tree
 species, evaluated over a 100 year period. These rates shall be adjusted,
 by region, to account differing land productivity and precipitation, and
 for CO2 emissions caused by reasonably anticipated loss of tree growth due
 to fire and other causes. In addition, these regulations should consider
 and prescribe the conditions under which public lands may be leased for
 the purpose of producing CO2 offsets. CO2 offset credits may be certified,
 on an annual basis, as follows:
 `(A) NEW FORESTS- Tree growth on lands which have not experienced significant
 tree growth for the 30 year period prior to 1990 shall be eligible for CO2
 offset credits equal to the applicable regional average annual per acre
 fixation rate multiplied by the number of acres planted as offsets, provided
 that the acres planted as offsets have a recorded easement assigned to the
 Administrator which ensures that such acreage will not be cut for at least
 100 years from the date such acreage is certified as CO2 offset credits.
 `(B) FOREST MANAGEMENT- Tree growth on lands which have experienced
 significant tree growth during the 30 year period prior to 1990 shall
 be eligible for CO2 offset credits equal to the difference between the
 average annual per acre fixation rate of the new tree growth and the
 regional average annual per acre fixation rate of the prior tree growth,
 multiplied by the number of acres planted for offset credits. Such credits
 shall be eligible provided that the acres identified as offsets have a
 recorded easement assigned to the Administrator which ensures that such
 acreage will not be cut for at least 100 years from the date such acreage
 is certified as CO2 offset credits.
 `(C) OLD GROWTH FORESTS- As part of the regulations promulgated under
 this paragraph, the Administrator shall promulgate sequestration values
 associated with the preservation of old growth forests. Such forests shall
 be eligible for total CO2 offset credits equal to the difference between
 the average expected sequestration value of such forests and the average
 expected sequestration value of new forest in the same region during a 100
 year period. The average expected sequestration value during a 100 year
 period shall be determined by adding the expected sequestration values
 for each year in the 100 year period and dividing by 100. For purposes of
 the preceding sentence, expected sequestration values shall account for
 CO2 emissions from tree loss due to fire and other natural causes. Such
 credits shall only be eligible if the acres identified as offsets have a
 recorded easement assigned to the Administrator which ensures that such
 acreage will not be cut for at least 100 years from the date such acreage
 is certified as CO2 offset credits. CO2 offset credits shall be issued in
 equal annual increments for the period of the easement.
 `(D) EASEMENTS- Easements under this paragraph shall provide, at a minimum,
 that clear cutting, harvesting or other methods of destruction of trees,
 bushes, and understory shall be prohibited, except that the Administrator,
 in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, may
 authorize the cutting of individual trees, including the Pacific Yew tree,
 if the Administrator has determined that cutting such trees will contribute
 significantly to the protection of human health.
 `(E) DEFINITION- For purposes of this paragraph, the term `old growth
 forests' means any significant tract of public or private forest land
 which can be harvested under Federal, State, or local laws; and which
 is referred to as `Old Growth' in the document Interim Definitions for
 Old-Growth Douglas-Fir and Mixed-Conifer Forests in the Pacific Northwest
 and California (1986), developed by the Old-Growth Definition Task Force of
 the Forest Service, United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service,
 Pacific Northwest Research Station Research Note PNW-447.
 `(3) CAFE- The Administrator shall, in consultation with the Secretary of
 Energy, promulgate rules not later than twenty-four months after the date
 of enactment of this title concerning the certification of CO2 credits from
 new vehicle fleet fuel efficiency improvements. CO2 offset credits may be
 certified only for corporate average fuel efficiency (CAFE) improvements
 beyond those actually achieved by the source from sales during 1990 and
 shall not include efficiency improvements which are banked for future use
 by the manufacturer under other provisions of Federal law. In no event
 shall CO2 offset credits be certified for efficiency improvements required
 by any provision of Federal law. For purposes of this certification, the
 Administrator shall develop and employ an assessment of the statistical
 lifetime and use of vehicles proposed for CO2 offsets. The number of CO2
 offset credits certified shall be based on the normal expected lifetime
 and use of the vehicles sold.
 `(4) APPLIANCE EFFICIENCY- Not later than twenty-four months after the
 date of enactment of this title, the Administrator, in consultation with
 the Secretary of Energy, shall promulgate regulations concerning the
 certification of CO2 credits from appliance efficiency improvements. CO2
 offset credits may be issued only for efficiency improvements beyond
 those actually achieved by the source from sales during 1990. In no event
 shall CO2 offset credits be issued for efficiency improvements required by
 any provision of Federal law. Such certification procedures shall include
 adjustments to extra energy efficiency improvements to reflect the national
 proportion of household electricity derived from fossil fuels. In addition,
 the number of CO2 credits certified shall be estimated on the basis of
 the normal expected lifetime and use of the appliance.
 `(5) ENERGY CONSERVATION- Not later than twenty-four months after the date of
 enactment of this title the Administrator, in consultation with the Secretary
 of Energy, shall promulgate regulations concerning the certification of
 CO2 credits for energy conservation investments. Such regulations shall
 include a list of energy conservation measures eligible for CO2 credits
 and shall indicate the amount of CO2 emissions avoided by and CO2 credits
 allowed for each measure. The Administrator shall determine the amount of
 CO2 emissions avoided based on the average CO2 emissions reported under
 section 821 of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 in the State in which
 the energy conservation investment was made. The Administrator shall
 revise the determination in the previous sentence each year to reflect
 changes in CO2 emissions reported in subsequent years under section 821
 of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990. Energy conservation measures
 which are exclusively informational or educational in nature shall not
 be eligible for CO2 credits. Energy conservation measures which increase
 the efficiency of appliances shall not be eligible for credit under this
 paragraph. The number of credits granted shall be adjusted by the national
 proportion of electricity generated by fossil fuels for the region in which
 the conservation investment is made. The Administrator shall publish and
 periodically update a listing of approved conservation options and their
 CO2 credit yields.
 `(6) METHANE RECOVERY- Not later than twenty-four months after the date
 of enactment of this title, the Administrator shall promulgate regulations
 concerning the certification of CO2 equivalent credits from the capture and
 use of methane from coalbeds, municipal landfills, wastewater treatment
 facilities and sewage sludge facilities. The credits certified shall
 reflect both the differential radiative activity and atmospheric lifetime
 of methane compared to CO2 as well as the CO2 produced as a result of its
 ultimate combustion. The CO2 equivalence of methane shall be established
 in accordance with section 703(c).
 `(7) COGENERATION FACILITIES- Not later than twenty-four months after
 the date of enactment of this title, the Administrator shall promulgate
 regulations concerning the certification of CO2 credits created by the
 construction and operation of cogeneration facilities that replace existing
 industrial boilers or other thermal power not produced by cogeneration,
 provided that emissions of CO2 from such cogeneration facilities shall be
 subject to the offset requirements of section 702. Credits for any given
 year shall be determined by calculating the following amounts--
 `(A) the emissions from the boiler being replaced in a baseline year to be
 determined by the Administrator, expressed in tons of CO2, multiplied by the
 total steam output in the year for which credit is to be given and divided
 by the total steam output of the boiler being replaced in the baseline year,
 `(B) the kilowatthours of electricity generated in that year by the
 cogeneration facility multiplied by the average emissions rate expressed
 in pounds of CO2 per kilowatthour of either the system or utility that
 the industrial facility bought electricity from in the baseline year,
 divided by 2,000,
 `(C) the total pounds of CO2 emitted in that year by the cogeneration
 facility, divided by 2,000,
Certified CO2 offset credits under this paragraph shall equal the sum of
(A) and (B) minus (C).
 `(8) CHLOROFLUOROCARBONS (CFCS)- The Administrator shall promulgate
 regulations not later than twelve months after the date of enactment of
 this title concerning the certification of CO2 equivalent credits for
 the capture and destruction of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) in the United
 States and in other nations. In no event shall the Administrator certify
 CO2 equivalent credits for the capture and destruction of CFCs obtained
 in the United States until the Administrator has determined, pursuant
 to the review required by section 603(e) of this Act, that alternative
 systems and products to manufacture and operate appliances without class
 II substances are commercially available. The CO2 equivalence of all CFCs
 shall be established in accordance with section 703(c).
 `(9) ALTERNATIVE FUEL VEHICLES- Within 12 months of the date of enactment
 of this title, the Administrator shall establish regulations identifying
 the CO2 credits for the manufacturer of alternative fuel vehicles which use
 less carbon intensive fuels than gasoline powered vehicles, as determined
 by the Administrator. No vehicle may be eligible for credit unless it
 operates using a single fuel.
 `(10) REPLACEMENT AND REPOWERING OF UTILITY SOURCES- Not later than
 24 months after the date of enactment of this title, the Administrator
 shall promulgate regulations concerning the certification of CO2 credits
 for utility sources that achieve more efficient heat rates through the
 repowering or replacement of an existing unit, including the use of fuel
 cell technology, provided that emissions of CO2 from such sources shall
 be subject to the offset requirements of section 702. Such regulations
 shall establish criteria to determine the heat rate of the unit, expressed
 in mmBtus per kilowatt hour, in a baseline year to be determined by the
 Administrator. Credits for any given year shall be determined as follows--
 `(A) if the kilowatt hours generated by the new or repowered unit in that
 year are greater than or equal to the kilowatt hours generated by the old
 unit in the baseline year, CO2 credits shall be determined by calculating
 the tons of CO2 emitted in the baseline year and subtracting from that
 amount the tons of CO2 determined by multiplying (i) the tons of CO2
 emitted in the baseline year and (ii) the ratio of the heat rate of the
 new or repowered unit to the heat rate of the old unit in the baseline year.
 `(B) if the kilowatt hours generated by the new or repowered unit in that
 year are less than the kilowatt hours generated in the baseline year,
 CO2 credits shall be determined by multiplying (i) the tons of CO2 emitted
 by the new or repowered unit in that year and (ii) the ratio of the heat
 rate of the old unit in the baseline year to the heat rate of the new or
 repowered unit and subtracting from that product the tons of CO2 emitted
 by the new or repowered unit in that year.
 `(11) REPLACEMENT OF UTILITY SOURCES WITH RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES- Not
 later than twenty-four months after the date of enactment of this title,
 the Administrator shall promulgate regulations concerning the certification
 of CO2 credits for renewable energy sources that replace existing utility
 sources which emit CO2. Credits for any given year shall be determined based
 on the amount of CO2 emissions from the existing utility source which is
 replaced. No credits may be certified under this paragraph unless it can
 be demonstrated that the renewable energy source replaces a specific,
 identifiable existing utility source. For purposes of this paragraph,
 the term `renewable energy' means energy derived from biomass, solar,
 geothermal, wind or fuel cell technology as identified by the Administrator
 in consultation with the Secretary of Energy. Incidental CO2 emissions
 associated with the use of these renewable energy technologies shall be
 subtracted from any CO2 offsets credit which may be certified under this
 paragraph, as determined by the Administrator.
 `(12) OTHER CREDIT SOURCES- In no case shall CO2 offset sources be limited
 to those explicitly defined by regulation under this section. Potential
 offset sources should be allowed to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
 Administrator after notice and comment that such sources should be certified
 according to the intent of this program. The Administrator shall establish a
 baseline for each source of CO2 offsets or category of such sources subject
 to certification requirements under this paragraph. Such baselines shall
 be set according to the actual performance of such sources or categories
 of sources during the baseline year specified by the Administrator. Offset
 sources explicitly credited by regulation shall be allowed to demonstrate
 to the satisfaction of the Administrator after notice and comment that
 technical progress or other innovation has improved the efficiency of
 the CO2 offset producing process. Except for paragraph (8), regulations
 promulgated under this subsection shall be construed to apply only to CO2
 offset credits obtained within the United States unless the Administrator
 has promulgated regulations to ensure that CO2 offset credits not obtained
 within the United States will comply with all the requirements of this title
 to the same extent as CO2 offset credits obtained within the United States.
 `(13) REPOWERING- In no case shall certification be granted for a utility
 shutdown for the purposes of repowering or refurbishing an existing facility.
 `(14) EXPEDITED CERTIFICATION- The Administrator may promulgate regulations
 under this section providing for expedited certification of CO2 credits. If
 such regulations are promulgated, the Administrator shall establish a
 requirement that, for purposes of section 702, a new major source of CO2
 shall obtain more than one ton of CO2 offset credits certified pursuant
 to this paragraph for each ton emitted by such source. In determining
 the additional CO2 offset credits required under the preceding sentence,
 the Administrator shall take into account the additional uncertainties in
 certification under such expedited procedures compared with certification
 under the other regulations of this section.
 `(15) Other authority-
 `(A) FEDERAL AUTHORITY- In no case shall certification be granted for
 greenhouse gas reductions which are required under any other provision of
 this Act or other authority of Federal law.
 `(B) STATE AUTHORITY- Nothing in this title shall preclude or deny the
 right of any State or any political subdivision thereof to disallow the
 certification of any CO2 offset credit, if, in the sole discretion of
 such State or political subdivision, such certification is determined
 to be inconsistent with the laws, regulations or policies of such State
 or political subdivision. In no event shall a State certify CO2 offset
 credits which do not meet the requirements of this section. Not later than
 18 months after the date of enactment of this title, the Administrator
 shall promulgate procedures for States and political subdivisions thereof
 to identify CO2 offset credits that will be disallowed. Such regulations
 shall establish reasonable time limits during which states must make
 determinations under this paragraph.
 `(c) GREENHOUSE GAS CREDITS- The regulations under subsection (b) shall
 provide that a reduction in any air pollutant (including methane and N2O)
 which the Administrator determines to contribute to global warming may be
 certified as a CO2 offset credit if such reduction satisfies the criteria
 of subsection (b), except that the amount of such credit may be reduced
 or increased based on radiative differences and atmospheric lifetime to
 reflect the relative global warming potential of such air pollutants. The
 Administrator shall consult with the Administrators of the National
 Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the National Aeronautic and
 Space Administration concerning the determination of CO2 equivalents for
 all CFCs regulated by the Montreal Protocol to control substances that
 deplete Stratospheric Ozone and for all other greenhouse gases including
 but not limited to N2O and methane.
`SEC. 704. PERMIT PROGRAMS.
 `(a) REGULATIONS- The Administrator shall promulgate within 18 months
 after the date of the enactment of this title regulations establishing
 the minimum elements of a permit program to be administered by any air
 pollution control agency. These elements shall include each of the following:
 `(1) Requirements for permit applications, including a standard application
 form and criteria for determining in a timely fashion the completeness
 of applications.
 `(2) Monitoring and reporting requirements.
 `(3) Requirements for adequate personnel and funding to administer the
 program.
 `(4) A requirement that the permitting authority have adequate authority to--
 `(A) issue permits and assure compliance by all sources required to have
 a permit under this title with each applicable standard, regulation or
 requirement under this title;
 `(B) issue permits for a fixed term;
 `(C) terminate, modify, or revoke and reissue permits for cause;
 `(D) enforce permits, the requirement to obtain a permit, including
 authority to recover civil penalties for permit violations; and;
 `(E) collect the annual CO2 offsets from affected sources for deposit with
 the Environmental Protection Agency to facilitate CO2 credit certification
 and tracking.
 `(5) Adequate, streamlined, and reasonable procedures for expeditiously
 determining when applications are complete, for processing such applications,
 for public notice, including offering an opportunity for public comment
 and a hearing, and for expeditious review of permit actions, including
 applications, renewals, or revisions, and including an opportunity for
 judicial review in State court of the final permit action by the applicant,
 any person who participated in the public comment process, and any other
 person who could obtain judicial review of that action under applicable law.
 `(b) SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL- (1) The Governor of each State shall develop
 and submit to the Administrator a permit program under State or local law or
 under an interstate compact meeting the requirements of this title. Not later
 than 1 year after receiving a program, and after notice and opportunity for
 public comment, the Administrator shall approve or disapprove such program.
 `(2) If the Governor does not submit a program as required under paragraph
 (1) or if the Administrator disapproves a program submitted by the Governor
 under paragraph (1), in whole or in part, the Administrator shall promulgate,
 administer, and enforce a program under this title for the State.
 `(c) SUSPENSION- The Administrator shall suspend the issuance of permits
 promptly upon publication of notice of approval of a permit program under
 this section, but may, in such notice, retain jurisdiction over permits
 that have been federally issued, but for which the administrative or
 judicial review process is not complete. The Administrator shall continue
 to administer and enforce federally issued permits under this title until
 they are replaced by a permit issued by a permitting program. Nothing in
 this subsection should be construed to limit the Administrator's ability
 to enforce permits issued by a State.
 `(d) CONDITIONS- Each permit issued under this title shall include
 an enforceable requirement that the permittee submit to the permitting
 authority, no less often than every 12 months, the results of any required
 monitoring, and such other conditions as are necessary to assure that the
 permittee has not emitted CO2 in excess of the CO2 emission offset credits
 held by the permittee.
 `(e) INSPECTION, ENTRY, MONITORING, CERTIFICATION AND REPORTING- Each permit
 issued under this title shall set forth inspection, entry, monitoring,
 compliance certification, and reporting requirements to assure compliance
 with the permit terms and conditions. Such monitoring and reporting
 requirements shall conform to any applicable regulation under subsection
 (b). Any report required to be submitted by a permit issued to a corporation
 under this title shall be signed by a responsible corporate official,
 who shall certify its accuracy.
`SEC. 705. NATIONAL CO2 OFFSET BANK.
 `(a) EPA REGULATIONS-
 `(1) NATIONAL CO2 OFFSET BANK- Within 12 months of enactment of this title,
 the Administration shall publish regulations creating a National CO2 Offset
 Bank for the purpose of ensuring adequate supplies of CO2 offsets and to
 create procedures for the tracking and retirement of used CO2 credits. At
 a minimum, these regulations must require the identification of the owners
 of CO2 offset credits, their addresses, the tonnages available, and the
 source of the CO2 credit. These regulations may require depositors to
 identify a minimum asking price.
 `(2) CO2 OFFSET CERTIFICATE ISSUANCE- Upon notification by the owner of a
 certified offset of a transfer of ownership of the offset, the Administrator
 shall debit the account of the seller in the National Offset Bank and
 credit the account of the purchaser. The Administrator, if requested by
 the purchaser, will issue certificates of CO2 credit equal to the purchase
 quantity and make such withdrawal from the bank within 60 days of receipt
 of such request.
 `(b) EPA OVERSIGHT- In exercising its certification review authority under
 section 703, the Administrator shall act within 90 days to decertify any CO2
 credit submitted for banking in accordance with the generic certification
 rules promulgated in accordance with section 703.
 `(c) PUBLIC LISTING OF CREDITS- The Administrator shall make available
 to the public on a continuous basis the contents of the National CO2
 Offset Bank to include but not be limited to the names and addresses of
 the owners of available CO2 credits, the associated tonnages, sources of
 the CO2 credits, and minimum asking prices if required.
 `(d) DEBITS- Allowances deposited with the Administrator by permitting
 authorities or permitted sources in compliance with CO2 offset requirements
 established in section 702 shall be debited from the accounts of registered
 certified credit owners listed in the National CO2 Offset Bank.'.