HR 3368 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3368
To strengthen the protections available to employees against reprisals for
disclosing information to protect the public health and safety, and for
other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
September 28, 1989
Mr. FORD of Michigan (for himself, Mr. HAWKINS, Mr. WILLIAMS, Mr. CLAY,
Mr. SAWYER, Mr. OWENS of New York, Mr. RAHALL, Mr. JONTZ, Mr. MARTINEZ,
Mr. FUSTER, Mrs. UNSOELD, Mr. DELLUMS, Mr. STARK, Mr. FAUNTROY, Mr. OBERSTAR,
Ms. PELOSI, Mr. BERMAN, Mr. BATES, Mr. KASTENMEIER, Ms. OAKAR, Mr. FAZIO,
Mr. POSHARD, Mr. KLECZKA, Mr. FRANK, Mr. TRAFICANT, Mr. DWYER of New Jersey,
Mr. STUDDS, Mrs. COLLINS, Mr. CONYERS, Mr. FOGLIETTA, Ms. SLAUGHTER,
Mrs. BOXER, Mr. KILDEE, Mr. PALLONE, Mr. LEVIN of Michigan, Mr. BONIOR,
Mr. DINGELL, and Mr. MILLER of California) introduced the following bill;
which was referred jointly to the Committees on Education and Labor and Post
Office and Civil Service
A BILL
To strengthen the protections available to employees against reprisals for
disclosing information to protect the public health and safety, and for
other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Employee Health and Safety Whistleblower
 Protection Act'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
 (a) FINDINGS- Congress finds that--
 (1) employees who report unlawful or hazardous activities are performing
 an important public service by helping ensure the health and safety of
 workers and the general public;
 (2) employees should be able to report unlawful or hazardous activities
 without fear of reprisal; and
 (3) employees who make such reports are not adequately protected against
 reprisal by the current Federal laws designed to protect whistleblowers.
 (b) PURPOSE- The purpose of this Act is to strengthen and improve
 protection for employees who report unlawful or hazardous activities,
 to prevent retaliation against employees, and to improve the health and
 safety of workers and the general public by--
 (1) creating uniform substantive protections and administrative procedures
 for whistleblower complaints regarding health and safety matters;
 (2) centralizing administration and enforcement of whistleblower protection
 regarding health and safety matters within the Department of Labor;
 (3) extending whistleblower protection regarding health and safety matters
 for private sector employees;
 (4) ensuring that reports of unlawful or hazardous activities are referred
 to the appropriate Federal agencies for investigation; and
 (5) recognizing the right of employees to refuse to work until dangerous
 working conditions are corrected.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act--
 (1) COMMERCE- The term `commerce' means trade, traffic, commerce,
 transportation, or communication among the several States, or between a
 State and any place outside thereof, or within the District of Columbia,
 or a possession of the United States, or between points in the same State
 but through a point outside thereof.
 (2) EMPLOYEE- The term `employee' means any individual who is employed by
 an employer.
 (3) EMPLOYER- The term `employer'--
 (A) means a person engaged in a business affecting commerce who has
 employees; and
 (B) includes--
 (i) a State or political subdivision of a State, or an interstate
 governmental agency; and
 (ii) an agent of an employer and an employer of an employer; and
 (C) does not include the United States except for a government corporation
 (as defined in section 103(1) of title 5, United States Code) and the
 United States Postal Service.
 (4) EXISTING FEDERAL WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION LAW- The term `existing
 Federal whistleblower protection law' means those provisions of Federal
 law that protect employees against discharge or discrimination for any of
 the conduct described in section 4, that are contained in--
 (A) section 942 of Department of Defense Authorization Act of 1987 (10
 U.S.C. 2409);
 (B) section 23 of the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2622);
 (C) section 211 of the Asbestos Hazard Emergency Response Act of 1986
 (15 U.S.C. 2651);
 (D) section 11(c) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29
 U.S.C. 660(c));
 (E) section 505(a) of the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection
 Act (29 U.S.C. 1855(a));
 (F) section 105(c) of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977
 (30 U.S.C. 815(c));
 (G) section 703 of the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977
 (30 U.S.C. 1293);
 (H) section 507 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1367);
 (I) section 1450 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300j-9);
 (J) section 210 of the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5851);
 (K) section 7001 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6971);
 (L) section 322 of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7622);
 (M) section 110 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation,
 and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9610);
 (N) section 212 of the Federal Railroad Safety Act of 1970 (45 U.S.C. 441);
 (O) section 7 of the International Safe Container Act (46 U.S.C. 1506); or
 (P) section 405 of the Surface Transportation Assistance Act of 1982
 (49 U.S.C. App. 2305).
 (5) FEDERAL AGENCY- The term `Federal agency' means each authority of the
 Government of the United States, whether or not it is within or subject
 to review by another agency, or any interstate governmental agency or
 commission. For purposes of section 4, the term includes each authority
 of the Government of a State or a political subdivision of a State that
 administers or enforces a Federal health or safety law.
 (6) FEDERAL HEALTH OR SAFETY LAW- The term `Federal health or safety law'
 means any Federal law, or any portion thereof, including any Federal
 regulation, rule, or order implementing such law or portion thereof,
 a primary purpose or effect of which is to protect health or safety. The
 term includes a State law, regulation, rule, or order, enacted as part of
 a State plan established to carry out a Federal health or safety law.
 (7) INVESTIGATION OFFICE- The term `investigation office' means the office
 or unit created or designated within the Department of Labor pursuant to
 section 5(c)(1).
 (8) PROCEEDING- The term `proceeding' means a trial, hearing, investigation,
 inquiry, inspection, administrative rulemaking, or adjudication involving
 a Federal agency.
 (9) RESPONDENT- The term `respondent' means a person named in a complaint
 as a respondent.
 (10) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Labor.
 (11) STATE- The term `State' means a State of the United States, the
 District of Columbia, Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands,
 American Samoa, Guam, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, or any
 other Territory or possession of the United States.
SEC. 4. EMPLOYEE PROTECTION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- No person shall discharge or in any other manner discriminate
 against any employee, former employee, or applicant for employment because
 the employee, former employee, or applicant for employment--
 (1) discloses, or demonstrates an intent to disclose, an activity, policy,
 or practice that the employee, former employee, or applicant for employment
 believes evidences a violation of any Federal health or safety law;
 (2) initiates, assists, participates, or demonstrates an intent to initiate,
 assist, or participate in, a proceeding with respect to--
 (A) an activity, policy, or practice that the employee, former employee,
 or applicant for employment believes evidences a violation of any Federal
 health or safety law;
 (B) consideration of enactment, adoption, promulgation, issuance, or
 amendment of a Federal health or safety law; or
 (C) administration or enforcement of a Federal health or safety law or of
 this Act; or
 (3) refuses to participate in an activity, policy, or practice when--
 (A)(i) such participation constitutes a violation of a Federal health or
 safety law; and
 (ii) the employee, former employee, or applicant for employment promptly
 reported the violation to a representative of the employer; or
 (B)(i) the employee, former employee, or applicant for employment has a
 reasonable apprehension of serious injury to the employee, former employee,
 or applicant for employment, or to other employees or the public due to
 such participation;
 (ii) the activity, policy, or practice causing the employee's, former
 employee's, or applicant's apprehension of such injury is of such a nature
 that a reasonable person, under the circumstances then confronting the
 employee, former employee, or applicant for employment, would conclude
 there is a bona fide danger of an accident, injury, or serious impairment
 of health or safety, resulting from participation in the activity, policy,
 or practice; and
 (iii) the employee, former employee, or applicant for employment promptly
 reported the dangerous activity, policy, or practice to a representative
 of the employer.
 (b) WAIVER- Except as provided in section 5(k) or pursuant to any court
 supervised settlement agreement, an agreement by an employee, former
 employee, or applicant for employment, express or implied, written or oral,
 purporting to waive or modify the rights of the employee, former employee,
 or applicant for employment under this Act or any Federal health or safety
 law shall be void as contrary to public policy.
 (c) EXEMPTION- This Act shall not apply under circumstances where an
 employee, former employee, or applicant for employment deliberately causes
 a violation of a Federal health or safety law, unless such employee,
 former employee, or applicant for employment was acting with the consent
 of the employer.
SEC. 5. REMEDY.
 (a) STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS- The statute of limitations for filing a complaint
 pursuant to this Act or an existing Federal whistleblower protection law
 shall be 180 days after the later of the date--
 (1) an alleged violation occurs;
 (2) the discharge or other discrimination has taken effect; or
 (3) the employee, former employee, or applicant for employment first learns
 or reasonably should have learned of the violation.
 (b) Complaint-
 (1) FILING- Any employee, former employee, or applicant for employment (or
 any person on behalf of such employee, former employee, or applicant for
 employment) who believes that he or she has been discharged or otherwise
 discriminated against by any person in violation of section 4 may, within
 the period prescribed in subsection (a), file (or have filed by any person
 on behalf of such employee, former employee, or applicant for employment)
 a complaint with the Secretary alleging such violation. Except as provided
 in section 4(a)(3)(B)(iii), the complaint may be filed without regard to
 exhaustion of any other remedy.
 (2) COPY- On receipt of a complaint, the Secretary shall cause a copy of
 the complaint to be served on the respondent and on any Federal agency
 that may have jurisdiction over the activity, policy, or practice alleged
 in the complaint.
 (c) Investigation-
 (1) ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS- The Secretary shall create or designate
 an identifiable office or unit within the Department of Labor that shall
 be responsible for investigation of complaints filed under subsection
 (b). The Secretary shall refer all such complaints immediately to the
 investigation office.
 (2) IN GENERAL- (A) Within 60 days after the receipt of a complaint
 filed under subsection (b), the investigation office shall conduct an
 investigation, determine whether there is reasonable cause to believe the
 complaint has merit, and make findings of fact.
 (B) If there is reasonable cause to believe a violation of this Act has
 occurred, the investigation office shall accompany the findings of fact
 with a preliminary order providing the relief prescribed by subsection
 (i), including immediate reinstatement of the employee or former employee,
 or employment of the applicant for employment, pending a final order on
 the complaint.
 (C) The Secretary or complainant may petition any United States district
 court for the enforcement of an order by filing in such court a written
 petition paying that such order be enforced. The court shall apply the
 same standard of review in enforcing such order as is applicable to the
 enforcement of administrative subpoenas. The court shall conduct any
 hearing under this subparagraph expeditiously.
 (3) HEARING- The findings and any preliminary order issued by the
 investigation office shall be served on all parties to the investigation and
 shall include a statement of the right of any party to request a hearing
 pursuant to subsection (d). Where a hearing is not timely requested,
 the findings and any preliminary order issued by the investigation office
 shall be deemed the final order of the Secretary and shall not be subject
 to judicial review.
 (4) HEARING PROCEDURE- In all hearings conducted under this Act, once the
 complainant has established by a preponderance of the evidence that an
 activity protected by this Act was a contributing factor in the alleged
 discharge or discrimination, the burden of proof shall be on the respondent
 to prove by clear and convincing evidence that the alleged discharge or
 discrimination would have occurred even if the employee, former employee, or
 applicant for employment had not engaged in activities protected by this Act.
 (d) Hearing Request-
 (1) TIMING- The complainant or the respondent may request a hearing before
 an administrative law judge--
 (A) within 30 days after the receipt of the findings or preliminary order
 of the investigation office; or
 (B) if no such findings have been issued on or before the 60th day after
 receipt of the complaint, within 30 days thereafter.
 (2) JURISDICTION- The jurisdiction of the investigation office to make
 findings or issue a preliminary order shall cease on the filing of a request
 by the complainant or respondent for a hearing. Once the investigation
 office has lost jurisdiction to make findings or issue a preliminary
 order, any investigative material compiled by the investigation office in
 connection with the investigation shall be made available to the complainant
 or the respondent on request, subject to section 552a of title 5, United
 States Code.
 (3) FILING WITH DEPARTMENT- Any request for a hearing shall be filed with
 the investigation office. The investigation office shall file the request
 with the Office of Administrative Law Judges in the Department of Labor
 within 5 days of receipt.
 (4) NO STAY OF REINSTATEMENT- Such a request shall not operate to stay
 any reinstatement remedy contained in a preliminary order issued by the
 investigation office.
 (5) NO FINDINGS- If the investigation office has failed to make findings
 within the period prescribed, the complainant may include in the hearing
 request, or by a motion submitted thereafter, a request to the administrative
 law judge for a preliminary order for immediate reinstatement. The
 administrative law judge shall conduct a preliminary reinstatement hearing
 and, upon finding that there is reasonable cause to believe that a violation
 of this Act has occurred, issue an order within 20 days of the request.
 (e) INTERVENTION-
 (1) VIOLATION DETERMINED BY INVESTIGATION OFFICE- If the investigation
 office has determined that there is reasonable cause to believe that a
 violation of this Act has occurred, the investigation office shall, with
 the consent of the complainant, intervene on behalf of the complainant in
 the proceedings authorized under this section.
 (2) REPRESENTATION- Such determination or the intervention by the
 investigation office shall not preclude the complainant or any other
 person on behalf of the complainant from representing the complainant in
 the proceedings authorized under this section.
 (f) SUBPOENA AND RULEMAKING-
 (1) SUBPOENA POWER- For purposes of any hearing or investigation provided
 for in this Act, the provisions of sections 9 and 10 (relating to attendance
 of witnesses and the production of books, papers, and documents) of the
 Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 49 and 50) shall be applicable to
 the jurisdiction, powers, and duties of the Secretary.
 (2) RULEMAKING AUTHORITY- The Secretary shall promulgate such rules and
 regulations as may be appropriate to administer this Act.
 (g) Hearing Procedure-
 (1) TIME FOR COMPLETION- Any hearing requested pursuant to subsection
 (d) shall be conducted by an administrative law judge and be completed
 within 180 days of receipt of the request for a hearing by the Office of
 Administrative Law Judges.
 (2) NOTICE- The parties shall have a reasonable opportunity for prehearing
 discovery and shall be given written notice of the time and place of the
 hearing at least 15 days before the hearing.
 (3) ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE- The hearing shall be subject to the
 requirements of section 554 of title 5, United States Code.
 (4) TRIAL DE NOVO- The hearing shall be de novo, except that any preliminary
 order directing immediate reinstatement shall continue to be enforceable
 until a decision on such hearing has been issued.
 (5) DECISION- Within 60 days after the conclusion of the hearing on the
 record, or within 240 days after receipt of the hearing request by the
 investigation office, whichever is sooner, the administrative law judge
 shall issue a decision containing findings of fact, conclusions of law, and
 the remedy ordered, if any. The decision shall be served on the Secretary
 and on all parties to the hearing and shall include a statement to the
 parties of their right to appeal.
 (h) Administrative Appeal-
 (1) REVIEW- Any decision issued pursuant to subsection (g) shall be the final
 order of the Secretary subject to judicial review pursuant to subsection
 (j) unless a party petitions the Secretary for review or the Secretary
 issues an order of review within 30 days after the issuance of the decision.
 (2) TIME FOR REVIEW- Within 60 days after receipt of the petition for review
 or issuance of an order of review, the Secretary shall issue a final order,
 based on the record (including the decision of the administrative law judge),
 which shall be served on all parties. If the Secretary does not issue a
 final order within the period prescribed by this subsection, the decision of
 the administrative law judge shall become the final order of the Secretary.
 (i) REMEDIES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- If, in response to a complaint filed under subsection
 (b), the Secretary, investigation office, court, or administrative law
 judge determines that a violation of this Act occurred, the Secretary,
 investigation office, court, or administrative law judge shall order--
 (A) the person who committed the violation to take affirmative action to
 abate the violation;
 (B) such person to reinstate the complainant to the complainant's former
 position, if reinstatement is sought, together with compensation, including
 back pay, and lost benefits, terms, conditions, and privileges of the
 complainant's employment;
 (C) such person to pay consequential damages;
 (D) such person to pay double damages, upon a determination that the
 violation of this Act involved willful, wanton conduct disclosing a
 deliberate disregard for public health and safety; and
 (E) such equitable relief as is necessary to correct any violation of this
 Act or to make the complainant whole.
 (2) COSTS- On the issuance or designation of a final order of the Secretary
 sustaining the complainant's complaint, the Secretary or court, at the
 request of the complainant, shall assess against the respondent a sum equal
 to the aggregate amount of all costs and expenses (including attorney's
 fees) reasonably incurred, as determined by the Secretary or court, by the
 complainant for and in connection with, the bringing of the complaint on
 which the order was issued.
 (j) JUDICIAL REVIEW- Any person adversely affected or aggrieved by a
 final order issued pursuant to subsection (h) may obtain review of the
 order in the United States court of appeals for the circuit in which the
 violation allegedly occurred. The petition for review must be filed within
 60 days after the issuance or designation of the final order. The review
 shall be conducted in accordance with chapter 7 of title 5, United States
 Code. The filing of a petition for review under this subsection shall not,
 unless ordered in accordance with the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure,
 operate as a stay of the order. A final order of the Secretary with respect
 to which review could have been obtained under this paragraph shall not
 be subject to judicial review in any criminal or other civil proceeding.
 (k) Settlement or Alternative Dispute Resolution-
 (1) SETTLEMENT- On receipt of a complaint pursuant to subsection (b),
 the investigation office shall attempt to reach a settlement between the
 complainant and the respondent. The Secretary, investigation office, or
 administrative law judge shall not enter into a settlement terminating
 a proceeding without the participation and written consent of the
 complainant. Any settlement order issued pursuant to this subsection
 shall be a final order of the Secretary and shall include findings that
 the settlement is fair, adequate, reasonable, and in the public interest.
 (2) ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION- While the complaint is pending within
 the Department of Labor, the Secretary may use alternative means of dispute
 resolution to resolve the complaint, but the parties must consent, in
 writing, before the Secretary may employ such means.
 (l) TIME COMPUTATIONS- Except as otherwise provided in this Act, for
 purposes of a proceeding on a complaint, all time computations shall be
 made in accordance with the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
 (m) POSTING- Each employer subject to this Act or any other Federal
 whistleblower law shall post and keep posted in prominent places on its
 premises a notice to be prepared or approved by the Secretary setting forth
 such information as the Secretary considers appropriate to effectuate the
 purposes of this Act.
SEC. 6. ENFORCEMENT.
 (a) BY THE SECRETARY- Whenever a person has failed to comply with an
 order issued under this Act, the Secretary may file a civil action in
 the United States district court for the district in which the violation
 is alleged to have occurred to enforce such order. In an action brought
 under this subsection, the district court shall have jurisdiction to grant
 all appropriate relief, including injunctive and declaratory relief and
 compensatory and exemplary damages.
 (b) BY THE PARTIES- Any person on whose behalf an order is issued pursuant
 to this Act may commence a civil action against the person named in the
 order to require compliance with such order. The appropriate United States
 district court shall have jurisdiction, without regard to the amount in
 controversy or the citizenship of the parties, to enforce such order. On
 issuance of an order on behalf of any person seeking enforcement under this
 subsection, the court may award costs of litigation (including reasonable
 attorney and expert witness fees) to the person seeking enforcement.
SEC. 7. COMPLAINT REFERRAL.
 (a) REFERRAL- On issuance of a final order (including an order approving
 a settlement pursuant to section 5(k)) by the Secretary, investigation
 office, or administrative law judge, the Secretary shall cause a copy
 of such order, but only the relevant portions of a settlement order,
 to be served on each Federal agency that may have jurisdiction over the
 activity, policy, or practice alleged in the complaint. Any such Federal
 agency shall take appropriate action with respect to the activity, policy,
 or practice. Within 30 days after taking such action any Federal agency
 shall inform the parties to the complaint filed under section 5(b) of any
 action taken.
 (b) OTHER INVESTIGATIVE AUTHORITY- Subject to section 8, nothing in this
 section shall limit the authority of any Federal agency under any other law.
SEC. 8. EFFECT ON OTHER RIGHTS AND REMEDIES.
 (a) FEDERAL RIGHTS AND REMEDIES- The rights and remedies provided to
 employees, former employees, and applicants for employment by this Act
 supersede, and are in lieu of, any other rights and remedies provided
 under any existing Federal whistleblower protection laws with respect
 to any discharge or discrimination based on employee, former employee,
 or applicant for employment conduct protected by section 4 of this Act.
 (b) STATE RIGHTS AND REMEDIES- The rights and remedies provided to
 employees, former employees, and applicants for employment by this Act
 and under existing Federal whistleblower protection laws are in addition
 to, and not in lieu of, any other rights and remedies of the employees,
 former employees, and applicants for employment provided under State law,
 and are not intended to alter or affect such rights and remedies.
 (c) CONTRACTUAL AND STATUTORY RIGHTS AND REMEDIES- The rights and remedies
 provided to employees, former employees, and applicants for employment
 by this Act are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other contractual
 rights and remedies of the employees, former employees, and applicants for
 employment, and are not intended to alter or affect such rights and remedies.
 (d) ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION- The enforcement and administration
 procedures of this Act supersede, and are in lieu of, the enforcement and
 administration procedures in any existing Federal whistleblower protection
 law with respect to any discharge or discrimination based on employee,
 former employee, or applicant for employment conduct protected by section
 4 of this Act.
SEC. 9. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 (a) EFFECTIVE DATE- This Act shall become effective on the date of enactment.
 (b) PENDING CASES- This Act shall apply only to those complaints filed on
 or after the effective date of this Act.