[Congressional Bills 115th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 3652 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

<DOC>

115th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 S. 3652

 To support the peaceful resolution of the civil war in Yemen, to 
address the resulting humanitarian crisis, and to hold the perpetrators 
 responsible for murdering a Saudi dissident.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 November 15, 2018

 Mr. Menendez (for himself, Mr. Young, Mr. Reed, Mr. Graham, Mrs. 
Shaheen, and Ms. Collins) introduced the following bill; which was read 
 twice and referred to the Committee on Foreign Relations

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To support the peaceful resolution of the civil war in Yemen, to 
address the resulting humanitarian crisis, and to hold the perpetrators 
 responsible for murdering a Saudi dissident.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Saudi Arabia Accountability and 
Yemen Act of 2018''.

SEC. 2. TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 The table of contents for this Act is as follows:

Sec. 1. Short title.
Sec. 2. Table of contents.
 TITLE I--PEACEFUL RESOLUTION OF THE CIVIL WAR IN YEMEN AND PROTECTION 
 OF CIVILIANS

Sec. 101. Statement of policy.
Sec. 102. Sense of Congress.
Sec. 103. United States strategy for ending the war in Yemen.
Sec. 104. Report on accountability for violations of international law, 
 including war crimes, and other harm to 
 civilians in Yemen.
Sec. 105. Suspension of arms transfers to Saudi Arabia.
Sec. 106. Prohibition on in-flight refueling of Saudi coalition 
 aircraft operating in Yemen.
Sec. 107. Imposition of sanctions with respect to persons hindering 
 humanitarian access and threatening the 
 peace or stability of Yemen.
Sec. 108. Imposition of sanctions with respect to persons supporting 
 the Houthis in Yemen.
Sec. 109. GAO review of United States military support to Saudi-led 
 coalition.
 TITLE II--SAUDI ARABIA ACCOUNTABILITY

Sec. 201. Imposition of sanctions on persons responsible for the death 
 of Jamal Khashoggi.
Sec. 202. Report on Saudi Arabia's human rights record.
 TITLE III--GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sec. 301. Rule of construction.
Sec. 302. Sunset.

 TITLE I--PEACEFUL RESOLUTION OF THE CIVIL WAR IN YEMEN AND PROTECTION 
 OF CIVILIANS

SEC. 101. STATEMENT OF POLICY.

 It is the policy of the United States--
 (1) to support United Nations-led efforts for a 
 comprehensive political settlement that leads to a 
 territorially unified, stable, and independent Yemen;
 (2) to insist on the urgent need for a political solution, 
 consistent with United Nations Security Council Resolution 
 2216, or any successor United Nations Security Council 
 Resolution demanding an end to violence in Yemen and peaceful 
 resolution of the conflict in that country;
 (3) to reject all statements, policies, or actions 
 advocating for a military solution to the civil war in Yemen; 
 and
 (4) to encourage long-standing United States security 
 partners, including the Government of Saudi Arabia and the 
 Government of the United Arab Emirates, to take the lead in 
 confidence-building measures that open space for political 
 dialogue to end the war in Yemen and address the humanitarian 
 crisis.

SEC. 102. SENSE OF CONGRESS.

 It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) direct negotiations between the Government of Saudi 
 Arabia and representatives of the Houthi movement (also known 
 as ``Ansar Allah'') are required--
 (A) to reach a political solution;
 (B) to address the suffering of the Yemeni people; 
 and
 (C) to counter efforts by Iran, al Qaeda, and ISIS 
 to exploit instability for their own malign purposes;
 (2) the Government of Saudi Arabia and the Government of 
 the United Arab Emirates bear significant responsibility for 
 the economic stabilization and eventual reconstruction of 
 Yemen; and
 (3) the United States and the international community must 
 continue to support the work of United Nations Special Envoy 
 Martin Griffiths to achieve a political solution to the civil 
 war in Yemen.

SEC. 103. UNITED STATES STRATEGY FOR ENDING THE WAR IN YEMEN.

 (a) Defined Term.--In this section, the term ``appropriate 
congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate;
 (2) the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate;
 (3) the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (4) the Committee on Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (b) Strategy.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, and every 90 days thereafter until a complete 
cessation of hostilities in the Yemen civil war, the Secretary of 
State, the Administrator of the United States Agency for International 
Development, the Secretary of Defense, and the Director of National 
Intelligence shall provide a briefing to the appropriate congressional 
committees on the progress of the United States strategy to end the war 
in Yemen.
 (c) Elements.--The briefing required under subsection (b) shall 
include--
 (1) a summary of the United States national security 
 interests threatened by continued civil war and instability in 
 Yemen;
 (2) a description of the steps necessary to end the civil 
 war in Yemen and achieve a territorially unified, stable, and 
 independent Yemen;
 (3) a description of whether the Saudi-led coalition, the 
 internationally recognized Government of Yemen, local Yemeni 
 forces, and Ansar Allah are taking the necessary steps referred 
 to in paragraph (2);
 (4) a description of United States activities to encourage 
 all parties to take the necessary steps referred to in 
 paragraph (2);
 (5) an assessment of the threat posed by Al Qaeda and the 
 Islamic State in Yemen to United States national security, 
 including--
 (A) a comprehensive list of all sources of support 
 received by these groups; and
 (B) an assessment regarding whether the activities 
 of Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula and the Islamic 
 State in Yemen have expanded or diminished since the 
 beginning of the war in Yemen;
 (6) an explanation of how the United States has used, and 
 plans to use, its military and diplomatic leverage--
 (A) to end the civil war in Yemen; and
 (B) to move the stakeholders in the war toward a 
 political process to end the war;
 (7) an assessment of Iran's activities in Yemen, 
 including--
 (A) a comprehensive summary of all recipients of 
 illicit Iranian support in Yemen; and
 (B) an assessment regarding whether the scope of 
 Iran's influence and activities in Yemen have increased 
 or decreased since the beginning of the war in Yemen;
 (8) a description of Russia's activities in Yemen and an 
 assessment of Russia's objectives for such activities; and
 (9) any other matters relevant to ending the civil war in 
 Yemen.

SEC. 104. REPORT ON ACCOUNTABILITY FOR VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL LAW, 
 INCLUDING WAR CRIMES, AND OTHER HARM TO CIVILIANS IN 
 YEMEN.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) all stakeholders in the conflict in Yemen should end 
 all practices involving arbitrary arrests, enforced 
 disappearances, torture, and other unlawful treatment;
 (2) all stakeholders in the conflict in Yemen should reveal 
 the fate or the location of all persons who have been subjected 
 to enforced disappearance by such stakeholders;
 (3) all persons who remain in custody as a result of the 
 conflict in Yemen should be granted immediate access to their 
 families;
 (4) the locations of all detention facilities run or 
 supervised by members of the Saudi-led coalition should be 
 revealed and brought under the supervision of the Prosecutor 
 General of Yemen;
 (5) independent monitors should be granted access to all 
 places of detention in Yemen;
 (6) all stakeholders to the conflict in Yemen should fully 
 cooperate with the United Nations Panel of Experts on Yemen.
 (b) Defined Term.--In this section, the term ``appropriate 
congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate;
 (2) the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate;
 (3) the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (4) the Committee on Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (c) Report.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of State shall submit a report to the 
appropriate congressional committees that describes the causes and 
consequences of civilian harm occurring in the armed conflict in Yemen, 
including war crimes, and gross violations of human rights as a result 
of the actions of all parties to the conflict.
 (d) Elements.--The report required under subsection (c) shall 
include--
 (1) a description of civilian harm occurring in the context 
 of the armed conflict in Yemen, including--
 (A) mass casualty incidents; and
 (B) damage to, and destruction of, civilian 
 infrastructure and services, including--
 (i) hospitals and other medical facilities;
 (ii) electrical grids;
 (iii) water systems;
 (iv) ports and port infrastructure; and
 (v) other critical infrastructure;
 (2) violations of the law of armed conflict committed 
 during the war in Yemen by--
 (A) all forces involved in the Saudi-led coalition 
 and all forces fighting on its behalf;
 (B) members of the Houthi movement and all forces 
 fighting on its behalf;
 (C) members of violent extremist organizations; and
 (D) any other combatants in the conflict;
 (3) as examples of violations referred to in paragraph 
 (2)--
 (A) alleged war crimes;
 (B) specific instances of failure by the parties to 
 the conflict to exercise distinction, proportionality, 
 and precaution in the use force in accordance with the 
 law of armed conflict;
 (C) arbitrary denials of humanitarian access and 
 the resulting impact on the alleviation of human 
 suffering;
 (D) detention-related abuses; and
 (E) other acts that may constitute violations of 
 the law of armed conflict; and
 (4) recommendations for establishing accountability 
 mechanisms for the civilian harm, war crimes, other violations 
 of the law of armed conflict, and gross violations of human 
 rights perpetrated by parties to the conflict in Yemen, 
 including--
 (A) the potential for prosecuting individuals 
 perpetrating, organizing, directing, or ordering such 
 violations; and
 (B) establishing condolence payments for the 
 impacted members of the civilian population.
 (e) Form.--The report required under subsection (c) shall be 
submitted in unclassified form, but may contain a classified annex.

SEC. 105. SUSPENSION OF ARMS TRANSFERS TO SAUDI ARABIA.

 (a) Defined Term.--In this section, the term ``appropriate 
committees of Congress'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate;
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives;
 (3) the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate; and
 (4) the Committee on Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (b) Restriction.--Except as provided in subsection (c), during the 
period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act and ending on 
September 30, 2020, the United States Government--
 (1) may not sell, transfer, or authorize licenses for 
 export to the Government of Saudi Arabia any item designated 
 under Category III, IV, VII, or VIII on the United States 
 Munitions List pursuant to section 38(a)(1) of the Arms Export 
 Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2778(a)(1)); and
 (2) shall suspend any licenses or other approvals that were 
 issued before the date of the enactment of this Act for the 
 export to the Government of Saudi Arabia of any item designated 
 under Category IV of the United States Munitions List.
 (c) Exception.--The prohibition under subsection (b) shall not 
apply to sales, transfers, or export licenses relating to ground-based 
missile defense systems.
 (d) Waiver.--The President may waive the restriction under 
subsection (b) for items designated under Categories III, VII, and VIII 
of the United States Munitions List not earlier than 30 days after--
 (1) the Secretary of State, in coordination with the 
 Secretary of Defense, submits a written, unclassified 
 certification to the appropriate committees of Congress stating 
 that--
 (A) such waiver is in the national security 
 interests of the United States;
 (B) the Saudi-led coalition, during the 180-day 
 period immediately preceding the date of such 
 certification, has continuously--
 (i) honored a complete cessation of 
 hostilities in the Yemen civil war, including 
 ending all air strikes and all offensive ground 
 operations that are not associated with al 
 Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula or ISIS;
 (ii) fully supported, in statements and 
 actions, the work of United Nations Special 
 Envoy Martin Griffiths to find a political 
 solution to the conflict in Yemen; and
 (iii) abstained from any actions to 
 restrict, delay, or interfere with the delivery 
 of cargo to or within Yemen unless--
 (I) such action was taken 
 exclusively to carry out inspections 
 based on specific intelligence that a 
 cargo shipment contains weapons 
 prohibited under United Nations 
 Security Council Resolution 2216; and
 (II) the Saudi-led coalition timely 
 submitted any reports required under 
 such Resolution after the conclusion of 
 such action; and
 (C) Ansar Allah or associated forces, during the 
 180-day period immediately preceding the date of such 
 certification--
 (i) launched missile or unmanned aerial 
 vehicle strikes into Saudi Arabia or the United 
 Arab Emirates;
 (ii) conducted ground incursions into the 
 territory of Saudi Arabia or the United Arab 
 Emirates;
 (iii) accepted weapons, weapons components, 
 funding, or military training from the Islamic 
 Republic of Iran;
 (iv) attacked vessels in the Red Sea; or
 (v) prohibited or otherwise restricted, 
 directly or indirectly, the transport or 
 delivery of humanitarian or commercial 
 shipments to and within Yemen; and
 (2) not later than 45 days after the submission of the 
 certification under paragraph (1), the Comptroller General of 
 the United States submits a written, unclassified report to the 
 appropriate committees of Congress assessing the 
 responsiveness, completeness, and accuracy of such 
 certification.
 (e) Classified Briefing.--If the Secretary of State and the 
Secretary of Defense determine that Ansar Allah has engaged in any of 
the actions described in subsection (d)(1)(C), the Secretaries shall 
provide a classified briefing to the appropriate committees of Congress 
not later than 10 days after submitting the certification under 
subsection (d)(1) to provide details to support such determination.

SEC. 106. PROHIBITION ON IN-FLIGHT REFUELING OF SAUDI COALITION 
 AIRCRAFT OPERATING IN YEMEN.

 No Federal funds may be obligated or expended under section 2342 of 
title 10, United States Code, or under any other applicable statutory 
authority, to provide in-flight refueling of Saudi or Saudi-led 
coalition non-United States aircraft conducting missions as part of the 
ongoing civil war in Yemen.

SEC. 107. IMPOSITION OF SANCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO PERSONS HINDERING 
 HUMANITARIAN ACCESS AND THREATENING THE PEACE OR 
 STABILITY OF YEMEN.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the 
President should continue to implement Executive Order 13611 (77 Fed. 
Reg. 29533), relating to blocking property of persons threatening the 
peace, security, or stability of Yemen.
 (b) Sanctions.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the President shall impose the sanctions 
described in subsection (c) with respect to each person that the 
President determines--
 (1)(A) is knowingly blocking access to Yemeni ports, ports 
 of entry, or other facilities used by the United Nations, its 
 specialized agencies and implementing partners, national and 
 international nongovernmental organizations, or any other 
 actors engaged in humanitarian relief activities in Yemen; or
 (B) is otherwise hindering the efforts of such 
 organizations to deliver humanitarian relief, including through 
 diversion of goods and materials intended to provide relief to 
 civilians in Yemen;
 (2)(A) is knowingly threatening the humanitarian actors 
 referred to in paragraph (1)(A); or
 (B) is engaging in acts of violence against such actors in 
 Yemen or across conflict lines and borders;
 (3) is responsible for actions or policies that are 
 intended to undermine--
 (A) the United Nations-led political process to end 
 the conflict in Yemen; or
 (B) efforts to promote stabilization and 
 reconstruction in Yemen;
 (4) is a successor entity to a person referred to in 
 paragraphs (1) through (3);
 (5) owns or controls, or is owned or controlled by, a 
 person referred to in paragraphs (1) through (3);
 (6) is acting for or, on behalf of, a person referred to in 
 paragraphs (1) through (3); or
 (7) has knowingly provided, or attempted to provide, 
 financial, material, technological, or other support for, or 
 goods or services in support of, a person referred to in 
 paragraphs (1) through (3).
 (c) Sanctions Described.--
 (1) In general.--The sanctions described in this subsection 
 are the following:
 (A) Asset blocking.--In accordance with the 
 International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 
 1701 et seq.), the President shall block all 
 transactions in all property and interests in property 
 of a person subject to subsection (a) if such property 
 and interests in property--
 (i) are in the United States;
 (ii) are transported into the United 
 States; or
 (iii) are in, or come into, the possession 
 or control of a United States person.
 (B) Aliens ineligible for visas, admission, or 
 parole.--
 (i) Exclusion from the united states.--The 
 Secretary of State shall deny a visa to, and 
 the Secretary of Homeland Security shall 
 exclude from the United States, any alien 
 subject to subsection (b).
 (ii) Current visas revoked.--
 (I) In general.--The issuing 
 consular officer, the Secretary of 
 State, or the Secretary of Homeland 
 Security (or a designee of any such 
 officer or Secretary) shall revoke any 
 visa or other entry documentation 
 issued to an alien subject to 
 subsection (b), regardless of when such 
 visa was issued.
 (II) Effect of revocation.--A 
 revocation under subclause (I) shall 
 take effect immediately and shall 
 automatically cancel any other valid 
 visa or entry documentation that is in 
 the alien's possession.
 (2) Inapplicability of national emergency requirement.--The 
 requirements under section 202 of the International Emergency 
 Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701) shall not apply for 
 purposes of the imposition of sanctions under this section.
 (3) Penalties.--Any person that violates, attempts to 
 violate, conspires to violate, or causes a violation described 
 in subsection (b), or any regulation, license, or order issued 
 to carry out such paragraph, shall be subject to the penalties 
 set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of section 206 of the 
 International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1705) to 
 the same extent as a person that commits an unlawful act 
 described in subsection (a) of such section.

SEC. 108. IMPOSITION OF SANCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO PERSONS SUPPORTING 
 THE HOUTHIS IN YEMEN.

 (a) Determination.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the President shall determine if the Houthi 
movement (also known as ``Ansar Allah'') has engaged meaningfully in 
United Nations-led efforts for a comprehensive political settlement 
that leads to a territorially unified, stable, and independent Yemen.
 (b) Sanctions.--If the President is unable to make the 
determination described in subsection (a), the President shall impose 
the sanctions described in subsection (c) on any person that the 
President determines--
 (1) has knowingly assisted, sponsored, provided, or 
 attempted to provide significant financial, material, or 
 technological support for, or goods or services in support of, 
 the Houthis movement in Yemen, its successor entities, entities 
 that own or control, or are owned or controlled by, the Houthi 
 movement, or entities acting for, or on behalf of, the Houthi 
 movement;
 (2) has knowingly engaged in any activity that materially 
 contributes to the supply, sale, or direct or indirect transfer 
 to or from the Houthi movement in Yemen, its successor 
 entities, entities that own or control, or are owned or 
 controlled by, the Houthi movement, or entities acting for or 
 on behalf of the Houthi movement, of any firearms or 
 ammunition, battle tanks, armored vehicles, artillery or mortar 
 systems, aircraft, attack helicopters, warships, missiles or 
 missile systems, or explosive mines of any type (as such terms 
 are defined for the purpose of the United Nations Register of 
 Conventional Arms), ground-to-air missiles, unmanned aerial 
 vehicles, or related materiel, including spare parts;
 (3) has knowingly provided any technical training, 
 financial resources or services, advice, other services or 
 assistance related to the supply, sale, transfer, manufacture, 
 maintenance, or use of arms and related materiel described in 
 paragraph (2) to the Houthi movement in Yemen, its successor 
 entities, entities that own or control, or are owned or 
 controlled by, the Houthi movement, or entities acting for or 
 on behalf of the Houthi movement;
 (4) is a successor entity to a person described in 
 paragraph (1), (2), or (3);
 (5) is an entity that owns or controls, or is owned or 
 controlled by, a person described in paragraph (1), (2), or 
 (3); or
 (6) is an entity that is acting for, or on behalf of, a 
 person referred to in paragraph (1), (2), or (3).
 (c) Sanctions Described.--
 (1) In general.--The sanctions described in this subsection 
 are the following:
 (A) Asset blocking.--In accordance with the 
 International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 
 1701 et seq.), the President shall block all 
 transactions in property, or interests in property, of 
 a person subject to subsection (b) if such property or 
 interests in property--
 (i) are in the United States;
 (ii) are transported into the United 
 States; or
 (iii) are in, or come into, the possession 
 or control of a United States person.
 (B) Aliens ineligible for visas, admission, or 
 parole.--
 (i) Exclusion from the united states.--The 
 Secretary of State shall deny a visa to, and 
 the Secretary of Homeland Security shall 
 exclude from the United States, any alien 
 subject to subsection (b).
 (ii) Current visas revoked.--
 (I) In general.--The issuing 
 consular officer, the Secretary of 
 State, or the Secretary of Homeland 
 Security (or a designee of any such 
 officer or Secretary) shall revoke any 
 visa or other entry documentation 
 issued to an alien subject to 
 subsection (b), regardless of when such 
 visa was issued.
 (II) Effect of revocation.--A 
 revocation under subclause (I) shall 
 take effect immediately and shall 
 automatically cancel any other valid 
 visa or entry documentation that is in 
 the alien's possession.
 (C) Denial of certain transactions.--Any letter of 
 offer and acceptance, or license to export, any defense 
 article or defense service controlled for export under 
 the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2751 et seq.) or 
 the Export Administration Act of 1979 (50 U.S.C. 4601 
 et seq.), as continued in force by the International 
 Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.), 
 requested by a person described in subsection (b) shall 
 be denied until the date that is 180 days after the 
 date on which the Secretary of State certifies to 
 Congress that any action by such person described in 
 subsection (b) has ceased.
 (2) Inapplicability of national emergency requirement.--The 
 requirements under section 202 of the International Emergency 
 Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701) shall not apply for 
 purposes of the imposition of sanctions under this section.
 (3) Penalties.--Any person that violates, attempts to 
 violate, conspires to violate, or causes a violation of 
 paragraph (1), (2), or (3) of subsection (b), or any 
 regulation, license, or order issued to carry out such 
 paragraph, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in 
 subsections (b) and (c) of section 206 of the International 
 Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1705) to the same 
 extent as a person that commits an unlawful act described in 
 subsection (a) of such section.
 (d) Exception.--The sanctions described in subsection (c)(1) shall 
not apply to any act incidental or necessary to the provision of 
urgently needed humanitarian assistance.

SEC. 109. GAO REVIEW OF UNITED STATES MILITARY SUPPORT TO SAUDI-LED 
 COALITION.

 (a) Review.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall 
conduct a review of the United States military support to the Saudi-led 
coalition that evaluates--
 (1) the manner and extent to which the United States 
 military provides support to the Saudi-led coalition;
 (2) how the Department of Defense prioritizes aerial 
 refueling capabilities in support of the Saudi-led coalition;
 (3) the manner and extent to which the United States has 
 been reimbursed for aerial refueling support of Saudi-led 
 coalition aircraft;
 (4) whether and how the Department of Defense determines 
 the extent to which its advice and assistance has reduced 
 civilian casualties and damage to civilian infrastructure, 
 including evaluating a differentiation between dynamic and 
 deliberate targeting by the Saudi-led coalition;
 (5) whether and how the Department of Defense determines 
 the efficacy of defensive advice and assistance to the Saudi-
 led coalition, including with respect to ballistic missiles and 
 other threats to the sovereignty of regional partners; and
 (6) the responsiveness, completeness, and accuracy of any 
 certifications submitted pursuant to section 1290 of the John 
 S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
 2019 (Public Law 115-232).
 (b) Briefing.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States 
shall provide the preliminary results of the review conducted under 
subsection (a) to--
 (1) the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate;
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate;
 (3) the Committee on Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (4) the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (c) Final Report.--During the briefing required under subsection 
(b), the Comptroller General shall notify the committees referred to in 
such subsection when a final report summarizing the results of the 
review conducted under subsection (a) will be submitted to such 
committees.

 TITLE II--SAUDI ARABIA ACCOUNTABILITY

SEC. 201. IMPOSITION OF SANCTIONS ON PERSONS RESPONSIBLE FOR THE DEATH 
 OF JAMAL KHASHOGGI.

 (a) In General.--Section 1263 of the Global Magnitsky Human Rights 
Accountability Act (22 U.S.C. 2656 note) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), in the matter preceding paragraph 
 (1), by striking ``(b)'' and inserting ``(c)'';
 (2) by redesignating subsections (b) through (j) as 
 subsections (c) through (k), respectively;
 (3) by inserting after subsection (a) the following:
 ``(b) Jamal Khashoggi.--Not later than 30 days after the date of 
the enactment of the Saudi Arabia Accountability and Yemen Act of 2018, 
the President shall impose the sanctions described in subsection (c) 
with respect to any foreign person, including any official of the 
government of Saudi Arabia or member of the royal family of Saudi 
Arabia that the President determines, based on credible evidence--
 ``(1) was responsible for, or complicit in, ordering, 
 controlling, or otherwise directing an act or acts contributing 
 to or causing the death of Jamal Khashoggi; or
 ``(2) has materially assisted, sponsored, or provided 
 financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or 
 services in support of an activity described in paragraph 
 (1).'';
 (4) in subsection (d), as redesignated, in the matter 
 preceding paragraph (1), by inserting ``or (b)'' after 
 ``subsection (a)'';
 (5) in subsection (f), as redesignated, by striking 
 ``subsection (b)(1)'' and inserting ``subsection (c)(1)'';
 (6) in subsection (j), as redesignated, by inserting ``or 
 (b)'' after ``subsection (a)''; and
 (7) in subsection (k), as redesignated, by striking 
 paragraphs (1) and (2) and inserting the following:
 ``(1) the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate;
 ``(2) the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs 
 of the Senate;
 ``(3) the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives;
 ``(4) the Committee on Financial Services of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 ``(5) the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of 
 Representatives.''.
 (b) Briefings.--Not later than 15 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, and every 45 days thereafter, the Secretary of 
State, in conjunction with the Secretary of the Treasury and the 
Director of National Intelligence, shall provide a briefing to the 
appropriate congressional committees (as defined in section 1263(k) of 
the Global Magnitsky Human Rights Accountability Act, as amended by 
subsection (a)(7)) regarding the implementation of the amendment made 
by subsection (a)(3).

SEC. 202. REPORT ON SAUDI ARABIA'S HUMAN RIGHTS RECORD.

 Not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary of State, in accordance with section 502B(c) of the 
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2304(c)), shall submit an 
unclassified, written report to Congress that--
 (1) includes the information required under such section 
 502B(c);
 (2) describes the extent to which officials of the 
 Government of Saudi Arabia, including members of the military 
 or security services, are responsible for or complicit in gross 
 violations of internationally recognized human rights, 
 including violations of the human rights of journalists, 
 bloggers, and those who support women's rights or religious 
 freedom;
 (3) describes the extent to which the Government of Saudi 
 Arabia--
 (A) has knowingly blocked access to Yemeni ports, 
 ports of entry, or other facilities used by the United 
 Nations, its specialized agencies and implementing 
 partners, national and international nongovernmental 
 organizations, or any other actors engaged in 
 humanitarian relief activities in Yemen;
 (B) has hindered the efforts of the organizations 
 referred to in subparagraph (A) to deliver humanitarian 
 relief, including through diversion of goods and 
 materials intended to provide relief to civilians in 
 Yemen;
 (C) has prohibited or directly or indirectly 
 restricted the transport or delivery of United States 
 humanitarian assistance to Yemen; and
 (D) complied with the Secretary of State's 
 statement on October 30, 2018, related to ``ending the 
 conflict in Yemen''; and
 (4) identifies the percentage by which civilian casualties 
 and deaths, respectively, increased as a result of Saudi 
 coalition air strikes in Yemen between November 2017 and August 
 2018.

 TITLE III--GENERAL PROVISIONS

SEC. 301. RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.

 Nothing in this Act may be construed to limit the authority of the 
President pursuant to the International Emergency Economic Powers Act 
(50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.).

SEC. 302. SUNSET.

 This Act shall cease to be effective on the date that is 5 years 
after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 <all>