[Congressional Bills 117th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 7900 Placed on Calendar Senate (PCS)]

<DOC>

 Calendar No. 467
117th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 H. R. 7900

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 July 28, 2022

 Received

 August 3, 2022

 Read twice and placed on the calendar

_______________________________________________________________________

 AN ACT

 To authorize appropriations for fiscal year 2023 for military 
activities of the Department of Defense and for military construction, 
 and for defense activities of the Department of Energy, to prescribe 
 military personnel strengths for such fiscal year, and for other 
 purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``National Defense Authorization Act 
for Fiscal Year 2023''.

SEC. 2. ORGANIZATION OF ACT INTO DIVISIONS; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Divisions.--This Act is organized into nine divisions as 
follows:
 (1) Division A--Department of Defense Authorizations.
 (2) Division B--Military Construction Authorizations.
 (3) Division C--Department of Energy National Security 
 Authorizations and Other Authorizations.
 (4) Division D--Funding Tables.
 (5) Division E--Non-Department of Defense Matters.
 (6) Division F--Other Matters.
 (7) Division G--Don Young Coast Guard Authorization Act of 
 2022.
 (8) Division H--Financial Transparency.
 (9) Division I--Public Lands.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title.
Sec. 2. Organization of Act into divisions; table of contents.
Sec. 3. Congressional defense committees.
 DIVISION A--DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE AUTHORIZATIONS

 TITLE I--PROCUREMENT

 Subtitle A--Authorization of Appropriations

Sec. 101. Authorization of appropriations.
 Subtitle B--Navy Programs

Sec. 111. Requirements relating to EA-18G aircraft of the Navy.
Sec. 112. Multiyear procurement authority for Arleigh Burke class 
 destroyers.
Sec. 113. Authority for procurement of additional Arleigh Burke class 
 destroyer.
Sec. 114. Authority for certain procurements for the Ship-to-Shore 
 Connector program.
Sec. 115. Authority to procure airframes and engines for CH-53K King 
 Stallion heavy-lift helicopters.
Sec. 116. Prohibition on availability of funds for retirement of HSC-85 
 aircraft.
Sec. 117. Quarterly briefings on the CH-53K King Stallion helicopter 
 program.
Sec. 118. Funding for additional Joint Strike Fighter aircraft.
Sec. 119. Report on advance procurement for CVN-82 and CVN-83.
Sec. 119A. Report on applicability of DDG(X) electric-drive propulsion 
 system.
Sec. 119B. Prohibition on availability of funds for disposal of 
 Littoral Combat Ships.
 Subtitle C--Air Force Programs

Sec. 121. Modification of inventory requirements for aircraft of the 
 combat air forces.
Sec. 122. Modification of minimum inventory requirement for air 
 refueling tanker aircraft.
Sec. 123. Requirements relating to F-22 aircraft.
Sec. 124. Modification of inventory requirements and limitations 
 relating to certain air refueling tanker 
 aircraft.
Sec. 125. Repeal of Air Force E-8C force presentation requirement.
Sec. 126. Minimum inventory of C-130 aircraft.
Sec. 127. Authority to procure upgraded ejection seats for certain T-
 38A aircraft.
Sec. 128. Prohibition on availability of funds for retirement of C-40 
 aircraft.
Sec. 129. Prohibition on availability of funds for procurement of 
 bridge tanker aircraft.
Sec. 130. Prohibition on availability of funds for termination of 
 production lines for HH-60W aircraft.
Sec. 131. Prohibition on certain reductions to B-1 bomber aircraft 
 squadrons.
Sec. 132. Limitation on retirement of E-3 Airborne Warning and Control 
 System aircraft.
Sec. 133. Requirements study and acquisition strategy for the combat 
 search and rescue mission of the Air Force.
Sec. 134. Plan for transfer of KC-135 aircraft to the Air National 
 Guard.
Sec. 135. Annual report on T-7A Advanced Pilot Training System.
Sec. 136. Report on F-22 aircraft force laydown.
Sec. 137. Limitation on divestment of F-15 aircraft.
Sec. 138. Funding for C-130 Modular Airborne Firefighting System.
Sec. 139. Requirement to maintain fleet of manned intelligence, 
 surveillance, and reconnaissance aircraft.
Sec. 139A. Procurement authority for commercial engineering software.
Sec. 139B. Sense of congress regarding united states air national guard 
 refueling mission.
 Subtitle D--Defense-wide, Joint, and Multiservice Matters

Sec. 141. Charging stations at commissary stores and military 
 exchanges.
Sec. 142. Increase Air Force and Navy use of used commercial dual-use 
 parts in certain aircraft and engines.
Sec. 143. Assessment and report on military rotary wing aircraft 
 industrial base.
 TITLE II--RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST, AND EVALUATION

 Subtitle A--Authorization of Appropriations

Sec. 201. Authorization of appropriations.
 Subtitle B--Program Requirements, Restrictions, and Limitations

Sec. 211. Clarification of role of senior official with principal 
 responsibility for artificial intelligence 
 and machine learning.
Sec. 212. Role of the Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence Officer 
 in fostering interoperability among joint 
 force systems.
Sec. 213. Modification of defense laboratory modernization pilot 
 program.
Sec. 214. Support for research and development of bioindustrial 
 manufacturing processes.
Sec. 215. Activities to support the use of metal additive manufacturing 
 for the subsurface fleet of the Navy.
Sec. 216. Digital mission operations platform for the Space Force.
Sec. 217. Air-breathing test capacity upgrade to support critical 
 hypersonic weapons development.
Sec. 218. Information on use of commercial software for the warfighter 
 machine interface of the Army.
Sec. 219. Measures to increase the capacity of historically Black 
 colleges and universities and other 
 minority-serving institutions to achieve 
 very high research activity status.
Sec. 220. Pilot program to support the development of patentable 
 inventions in the Department of the Navy.
Sec. 221. Pilot program to facilitate the research, development, and 
 production of advanced battery technologies 
 for warfighters.
Sec. 222. Pilot program on research and development of plant-based 
 protein for the Navy.
Sec. 223. Allowable uses of funds under the Commercial Weather Data 
 Pilot Program of the Air Force.
Sec. 224. Pilot program on use of digital twin technologies in the 
 Armed Forces.
Sec. 225. Funding for advanced above water sensors.
Sec. 226. Biofuel and fuel cell vehicle research, development, and 
 demonstration program.
Sec. 227. Radar obstruction research, development, test, and evaluation 
 program.
Sec. 228. Funding for research and development relating to rare earth 
 elements.
Sec. 229. Funding for National Defense Education Program.
Sec. 229A. Funding for high energy laser and certain emerging 
 technology initiatives.
Sec. 229B. Department of Defense advanced technology investment 
 incentive pilot program.
Sec. 229C. Funding for development of measures to prevent infections 
 caused by severe fractures.
Sec. 229D. Funding for research into the effects of head-supported mass 
 on cervical spine health.
Sec. 229E. Requirement for separate program element for the multi-
 medicine manufacturing platform program.
 Subtitle C--Plans, Reports, and Other Matters

Sec. 231. Modification of national security strategy for national 
 technology and industrial base.
Sec. 232. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency Innovation 
 Fellowship Program.
Sec. 233. Report on efforts to increase the participation of 
 historically Black colleges and 
 universities and other minority-serving 
 institutions in the research and 
 development activities of the Department of 
 Defense.
Sec. 234. Assessment of test infrastructure and priorities related to 
 hypersonic capabilities and related 
 technologies and hypersonic test strategy.
Sec. 235. Independent review and assessment of test and evaluation 
 resource planning.
Sec. 236. Study on costs associated with underperforming software and 
 information technology.
Sec. 237. Study and report on sufficiency of test and evaluation 
 resources for certain major defense 
 acquisition programs.
Sec. 238. Periodic reports on risk distribution within research, 
 development, test, and evaluation 
 activities.
Sec. 239. Review and report on offensive hypersonic weapons programs of 
 the Department of Defense.
Sec. 240. Report on potential for increased utilization of the 
 Electronic Proving Grounds testing range.
Sec. 241. Sense of Congress on the additive manufacturing and machine 
 learning initiative of the Army.
Sec. 242. Funding for robotics supply chain research.
Sec. 243. Funding for enterprise digital transformation with commercial 
 physics simulation.
Sec. 244. Report on national security applications for fusion energy 
 technology.
 TITLE III--OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE

 Subtitle A--Authorization of Appropriations

Sec. 301. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 302. Funding for Army Community Services.
 Subtitle B--Energy and Environment

Sec. 311. Equivalent authority for environmental restoration projects 
 at National Guard training sites.
Sec. 312. Amendment to budgeting of Department of Defense relating to 
 extreme weather.
Sec. 313. Prototype and demonstration projects for energy resilience at 
 certain military installations.
Sec. 314. Pilot program for transition of certain nontactical vehicle 
 fleets of Department of Defense to electric 
 vehicles.
Sec. 315. Pilot program on use of sustainable aviation fuel.
Sec. 316. Policy to increase disposition of spent advanced batteries 
 through recycling.
Sec. 317. Guidance and target deadline relating to formerly used 
 defense sites programs.
Sec. 318. Budget information for alternatives to burn pits.
Sec. 319. Program to track and reduce Scope 3 emissions and energy 
 costs.
Sec. 320. Requirement to include information relating to electric 
 vehicle charging in certain military 
 construction project proposals.
Sec. 321. Sense of Congress regarding electric or zero-emission 
 vehicles for non-combat vehicle fleet.
Sec. 322. Study on environmental contamination and cleanup associated 
 with Thorium-230 and related substances.
Sec. 323. Destruction of materials containing PFAS with technologies 
 not requiring incineration.
Sec. 324. Analysis and plan for addressing heat island effect on 
 military installations.
Sec. 325. Comptroller General report on acceleration and improvement of 
 environmental cleanup of Vieques and 
 Culebra, Puerto Rico.
Sec. 326. Report on Department of Defense flood mapping efforts.
Sec. 327. Biannual leak inspections of Navy and Air Force underground 
 storage tanks on Guam.
Sec. 328. Additional special considerations for energy performance 
 goals and energy performance master plan.
Sec. 329. Clarification and requirement for Department of Defense 
 relating to renewable biomass and biogas.
 Subtitle C--Red Hill Bulk Fuel Facility

Sec. 331. Defueling of Red Hill Bulk Fuel Storage Facility.
Sec. 332. Activities prior to decommissioning of Red Hill Bulk Storage 
 Facility.
Sec. 333. Limitation on use of funds pending award of certain projects 
 and implementation of certain 
 recommendations.
Sec. 334. Placement of sentinel or monitoring wells in proximity to Red 
 Hill Bulk Fuel Facility.
Sec. 335. Report on Department of Defense efforts to track health 
 implications of fuel leaks at Red Hill Bulk 
 Fuel Facility.
Sec. 336. Studies relating to water needs of the Armed Forces on Oahu.
Sec. 337. Study on alternative uses for Red Hill Bulk Fuel Facility.
Subtitle D--Treatment of Perfluoroalkyl Substances and Polyfluoroalkyl 
 Substances

Sec. 341. Prizes for development of non-PFAS-containing turnout gear.
Sec. 342. Modification to restriction on Department of Defense 
 procurement of certain items containing 
 perfluorooctane sulfonate or 
 perfluorooctanoic acid.
Sec. 343. Prohibition on purchase by Department of Defense of 
 firefighting equipment containing per- and 
 polyfluoroalkyl substances.
Sec. 344. Standards for response actions with respect to PFAS 
 contamination.
Sec. 345. List of certain PFAS uses deemed essential; briefings on 
 Department of Defense procurement of 
 certain items containing PFOS or PFOA.
 Subtitle E--Logistics and Sustainment

Sec. 351. Resources required for achieving materiel readiness metrics 
 and objectives for major defense 
 acquisition programs.
Sec. 352. Annual plan for maintenance and modernization of naval 
 vessels.
Sec. 353. Independent study relating to fuel distribution logistics 
 across United States Indo-Pacific Command.
Sec. 354. Programs of military departments on reduction of fuel 
 reliance and promotion of energy-aware 
 behaviors.
 Subtitle F--Matters Relating to Depots and Ammunition Production 
 Facilities

Sec. 361. Budgeting for depot and ammunition production facility 
 maintenance and repair: annual report.
Sec. 362. Extension of authorization of depot working capital funds for 
 unspecified minor military construction.
Sec. 363. Modification to minimum capital investment for certain 
 depots.
Sec. 364. Continuation of requirement for biennial report on core 
 depot-level maintenance and repair.
Sec. 365. Continuation of requirement for annual report on funds 
 expended for performance of depot-level 
 maintenance and repair workloads.
Sec. 366. Five-year plans for improvements to depot and ammunition 
 production facility infrastructure.
Sec. 367. Clarification of calculation for certain workload carryover 
 of Department of Army.
 Subtitle G--Reports

Sec. 371. Annual reports by Deputy Secretary of Defense on activities 
 of Joint Safety Council.
Sec. 372. Quarterly reports on expenditures for establishment of fuel 
 distribution points in INDOPACOM area of 
 responsibility.
Sec. 373. Secretary of Defense report on establishing procedure for 
 alerting about exposure to perfluoroalkyl 
 substances.
Sec. 374. Report on effects of wildfire and drought conditions on 
 military readiness at United States Naval 
 Observatory Flagstaff Station.
Sec. 375. Reports relating to aqueous film-forming foam substitutes and 
 PFAS contamination at certain 
 installations.
Sec. 376. Briefings on implementation of recommendations relating to 
 safety and accident prevention.
 Subtitle H--Other Matters

Sec. 381. Accountability for military working dogs.
Sec. 382. Membership of Coast Guard on Joint Safety Council.
Sec. 383. Requirement of Secretary of Defense to reimburse State costs 
 of fighting certain wildland fires.
Sec. 384. Expanded consultation in training of National Guard personnel 
 on wildfire response.
Sec. 385. Interagency collaboration and extension of pilot program on 
 military working dogs and explosives 
 detection.
Sec. 386. Establishment of Army and Air Force Safety Commands; 
 implementation of accident investigation 
 recommendations.
Sec. 387. National standards for Federal fire protection at military 
 installations.
Sec. 388. Pilot program for tactical vehicle safety data collection.
Sec. 389. Requirement for public disclosure of results of Department of 
 Defense lead testing.
Sec. 390. Briefing relating to use of recycled rubber waste products by 
 Department of Defense.
Sec. 391. Revival of report on non-federalized National Guard 
 personnel, training, and equipment 
 requirements.
Sec. 392. Use of amounts available to Department of Defense for 
 operation and maintenance for removal of 
 munitions and explosives of concern in 
 Guam.
Sec. 393. Funding for Utility Helicopter Mods.
Sec. 394. Sense of Congress regarding the use of working dogs to detect 
 early stages of diseases.
Sec. 395. Requirements to reduce out-of-pocket costs of members of the 
 Armed Forces for uniform items.
Sec. 396. Recognition of service of military working dogs.
Sec. 397. Maintenance of publicly accessible website by Joint Safety 
 Council.
 TITLE IV--MILITARY PERSONNEL AUTHORIZATIONS

 Subtitle A--Active Forces

Sec. 401. End strengths for active forces.
Sec. 402. Revisions in permanent active duty end strength minimum 
 levels.
 Subtitle B--Reserve Forces

Sec. 411. End strengths for Selected Reserve.
Sec. 412. End strengths for Reserves on active duty in support of the 
 Reserves.
Sec. 413. End strengths for military technicians (dual status).
Sec. 414. Maximum number of reserve personnel authorized to be on 
 active duty for operational support.
 Subtitle C--Authorization of Appropriations

Sec. 421. Military personnel.
 TITLE V--MILITARY PERSONNEL POLICY

 Subtitle A--Officer Personnel Policy

Sec. 501. Distribution of commissioned officers on active duty in 
 general officer and flag officer grades.
Sec. 502. Authorized strength after December 31, 2022: general officers 
 and flag officers on active duty.
Sec. 503. Exclusion of lead special trial counsel from limitations on 
 general officers and flag officers on 
 active duty.
Sec. 504. Constructive service credit for certain officers of the Armed 
 Forces: authorization; special pay.
Sec. 505. Clarification of grade of Surgeon General of the Navy.
Sec. 506. Assessments of staffing in the Office of the Secretary of 
 Defense and other Department of Defense 
 headquarters offices.
Sec. 507. Survey of chaplains.
Sec. 508. Independent review of Army officer performance evaluations.
 Subtitle B--Reserve Component Management

Sec. 511. Grades of certain chiefs of reserve components.
Sec. 512. Grade of Vice Chief of the National Guard Bureau.
Sec. 513. Backdating of effective date of rank for reserve officers in 
 the National Guard due to undue delays in 
 Federal recognition.
Sec. 514. Financial assistance program for specially selected members: 
 Army Reserve and Army National Guard.
Sec. 515. Inspections of National Guard.
Sec. 516. Requirement of consent of the chief executive officer for 
 certain full-time National Guard duty 
 performed in a State, Territory, or the 
 District of Columbia.
Sec. 517. Extension of National Guard support for FireGuard program.
Sec. 518. Notice to Congress before certain actions regarding units of 
 certain reserve components.
Sec. 519. Plan to ensure reasonable access to the Junior Reserve 
 Officers' Training Corps.
Sec. 519A. Inclusion of additional information on the Senior Reserve 
 Officers' Training Corps in reports 
 accompanying the national defense strategy.
Sec. 519B. Additional matters relating to support for FireGuard 
 program.
Sec. 519C. Divestiture of Tactical Control Party.
Sec. 519D. Recognition of the Army Interagency Training and Education 
 Center as a joint activity of the National 
 Guard; report.
Sec. 519E. Enhancement of National Guard Youth Challenge Program.
 Subtitle C--General Service Authorities and Military Records

Sec. 521. Notification to next of kin upon the death of a member of the 
 Armed Forces.
Sec. 522. Direct acceptance of gifts from certain sources by enlisted 
 members.
Sec. 523. Limitation of extension of period of active duty for a member 
 who accepts a fellowship, scholarship, or 
 grant.
Sec. 524. Briefing and report on administrative separation boards.
Sec. 525. Elimination of time limit for mandatory characterizations of 
 administrative discharges of certain 
 members on the basis of failure to receive 
 COVID-19 vaccine.
Sec. 526. Prohibition on use of photographs by certain military 
 promotion boards.
Sec. 527. Gender-neutral fitness standards for combat military 
 occupational specialties of the Army.
Sec. 528. Retention and recruitment of members of the Army who 
 specialize in air and missile defense 
 systems.
Sec. 529. Pilot program on remote personnel processing in the Army.
Sec. 529A. Improving oversight of military recruitment practices in 
 public secondary schools.
Sec. 529B. Enlistments: compilation of directory and other prospective 
 recruit information.
Sec. 529C. Continuing military service for certain members eligible for 
 chapter 61 retirement.
Sec. 529D. Sense of Congress regarding the Port Chicago 50.
Sec. 529E. Treatment of personally identifiable information regarding 
 prospective recruits.
Sec. 529F. Implementation of certain recommendations regarding 
 screening individuals who seek to enlist in 
 the Armed Forces and countering extremist 
 activity in the Department of Defense.
Sec. 529G. Best practices for the retention of certain female members 
 of the Armed Forces.
Sec. 529H. Record of military service for members of the Armed Forces.
 Subtitle D--Military Justice

Sec. 531. Sexual Harassment Independent Investigations and Prosecution.
Sec. 532. Matters in connection with special trial counsel.
Sec. 533. Standards for imposition of commanding officer's non-judicial 
 punishment.
Sec. 534. Special trial counsel of the Air Force.
Sec. 535. Financial assistance for victims of offenses under the 
 Uniform Code of Military Justice.
Sec. 536. Addressing sex-related offenses and sexual harassment 
 involving members of the National Guard.
Sec. 537. Prohibition on sharing of information on domestic violence 
 incidents.
Sec. 538. Mandatory notification of members of the Armed Forces 
 identified in certain records of criminal 
 investigations.
Sec. 539. Sentencing parameters under the Uniform Code of Military 
 Justice for hate crimes.
Sec. 539A. Limitation on availability of funds for relocation of Army 
 CID special agent training course.
Sec. 539B. Recommendations for sentencing of marijuana-based offenses 
 under the Uniform Code of Military Justice.
Sec. 539C. Report on sharing information with counsel for victims of 
 offenses under the Uniform Code of Military 
 Justice.
Sec. 539D. Public availability of military commission proceedings.
Sec. 539E. Review and report on the definition of consent for purposes 
 of the offenses of rape and sexual assault 
 under the Uniform Code of Military Justice.
Sec. 539F. Standards and reports relating to cases overseen by military 
 criminal investigative organizations.
 Subtitle E--Other Legal Matters

Sec. 541. Clarifications of procedure in investigations of personnel 
 actions taken against members of the Armed 
 Forces in retaliation for protected 
 communications.
Sec. 542. Primary prevention of violence.
Sec. 543. Treatment of certain complaints from members of the Armed 
 Forces.
Sec. 544. Pilot program on financial assistance for victims of domestic 
 violence.
Sec. 545. Agreements with civilian victim service agencies.
Sec. 546. Activities to improve information sharing and collaboration 
 on matters relating to the prevention of 
 and response to domestic abuse and child 
 abuse and neglect among military families.
Sec. 547. Inspector General investigation into discrimination against 
 members and employees of Middle Eastern and 
 North African descent.
Sec. 548. Time limit for processing certain administrative complaints.
Sec. 549. Review and report on administration of sexual harassment 
 claims.
Sec. 549A. Interagency task force to protect members, veterans, and 
 military families from financial fraud.
Sec. 549B. Exclusion of evidence obtained without prior authorization.
 Subtitle F--Member Education

Sec. 551. Increase in maximum number of students enrolled at Uniformed 
 Services University of the Health Sciences.
Sec. 552. Authorization of certain support for military service academy 
 foundations.
Sec. 553. Agreement by a cadet or midshipman to play professional sport 
 constitutes a breach of service obligation.
Sec. 554. Naval Postgraduate School: attendance by enlisted members.
Sec. 555. Authority to waive tuition at United States Air Force 
 Institute of Technology for certain private 
 sector civilians.
Sec. 556. Terms of Provost and Academic Dean of the United States Air 
 Force Institute of Technology.
Sec. 557. Establishment of consortium for curricula in military 
 education.
Sec. 558. Establishment of consortium of institutions of military 
 education for cybersecurity matters.
Sec. 559. Commission on Professional Military Education.
Sec. 559A. Increase in the number of individuals from the District of 
 Columbia who may be appointed to military 
 service academies.
Sec. 559B. Modification of annual report on demographics of military 
 service academy applicants.
Sec. 559C. Report on treatment of China in curricula of professional 
 military education.
Sec. 559D. Speech disorders of cadets and midshipmen.
Sec. 559E. Amendments to pathways for counseling in the Transition 
 Assistance Program.
 Subtitle G--Member Training and Transition

Sec. 561. Information regarding apprenticeships for members during 
 initial entry training.
Sec. 562. Extremist activity by a member of the Armed Forces: notation 
 in service record; TAP counseling.
Sec. 563. Codification of Skillbridge program.
Sec. 564. Training on digital citizenship and media literacy in annual 
 cyber awareness training for certain 
 members.
Sec. 565. Pilot grant program to supplement the transition assistance 
 program of the Department of Defense.
Sec. 566. Female members of certain Armed Forces and civilian employees 
 of the Department of Defense in STEM.
Sec. 567. Skillbridge: apprenticeship programs.
Sec. 568. Training on consequences of committing a crime in 
 preseparation counseling of the Transition 
 Assistance Program.
Sec. 569. Participation of members of the reserve components of the 
 armed forces in the SkillBridge program.
Sec. 569A. Annual report on members separating from active duty who 
 file claims for disability benefits.
Sec. 569B. Outreach to members regarding possible toxic exposure.
Sec. 569C. Activities to assist the transition of members of the Armed 
 Forces and veterans into careers in 
 education.
Sec. 569D. Funding for Skillbridge.
Sec. 569E. Funding for Skillbridge for law enforcement training.
Sec. 569F. Numbers of certain nominations for cadets at the United 
 States Military Academy.
Sec. 569G. Pilot transition assistance program for military spouses.
Sec. 569H. Guidelines for active duty military on potential risks and 
 prevention of toxic exposures.
Sec. 569I. GAO report on use of transition programs by members of 
 special operations forces.
Sec. 569J. GAO report on screenings included in the health assessment 
 for members separating from the Armed 
 Forces.
Sec. 569K. Department of defense report on third-party job search 
 technology.
 Subtitle H--Military Family Readiness and Dependents' Education

Sec. 571. Clarification and expansion of authorization of support for 
 chaplain-led programs for members of the 
 Armed Forces.
Sec. 572. Rights of parents of children attending schools operated by 
 the Department of Defense Education 
 Activity.
Sec. 573. Expansion of pilot program to provide financial assistance to 
 members of the Armed Forces for in-home 
 child care.
Sec. 574. Extension of pilot program to expand eligibility for 
 enrollment at domestic dependent elementary 
 and secondary schools.
Sec. 575. Advisory panel on community support for military families 
 with special needs.
Sec. 576. Certain assistance to local educational agencies that benefit 
 dependents of military and civilian 
 personnel.
Sec. 577. Verification of reporting of eligible federally connected 
 children for purposes of Federal impact aid 
 programs.
Sec. 578. EFMP grant program.
Sec. 579. Promotion of certain child care assistance.
Sec. 579A. Recommendations for the improvement of the Military 
 Interstate Children's Compact.
Sec. 579B. Industry roundtable on military spouse hiring.
Sec. 579C. Feasibility study and report on pilot program to provide 
 POTFF services to separating members of 
 special operations forces and certain 
 family members.
Sec. 579D. MySTeP: provision online and in multiple languages.
Sec. 579E. Assistance to local educational agencies that benefit 
 dependents of members of the Armed Forces 
 with enrollment changes due to base 
 closures, force structure changes, or force 
 relocations.
Sec. 579F. Surveys regarding military spouses.
Sec. 579G. Review of policies regarding single parents serving as 
 members of the Armed Forces.
Sec. 579H. Public reporting on certain military child care programs.
Sec. 579I. Feasibility of inclusion of au pairs in pilot program to 
 provide financial assistance to members of 
 the Armed Forces for in-home child care.
Sec. 579J. Report on the effects of economic inflation on families of 
 members of the Armed Forces.
Sec. 579K. Report on the effects of the shortage of infant formula on 
 the families of members of the Armed 
 Forces.
Sec. 579L. Briefing on child care at Camp Bull Simons.
 Subtitle I--Decorations and Awards

Sec. 581. Authority to award the Medal of Honor to a member of the 
 Armed Forces for acts of valor while a 
 prisoner of war.
Sec. 582. Authorization for award of the Medal of Honor to David R. 
 Halbruner for acts of valor on September 
 11-12, 2012.
Sec. 583. Authorization for posthumous award of Medal of Honor to 
 Master Sergeant Roderick W. Edmonds for 
 acts of valor during World War II.
Sec. 584. Rescission of Medals of Honor awarded for acts at Wounded 
 Knee Creek on December 29, 1890.
Sec. 585. Sense of Congress regarding service of Gary Andrew Cyr.
Sec. 586. Eligibility of veterans of Operation End Sweep for Vietnam 
 Service Medal.
Sec. 587. Authorization for award of Medal of Honor to E. Royce 
 Williams for acts of valor during the 
 Korean War.
Sec. 588. Authorization for award of Medal of Honor to James Capers, 
 Jr. for acts of valor as a member of the 
 Marine Corps during the Vietnam War.
Sec. 589. Inclusion of Purple Heart awards on military valor website.
Sec. 589A. Study on fraudulent misrepresentation about receipt of a 
 military medal or decoration.
 Subtitle J--Miscellaneous Reports and Other Matters

Sec. 591. Electronic notarization for members of the Armed Forces.
Sec. 592. Disinterments from national cemeteries.
Sec. 593. Clarification of authority of NCMAF to update Chaplains Hill 
 at Arlington National Cemetery.
Sec. 594. Notifications on manning of afloat naval forces.
Sec. 595. Pilot program on car sharing on military installations in 
 Alaska.
Sec. 596. Support for members who perform duties regarding remotely 
 piloted aircraft: study; report.
Sec. 597. Review of marketing and recruiting of the Department of 
 Defense.
Sec. 598. Report on recruiting efforts of the Army.
Sec. 599. Sense of congress regarding women involuntarily separated 
 from the Armed Forces due to pregnancy or 
 parenthood.
Sec. 599A. Armed Forces workplace and gender relations surveys.
Sec. 599B. Task Force on Historical and Current Barriers to African 
 American Participation and Equal Treatment 
 in the Armed Services.
Sec. 599C. Plan to combat racial bias, discrimination, and harassment 
 against Asian American service members, 
 civilians, and contractor personnel.
Sec. 599D. Recurring report regarding COVID-19 mandate.
Sec. 599E. Pilot program on safe storage of personally owned firearms.
Sec. 599F. Report on non-citizen members of the Armed Forces.
Sec. 599G. Report on instances of antisemitism.
Sec. 599H. Annual report regarding cost of living for members and 
 employees of the Department of Defense.
Sec. 599I. Review of recruiting efforts for women.
Sec. 599J. Report on support for pregnant members.
Sec. 599K. Clarification of authority to solicit gifts in support of 
 the mission of the Defense POW/MIA 
 Accounting Agency to account for members of 
 the Armed Forces and Department of Defense 
 civilian employees listed as missing.
Sec. 599L. Report on efforts to prevent and respond to deaths by 
 suicide in the Navy.
Sec. 599M. Report on programs through which members of the Armed Forces 
 may file anonymous concerns.
Sec. 599N. Sense of Congress regarding Ulysses S. Grant.
 TITLE VI--COMPENSATION AND OTHER PERSONNEL BENEFITS

 Subtitle A--Basic Pay and Allowances

Sec. 601. Exclusion of BAH from gross household income for purposes of 
 basic needs allowance.
Sec. 602. Basic allowance for housing for a member without dependents 
 whose relocation would financially 
 disadvantage such member.
Sec. 603. Temporary continuation of rate of basic allowance for housing 
 for members of the Armed Forces whose sole 
 dependent dies while residing with the 
 member.
Sec. 604. Allowance for gym membership for certain members of the Armed 
 Forces who reside more than 10 miles from a 
 military installation.
Sec. 605. Revival and redesignation of provision establishing benefits 
 for certain members assigned to the Defense 
 Intelligence Agency.
Sec. 606. Reimbursement of certain child care costs incident to a 
 permanent change of station or assignment.
Sec. 607. Allowable travel and transportation allowances: complex 
 overhaul.
Sec. 608. Expansion of authority to reimburse a member of the uniformed 
 services for spousal business costs arising 
 from a permanent change of station.
Sec. 609. Permanent authority to reimburse members for spouse 
 relicensing costs pursuant to a permanent 
 change of station.
Sec. 609A. Travel and transportation allowances for certain members of 
 the Armed Forces who attend a professional 
 military education institution or training 
 classes.
Sec. 609B. Establishment of allowance for certain relocations of pets 
 of members of the uniformed services.
Sec. 609C. Extension of one-time uniform allowance for officers who 
 transfer to the Space Force.
Sec. 609D. OCONUS cost of living allowance: adjustments; notice to 
 certain congressional committees.
Sec. 609E. Pay for DOD and Coast Guard child care providers: studies; 
 adjustment.
 Subtitle B--Bonus and Incentive Pays

Sec. 611. One-year extension of certain expiring bonus and special pay 
 authorities.
Sec. 612. Increase to maximum amounts of certain bonus and special pay 
 authorities.
Sec. 613. Special pay and allowances for members of the Armed Forces 
 assigned to cold weather operations.
Sec. 614. Authorization of incentive pay to a member of the Armed 
 Forces whose disclosure of fraud, waste, or 
 mismanagement results in cost savings to 
 the military department concerned.
Sec. 615. Inflation bonus pay.
Sec. 616. Establishing complex overhaul pay.
Sec. 617. Air Force rated officer retention demonstration program.
 Subtitle C--Family and Survivor Benefits

Sec. 621. Expanded eligibility for bereavement leave for members of the 
 Armed Forces.
Sec. 622. Claims relating to the return of personal effects of a 
 deceased member of the Armed Forces.
Sec. 623. Expansion of authorized assistance for providers of child 
 care services to members of the Armed 
 Forces.
Sec. 624. Survivor Benefit Plan open enrollment period.
Sec. 625. Study and report on military installations with limited child 
 care.
Sec. 626. Hunger among military families: data collection; training; 
 report.
 Subtitle D--Defense Resale Matters

Sec. 631. Prohibition on sale of Chinese goods in commissary stores and 
 military exchanges.
 Subtitle E--Miscellaneous Rights, Benefits, and Reports

Sec. 641. Transitional compensation and benefits for the former spouse 
 of a member of the Armed Forces who 
 allegedly committed a dependent-abuse 
 offense during marriage.
Sec. 642. Authorization of permissive temporary duty for wellness.
Sec. 643. Study on basic pay.
Sec. 644. Report on accuracy of basic allowance for housing.
Sec. 645. Study and report on barriers to home ownership for members of 
 the Armed Forces.
Sec. 646. Plan for reimbursement of certain expenses of certain members 
 and veterans related to Afghanistan 
 evacuation.
Sec. 647. Expansion of the space-available travel program to allow 
 certain disabled veterans to travel with a 
 caregiver or dependent on certain aircraft.
 Subtitle F--Disability and Retired Pay

Sec. 651. Elimination of cap on additional retired pay for 
 extraordinary heroism for members of the 
 Army and Air Force who served during the 
 Vietnam Era.
 TITLE VII--HEALTH CARE PROVISIONS

 Subtitle A--TRICARE and Other Health Care Benefits

Sec. 701. Clarification of coverage of artificial reproductive services 
 for certain TRICARE beneficiaries.
Sec. 702. Clarification of coverage of certain areolar nipple tattooing 
 procedures under TRICARE program.
Sec. 703. TRICARE Dental for Selected Reserve.
Sec. 704. Report requirement for certain contracts under TRICARE 
 program.
Sec. 705. Temporary requirement for contraception coverage parity under 
 the TRICARE program.
Sec. 706. Rates of reimbursement for providers of applied behavior 
 analysis.
Sec. 707. Medical testing and related services for firefighters of 
 Department of Defense.
Sec. 708. Audit of behavioral health care network providers listed in 
 TRICARE directory.
Sec. 709. Independent analysis of quality and patient safety review 
 process under direct care component of 
 TRICARE program.
 Subtitle B--Health Care Administration

Sec. 721. Congressional notification requirement to modify scope of 
 services provided at military medical 
 treatment facilities.
Sec. 722. Modification of certain deadline and requirement to transfer 
 research and development functions to 
 Defense Health Agency.
Sec. 723. Modification of requirement to transfer public health 
 functions to Defense Health Agency.
Sec. 724. Other transaction authority for studies and demonstration 
 projects relating to delivery of health and 
 medical care.
Sec. 725. Licensure requirement for certain health-care professionals 
 providing services as part of mission 
 relating to emergency, humanitarian, or 
 refugee assistance.
Sec. 726. Improvements relating to Medical Officer of the Marine Corps 
 position.
Sec. 727. Authority for Department of Defense program to promote early 
 literacy among certain young children as 
 part of pediatric primary care.
Sec. 728. Accountability for wounded warriors undergoing disability 
 evaluation.
Sec. 729. Incentive payments for retention of certain behavioral health 
 providers.
Sec. 730. Clarification of license portability for health care 
 providers providing services under Reserve 
 Health Readiness program.
Sec. 731. Policy of Defense Health Agency on expanded recognition of 
 board certifications for physicians.
Sec. 732. Sleep Apnea Screening.
Sec. 733. Demonstration project on infant and early childhood mental 
 health services for children of members of 
 the Armed Forces.
Sec. 734. Improvements to processes to reduce financial harm caused to 
 civilians for care provided at military 
 medical treatment facilities.
Sec. 735. Improvements to military medical treatment facilities and 
 other facilities under military health 
 system.
Sec. 736. Access to certain dependent medical records by remarried 
 former spouses.
Sec. 737. Affiliates Sharing Pilot Program.
Sec. 738. Housing first report.
 Subtitle C--Studies and Reports

Sec. 741. GAO study on coverage of mental health disorders under 
 TRICARE program and relationship to certain 
 mental health parity laws.
Sec. 742. Feasibility study on establishment of new command on defense 
 health.
Sec. 743. Study and awareness initiative regarding use of qualified 
 alternative therapies to treat certain 
 members of the Armed Forces on terminal 
 leave.
Sec. 744. Report on composition of medical personnel of each military 
 department and related matters.
Sec. 745. Briefing and report on reduction or realignment of military 
 medical manning and medical billets.
Sec. 746. Report on feasability of certain licensing models for 
 Department of Defense-owned vaccines and 
 other medical interventions relating to 
 COVID-19.
Sec. 747. Study on the impact of military trauma and intimate partner 
 violence on maternal health outcomes.
Sec. 748. Report on coverage of behavioral and mental health crisis 
 services under TRICARE program.
Sec. 749. Report on mental health provider readiness designations.
Sec. 750. Study on provider training gaps with respect to screening and 
 treatment of maternal mental health 
 conditions.
Sec. 751. Report on mental health conditions and metabolic disease 
 among certain members of Armed Forces.
Sec. 752. Study on accessability of mental health providers and 
 services for active duty members of the 
 Armed Forces.
Sec. 753. Health-related behaviors survey and report.
Sec. 754. Report on Coordination, Data Sharing, and Evaluation Efforts 
 for Suicide Prevention.
Sec. 755. GAO study on DOD and VA mammogram and breast cancer screening 
 policies.
Sec. 756. Study and report on rate of cancer-related morbidity and 
 mortality.
Sec. 757. GAO study on access to Exceptional Family Member program and 
 Extended Care Health Option program by 
 members of reserve components.
Sec. 758. Kyle Mullen Naval safety enhancements.
Sec. 759. Report on operational and physical and mental health effects 
 of low recruitment and retention to Armed 
 Forces.
Sec. 759A. Report on maternal mortality rates of female members of the 
 Armed Forces.
Sec. 759B. Report on Defense Health Agency contracts.
 Subtitle D--Other Matters

Sec. 761. Inclusion of exposure to perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl 
 substances as component of periodic health 
 assessments.
Sec. 762. Mandatory training on health effects of perfluoroalkyl or 
 polyfluoroalkyl substances.
Sec. 763. Non-medical counseling services for military families.
Sec. 764. Clarifications relating to analysis of Department of Defense 
 Comprehensive Autism Demonstration Program 
 by National Academies.
Sec. 765. Clarification of eligibility for membership to independent 
 suicide prevention and response review 
 committee.
Sec. 766. Improvement to Wounded Warrior Service Dog Program.
Sec. 767. Improvements relating to behavioral health care available 
 under military health system.
Sec. 768. Assignment of behavioral health providers and technicians to 
 aircraft carriers.
Sec. 769. Department of Defense internship programs relating to 
 civilian behavioral health providers.
Sec. 770. Brain health initiative of Department of Defense.
Sec. 771. Authority to conduct pilot program relating to monitoring of 
 blast overpressure exposure.
Sec. 772. Standardization across Department of Defense of policies 
 relating to service by individuals 
 diagnosed with HBV.
Sec. 773. Certification program in provision of mental health services 
 to members of the Armed Forces, veterans, 
 and military families.
Sec. 774. Pilot program on cryopreservation and storage.
Sec. 775. Pilot program for participation by members of Selected 
 Reserve in health professions scholarship 
 and financial assistance programs.
Sec. 776. Pilot program on ensuring pharmaceutical supply stability.
Sec. 777. Establishment of partnership program between United States 
 and Ukraine for military trauma care and 
 research.
Sec. 778. Grant program for increased cooperation on post-traumatic 
 stress disorder research between United 
 States and Israel.
Sec. 779. Suicide cluster: standardized definition for use by 
 Department of Defense; congressional 
 notification.
Sec. 780. Limitation on realignment or reduction of military medical 
 manning end strength: certification 
 requirement and other reforms.
Sec. 781. Review and update of policy relating to command notification 
 process and reduction of mental health 
 stigma.
Sec. 782. Grant program to study treatment of post-traumatic stress 
 disorder using certain psychedelic 
 substances.
Sec. 783. Pilot programs of Defense Health Agency relating to sexual 
 health.
Sec. 784. Drop boxes on military installations for deposit of unused 
 prescription drugs.
Sec. 785. Funding for pancreatic cancer research.
Sec. 786. Psychological evaluations for members of the Armed Forces 
 returning from Kabul.
Sec. 787. Annual review and update of online information relating to 
 suicide prevention.
Sec. 788. Funding for post-traumatic stress disorder.
Sec. 789. Increased collaboration with NIH to combat triple negative 
 breast cancer.
Sec. 790. Pilot program to improve military readiness through nutrition 
 and wellness initiatives.
Sec. 791. Guidance for addressing healthy relationships and intimate 
 partner violence through TRICARE Program.
 TITLE VIII--ACQUISITION POLICY, ACQUISITION MANAGEMENT, AND RELATED 
 MATTERS

 Subtitle A--Acquisition Policy and Management

Sec. 801. Writing award to encourage curiosity and persistence in 
 overcoming obstacles in acquisition.
Sec. 802. Data requirements for commercial item pricing not based on 
 adequate price competition.
Sec. 803. Preference for domestic foods for military working dogs.
Sec. 804. Life cycle management and product support.
Sec. 805. Extension of requirement to submit Selected Acquisition 
 Reports.
Sec. 806. Amendments to contractor employee protections from reprisal 
 for disclosure of certain information.
Sec. 807. Enhanced domestic content requirement for major defense 
 acquisition programs.
Sec. 808. Mission-Based Rapid Acquisition Account.
Sec. 809. Preference for offerors that meet certain requirements.
Subtitle B--Amendments to General Contracting Authorities, Procedures, 
 and Limitations

Sec. 811. Membership of Coast Guard on Strategic Materials Protection 
 Board.
Sec. 812 . Comptroller General assessment of acquisition programs and 
 efforts.
Sec. 813. Subcontracting requirements for certain contracts awarded to 
 educational institutions.
Sec. 814. Clarification to fixed-price incentive contract references.
Sec. 815. Modification to indemnification authority for research and 
 development contracts.
Sec. 816. Competition requirements for purchases from Federal Prison 
 Industries.
Sec. 817. Clarification of authority of the Department of Defense to 
 carry out certain prototype projects.
Sec. 818. Requirements for the procurement of certain components for 
 certain naval vessels and auxiliary ships.
Sec. 819. Modification to prohibition on operation or procurement of 
 foreign-made unmanned aircraft systems.
Sec. 820. Extension of pilot program to accelerate contracting and 
 pricing processes.
Sec. 821. Extension and modification of Never Contract with the Enemy.
Sec. 822. Require full domestic production of flags of the United 
 States acquired by the Department of 
 Defense.
Sec. 823. Guidelines and resources on the acquisition or licensing of 
 intellectual property.
Sec. 824. Compliance procedures for investigating the prohibition on 
 criminal history inquiries by Federal 
 contractors prior to conditional offer.
Sec. 825. Reestablishment of Commission on Wartime Contracting.
 Subtitle C--Provisions Relating to Acquisition Workforce

Sec. 831. Key experiences and enhanced pay authority for acquisition 
 workforce excellence.
Sec. 832. Defense Acquisition University reforms.
Sec. 833. Modifications to Defense Civilian Training Corps.
Sec. 834. Repeal of certain provisions relating to acquisition 
 workforce incentives.
Sec. 835. Acquisition workforce incentives relating to training on and 
 agreements with certain software 
 businesses.
 Subtitle D--Provisions Relating to Software and Technology

Sec. 841. Prizes for advanced technology achievements.
Sec. 842. Congressional notification for pilot program to accelerate 
 the procurement and fielding of innovative 
 technologies.
Sec. 843. Curricula on software acquisitions and cybersecurity software 
 or hardware acquisitions for covered 
 individuals.
Sec. 844. Report on covered software development.
Sec. 845. Other transaction authority clarification.
Sec. 846. Existing agreement limits for Operation Warp Speed.
 Subtitle E--Industrial Base Matters

Sec. 851. Recognition of an association of eligible entities that 
 provide procurement technical assistance.
Sec. 852. Update to plan on reduction of reliance on services, 
 supplies, or materials from covered 
 countries.
Sec. 853. Modification to prohibition on certain procurements from the 
 Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region.
Sec. 854. Codification of the Department of Defense Mentor-Protege 
 Program.
Sec. 855. Microloan program; definitions.
Sec. 856. Small Business Innovation Program extension.
Sec. 857. Prohibition on covered airport contracts with certain 
 entities.
Sec. 858. Risk management for Department of Defense supply chains.
Sec. 859. Review of advances in domestic production of carbon fiber.
Sec. 859A. Extension of transfer date for the verification of small 
 business concerns owned and controlled by 
 veterans or service-disabled veterans to 
 the Small Business Administration.
Sec. 859B. Application of price evaluation preference for qualified 
 HUBZone small business concerns to certain 
 contracts.
Sec. 859C. Codification of Small Business Administration scorecard.
Sec. 859D. Modifications to the nonmanufacturer rule.
Sec. 859E. Study on small business assistance to foreign-based 
 companies.
Sec. 859F. Report on strategic and critical materials.
Sec. 859G. Report and modification to the national technology and 
 industrial base.
Sec. 859H. Sense of Congress on modernizing defense supply chain 
 management.
Sec. 859I. Prohibition on the use of LOGINK.
Sec. 859J. Report on transition to Phase III for Small Business 
 Innovation Research and Small Business 
 Technology Transfer program awards.
Sec. 859K. Extension of participation in 8(a) program.
Sec. 859L. Access to contract bundling data.
Sec. 859M. Report on small business concerns owned and controlled by 
 women.
Sec. 859N. Native Hawaiian Organizations.
 Subtitle F--Other Matters

Sec. 861. Technical correction to effective date of the transfer of 
 certain title 10 acquisition provisions.
Sec. 862. Regulations on use of fixed-price type contracts for major 
 defense acquisition programs.
Sec. 863. Notification on retention rate policy.
Sec. 864. Security clearance bridge pilot program.
Sec. 865. Department of Defense national imperative for industrial 
 skills program.
Sec. 866. Temporary suspension of COVID-19 vaccine mandate for 
 Department of Defense contractors.
Sec. 867. GAO report on Department of Defense contract financing and 
 commercial best practices.
Sec. 868. Prohibition on contracting with employers that violated the 
 National Labor Relations Act.
Sec. 869. Amendments to contracting authority for certain small 
 business concerns.
Sec. 870. Equitable adjustments to construction contracts.
Sec. 871. Manufacturing of insulin.
Sec. 872. Need for development and acquisition of natural rubber from 
 domestic herbacious plant sources.
Sec. 873. Increased competitive opportunities and strategy for certain 
 critical technology contractors.
Sec. 874. Duties of small business development center counselors.
 TITLE IX--DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT

 Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Defense and Related Matters

Sec. 901. Increase in authorized number of Assistant and Deputy 
 Assistant Secretaries of Defense.
Sec. 902. Responsibilities of Assistant Secretary of Defense for 
 Special Operations and Low Intensity 
 Conflict.
 Subtitle B--Other Department of Defense Organization and Management 
 Matters

Sec. 911. Eligibility of Chief of the National Guard Bureau for 
 appointment as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs 
 of Staff.
Sec. 912. Clarification of peacetime functions of the Navy.
Sec. 913. Explosive ordnance disposal defense program.
Sec. 914. Modification of report regarding the designation of the 
 Explosive Ordnance Disposal Corps as a 
 basic branch of the Army.
Sec. 915. Clarification of roles and responsibilities for force 
 modernization efforts of the Army.
Sec. 916. Report on potential transition of all members of Space Force 
 into a single component.
Sec. 917. Sense of Congress on the Electromagnetic Spectrum Superiority 
 Strategy.
 Subtitle C--Space National Guard

Sec. 921. Establishment of Space National Guard.
Sec. 922. No effect on military installations.
Sec. 923. Implementation of Space National Guard.
Sec. 924. Conforming amendments and clarification of authorities.
 TITLE X--GENERAL PROVISIONS

 Subtitle A--Financial Matters

Sec. 1001. General transfer authority.
Sec. 1002. Determination of budgetary effects.
Sec. 1003. Sense of Congress relating to enlisted personnel 
 subsistence.
Sec. 1004. Sense of Congress relating to the corrective action plans 
 review process.
Sec. 1005. Sense of Congress relating to the Fraud Reduction Task 
 Force.
 Subtitle B--Counterdrug Activities

Sec. 1011. Extension of authority to support a unified counterdrug and 
 counterterrorism campaign in Colombia.
 Subtitle C--Naval Vessels and Shipyards

Sec. 1021. Navy consultation with Marine Corps on major decisions 
 directly concerning Marine Corps amphibious 
 force structure and capability.
Sec. 1022. Number of Navy operational amphibious ships.
Sec. 1023. Availability of funds for retirement or inactivation of 
 landing dock ships.
Sec. 1024. Availability of funds for retirement or inactivation of 
 guided missile cruisers.
Sec. 1025. Business case analyses on disposition of certain Government-
 owned dry-docks.
Sec. 1026. Prohibition on use of funds for retirement of legacy 
 maritime mine countermeasures platforms.
Sec. 1027. Deadline for 75 percent manning fill for ships undergoing 
 nuclear refueling or defueling.
Sec. 1028. Prohibition on deactivation of Navy Combat Documentation 
 Detachment 206.
Sec. 1029. Withholding of certain information about sunken military 
 crafts.
Sec. 1030. Availability of funds for retirement or inactivation of 
 expeditionary transfer dock ships.
Sec. 1031. Availability of funds for retirement or inactivation of 
 Littoral Combat Ships.
Sec. 1032. Briefing on fielding of SPEIR on all surface combatant 
 vessels.
Sec. 1033. Report on effects of Multiple Award Contract-multi Order 
 contracting.
Sec. 1034. Congressional notification regarding pending retirement of 
 naval vessels viable for artificial 
 reefing.
Sec. 1034A. Award of contracts for ship repair work to non-homeport 
 shipyards to meet surge capacity.
 Subtitle D--Counterterrorism

Sec. 1035. Prohibition on use of funds for transfer or release of 
 individuals detained at United States Naval 
 Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to certain 
 countries.
Sec. 1036. Report on threat posed by domestic terrorists.
Sec. 1037. Consideration of human rights records of recipients of 
 support of special operations to combat 
 terrorism.
Sec. 1038. Consideration of human rights records of recipients of 
 support of Special Operations for irregular 
 warfare.
 Subtitle E--Miscellaneous Authorities and Limitations

Sec. 1041. Modification of authority for humanitarian demining 
 assistance and stockpiled conventional 
 munitions assistance.
Sec. 1042. Security clearances for recently separated members of the 
 Armed Forces and civilian employees of the 
 Department of Defense.
Sec. 1043. Submission of national defense strategy in unclassified 
 form.
Sec. 1044. Common access cards for Department of Defense facilities for 
 certain congressional staff.
Sec. 1045. Introduction of entities in transactions critical to 
 national security.
Sec. 1046. Repository of local nationals working for or on behalf of 
 Federal Government in theater of combat 
 operations.
Sec. 1047. Transfers and pay of nonappropriated fund employees.
Sec. 1048. Establishment of joint training pipeline between United 
 States Navy and Royal Australian Navy.
Sec. 1049. Inspector General oversight of Department of Defense 
 activities in response to Russia's further 
 invasion of Ukraine.
Sec. 1050. Consultation of congressional defense committees in 
 preparation of national defense strategy.
Sec. 1051. Prohibition on use of funds for aerial fumigation in 
 Colombia.
Sec. 1052. Assessment of suicide risk at military installations.
 Subtitle F--Studies and Reports

Sec. 1061. Briefing on Global Force Management Allocation Plan.
Sec. 1062. Extension and modification of reporting requirement 
 regarding enhancement of information 
 sharing and coordination of military 
 training between Department of Homeland 
 Security and Department of Defense.
Sec. 1063. Continuation of requirement for annual report on National 
 Guard and reserve component equipment.
Sec. 1064. Combatant command risk assessment for airborne intelligence, 
 surveillance, and reconnaissance.
Sec. 1065. Reports on effects of strategic competitor naval facilities 
 in Africa.
Sec. 1066. Annual reports on safety upgrades to the high mobility 
 multipurpose wheeled vehicle fleets.
Sec. 1067. Quarterly reports on Operation Spartan Shield.
Sec. 1068. Congressional notification of military information support 
 operations in the information environment.
Sec. 1069. Department of Defense delays in providing comments on 
 Government Accountability Office reports.
Sec. 1070. Reports on hostilities involving United States Armed Forces.
Sec. 1071. Annual report on civilian casualties in connection with 
 United States military operations.
Sec. 1072. Justification for transfer or elimination of flying 
 missions.
Sec. 1073. Equipment of Army reserve components: annual report to 
 Congress.
Sec. 1074. Public availability of reports.
Sec. 1075. Quarterly reports on expenditures for planning and design of 
 infrastructure to support permanent United 
 States force presence on Europe's eastern 
 flank.
Sec. 1076. Study on military training routes and special use air space 
 near wind turbines.
Sec. 1077. Study on Joint Task Force Indo-Pacific.
Sec. 1078. Biannual Department of Defense Inspector General reporting 
 on response to Russian aggression and 
 assistance to Ukraine.
Sec. 1079. Review of security assistance provided to Elie Wiesel 
 countries.
Sec. 1079A. Report on Department of Defense practices regarding 
 distinction between combatants and 
 civilians in United States military 
 operations.
Sec. 1079B. Report on Department of Defense recruitment advertising to 
 racial and ethnic minority communities.
Sec. 1079C. Public availability of information about cost of United 
 States overseas military footprint.
Sec. 1079D. Study and report on potential inclusion of black box data 
 recorders in tactical vehicles.
Sec. 1079E. Report on the strategy and engagement efforts of the Armed 
 Forces in Hawaii.
Sec. 1079F. Department of Defense engagement with Native Hawaiian 
 organizations.
Sec. 1079G. FFRDC study on shipyard infrastructure optimization program 
 efforts to optimize, recapitalize and 
 reconfigure facilities and industrial plant 
 equipment.
Sec. 1079H. Study on efforts of the Department of Defense to reduce the 
 use of single-use plastics.
Sec. 1079I. Report on Littoral Explosive Ordnance Neutralization 
 program of record.
Sec. 1079J. Assessment, plan, and reports on the automated surface 
 observing system.
Sec. 1079K. Annual report on use of social media by foreign terrorist 
 organizations.
Sec. 1079L. Report on protection of members of the Armed Forces from 
 Russian-sponsored armed attacks.
Sec. 1079M. Report on desalinization technology.
Sec. 1079N. Report on Department of Defense military capabilities in 
 the Caribbean.
Sec. 1079O. Annual report on unfunded priorities of Defense POW/MIA 
 Accounting Agency.
Sec. 1079P. Review of Navy study on Requirements for and Potential 
 Benefits of Realistically Simulating Real 
 World and Near Peer Adversary Submarines.
Sec. 1079Q. Report on unmanned traffic management systems at military 
 bases and installations.
Sec. 1079R. Report on non-domestic fuel use.
Sec. 1079S. Report on human trafficking as a result of Russian invasion 
 of Ukraine.
 Subtitle G--Other Matters

Sec. 1081. Technical and conforming amendments.
Sec. 1082. Ronald V. Dellums Memorial Fellowship for Women of Color in 
 STEAM.
Sec. 1083. Combating military reliance on Russian energy.
Sec. 1084. Commission on Civilian Harm.
Sec. 1085. Department of Defense Center for Excellence in Civilian Harm 
 Mitigation.
Sec. 1086. Sense of Congress regarding naming a warship the USS 
 Fallujah.
Sec. 1087. Standardization of sectional barge construction for 
 Department of Defense use on rivers and 
 intercoastal waterways.
Sec. 1088. Sense of Congress regarding naming warships after deceased 
 Navy Medal of Honor recipients.
Sec. 1089. Sense of Congress regarding the service and crew of the USS 
 Oklahoma City.
Sec. 1090. Target date for deployment of 5G wireless broadband 
 infrastructure at all military 
 installations.
Sec. 1091. Inclusion of Air Force student pilots in personnel metrics 
 for establishing and sustaining dining 
 facilities at Air Education and Training 
 Commands.
Sec. 1092. Sense of Congress regarding conduct of international naval 
 review on July 4, 2026.
Sec. 1093. Sense of Congress regarding crisis at the Southwest border.
Sec. 1094. National Commission on the Future of the Navy.
Sec. 1095. Transfer of aircraft to other departments for wildfire 
 suppression and other purposes.
Sec. 1096. National Museum of Intelligence and Special Operations.
Sec. 1097. Availability of information regarding procurement of 
 equipment by State and local governments 
 through the Department of Defense.
Sec. 1098. Report on purchase and use by Department of Defense of 
 location data generated by Americans' 
 phones and their internet metadata.
Sec. 1099. National tabletop exercise.
Sec. 1099A. Greenhouse gas mitigation actions and results dashboard.
Sec. 1099B. Administration of risk-based surveys to certain educational 
 institutions.
Sec. 1099C. Briefing on Guam and Northern Mariana Islands military 
 construction costs.
Sec. 1099D. Resources to implement Department of Defense policy on 
 civilian harm in connection with United 
 States military operations.
Sec. 1099E. Availability of modular small arms range for Army Reserve 
 in Puerto Rico.
Sec. 1099F. Independent epidemiological analysis of health effects from 
 exposure to Department of Defense 
 activities in Vieques.
Sec. 1099G. Participation in Federal Transportation Incentive PRogram.
Sec. 1099H. Report on initiatives of Department of Defense to source 
 locally and regionally produced foods for 
 installations of the Department.
Sec. 1099I. Limitations on sale and use of portable heating devices on 
 military installations.
Sec. 1099J. Training and information for first responders regarding aid 
 for victims of trauma-related injuries.
Sec. 1099K. Public availability of cost of certain military operations 
 to each United States taxpayer.
Sec. 1099L. Report on Department of Defense plan to achieve strategic 
 overmatch in the information environment.
 TITLE XI--CIVILIAN PERSONNEL MATTERS

Sec. 1101. One-year extension of authority to waive annual limitation 
 on premium pay and aggregate limitation on 
 pay for Federal civilian employees working 
 overseas.
Sec. 1102. One-year extension of temporary authority to grant 
 allowances, benefits, and gratuities to 
 civilian personnel on official duty in a 
 combat zone.
Sec. 1103. Standardized credentials for law enforcement officers of the 
 Department of Defense.
Sec. 1104. Temporary extension of authority to provide security for 
 former Department of Defense officials.
Sec. 1105. Increase in positions eligible for enhanced pay authority 
 for certain research and technology 
 positions in science and technology 
 reinvention laboratories.
Sec. 1106. GAO Report on Federal Employee Paid Leave Act.
Sec. 1107. Inflation bonus pay for certain Department of Defense 
 civilian employees.
Sec. 1108. Flexible workplace programs.
Sec. 1109. GAO study on Federal Wage System parity with local 
 prevailing wage rate.
Sec. 1110. Temporary authority to appoint retired members of the Armed 
 Forces to Military Health System positions.
Sec. 1111. Purchase of retired handguns by Federal law enforcement 
 officers.
Sec. 1112. National Digital Reserve Corps.
 Subtitle B--PLUM Act of 2022

Sec. 1121. Short title.
Sec. 1122. Establishment of public website on Government policy and 
 supporting positions.
 TITLE XII--MATTERS RELATING TO FOREIGN NATIONS

 Subtitle A--Assistance and Training

Sec. 1201. Modifications to annual reports on security cooperation.
Sec. 1202. Modification to authority to provide support for conduct of 
 operations.
Sec. 1203. Extension and modification of authority for reimbursement of 
 certain coalition nations for support 
 provided to United States military 
 operations.
Sec. 1204. Modification to authority to build capacity of foreign 
 security forces.
Sec. 1205. Public report on military capabilities of China, Iran, North 
 Korea, and Russia.
Sec. 1206. Security cooperation programs with foreign partners to 
 advance women, peace, and security.
Sec. 1207. Strategy for security cooperation.
Sec. 1208. General Thaddeus Kosciuszko Exchange Program.
Sec. 1209. Assessment, monitoring, and evaluation of programs and 
 activities.
Sec. 1209A. Report on chief of mission concurrence.
Sec. 1209B. Repeal of limitation on costs covered under humanitarian 
 demining assistance.
Sec. 1209C. Modification to fellowship program to add training relating 
 to urban warfare.
 Subtitle B--Matters Relating to Afghanistan and Pakistan

Sec. 1211. Extension and modification of the Afghan Special Immigrant 
 Visa Program.
Sec. 1212. Additional matters for inclusion in reports on oversight in 
 Afghanistan.
Sec. 1213. Prohibition on transporting currency to the Taliban and the 
 Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan.
 Subtitle C--Matters Relating to Syria, Iraq, and Iran

Sec. 1221. Extension of authority to provide assistance to vetted 
 Syrian groups and individuals.
Sec. 1222. Extension and modification of authority to provide 
 assistance to counter the Islamic State of 
 Iraq and Syria.
Sec. 1223. Extension of authority to support operations and activities 
 of the Office of Security Cooperation in 
 Iraq.
Sec. 1224. Extension and modification of report on the military 
 capabilities of Iran and related 
 activities.
Sec. 1225. Prohibition on transfers to Iran.
Sec. 1226. Report on assisting Iranian dissidents and people access 
 telecommunications tools.
Sec. 1227. State Department authorization for pavilion at Expo 2025 
 Osaka.
Sec. 1228. Report on the U.N. arms embargo on Iran.
Sec. 1229. Report on Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps-affiliated 
 operatives abroad.
Sec. 1229A. Repeal of Authorization for Use of Military Force Against 
 Iraq Resolution of 2002.
Sec. 1229B. Interagency strategy to disrupt and dismantle narcotics 
 production and trafficking and affiliated 
 networks linked to the regime of Bashar al-
 Assad in Syria.
 Subtitle D--Matters Relating to Russia

Sec. 1231. Extension of limitation on military cooperation between the 
 United States and Russia.
Sec. 1232. Modification and extension of Ukraine Security Assistance 
 Initiative.
Sec. 1233. Prohibition on availability of funds relating to sovereignty 
 of Russia over Crimea.
Sec. 1234. Assessment of Russian strategy in Ukraine.
Sec. 1235. Report on efforts by the Russian Federation to expand its 
 presence and influence in Latin America and 
 the Caribbean.
Sec. 1236. Expansion of cooperation and training with Ukraine.
Sec. 1237. Statement of policy.
Sec. 1238. Report on Department of Defense plan for responding to 
 Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
Sec. 1239. Prohibition on Russian participation in the G7.
Sec. 1240. Condemning detention and indictment of Russian opposition 
 leader Vladimir Vladimirovich Kara-Murza.
Sec. 1241. Task force to track security assistance to Ukraine.
Sec. 1242. Report on risk of nuclear war in Ukraine.
Sec. 1243. Report on distribution and use of weapons in Ukraine.
Sec. 1244. Report from Council of the Inspectors General on Ukraine.
 Subtitle E--Matters Relating to Europe and NATO

Sec. 1261. Sense of Congress on United States defense posture in Europe 
 following the further invasion of Ukraine.
Sec. 1262. Sense of Congress on NATO membership for Finland and Sweden.
Sec. 1263. Matters relating to climate change at NATO.
Sec. 1264. Baltic Reassurance Act.
Sec. 1265. Report on efforts of NATO to counter misinformation and 
 disinformation.
Sec. 1266. Improvements to the NATO Strategic Communications Center of 
 Excellence.
Sec. 1267. Sense of Congress on enhancing strategic partnership, 
 defense and security cooperation with 
 Georgia.
Sec. 1268. Report on improved diplomatic relations and defense 
 relationship with Albania.
Sec. 1269. Restriction of entities from using Federal funds from 
 engaging, entering into, and awarding 
 public works contracts.
Sec. 1270. Modification to United States membership in 
 interparliamentary group.
Sec. 1271. Limitation on transfer of F-16 aircraft.
 TITLE XIII--OTHER MATTERS RELATING TO FOREIGN NATIONS

 Subtitle A--Matters Relating to the Indo-Pacific Region

Sec. 1301. Modification to annual report on military and security 
 developments involving the People's 
 Republic of China.
Sec. 1302. Sense of Congress on South Korea.
Sec. 1303. Sense of Congress on Taiwan defense relations.
Sec. 1304. Sense of Congress and report on United States security 
 cooperation with India.
Sec. 1305. Modification to report on resourcing United States defense 
 requirements for the Indo-Pacific region 
 and report on enhancing defense cooperation 
 with allies and partners in the Indo-
 Pacific.
Sec. 1306. Report on support and sustainment for critical capabilities 
 in the area of responsibility of the United 
 States Indo-Pacific Command necessary to 
 meet operational requirements in certain 
 conflicts with strategic competitors.
Sec. 1307. Modification to Pacific Deterrence Initiative.
Sec. 1308. Seize the Initiative.
Sec. 1309. Modification to China military power report.
Sec. 1310. Modifications to public reporting of Chinese military 
 companies operating in the United States.
Sec. 1311. Reporting on institutions of higher education domiciled in 
 the People's Republic of China that provide 
 support to the People's Liberation Army.
Sec. 1312. Sense of Congress on inviting Taiwan to the Rim of the 
 Pacific exercise.
Sec. 1313. Joint exercises with Taiwan.
Sec. 1314. Taiwan defense cooperation.
Sec. 1315. Modification of prohibition on participation of the people's 
 republic of china in rim of the pacific 
 (rimpac) naval exercises to include 
 cessation of genocide by china.
Sec. 1316. Addition to next annual report on military and security 
 developments involving China.
Sec. 1317. Sense of Congress on enhancing NATO efforts to counter 
 misinformation and disinformation.
Sec. 1318. Sense of Congress relating to the NATO Parliamentary 
 Assembly.
Sec. 1319. Report on Indo-Pacific region.
Sec. 1320. Sense of Congress regarding the status of China.
Sec. 1321. Report on providing access to uncensored media in China.
 Subtitle B--Other Matters Relating to Foreign Nations

Sec. 1331. Support of special operations for irregular warfare.
Sec. 1332. Permanent extension of authority for certain payments to 
 redress injury and loss.
Sec. 1333. Extension of United States-Israel cooperation to counter 
 unmanned aerial systems.
Sec. 1334. Modification and extension of United States-Israel 
 cooperation to counter unmanned aerial 
 systems.
Sec. 1335. Modification to initiative to support protection of national 
 security academic researchers from undue 
 influence and other security threats.
Sec. 1336. Annual report on role of antisemitisim in violent extremist 
 movements.
Sec. 1337. Use of United States-origin defense articles in Yemen.
Sec. 1338. Sense of Congress regarding Israel.
Sec. 1339. Sense of Congress and briefing on multinational force and 
 observers.
Sec. 1340. Comprehensive strategy to counter gray zone operations and 
 other hybrid warfare methods.
Sec. 1341. Study on Department of Defense support for stabilization 
 activities in national security interest of 
 the United States.
Sec. 1342. Report on American Institute in Taiwan efforts to combat 
 certain disinformation and propaganda.
Sec. 1343. Report on Azerbaijan.
Sec. 1344. Defense and diplomatic strategy for Libya.
Sec. 1345. Repeal of restriction on funding for the Preparatory 
 Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-
 Test-Ban Treaty Organization.
Sec. 1346. Sense of Congress regarding the boycott of certain companies 
 that continue to operate in Russia and 
 provide financial benefits to the Putin 
 regime.
Sec. 1347. Report on arms trafficking in Haiti.
Sec. 1348. Establishment of the Office of City and State Diplomacy.
Sec. 1349. Transfer of excess OLIVER HAZARD PERRY class guided missile 
 frigates to Egypt.
Sec. 1350. Sense of Congress on Azerbaijan's illegal detention of 
 Armenian prisoners of war.
Sec. 1351. United States-India Defense Partnership.
Sec. 1352. Briefing on Department of Defense Program to Protect United 
 States Students Against Foreign Agents.
Sec. 1353. Report on efforts to combat Boko Haram in Nigeria and the 
 Lake Chad Basin.
Sec. 1354. Chief of mission concurrence.
Sec. 1355. GAO study on Department of Defense support for other 
 departments and agencies of the United 
 States Government that advance Department 
 of Defense security cooperation objectives.
Sec. 1356. Feasibility study and report relating to Somaliland.
Sec. 1357. Repeal of joint resolution to promote peace and stability in 
 the Middle East.
Sec. 1358. Sense of Congress regarding the inclusion of sunset 
 provisions in authorizations for use of 
 military force.
Sec. 1359. Report on Mexico.
Sec. 1360. Unpaid Peruvian agrarian reform bonds.
Sec. 1361. Report on Chinese support to Russia with respect to its 
 unprovoked invasion of and full-scale war 
 against Ukraine.
 TITLE XIV--OTHER AUTHORIZATIONS

 Subtitle A--Military Programs

Sec. 1401. Working capital funds.
Sec. 1402. Chemical agents and munitions destruction, defense.
Sec. 1403. Drug interdiction and counter-drug activities, defense-wide.
Sec. 1404. Defense Inspector General.
Sec. 1405. Defense health program.
 Subtitle B--Other Matters

Sec. 1411. Authority for transfer of funds to joint Department of 
 Defense-Department of Veterans Affairs 
 Medical Facility Demonstration Fund for 
 Captain James A. Lovell Health Care Center, 
 Illinois.
Sec. 1412. Authorization of appropriations for Armed Forces Retirement 
 Home.
Sec. 1413. Study and pilot program on semiconductors and the National 
 Defense Stockpile.
Sec. 1414. Restoring essential energy and security holdings onshore for 
 rare earths.
Sec. 1415. Report on feasibility of increasing quantities of rare earth 
 permanent magnets in National Defense 
 Stockpile.
Sec. 1416. Study on stockpiling energy storage components.
 Subtitle C--Homeland Acceleration of Recovering Deposits and Renewing 
 Onshore Critical Keystones

Sec. 1421. Authority to acquire materials for National Defense 
 Stockpile to address shortfalls.
Sec. 1422. Report on modifications to the national technology and 
 industrial base.
 TITLE XV--CYBER AND INFORMATION OPERATIONS MATTERS

 Subtitle A--Cyber Matters

Sec. 1501. Improvements to Principal Cyber Advisors.
Sec. 1502. Modification of office of primary responsibility for 
 strategic cybersecurity program.
Sec. 1503. Establishment of cyber operations designator and rating for 
 the Navy.
Sec. 1504. Cyber threat information collaboration environment program.
Sec. 1505. Department of defense enterprise-wide procurement of cyber 
 data products and services.
Sec. 1506. Cybersecurity of military standards for data.
 Subtitle B--Information Operations

Sec. 1511. Military operations in information environment: authority 
 and notifications.
Sec. 1512. Limitation on availability of certain funds until submission 
 of joint lexicon for terms related to 
 information operations.
Sec. 1513. Joint information operations course.
Sec. 1514. Consistency in delegation of certain authorities relating to 
 information operations.
Sec. 1515. Assessment and optimization of Department of Defense 
 information operations within the cyber 
 domain.
Sec. 1516. Requirement to notify Chief of Mission of military operation 
 in the information environment.
 Subtitle C--Reports and Other Matters

Sec. 1531. Annual reports on support by military departments for 
 cyberspace operations.
Sec. 1532. Independent review of posture and staffing levels of Office 
 of the Chief Information Officer.
Sec. 1533. Comprehensive review of Cyber Excepted Service.
Sec. 1534. Standardization of authority to operate applications in the 
 Department of Defense.
Sec. 1535. Establishment of hacking for national security and public 
 service innovation program.
Sec. 1536. Tailored cyberspace operations organizations.
Sec. 1537. Cyber operations-peculiar awards.
Sec. 1538. Manning review of Space Force cyber squadrons.
Sec. 1539. Review of definitions associated with Cyberspace Operations 
 Forces.
 TITLE XVI--SPACE ACTIVITIES, STRATEGIC PROGRAMS, AND INTELLIGENCE 
 MATTERS

 Subtitle A--Space Activities

Sec. 1601. Requirements for protection of satellites.
Sec. 1602. Strategy on protection of satellites.
Sec. 1603. National Security Space Launch program.
Sec. 1604. Responsive space strategy, principles, model architecture, 
 and implementation plans.
Sec. 1605. Responsive space demonstrations.
Sec. 1606. Allied responsive space capabilities.
Sec. 1607. Report on tactically responsive space capabilities.
Sec. 1608. Sense of Congress on Range of the Future and support to 
 commercial space launch activity.
Sec. 1609. Report on hyperspectral satellite technology.
Sec. 1610. Report on space debris.
Sec. 1611. Plan on pilot program for deployment of dedicated X-band 
 small satellite communications.
Sec. 1612. Report on stratospheric balloons, aerostats, or satellite 
 technology capable of rapidly delivering 
 wireless internet.
 Subtitle B--Defense Intelligence and Intelligence-Related Activities

Sec. 1621. Congressional oversight of clandestine activities that 
 support operational preparation of the 
 environment.
Sec. 1622. Executive agent for explosive ordnance intelligence.
Sec. 1623. Information on cover and cover support activities.
Sec. 1624. Funding for research and development of advanced naval 
 nuclear fuel system based on low-enriched 
 uranium.
 Subtitle C--Nuclear Forces

Sec. 1631. Improvements to Nuclear Weapons Council.
Sec. 1632. Portfolio management framework for nuclear forces.
Sec. 1633. Modification of Annual Assessment of Cyber Resilience of 
 Nuclear Command and Control System.
Sec. 1634. Nuclear-capable sea-launched cruise missile.
Sec. 1635. Limitation on availability of certain funds until submission 
 of information relating to proposed budget 
 for nuclear-armed sea-launched cruise 
 missile.
Sec. 1636. Prohibition on reduction of the intercontinental ballistic 
 missiles of the United States.
 Subtitle D--Missile Defense Programs

Sec. 1641. Repeal of requirement to transition ballistic missile 
 defense programs to the military 
 departments.
Sec. 1642. Fire control architectures.
Sec. 1643. Limitation on availability of certain funds until required 
 acquisition authority designation relating 
 to capability to defend the homeland from 
 cruise missiles.
Sec. 1644. Limitation on availability of funds until submission of 
 report on layered defense for the homeland.
Sec. 1645. Middle East integrated air and missile defense.
Sec. 1646. Strategy to use asymmetric capabilities to defeat hypersonic 
 missile threats.
Sec. 1647. Report on integrated air and missile defense sensor of 
 United States Indo-Pacific Command.
Sec. 1648. Risk reduction in procurement of Guam missile defense 
 system.
Sec. 1649. Plan on delivering Shared Early Warning System data to 
 certain allies and partners of the United 
 States.
Sec. 1650. Reports on ground-based interceptors.
Sec. 1651. Report on missile defense interceptor site in contiguous 
 United States.
Sec. 1652. Report on gun launched interceptor technologies.
Sec. 1653. Report on radiation hardened, thermally insensitive 
 telescopes for SM-3 interceptor.
 Subtitle E--Other Matters

Sec. 1661. Cooperative threat reduction funds.
Sec. 1662. Study of weapons programs that allow the Armed Forces to 
 address hard and deeply buried targets.
Sec. 1663. Unidentified aerial phenomena reporting procedures.
 TITLE XVII--MUNITIONS REPLENISHMENT AND FUTURE PROCUREMENT

Sec. 1701. Modification to Special Defense Acquisition Fund.
Sec. 1702. Development of technologies with respect to critical, 
 preferred, and precision-guided 
 conventional munitions.
Sec. 1703. Sense of Congress and quarterly briefings on replenishment 
 and revitalization of stocks of tactical 
 missiles provided to Ukraine.
Sec. 1704. Assessment of acquisition objectives for Patriot air and 
 missile defense battalions.
Sec. 1705. Federally funded research and development center analysis of 
 Department of Defense capability and 
 capacity to replenish missile and munition 
 inventories.
Sec. 1706. Out-Year Unconstrained Total Munitions Requirement, Out-Year 
 inventory numbers, and critical munitions 
 reserve.
Sec. 1707. Identification of subcontractors for critical munitions 
 contracts.
Sec. 1708. Study on stockpiles and production of critical guided 
 munitions.
Sec. 1709. Ukraine Critical Munitions Acquisition Fund.
Sec. 1710. Quarterly briefings on replenishment and revitalization of 
 stocks of defensive and offensive weapons 
 provided to Ukraine.
 DIVISION B--MILITARY CONSTRUCTION AUTHORIZATIONS

Sec. 2001. Short title.
Sec. 2002. Expiration of authorizations and amounts required to be 
 specified by law.
Sec. 2003. Effective date and automatic execution of conforming changes 
 to tables of sections, tables of contents, 
 and similar tabular entries.
Sec. 2004. Directing the Secretary of Defense to continue military 
 housing reforms.
 TITLE XXI--ARMY MILITARY CONSTRUCTION

Sec. 2101. Authorized Army construction and land acquisition projects.
Sec. 2102. Family housing.
Sec. 2103. Authorization of appropriations, Army.
Sec. 2104. Demolition of District of Columbia Fort McNair Quarters 4, 
 13, and 15.
Sec. 2105. Modification of authority to carry out certain fiscal year 
 2019 project.
Sec. 2106. Extension of authority to carry out certain fiscal year 2018 
 projects.
Sec. 2107. Modification of authority to carry out certain fiscal year 
 2018 projects.
 TITLE XXII--NAVY MILITARY CONSTRUCTION

Sec. 2201. Authorized Navy construction and land acquisition projects.
Sec. 2202. Family housing.
Sec. 2203. Authorization of appropriations, Navy.
Sec. 2204. Extension of authority to carry out certain fiscal year 2018 
 project.
Sec. 2205. Transfer of customers from electrical utility system of the 
 Navy at former Naval Air Station Barber's 
 Point, Hawaii, to new electrical system in 
 Kalaeloa, Hawaii.
 TITLE XXIII--AIR FORCE MILITARY CONSTRUCTION

Sec. 2301. Authorized Air Force construction and land acquisition 
 projects.
Sec. 2302. Family housing and improvements to military family housing 
 units.
Sec. 2303. Authorization of appropriations, Air Force.
Sec. 2304. Extension of authority to carry out certain fiscal year 2018 
 projects.
Sec. 2305. Modification of authority to carry out certain fiscal year 
 2021 project.
Sec. 2306. Modification of authority to carry out certain military 
 construction projects at Tyndall Air Force 
 Base, Florida.
 TITLE XXIV--DEFENSE AGENCIES MILITARY CONSTRUCTION

Sec. 2401. Authorized Defense Agencies construction and land 
 acquisition projects.
Sec. 2402. Authorized Energy Resilience and Conservation Investment 
 Program projects.
Sec. 2403. Authorization of appropriations, Defense Agencies.
Sec. 2404. Extension of authority to carry out certain fiscal year 2018 
 projects.
 TITLE XXV--INTERNATIONAL PROGRAMS

 Subtitle A--North Atlantic Treaty Organization Security Investment 
 Program

Sec. 2501. Authorized NATO construction and land acquisition projects.
Sec. 2502. Authorization of appropriations, NATO.
 Subtitle B--Host Country In-Kind Contributions

Sec. 2511. Republic of Korea funded construction projects.
Sec. 2512. Repeal of authorized approach to certain construction 
 project.
 TITLE XXVI--GUARD AND RESERVE FORCES FACILITIES

Sec. 2601. Authorized Army National Guard construction and land 
 acquisition projects.
Sec. 2602. Authorized Army Reserve construction and land acquisition 
 projects.
Sec. 2603. Authorized Air National Guard construction and land 
 acquisition projects.
Sec. 2604. Authorized Air Force Reserve construction and land 
 acquisition projects.
Sec. 2605. Authorization of appropriations, National Guard and Reserve.
Sec. 2606. Corrections to authority to carry out certain fiscal year 
 2022 projects.
Sec. 2607. Extension of authority to carry out certain fiscal year 2018 
 projects.
 TITLE XXVII--BASE REALIGNMENT AND CLOSURE ACTIVITIES

Sec. 2701. Authorization of appropriations for base realignment and 
 closure activities funded through 
 Department of Defense Base Closure Account.
Sec. 2702. Authorization to fund certain demolition and removal 
 activities through Department of Defense 
 Base Closure Account.
 TITLE XXVIII--MILITARY CONSTRUCTION GENERAL PROVISIONS

 Subtitle A--Military Construction Program Changes

Sec. 2801. Modification of annual locality adjustment of dollar 
 thresholds applicable to unspecified minor 
 military construction authorities.
Sec. 2802. Military construction projects for innovation, research, 
 development, test, and evaluation.
Sec. 2803. Further clarification of requirements related to authorized 
 cost and scope of work variations.
Sec. 2804. Use of operation and maintenance funds for certain 
 construction projects outside the United 
 States.
Sec. 2805. Increase in maximum approved cost of unspecified minor 
 military construction projects.
Sec. 2806. Increase in unspecified minor military construction 
 authority for laboratory revitalization 
 projects.
Sec. 2807. Permanent application of dollar limits for location and 
 application to projects outside the United 
 States.
Sec. 2808. Prohibition on availability of funds for special operations 
 forces military construction.
Sec. 2809. Requirements relating to certain military construction 
 projects.
Sec. 2809A. Supervision of large military construction projects.
Sec. 2809B. Local hire requirements for military construction 
 contracts.
 Subtitle B--Continuation of Military Housing Reforms

Sec. 2811. Standardization of military installation Housing 
 Requirements and Market Analyses.
Sec. 2812. Notice requirement for MHPI ground lease extensions.
Sec. 2813. Annual briefings on military housing privatization projects.
Sec. 2814. Privatization of Navy and Air Force transient housing.
Sec. 2815. Military housing feedback tool.
Sec. 2816. Screening and registry of individuals with health conditions 
 resulting from unsafe housing units.
Sec. 2817. Mandatory disclosure of presence of mold and health effects 
 of mycotoxins before a lease is signed for 
 privatized military housing.
Sec. 2818. Modification of prohibition on ownership or trading of 
 stocks in certain companies by certain 
 officials of the Department of Defense.
 Subtitle C--Real Property and Facilities Administration

Sec. 2821. Authorized land and facilities transfer to support contracts 
 with Federally Funded Research and 
 Development Centers.
Sec. 2822. Restoration or replacement of damaged, destroyed, or 
 economically unrepairable facilities.
Sec. 2823. Defense access road program enhancements to address 
 transportation infrastructure in vicinity 
 of military installations.
Sec. 2824. Physical entrances to certain military installations.
Sec. 2825. Improvements relating to access to military installations in 
 United States.
 Subtitle D--Military Facilities Master Plan Requirements

Sec. 2831. Limitation on use of funds pending completion of military 
 installation resilience component of master 
 plans for at-risk major military 
 installations.
Subtitle E--Matters Related to Unified Facilities Criteria and Military 
 Construction Planning and Design

Sec. 2841. Consideration of installation of integrated solar roofing to 
 improve energy resiliency of military 
 installations.
Sec. 2842. Study of military housing resilience and energy efficiency.
 Subtitle F--Land Conveyances

Sec. 2851. Extension of time frame for land conveyance, Sharpe Army 
 Depot, Lathrop, California.
Sec. 2852. Authority for transfer of administrative jurisdiction, 
 Castner Range, Fort Bliss, Texas.
Sec. 2853. Conveyance, Joint Base Charleston, South Carolina.
Sec. 2854. Land conveyance, Naval Air Station Oceana, Dam Neck Annex, 
 Virginia Beach, Virginia.
Sec. 2855. Land exchange, Marine Reserve Training Center, Omaha, 
 Nebraska.
 Subtitle G--Miscellaneous Studies and Reports

Sec. 2861. FFRDC study on practices with respect to development of 
 military construction projects.
Sec. 2862. Feasibility study for Blue Grass Chemical Agent-Destruction 
 Pilot Plant.
Sec. 2863. Comptroller General assessment of military construction, 
 maintenance, and upgrades of joint base 
 infrastructure and facilities.
Sec. 2864. Report on underground tunnels and facilities in Hawaii.
Sec. 2865. Comptroller General report on community engagement 
 activities at military installations in 
 foreign countries.
Sec. 2866. Report on recognition of African American servicemembers in 
 Department of Defense naming practices.
Sec. 2867. Report on capacity of Department of Defense to provide 
 survivors of natural disasters with 
 emergency short-term housing.
Sec. 2868. Directing the Secretary of Defense to deliver a briefing on 
 housing with respect to junior members of 
 the Armed Forces.
Sec. 2869. Reporting on lead service lines and lead plumbing.
 Subtitle H--Other Matters

Sec. 2871. Defense community infrastructure program.
Sec. 2872. Inclusion in Defense Community Infrastructure Pilot Program 
 of certain projects for ROTC training.
Sec. 2873. Basing decision scorecard consistency and transparency.
Sec. 2874. Lease or use agreement for category 3 subterranean training 
 facility.
Sec. 2875. Required consultation with State and local entities on 
 issues related to increase in number of 
 military personnel at military 
 installations.
Sec. 2876. Required investments in improving child development centers.
Sec. 2877. Limitation on use of funds for closure of combat readiness 
 training centers.
Sec. 2878. Pilot program on use of mass timber in military construction 
 projects.
Sec. 2879. Contributions for climate resilience for North Atlantic 
 Treaty Organizations Security Investment.
Sec. 2880. Screening and registry of individuals with health conditions 
 resulting from unsafe housing units.
Sec. 2881. Recognition of Memorial, Memorial Garden, and K9 Memorial of 
 the National Navy UDT-SEAL Museum in Fort 
 Pierce, Florida, as a national memorial, 
 memorial garden, and K9 memorial, 
 respectively, of Navy SEALs and their 
 predecessors.
Sec. 2882. Ensuring that contractor employees on Army Corps projects 
 are paid prevailing wages as required by 
 law.
Sec. 2883. Inclusion of climate resilience services in the Combatant 
 Commander Initiative Fund.
Sec. 2884. Interagency Regional Coordinator for Resilience Pilot 
 Project.
 TITLE XXIX--SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY MILITARY CONSTRUCTION

Sec. 2901. Authorized Army construction and land acquisition projects.
Sec. 2902. Authorized Navy construction and land acquisition project.
Sec. 2903. Authorized Air Force construction and land acquisition 
 projects.
Sec. 2904. Authorization of appropriations.
 DIVISION C--DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY NATIONAL SECURITY AUTHORIZATIONS AND 
 OTHER AUTHORIZATIONS

 TITLE XXXI--DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY NATIONAL SECURITY PROGRAMS

 Subtitle A--National Security Programs and Authorizations

Sec. 3101. National Nuclear Security Administration.
Sec. 3102. Defense environmental cleanup.
Sec. 3103. Other defense activities.
Sec. 3104. Nuclear energy.
 Subtitle B--Program Authorizations, Restrictions, Limitations, and 
 Other Matters

Sec. 3111. Plutonium pit production capacity.
Sec. 3112. Nuclear warhead acquisition process.
Sec. 3113. Authorized personnel levels of the Office of the 
 Administrator.
Sec. 3114. Modification to certain reporting requirements.
Sec. 3115. Modifications to long-term plan for meeting national 
 security requirements for unencumbered 
 uranium.
Sec. 3116. Modification of minor construction threshold for plant 
 projects.
Sec. 3117. Prohibition on availability of funds to reconvert or retire 
 W76-2 warheads.
Sec. 3118. Comptroller General study on National Nuclear Security 
 Administration management and operation 
 contracting process.
Sec. 3119. Funding for W80-4 life extension program.
Sec. 3120. Requirements for specific request for new or modified 
 nuclear weapons.
Sec. 3121. Extension of deadline for transfer of parcels of land in New 
 Mexico.
Sec. 3122. Designation of National Nuclear Security Administration as 
 technical nuclear forensics lead.
 TITLE XXXII--DEFENSE NUCLEAR FACILITIES SAFETY BOARD

Sec. 3201. Authorization.
Sec. 3202. Continuation of functions and powers during loss of quorum.
 TITLE XXXIV--NAVAL PETROLEUM RESERVES

Sec. 3401. Authorization of appropriations.
 TITLE XXXV--MARITIME SECURITY

 Subtitle A--Maritime Administration

Sec. 3501. Authorization of the Maritime Administration.
Sec. 3502. Secretary of Transportation responsibility with respect to 
 cargoes procured, furnished, or financed by 
 other Federal departments and agencies.
Sec. 3503. United States marine highway program.
Sec. 3504. Multistate, State, and regional transportation planning.
 Subtitle B--Merchant Marine Academy

Sec. 3511. Appointment of Superintendent of United States Merchant 
 Marine Academy.
Sec. 3512. Exemption of certain students from requirement to obtain 
 merchant mariner license.
Sec. 3513. Protection of cadets from sexual assault onboard vessels.
Sec. 3514. Requirements relating to training of Merchant Marine Academy 
 cadets on certain vessels.
Sec. 3515. Reports on matters relating to the United States Merchant 
 Marine Academy.
 Subtitle C--Vessels

Sec. 3521. Waiver of navigation and vessel-inspection laws.
Sec. 3522. Certificates of numbers for undocumented vessels.
Sec. 3523. Recapitalization of National Defense Reserve Fleet.
Sec. 3524. Cargoes procured, furnished, or financed by the United 
 States Government.
 Subtitle D--Reports and Other Matters

Sec. 3532. National maritime transportation report and strategy.
 DIVISION D--FUNDING TABLES

Sec. 4001. Authorization of amounts in funding tables.
 TITLE XLI--PROCUREMENT

Sec. 4101. Procurement.
 TITLE XLII--RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST, AND EVALUATION

Sec. 4201. Research, development, test, and evaluation.
 TITLE XLIII--OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE

Sec. 4301. Operation and maintenance.
 TITLE XLIV--MILITARY PERSONNEL

Sec. 4401. Military personnel.
 TITLE XLV--OTHER AUTHORIZATIONS

Sec. 4501. Other authorizations.
 TITLE XLVI--MILITARY CONSTRUCTION

Sec. 4601. Military construction.
 TITLE XLVII--DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY NATIONAL SECURITY PROGRAMS

Sec. 4701. Department of Energy National Security Programs.
 DIVISION E--NON-DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE MATTERS

 TITLE LI--VETERANS AFFAIRS MATTERS

Sec. 5101. Maximum rate of interest on debts incurred before military 
 service applicable to military dependents.
Sec. 5102. Report on handling of certain records of the Department of 
 Veterans Affairs.
Sec. 5103. Sense of Congress regarding women who served as cadet nurses 
 during World War II.
Sec. 5104. Sense of Congress regarding Korean and Korean-American 
 Vietnam war veterans.
Sec. 5105. Use of veterans with medical occupations in response to 
 national emergencies.
Sec. 5106. Pilot program to employ veterans in positions relating to 
 conservation and resource management 
 activities.
Sec. 5107. Elimination of Asset and Infrastructure Review Commission of 
 Department of Veterans Affairs.
Sec. 5108. Eligibility requirements for reimbursement for emergency 
 treatment furnished to veterans.
Sec. 5109. Improving processing by the Department of Veterans Affairs 
 of disability claims for post-traumatic 
 stress disorder.
Sec. 5110. Registry of individuals exposed to per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
 substances on military installations.
Sec. 5111. Department of Veterans Affairs Advisory Committee on United 
 States Outlying Areas and Freely Associated 
 States.
Sec. 5112. Report on barriers to veteran participation in Federal 
 housing programs.
Sec. 5113. Department of Veterans Affairs report on supportive services 
 and housing insecurity.
Sec. 5114. Inclusion on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Wall of the names 
 of the lost crew members of the U.S.S. 
 Frank E. Evans killed on June 3, 1969.
Sec. 5115. Provision of health care benefits for certain individuals 
 who served in the armed forces of the 
 Republic of Korea.
Sec. 5116. Grants for provision of transition assistance to members and 
 former members of the Armed Forces after 
 separation, retirement, or discharge.
Sec. 5117. Study on incidence and mortality of cancer among former 
 aircrew of the Navy, Air Force, and Marine 
 Corps.
Sec. 5118. Feasibility study on inclusion on the Vietnam Veterans 
 Memorial Wall of the names of the lost crew 
 members of the USS Frank E. Evans killed on 
 June 3, 1969.
Sec. 5119. Limitation on copayments for contraception.
Sec. 5120. Requirement for timely scheduling of appointments at medical 
 facilities of Department of Veterans 
 Affairs.
Sec. 5121. Provision by Department of Veterans Affairs health care 
 providers of recommendations and opinions 
 regarding veteran participation in State 
 marijuana programs.
Sec. 5122. Annual report from the advisory committee on women veterans.
Sec. 5123. VA payments or allowances for beneficiary travel.
Sec. 5124. Improvement of Vet Centers at Department of Veterans 
 Affairs.
Sec. 5125. Secretary of Veterans Affairs study on VA Home Loan Benefit.
Sec. 5126. GAO study on post-market surveillance of medical devices by 
 Department of Veterans Affairs.
Sec. 5127. Competitive pay for health care providers of the Department 
 of Veterans Affairs.
Sec. 5128. Department of Veterans Affairs program to provide grants for 
 certain veterans service organizations 
 affected by the COVID-19 Pandemic.
Sec. 5129. Inclusion of veterans in housing planning.
Sec. 5130. Annual report on housing assistance to veterans.
Sec. 5131. Payments to individuals who served during World War II in 
 the United States Merchant Marine.
Sec. 5132. Expansion of eligibility for hospital care, medical 
 services, and nursing home care from the 
 Department of Veterans Affairs to include 
 veterans of World War II.
Sec. 5133. Pilot program on cybersecurity training for veterans and 
 military spouses.
Sec. 5134. Department of Veterans Affairs awareness campaign on 
 fertility services.
 TITLE LII--HOMELAND SECURITY MATTERS

Sec. 5201. Chemical Security Analysis Center.
Sec. 5202. National Cybersecurity Preparedness Consortium.
Sec. 5203. Report on cybersecurity roles and responsibilities of the 
 Department of Homeland Security.
Sec. 5204. Exemption of certain Homeland Security fees for certain 
 immediate relatives of an individual who 
 received the Purple Heart.
Sec. 5205. Clarifications regarding scope of employment and 
 reemployment rights of members of the 
 uniformed services.
Sec. 5206. Critical technology security centers.
Sec. 5207. Systemically important entities.
Sec. 5208. GAO review of Department of Homeland Security efforts 
 related to establishing space as a critical 
 infrastructure sector.
Sec. 5209. Report on commercial satellite cybersecurity; CISA 
 commercial satellite system cybersecurity 
 clearinghouse.
Sec. 5210. Reports, evaluations, and research regarding drug 
 interdiction at and between ports of entry.
Sec. 5211. Report on Puerto Rico's electric grid.
Sec. 5212. Access to military installations for Homeland Security 
 Investigations personnel in Guam.
Sec. 5213. Building cyber resilience after SolarWinds.
Sec. 5214. CISA director appointment and term.
Sec. 5215. Department of Homeland Security report relating to 
 establishment of preclearance facility in 
 Taiwan.
Sec. 5216. Human trafficking training.
 TITLE LIII--TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE MATTERS

Sec. 5301. Calculation of active service.
Sec. 5302. Acquisition of icebreaker.
Sec. 5303. Department of Defense civilian pilots.
Sec. 5304. Pilot program for spaceflight recovery operations at sea.
Sec. 5305. Port infrastructure development grants.
Sec. 5306. Preliminary damage assessment.
Sec. 5307. Designation of small state and rural advocate.
Sec. 5308. Flexibility.
Sec. 5309. Menstrual products in public buildings.
Sec. 5310. Fly America Act exception.
Sec. 5311. Aqua alert notification system pilot program.
Sec. 5312. Recognizing FEMA support.
Sec. 5313. Definitions.
Sec. 5314. Permitting use of highway trust fund for construction of 
 certain noise barriers.
Sec. 5315. Establishment of Southern New England Regional Commission.
Sec. 5316. Critical document fee waiver.
Sec. 5317. Disadvantaged business enterprises.
Sec. 5318. Secretary of Agriculture report on improving supply chain 
 shortfalls and infrastructure needs at 
 wholesale produce markets.
Sec. 5319. Report on improving counterterrorism security at passenger 
 rail stations.
Sec. 5320. Extreme weather events.
Sec. 5321. Safety standards.
Sec. 5322. Extension.
Sec. 5323. Centers of excellence for domestic maritime workforce 
 training and education.
Sec. 5324. Duplication of benefits.
Sec. 5325. Flight instruction or testing.
Sec. 5326. High-speed broadband deployment initiative.
 TITLE LIV--FINANCIAL SERVICES MATTERS

 Subtitle A--In General

Sec. 5401. Services That Open Portals to Dirty Money Act.
Sec. 5402. Review of Cyber-related Matters at the Department of the 
 Treasury.
Sec. 5403. Strengthening Awareness of Sanctions.
Sec. 5404. Briefing on Chinese support for Afghan illicit finance.
Sec. 5405. Support for international initiatives to provide debt 
 restructuring or relief to developing 
 countries with unsustainable levels of 
 debt.
Sec. 5406. Payment choice.
Sec. 5407. Disclosure requirements relating to China-based hedge funds 
 capital raising activities in the United 
 States through certain exempted 
 transactions.
Sec. 5408. Russia and Belarus Financial Sanctions.
Sec. 5409. Appraisal standards for single-family housing mortgages.
Sec. 5410. China financial threat mitigation.
Sec. 5411. Review of FHA small-dollar mortgage practices.
Sec. 5412. Disclosure of businesses ties to Russia.
Sec. 5413. Small business loan data collection.
Sec. 5414. Nationwide Emergency Declaration medical supplies 
 enhancement.
Sec. 5415. Special measures to fight modern threats.
Sec. 5416. Submission of data relating to diversity.
Sec. 5417. Diversity advisory group.
Sec. 5418. Discount on mortgage insurance premium payments for first-
 time homebuyers who complete financial 
 literacy housing counseling programs.
Sec. 5419. Capacity building for community development and affordable 
 housing.
Sec. 5420. Affordable housing construction as eligible activity under 
 Community Development Block Grant Program.
Sec. 5421. Consideration of small home mortgage lending under Community 
 Reinvestment Act.
Sec. 5422. Prohibition on consumer reports containing adverse 
 information related to certain student 
 loans.
Sec. 5423. Extension of the Central Liquidity Facility.
Sec. 5424. Promoting capital raising options for traditionally 
 underrepresented small businesses.
Sec. 5425. Improvements by countries in combating narcotics-related 
 money laundering.
Sec. 5426. Study on the role of online platforms and tenant screening 
 companies in the housing market.
Sec. 5427. United States opposition to multilateral development bank 
 projects that provide a public subsidy to a 
 private sector firm unless the subsidy is 
 awarded using an open, competitive process 
 or on an open-access basis.
Sec. 5428. United States contribution to the Catastrophe Containment 
 and Relief Trust at the International 
 Monetary Fund.
Sec. 5429. Public reporting of United States votes to support, or 
 abstention from voting on, multilateral 
 development bank projects under the 
 Guidance on Fossil Fuel Energy at the 
 Multilateral Development Banks issued by 
 the Department of the Treasury on August 
 16, 2021.
Sec. 5430. United States policy on international finance corporation 
 disclosure of high and substantial risk 
 sub-projects of financial intermediary 
 clients.
Sec. 5431. United states policy on multilateral development bank 
 disclosure of beneficial ownership 
 information.
Sec. 5432. Strengthening the SEC's Whistleblower Fund.
Sec. 5433. United States policy on World Bank Group and Asian 
 Development Bank assistance to the People's 
 Republic of China.
Sec. 5434. Addition of United Kingdom and Australia as DPA domestic 
 sources.
Sec. 5435. Servicemember protections for medical debt collections.
Sec. 5436. Protections for active duty uniformed consumer.
Sec. 5437. Fair Debt Collection Practices for Servicemembers.
Sec. 5438. Fair hiring in banking.
Sec. 5439. Banking transparency for sanctioned persons.
Sec. 5440. Ukraine debt payment relief.
Sec. 5441. Grant program for grandfamily housing.
Sec. 5442. Flexibility in Addressing Rural Homelessness.
Sec. 5443. Promoting diversity and inclusion in the appraisal 
 profession.
Sec. 5444. Combating Trade-Based Money Laundering.
Sec. 5445. Disclosure of disability, veteran, and military status.
Sec. 5446. Strengthening Cybersecurity for the Financial Sector.
Sec. 5447. Review of IMF loan surcharge policy.
Sec. 5448. Grants to eligible entities for enhanced protection of 
 senior investors and senior policyholders.
Sec. 5449. Banking Transparency for Sanctioned Persons.
Sec. 5450. Bureau servicemember and veteran credit reporting 
 ombudsperson.
Sec. 5451. Senior Investor Taskforce.
Sec. 5452. Military service question.
Sec. 5453. Prohibition on trading ahead by market makers.
Sec. 5454. Securing America's Vaccines for Emergencies.
Sec. 5455. Special Drawing Rights exchange prohibition.
Sec. 5456. Prohibition on insider trading.
Sec. 5457. Community development block grant disaster recovery program.
 Subtitle B--SAFE Banking

Sec. 5461. Short title; table of contents; purpose.
Sec. 5462. Safe harbor for depository institutions.
Sec. 5463. Protections for ancillary businesses.
Sec. 5464. Protections under Federal law.
Sec. 5465. Rules of construction.
Sec. 5466. Requirements for filing suspicious activity reports.
Sec. 5467. Guidance and examination procedures.
Sec. 5468. Annual diversity and inclusion report.
Sec. 5469. GAO study on diversity and inclusion.
Sec. 5470. GAO study on effectiveness of certain reports on finding 
 certain persons.
Sec. 5471. Application of this subtitle with respect to hemp-related 
 legitimate businesses and hemp-related 
 service providers.
Sec. 5472. Banking services for hemp-related legitimate businesses and 
 hemp-related service providers.
Sec. 5473. Requirements for deposit account termination requests and 
 orders.
Sec. 5474. Definitions.
Sec. 5475. Discretionary surplus funds.
 TITLE LV--NATURAL RESOURCES MATTERS

Sec. 5501. Ysleta del Sur Pueblo and Alabama-Coushatta Tribes of Texas 
 Equal and Fair Opportunity amendment.
Sec. 5502. Inclusion of Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands 
 and American Samoa.
Sec. 5503. Amendments to Sikes Act.
Sec. 5504. Brennan Reef.
Sec. 5505. Establishment of Fund.
Sec. 5506. Leasing on the Outer Continental Shelf.
Sec. 5507. Continental Divide National Scenic Trail.
Sec. 5508. Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta National Heritage Area.
Sec. 5509. New York-New Jersey Watershed Protection.
Sec. 5510. Authorization of appropriations for the National Maritime 
 Heritage Grant Program.
Sec. 5511. Berryessa Snow Mountain National Monument Expansion.
 TITLE LVI--INSPECTOR GENERAL INDEPENDENCE AND EMPOWERMENT MATTERS

 Subtitle A--Inspector General Independence

Sec. 5601. Short title.
Sec. 5602. Removal or transfer of inspectors general; placement on non-
 duty status.
Sec. 5603. Vacancy in position of inspector general.
Sec. 5604. Office of inspector general whistleblower complaints.
 Subtitle B--Presidential Explanation of Failure to Nominate an 
 Inspector General

Sec. 5611. Presidential explanation of failure to nominate an inspector 
 general.
Subtitle C--Integrity Committee of the Council of Inspectors General on 
 Integrity and Efficiency Transparency

Sec. 5621. Short title.
Sec. 5622. Additional information to be included in requests and 
 reports to Congress.
Sec. 5623. Availability of information to Congress on certain 
 allegations of wrongdoing closed without 
 referral.
Sec. 5624. Semiannual report.
Sec. 5625. Additional reports.
Sec. 5626. Requirement to report final disposition to Congress.
Sec. 5627. Investigations of Offices of Inspectors General of 
 establishments by the Integrity Committee.
Subtitle D--Notice of Ongoing Investigations When There Is a Change in 
 Status of Inspector General

Sec. 5631. Notice of ongoing investigations when there is a change in 
 status of Inspector General.
 Subtitle E--Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and 
 Efficiency Report on Expenditures

Sec. 5641. CIGIE report on expenditures.
 Subtitle F--Notice of Refusal to Provide Inspectors General Access

Sec. 5651. Notice of refusal to provide information or assistance to 
 inspectors general.
Subtitle G--Training Resources for Inspectors General and Other Matters

Sec. 5671. Training resources for inspectors general.
Sec. 5672. Definition of appropriate congressional committees.
Sec. 5673. Semiannual reports.
Sec. 5674. Submission of reports that specifically identify non-
 governmental organizations or business 
 entities.
Sec. 5675. Review relating to vetting, processing, and resettlement of 
 evacuees from Afghanistan and the 
 Afghanistan special immigrant visa program.
Sec. 5676. Investigations of department of justice personnel.
Sec. 5677. Law enforcement authority of the Inspector General of the 
 United States International Development 
 Finance Corporation.
Sec. 5678. Inspector General for the Office of Management and Budget.
 TITLE LVII--FEDERAL EMPLOYEE MATTERS

Sec. 5701. Appeals to Merit Systems Protection Board relating to FBI 
 reprisal allegations; salary of Special 
 Counsel.
Sec. 5702. Minimum wage for Federal contractors.
Sec. 5703. Federal wildland firefighter recruitment and retention.
Sec. 5704. Study and report on returnship programs.
Sec. 5705. Limitations on exception of competitive service positions.
 TITLE LVIII--OTHER MATTERS

 Subtitle A--In General

Sec. 5801. Afghan Allies Protection.
Sec. 5802. Advancing Mutual Interests and Growing Our Success.
Sec. 5803. Expansion of study of PFAS contamination.
Sec. 5804. National research and development strategy for distributed 
 ledger technology.
Sec. 5805. Commercial air waiver for next of kin regarding 
 transportation of remains of casualties.
Sec. 5806. Arms Exports Delivery Solutions Act.
Sec. 5807. Prohibition on transfers to Badr Organization.
Sec. 5808. Prohibition of Federal funding for induced or required 
 undermining of security of consumer 
 communications goods.
Sec. 5809. Foreign state computer intrusions.
Sec. 5810. School PFAS testing and filtration program.
Sec. 5811. Report on EMT national licensing standards.
Sec. 5812. Requirement for cut flowers and cut greens displayed in 
 certain Federal buildings to be produced in 
 the United States.
Sec. 5813. Renegotiation of Compacts of Free Association.
Sec. 5814. Interagency report on extremist activity.
Sec. 5815. Reporting on previous Federal Bureau of Investigation and 
 Department of Homeland Security 
 requirements.
Sec. 5816. PFAS data call.
Sec. 5817. Prohibition on contracting with persons with willful or 
 repeated violations of the Fair Labor 
 Standards Act of 1938.
Sec. 5818. Report on human rights in the Philippines.
Sec. 5819. Requirement for the Secretary of Housing and Urban 
 Development to annually report complaints 
 of sexual harassment.
Sec. 5820. Department of Labor study on factors affecting employment 
 opportunities for immigrants and refugees 
 with professional credentials obtained in 
 foreign countries.
Sec. 5821. Sense of Congress and statement of policy on Haiti.
Sec. 5822. Correctional Facility Disaster Preparedness.
Sec. 5823. Nondiscrimination in Federal hiring for veteran medical 
 cannabis users; Authorized provision of 
 information on State-approved marijuana 
 programs to veterans.
Sec. 5824. Report on certain entities connected to foreign persons on 
 the murder of Jamal Khashoggi.
Sec. 5825. Review of implementation of United States sanctions with 
 respect to violators of the arms embargo on 
 Libya.
Sec. 5826. Modification of prior notification of shipment of arms.
Sec. 5827. Study and report on feasability of suspension of mergers, 
 acquisitions, and takeovers of certain 
 foreign surveillance companies.
Sec. 5828. Report on political prisoners in Egypt.
Sec. 5829. Attorney General authority to transfer forfeited Russian 
 assets to assist Ukraine.
Sec. 5830. Removing Russian rough diamonds from global markets.
Sec. 5831. Liu Xiaobo Fund for Study of the Chinese language.
Sec. 5832. Access for Veterans to Records.
Sec. 5833. Japanese American confinement education grants.
Sec. 5834. Reporting on internationally recognized human rights in the 
 United States in the annual Country Reports 
 on Human Rights Practices.
Sec. 5835. Export prohibition of munitions items to the Hong Kong 
 police force.
Sec. 5836. Congressional notification for rewards paid using 
 cryptocurrencies.
Sec. 5837. Consultations on reuniting Korean Americans with family 
 members in North Korea.
Sec. 5838. Secure access to sanitation facilities for women and girls.
Sec. 5839. Blackwater Trading Post Land.
Sec. 5840. Authorizations relating to veterinary care overseas.
Sec. 5841. Crisis counseling assistance and training.
Sec. 5842. Prohibited uses of acquired, donated, and conservation land.
Sec. 5843. Jamal Khashoggi Press Freedom Accountability Act of 2021.
Sec. 5844. GAO study on the Daniel Pearl Freedom of the Press Act of 
 2009.
Sec. 5845. Secretary of State assistance for prisoners in Islamic 
 Republic of Iran.
Sec. 5846. Policy regarding development of nuclear weapons by Iran.
Sec. 5847. Transfer of NOAA property in Norfolk, Virginia.
Sec. 5848. Elimination of sentencing disparity for cocaine offenses.
Sec. 5849. Imposition of sanctions with respect to the sale, supply, or 
 transfer of gold to or from Russia.
Sec. 5850. Support for Afghan Special Immigrant Visa and Refugee 
 Applicants.
Sec. 5851. Liability for failure to disclose or update information.
Sec. 5852. Government Accountability Office study and report on 
 contractors using distributors to avoid 
 scrutiny.
Sec. 5853. Supplement to Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey.
Sec. 5854. Certain activities relating to intimate visual depictions.
Sec. 5855. Waiver of special use permit application fee for veterans' 
 special events.
Sec. 5856. Regional water programs.
Sec. 5857. Limitation on licenses and other authorizations for export 
 of certain items removed from the 
 jurisdiction of the United States Munitions 
 List and made subject to the jurisdiction 
 of the Export Administration Regulations.
Sec. 5858. Review of standard occupational classification system.
Sec. 5859. United States Fire Administration on-site investigations of 
 major fires.
Sec. 5860. Multilateral agreement to establish an independent 
 international center for research on the 
 information environment.
Sec. 5861. Prioritization of efforts of the Department of State to 
 combat international trafficking in covered 
 synthetic drugs.
Sec. 5862. Isolate Russian Government Officials Act of 2022.
Sec. 5863. Prohibition on certain assistance to the Philippines.
Sec. 5864. Gender analysis in foreign training programs.
Sec. 5865. Report on Columbian military forces.
Sec. 5866. Federal Contracting for Peace and Security.
Sec. 5867. Department of Defense Cyber and Digital Service Academy.
Sec. 5868. Democracy disruption in the Middle East and Africa.
Sec. 5869. Feasibility study on United States support for and 
 participation in the international 
 counterterrorism academy in Cote d'Ivoire.
Sec. 5870. Memorial for those who lost their lives in the attack on 
 Hamid Karzai International Airport on 
 August 26, 2021.
Sec. 5871. Reports on substance abuse in the Armed Forces.
Sec. 5872. GAO report on civilian support positions at remote military 
 installations.
Sec. 5873. GAO study on Foreign Service Institute's School of Language 
 Studies.
Sec. 5874. Report on waivers under section 907 of the Freedom for 
 Russia and Emerging Eurasian Democracies 
 and Open Markets Support Act of 1992.
Sec. 5875. Amendments to the Ukraine Freedom Support Act of 2014.
Sec. 5876. GAO study on end use monitoring.
Sec. 5877. Sense of Congress regarding the life and legacy of Senator 
 Joseph Maxwell Cleland.
Sec. 5878. Repeal of 1991 Authorization for Use of Military Force 
 Against Iraq Resolution.
Sec. 5879. ONDCP supplemental strategies.
Sec. 5880. Support for Afghans applying for student visas.
Sec. 5881. Immigration age-out protections.
Sec. 5882. Medicare Improvement Fund.
Sec. 5883. Clean Water Act effluent limitations guidelines and 
 standards and water quality criteria for 
 PFAS.
Sec. 5884. Amendments to the Maine Indian Claims Settlement Act of 
 1980.
Sec. 5885. Sense of Congress that the Department of Veterans Affairs 
 should be prohibited from denying home 
 loans for veterans who legally work in the 
 marijuana industry.
Sec. 5886. Hermit's Peak/Calf Canyon Fire Assistance.
Sec. 5887. Open Technology Fund grants.
Sec. 5888. Strategic transformer reserve and resilience.
Sec. 5889. AI in Counterterrorism Oversight Enhancement.
Sec. 5890. Elimination of termination clause for Global Engagement 
 Center.
Sec. 5891. Resolution of controversies under Servicemembers Civil 
 Relief Act.
Sec. 5892. Limitation on waiver of rights and protections under 
 Servicemembers Civil Relief Act.
Sec. 5893. Clarification of private right of action under 
 Servicemembers Civil Relief Act.
Sec. 5894. Definition of land use revenue under West Los Angeles 
 Leasing Act of 2016.
Sec. 5895. Report on the use of data and data science at the Department 
 of State and USAID.
Sec. 5896. Modification of reports to Congress under Global Magnitsky 
 Human Rights Accountability Act.
Sec. 5897. Department of State fellowships for rule of law activities 
 in Central America.
Sec. 5898. Report on all comprehensive sanctions imposed on foreign 
 governments.
Sec. 5899. Wastewater assistance to colonias.
Sec. 5900. Contracts by the President, the Vice President, or a Cabinet 
 Member.
Sec. 5901. Statement of policy and report on engaging with Niger.
Sec. 5902. Interagency task force.
Sec. 5903. Modification of duties of united states-china economic and 
 security review commission.
Sec. 5904. Taiwan Fellowship Program.
Sec. 5905. Treatment of paycheck protection program loan forgiveness of 
 payroll costs under highway and public 
 transportation project cost-reimbursement 
 contracts.
Sec. 5906. Biliteracy Education Seal and Teaching Act.
Sec. 5907. Presumption of cause of disability or death due to 
 employment in fire protection activities.
Sec. 5908. Documenting and responding to discrimination against 
 migrants abroad.
Sec. 5909. Extending the statute of limitations for certain money 
 laundering offenses.
Sec. 5910. Foreign corruption accountability sanctions and criminal 
 enforcement.
Sec. 5911. FedRAMP Authorization Act.
Sec. 5912. Amendment.
Sec. 5913. Improving investigation and prosecution of child abuse 
 cases.
Sec. 5914. Report on humanitarian situation and food security in 
 Lebanon.
Sec. 5915. Designation of El Paso Community Healing Garden National 
 Memorial.
Sec. 5916. Administrator of General Services study on counterfeit items 
 on e-commerce platforms of the General 
 Services Administration.
Sec. 5917. Report on removal of service members.
Sec. 5918. Limitation on availability of funds for certain contractors 
 or grantees that require nondisparagement 
 or nondisclosure clause related to sexual 
 harassment and sexual assault.
Sec. 5919. Department of Homeland Security Office for Civil Rights and 
 Civil Liberties authorization.
Sec. 5920. Modification to peacekeeping operations report.
Sec. 5921. Report to Congress by Secretary of State on government-
 ordered internet or telecommunications 
 shutdowns.
Sec. 5922. Survivors' bill of rights.
Sec. 5923. Admission of essential scientists and technical experts to 
 promote and protect National Security 
 Innovation Base.
Sec. 5924. Delaware River Basin Conservation reauthorization.
 Subtitle B--Rights for the TSA Workforce Act of 2022

Sec. 5931. Short title.
Sec. 5932. Definitions.
Sec. 5933. Conversion of TSA personnel.
Sec. 5934. Transition rules.
Sec. 5935. Consultation requirement.
Sec. 5936. No right to strike.
Sec. 5937. Proposal on hiring and contracting background check 
 requirements.
Sec. 5938. Comptroller General reviews.
Sec. 5939. Sense of Congress.
Sec. 5940. Assistance for Federal air marshal service.
Sec. 5941. Prevention and protection against certain illness.
Sec. 5942. Hazardous duty payments.
Sec. 5943. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 5944. Study on feasibility of commuting benefits.
Sec. 5945. Briefing on assaults and threats on tsa employees.
Sec. 5946. Annual reports on TSA workforce.
 DIVISION F--OTHER MATTERS

 TITLE LX--TAIWAN PEACE AND STABILITY ACT

Sec. 6001. Short title.
Sec. 6002. Findings and statement of policy.
Sec. 6003. Definitions.
 Subtitle A--Supporting Taiwan's Meaningful Participation in the 
 International Community

Sec. 6011. Findings.
Sec. 6012. Sense of Congress on Taiwan's meaningful participation in 
 the international community.
Sec. 6013. Strategy to support Taiwan's meaningful participation in 
 international organizations.
Sec. 6014. Expanding United States-Taiwan development cooperation.
 Subtitle B--Advancing Taiwan's Economic Space

Sec. 6021. Sense of Congress on expanding U.S. economic relations with 
 Taiwan.
 Subtitle C--Enhancing Deterrence Over Taiwan

Sec. 6031. Sense of Congress on peace and stability in the Taiwan 
 Strait.
Sec. 6032. Strategy to enhance deterrence over a cross-Strait conflict.
Sec. 6033. Strengthening Taiwan's civilian defense professionals.
 TITLE LXI--LIBYA STABILIZATION ACT

Sec. 6101. Short title.
Sec. 6102. Statement of policy.
 Subtitle A--Identifying Challenges to Stability in Libya

Sec. 6111. Report on activities of certain foreign governments and 
 actors in Libya.
Sec. 6112. Report of Russian activities and objectives in Libya.
Sec. 6113. Determination of sanctionable activities of the Libyan 
 National Army with respect to Syria.
 Subtitle B--Actions to Address Foreign Intervention in Libya

Sec. 6121. Sanctions with respect to foreign persons leading, 
 directing, or supporting certain foreign 
 government involvement in Libya.
Sec. 6122. Sanctions with respect to foreign persons threatening the 
 peace or stability of Libya.
Sec. 6123. Sanctions with respect to foreign persons who are 
 responsible for or complicit in gross 
 violations of internationally recognized 
 human rights committed in Libya.
Sec. 6124. Sanctions described.
Sec. 6125. Waiver.
Sec. 6126. Implementation and regulatory authority.
Sec. 6127. Exception relating to importation of goods.
Sec. 6128. Definitions.
Sec. 6129. Suspension of sanctions.
Sec. 6130. Sunset.
 Subtitle C--Assistance for Libya

Sec. 6131. Humanitarian relief for the people of Libya and 
 international refugees and migrants in 
 Libya.
Sec. 6132. Support for democratic governance, elections, and civil 
 society.
Sec. 6133. Engaging international financial institutions to advance 
 Libyan economic recovery and improve public 
 sector financial management.
Sec. 6134. Recovering assets stolen from the Libyan people.
Sec. 6135. Authority to expand educational and cultural exchange 
 programs with Libya.
 TITLE LXII--DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA NATIONAL GUARD HOME RULE

Sec. 6251. Short title.
Sec. 6252. Extension of National Guard authorities to Mayor of the 
 District of Columbia.
Sec. 6253. Conforming amendments to title 10, United States Code.
Sec. 6254. Conforming amendments to title 32, United States Code.
Sec. 6255. Conforming amendment to the District of Columbia Home Rule 
 Act.
 TITLE LXIII--PREVENTING FUTURE PANDEMICS

Sec. 6301. Definitions.
Sec. 6302. Country-driven approach to end the commercial trade in live 
 wildlife and associated wildlife markets.
Sec. 6303. Sense of Congress.
Sec. 6304. Statement of policy.
Sec. 6305. Prevention of future zoonotic spillover event.
Sec. 6306. Law enforcement attache deployment.
Sec. 6307. Reservation of rights.
TITLE LXIV--PROHIBITION OF ARMS SALES TO COUNTRIES COMMITTING GENOCIDE 
 OR WAR CRIMES AND RELATED MATTERS

Sec. 6401. Prohibition of arms sales to countries committing genocide 
 or war crimes.
Sec. 6402. Consideration of human rights and democratization in arms 
 exports.
Sec. 6403. Enhancement of congressional oversight of human rights in 
 arms exports.
Sec. 6404. End use monitoring of misuse of arms in human rights abuses.
Sec. 6405. Definitions.
 TITLE LXV--BURMA ACT OF 2022

Sec. 6501. Short title.
Sec. 6502. Definitions.
 Subtitle A--Matters Relating to the Conflict in Burma

Sec. 6511. Findings.
Sec. 6512. Statement of policy.
 Subtitle B--Sanctions and Policy Coordination With Respect to Burma

Sec. 6521. Definitions.
Sec. 6522. Imposition of sanctions with respect to human rights abuses 
 and perpetration of a coup in Burma.
Sec. 6523. Certification requirement for removal of certain persons 
 from the list of specially designated 
 nationals and blocked persons.
Sec. 6524. Sanctions and policy coordination for Burma.
Sec. 6525. Support for greater United Nations action with respect to 
 Burma.
Sec. 6526. Sunset.
 Subtitle C--Humanitarian Assistance and Civil Society Support With 
 Respect to Burma

Sec. 6531. Support to civil society and independent media.
Sec. 6532. Humanitarian assistance and reconciliation.
Sec. 6533. Authorization of assistance for Burma political prisoners.
 Subtitle D--Accountability for Human Rights Abuses

Sec. 6541. Report on accountability for war crimes, crimes against 
 humanity, and genocide in Burma.
Sec. 6542. Authorization to provide technical assistance for efforts 
 against human rights abuses.
 Subtitle E--Sanctions Exception Relating to Importation of Goods

Sec. 6551. Sanctions exception relating to importation of goods.
 TITLE LXVI--PROMOTING AND ADVANCING COMMUNITIES OF COLOR THROUGH 
 INCLUSIVE LENDING ACT

Sec. 6601. Short title.
 Subtitle A--Promoting and Advancing Communities of Color Through 
 Inclusive Lending

Sec. 6611. Strengthening diverse and mission-driven community financial 
 institutions.
Sec. 6612. Capital investments, grants, and technology support for MDIs 
 and CDFIs.
Sec. 6613. Supporting Young Entrepreneurs Program.
Sec. 6614. Map of minority depository institutions and community 
 development financial institutions.
Sec. 6615. Report on certified community development financial 
 institutions.
Sec. 6616. Consultation and minimization of data requests.
Sec. 6617. Access to the discount window of the Federal Reserve System 
 for MDIs and CDFIs.
Sec. 6618. Study on securitization by CDFIs.
 Subtitle B--Promoting New and Diverse Depository Institutions

Sec. 6621. Study and strategic plan.
 Subtitle C--Ensuring Diversity in Community Banking

Sec. 6631. Short title.
Sec. 6632. Sense of Congress on funding the loan-loss reserve fund for 
 small dollar loans.
Sec. 6633. Definitions.
Sec. 6634. Inclusion of women's banks in the definition of minority 
 depository institution.
Sec. 6635. Establishment of impact bank designation.
Sec. 6636. Minority Depositories Advisory Committees.
Sec. 6637. Federal deposits in minority depository institutions.
Sec. 6638. Minority Bank Deposit Program.
Sec. 6639. Diversity report and best practices.
Sec. 6640. Investments in minority depository institutions and impact 
 banks.
Sec. 6641. Report on covered mentor-protege programs.
Sec. 6642. Custodial deposit program for covered minority depository 
 institutions and impact banks.
Sec. 6643. Streamlined community development financial institution 
 applications and reporting.
Sec. 6644. Task force on lending to small business concerns.
Sec. 6645. Discretionary surplus fund.
 Subtitle D--Expanding Opportunity for Minority Depository Institutions

Sec. 6651. Establishment of Financial Agent Mentor-Protege Program.
 Subtitle E--CDFI Bond Guarantee Program Improvement

Sec. 6661. Sense of Congress.
Sec. 6662. Guarantees for bonds and notes issued for community or 
 economic development purposes.
Sec. 6663. Report on the CDFI bond guarantee program.
 TITLE LXVII--HOMELAND SECURITY PROVISIONS

 Subtitle A--Strengthening Security of Our Communities

Sec. 6701. Nonprofit security grant program improvement.
Sec. 6702. National Computer Forensics Institute reauthorization.
Sec. 6703. Homeland security capabilities preservation.
Sec. 6704. School and daycare protection.
Sec. 6705. Reporting efficiently to proper officials in response to 
 terrorism.
Sec. 6706. Cybersecurity grants for schools.
 Subtitle B--Enhancing DHS Acquisitions and Supply Chain

Sec. 6721. Homeland procurement reform.
Sec. 6722. DHS software supply chain risk management.
Sec. 6723. Department of Homeland Security mentor-protege program.
Sec. 6724. DHS Trade and Economic Security Council.
Sec. 6725. DHS acquisition reform.
Sec. 6726. DHS Acquisition Review Board.
Sec. 6727. DHS contract reporting.
Sec. 6728. Unmanned aerial security.
 Subtitle C--Enhancing DHS Operations

Sec. 6731. Quadrennial homeland security review technical corrections.
Sec. 6732. Bombing prevention.
Sec. 6733. DHS basic training accreditation improvement.
Sec. 6734. Department of Homeland Security Inspector General 
 transparency.
Sec. 6735. President's cup cybersecurity competition.
Sec. 6736. Industrial control systems cybersecurity training.
Sec. 6737. TSA reaching across nationalities, societies, and languages 
 to advance traveler education.
Sec. 6738. Best practices related to certain information collected by 
 rental companies and dealers (Darren 
 Drake).
Sec. 6739. One-stop pilot program.
Sec. 6740. DHS illicit cross-border tunnel defense.
Sec. 6741. Prevent exposure to narcotics and toxics.
 Subtitle D--Technical, Conforming, and Clerical Amendments

Sec. 6751. Technical, conforming, and clerical amendments.
 TITLE LXVIII--FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ADVANCEMENT OF EQUITY

Sec. 6801. Definitions.
 Subtitle A--Ensuring Equity in Federal Disaster Management

Sec. 6811. Data collection, analysis, and criteria.
Sec. 6812. Criteria for ensuring equity in policies and programs.
Sec. 6813. Metrics; report.
 Subtitle B--Operational Enhancement to Improve Equity in Federal 
 Disaster Management

Sec. 6821. Equity advisor.
Sec. 6822. Equity Enterprise Steering Group.
Sec. 6823. GAO review of equity reforms.
 Subtitle C--GAO Review of Factors to Determine Assistance

Sec. 6831. GAO review of factors to determine assistance.
 TITLE LXIX--GLOBAL HEALTH SECURITY ACT OF 2022

Sec. 6901. Short title.
Sec. 6902. Findings.
Sec. 6903. Statement of policy.
Sec. 6904. Global Health Security Agenda Interagency Review Council.
Sec. 6905. United States Coordinator for Global Health Security.
Sec. 6906. Sense of Congress.
Sec. 6907. Strategy and reports.
Sec. 6908. Establishment of fund for global health security and 
 pandemic preparedness.
Sec. 6909. Fund authorities.
Sec. 6910. Fund administration.
Sec. 6911. Fund Advisory Board.
Sec. 6912. Reports to Congress on the Fund.
Sec. 6913. United States contributions.
Sec. 6914. Compliance with the Foreign Aid Transparency and 
 Accountability Act of 2016.
Sec. 6915. Definitions.
Sec. 6916. Sunset.
 TITLE LXX--PROTECTION OF SAUDI DISSIDENTS

Sec. 7001. Restrictions on transfers of defense articles and services, 
 design and construction services, and major 
 defense equipment to Saudi Arabia.
Sec. 7002. Report on consistent pattern of acts of intimidation or 
 harassment directed against individuals in 
 the United States.
Sec. 7003. Report and certification with respect to Saudi diplomats and 
 diplomatic facilities in the United States.
Sec. 7004. Report on the duty to warn obligation of the Government of 
 the United States.
 TITLE LXXI--COLORADO AND GRAND CANYON PUBLIC LANDS

Sec. 7101. Definition of State.
 Subtitle A--Continental Divide

Sec. 7111. Definitions.
Sec. 7112. Colorado Wilderness additions.
Sec. 7113. Williams Fork Mountains potential wilderness.
Sec. 7114. Tenmile Recreation Management Area.
Sec. 7115. Porcupine Gulch Wildlife Conservation Area.
Sec. 7116. Williams Fork Mountains Wildlife Conservation Area.
Sec. 7117. Spraddle Creek Wildlife Conservation Area.
Sec. 7118. Camp Hale National Historic Landscape.
Sec. 7119. White River National Forest boundary modification.
Sec. 7120. Rocky Mountain National Park potential wilderness boundary 
 adjustment.
Sec. 7121. Administrative provisions.
 Subtitle B--San Juan Mountains

Sec. 7131. Definitions.
Sec. 7132. Additions to National Wilderness Preservation System.
Sec. 7133. Special management areas.
Sec. 7134. Release of wilderness study areas.
Sec. 7135. Administrative provisions.
 Subtitle C--Thompson Divide

Sec. 7141. Purposes.
Sec. 7142. Definitions.
Sec. 7143. Thompson Divide Withdrawal and Protection Area.
Sec. 7144. Thompson Divide lease credits.
Sec. 7145. Greater Thompson Divide Fugitive Coal Mine Methane Use Pilot 
 Program.
Sec. 7146. Effect.
 Subtitle D--Curecanti National Recreation Area

Sec. 7151. Definitions.
Sec. 7152. Curecanti National Recreation Area.
Sec. 7153. Acquisition of land; boundary management.
Sec. 7154. General management plan.
Sec. 7155. Boundary survey.
 Subtitle E--Grand Canyon Protection

Sec. 7161. Withdrawal of Certain Federal land in the State of Arizona.
 DIVISION G--DON YOUNG COAST GUARD AUTHORIZATION ACT OF 2022

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
 TITLE I--AUTHORIZATION

Sec. 101. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 102. Authorized levels of military strength and training.
Sec. 103. Shoreside infrastructure and facilities.
Sec. 104. Availability of amounts for acquisition of additional 
 cutters.
 TITLE II--COAST GUARD

 Subtitle A--Military Personnel Matters

Sec. 201. Authorized strength.
Sec. 202. Continuation of officers with certain critical skills on 
 active duty.
Sec. 203. Number and distribution of officers on active duty promotion 
 list.
Sec. 204. Coast Guard behavioral health policy.
Sec. 205. Improving representation of women and of racial and ethnic 
 minorities among Coast Guard active-duty 
 members.
 Subtitle B--Operational Matters

Sec. 206. Pilot project for enhancing Coast Guard cutter readiness 
 through condition-based maintenance.
Sec. 207. Unmanned systems strategy.
Sec. 208. Budgeting of Coast Guard relating to certain operations.
Sec. 209. Report on San Diego maritime domain awareness.
Sec. 210. Great Lakes winter shipping.
Sec. 211. Center of expertise for Great Lakes oil spill search and 
 response.
Sec. 212. Study on laydown of Coast Guard cutters.
 Subtitle C--Other Matters

Sec. 213. Responses of Commandant of the Coast Guard to safety 
 recommendations.
Sec. 214. Conveyance of Coast Guard vessels for public purposes.
Sec. 215. Acquisition life-cycle cost estimates.
Sec. 216. National Coast Guard Museum funding plan.
Sec. 217. Report on Coast Guard explosive ordnance disposal.
Sec. 218. Pribilof Island transition completion actions.
Sec. 219. Notification of communication outages.
 TITLE III--MARITIME

 Subtitle A--Shipping

Sec. 301. Nonoperating individual.
Sec. 302. Oceanographic research vessels.
Sec. 303. Atlantic Coast port access routes briefing.
 Subtitle B--Vessel Safety

Sec. 304. Fishing vessel safety.
Sec. 305. Requirements for DUKW-type amphibious passenger vessels.
Sec. 306. Exoneration and limitation of liability for small passengers 
 vessels.
Sec. 307. Automatic identification system requirements.
 Subtitle C--Shipbuilding Program

Sec. 308. Qualified vessel.
Sec. 309. Establishing a capital construction fund.
 TITLE IV--FEDERAL MARITIME COMMISSION

Sec. 401. Terms and vacancies.
 TITLE V--MISCELLANEOUS

 Subtitle A--Navigation

Sec. 501. Restriction on changing salvors.
Sec. 502. Providing requirements for vessels anchored in established 
 anchorage grounds.
Sec. 503. Aquatic Nuisance Species Task Force.
Sec. 504. Limitation on recovery for certain injuries incurred in 
 aquaculture activities.
 Subtitle B--Other Matters

Sec. 505. Information on type approval certificates.
Sec. 506. Passenger vessel security and safety requirements.
Sec. 507. Cargo waiting time reduction.
Sec. 508. Limited indemnity provisions in standby oil spill response 
 contracts.
Sec. 509. Port Coordination Council for Point Spencer.
Sec. 510. Western Alaska oil spill planning criteria.
Sec. 511. Nonapplicability.
Sec. 512. Report on enforcement of coastwise laws.
Sec. 513. Land conveyance, Sharpe Army Depot, Lathrop, California.
Sec. 514. Center of Expertise for Marine Environmental Response.
Sec. 515. Prohibition on entry and operation.
Sec. 516. St. Lucie River railroad bridge.
Sec. 517. Assistance related to marine mammals.
Sec. 518. Manning and crewing requirements for certain vessels, 
 vehicles, and structures.
 TITLE VI--SEXUAL ASSAULT AND SEXUAL HARASSMENT PREVENTION AND RESPONSE

Sec. 601. Definitions.
Sec. 602. Convicted sex offender as grounds for denial.
Sec. 603. Sexual harassment or sexual assault as grounds for suspension 
 or revocation.
Sec. 604. Accommodation; notices.
Sec. 605. Protection against discrimination.
Sec. 606. Alcohol prohibition.
Sec. 607. Surveillance requirements.
Sec. 608. Master key control.
Sec. 609. Safety management systems.
Sec. 610. Requirement to report sexual assault and harassment.
Sec. 611. Civil actions for personal injury or death of seamen.
Sec. 612. Administration of sexual assault forensic examination kits.
 TITLE VII--TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING PROVISIONS

Sec. 701. Technical corrections.
Sec. 702. Transportation worker identification credential technical 
 amendments.
Sec. 703. Reinstatement.
 DIVISION H--FINANCIAL TRANSPARENCY

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Deeming.
 TITLE I--DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY

Sec. 101. Data standards.
Sec. 102. Open data publication by the Department of the Treasury.
Sec. 103. Rulemaking.
Sec. 104. No new disclosure requirements.
Sec. 105. Report.
 TITLE II--SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION

Sec. 201. Data standards requirements for the Securities and Exchange 
 Commission.
Sec. 202. Open data publication by the Securities and Exchange 
 Commission.
Sec. 203. Data transparency at the Municipal Securities Rulemaking 
 Board.
Sec. 204. Data transparency at national securities associations.
Sec. 205. Shorter-term burden reduction and disclosure simplification 
 at the Securities and Exchange Commission; 
 sunset.
Sec. 206. No new disclosure requirements.
 TITLE III--FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION

Sec. 301. Data standards requirements for the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Corporation.
Sec. 302. Open data publication by the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Corporation.
Sec. 303. Rulemaking.
Sec. 304. No new disclosure requirements.
 TITLE IV--OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER OF THE CURRENCY

Sec. 401. Data standards and open data publication requirements for the 
 Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.
Sec. 402. Rulemaking.
Sec. 403. No new disclosure requirements.
 TITLE V--BUREAU OF CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION

Sec. 501. Data standards and open data publication requirements for the 
 Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection.
Sec. 502. Rulemaking.
Sec. 503. No new disclosure requirements.
 TITLE VI--FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

Sec. 601. Data standards requirements for the Board of Governors of the 
 Federal Reserve System.
Sec. 602. Open data publication by the Board of Governors of the 
 Federal Reserve System.
Sec. 603. Rulemaking.
Sec. 604. No new disclosure requirements.
 TITLE VII--NATIONAL CREDIT UNION ADMINISTRATION

Sec. 701. Data standards.
Sec. 702. Open data publication by the National Credit Union 
 Administration.
Sec. 703. Rulemaking.
Sec. 704. No new disclosure requirements.
 TITLE VIII--FEDERAL HOUSING FINANCE AGENCY

Sec. 801. Data standards requirements for the Federal Housing Finance 
 Agency.
Sec. 802. Open data publication by the Federal Housing Finance Agency.
Sec. 803. Rulemaking.
Sec. 804. No new disclosure requirements.
 TITLE IX--MISCELLANEOUS

Sec. 901. Rules of construction.
Sec. 902. Classified and protected information.
Sec. 903. Discretionary surplus fund.
 DIVISION I--PUBLIC LANDS

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
 TITLE I--COLORADO WILDERNESS

Sec. 101. Short title; definition.
Sec. 102. Additions to National Wilderness Preservation System in the 
 State of Colorado.
Sec. 103. Administrative provisions.
Sec. 104. Water.
Sec. 105. Sense of Congress.
Sec. 106. Department of defense study on impacts that the expansion of 
 wilderness designations in the western 
 united states would have on the readiness 
 of the armed forces of the united states 
 with respect to aviation training.
 TITLE II--NORTHWEST CALIFORNIA WILDERNESS, RECREATION, AND WORKING 
 FORESTS

Sec. 201. Short title.
Sec. 202. Definitions.
 Subtitle A--Restoration and Economic Development

Sec. 211. South Fork Trinity-Mad River Restoration Area.
Sec. 212. Redwood National and State Parks restoration.
Sec. 213. California Public Lands Remediation Partnership.
Sec. 214. Trinity Lake visitor center.
Sec. 215. Del Norte County visitor center.
Sec. 216. Management plans.
Sec. 217. Study; partnerships related to overnight accommodations.
 Subtitle B--Recreation

Sec. 221. Horse Mountain Special Management Area.
Sec. 222. Bigfoot National Recreation Trail.
Sec. 223. Elk Camp Ridge Recreation Trail.
Sec. 224. Trinity Lake Trail.
Sec. 225. Trails study.
Sec. 226. Construction of mountain bicycling routes.
Sec. 227. Partnerships.
 Subtitle C--Conservation

Sec. 231. Designation of wilderness.
Sec. 232. Administration of wilderness.
Sec. 233. Designation of potential wilderness.
Sec. 234. Designation of wild and scenic rivers.
Sec. 235. Sanhedrin Special Conservation Management Area.
 Subtitle D--Miscellaneous

Sec. 241. Maps and legal descriptions.
Sec. 242. Updates to land and resource management plans.
Sec. 243. Pacific Gas and Electric Company Utility facilities and 
 rights-of-way.
 TITLE III--CENTRAL COAST HERITAGE PROTECTION

Sec. 301. Short title.
Sec. 302. Definitions.
Sec. 303. Designation of wilderness.
Sec. 304. Designation of the Machesna Mountain Potential Wilderness.
Sec. 305. Administration of wilderness.
Sec. 306. Designation of Wild and Scenic Rivers.
Sec. 307. Designation of the Fox Mountain Potential Wilderness.
Sec. 308. Designation of scenic areas.
Sec. 309. Condor National Scenic Trail.
Sec. 310. Forest service study.
Sec. 311. Nonmotorized recreation opportunities.
Sec. 312. Use by members of Tribes.
 TITLE IV--SAN GABRIEL MOUNTAINS FOOTHILLS AND RIVERS PROTECTION

Sec. 401. Short title.
Sec. 402. Definition of State.
 Subtitle A--San Gabriel National Recreation Area

Sec. 411. Purposes.
Sec. 412. Definitions.
Sec. 413. San Gabriel National Recreation Area.
Sec. 414. Management.
Sec. 415. Acquisition of non-Federal land within Recreation Area.
Sec. 416. Water rights; water resource facilities; public roads; 
 utility facilities.
Sec. 417. San Gabriel National Recreation Area Public Advisory Council.
Sec. 418. San Gabriel National Recreation Area Partnership.
Sec. 419. Visitor services and facilities.
 Subtitle B--San Gabriel Mountains

Sec. 421. Definitions.
Sec. 422. National monument boundary modification.
Sec. 423. Designation of Wilderness Areas and Additions.
Sec. 424. Administration of Wilderness Areas and Additions.
Sec. 425. Designation of Wild and Scenic Rivers.
Sec. 426. Water rights.
 TITLE V--RIM OF THE VALLEY CORRIDOR PRESERVATION

Sec. 501. Short title.
Sec. 502. Boundary adjustment; land acquisition; administration.
 TITLE VI--WILD OLYMPICS WILDERNESS AND WILD AND SCENIC RIVERS

Sec. 601. Short title.
Sec. 602. Designation of olympic national forest wilderness areas.
Sec. 603. Wild and scenic river designations.
Sec. 604. Existing rights and withdrawal.
Sec. 605. Treaty rights.
 TITLE VII--CERRO DE LA OLLA WILDERNESS ESTABLISHMENT

Sec. 701. Designation of Cerro de la Olla Wilderness.
 TITLE VIII--STUDY ON FLOOD RISK MITIGATION

Sec. 801. Study on Flood Risk Mitigation.
 TITLE IX--MISCELLANEOUS

Sec. 901. Promoting health and wellness for veterans and 
 servicemembers.
Sec. 902. Fire, insects, and diseases.
Sec. 903. Military activities.

SEC. 3. CONGRESSIONAL DEFENSE COMMITTEES.

 In this Act, the term ``congressional defense committees'' has the 
meaning given that term in section 101(a)(16) of title 10, United 
States Code.

 DIVISION A--DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE AUTHORIZATIONS

 TITLE I--PROCUREMENT

 Subtitle A--Authorization of Appropriations

SEC. 101. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 Funds are hereby authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 2023 
for procurement for the Army, the Navy and the Marine Corps, the Air 
Force and the Space Force, and Defense-wide activities, as specified in 
the funding table in section 4101.

 Subtitle B--Navy Programs

SEC. 111. REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO EA-18G AIRCRAFT OF THE NAVY.

 Section 8062 of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (f) as subsection (g); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (e) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(f)(1)(A) The Secretary of the Navy may not--
 ``(i) retire an EA-18G aircraft;
 ``(ii) prepare to retire an EA-18G aircraft;
 ``(iii) place an EA-18G aircraft in active storage 
 status or inactive storage status; or
 ``(iv) keep an EA-18G aircraft in a status 
 considered excess to the requirements of the possessing 
 command and awaiting disposition instructions.
 ``(B) The prohibition under subparagraph (A) shall not 
 apply to individual EA-18G aircraft that the Secretary of the 
 Navy determines, on a case-by-case basis, to be no longer 
 mission capable and uneconomical to repair because of aircraft 
 accidents or mishaps.
 ``(2)(A) Beginning on October 1, 2022, the Secretary of the Navy 
shall maintain a total aircraft inventory of EA-18G aircraft of not 
less than 158 aircraft, of which not less than 126 aircraft shall be 
coded as primary mission aircraft inventory.
 ``(B) The Secretary of the Navy may reduce the number of EA-18G 
aircraft in the inventory of the Navy below the minimum number 
specified in subparagraph (A) if the Secretary determines on a case-by-
case basis, that an aircraft is no longer mission capable and 
uneconomical to repair because of aircraft accidents or mishaps.
 ``(C) In this paragraph, the term `primary mission aircraft 
inventory' means aircraft assigned to meet the primary aircraft 
authorization--
 ``(i) to a unit for the performance of its wartime mission;
 ``(ii) to a training unit for technical and specialized 
 training for crew personnel or leading to aircrew 
 qualification;
 ``(iii) to a test unit for testing of the aircraft or its 
 components for purposes of research, development, test, and 
 evaluation, operational test and evaluation, or to support 
 testing programs; or
 ``(iv) to meet requirements for missions not otherwise 
 specified in clauses (i) through (iii).''.

SEC. 112. MULTIYEAR PROCUREMENT AUTHORITY FOR ARLEIGH BURKE CLASS 
 DESTROYERS.

 (a) Findings; Sense of Congress.--
 (1) Findings.--Congress makes the following findings:
 (A) The DDG Flight III destroyer is the most 
 capable large surface combatant in the world-wide 
 inventory of the Department of Defense.
 (B) The Department plans to retire 18 large surface 
 combatants over the next five years.
 (C) Under the future-years defense plan, the 
 Department plans to procure two DDGs per year over the 
 next five years.
 (2) Sense of congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (A) the loss of aggregate fire power due to the 
 retirement of 18 large surface combatants over the next 
 five years is cause for concern;
 (B) the Department should continue to procure large 
 surface combatants at the fastest possible rate based 
 on industrial base capacity; and
 (C) the Department should maximize savings and 
 provide stability to the large surface combatant 
 industrial base through the use of multiyear 
 procurement contracts for the maximum number of ships, 
 realized at a consistent number of ships per year.
 (b) Authority for Multiyear Procurement.--Subject to section 3501 
of title 10, United States Code, the Secretary of the Navy may enter 
into one or more multiyear contracts for the procurement of up to 15 
Arleigh Burke class Flight III guided missile destroyers.
 (c) Authority for Advance Procurement.--The Secretary of the Navy 
may enter into one or more contracts, beginning in fiscal year 2023, 
for advance procurement associated with the destroyers for which 
authorization to enter into a multiyear procurement contract is 
provided under subsection (b), and for systems and subsystems 
associated with such destroyers in economic order quantities when cost 
savings are achievable.
 (d) Condition for Out-year Contract Payments.--A contract entered 
into under subsection (b) shall provide that any obligation of the 
United States to make a payment under the contract for a fiscal year 
after fiscal year 2023 is subject to the availability of appropriations 
or funds for that purpose for such later fiscal year.
 (e) Limitation.--The Secretary of the Navy may not modify a 
contract entered into under subsection (b) if the modification would 
increase the target price of the destroyer by more than 10 percent 
above the target price specified in the original contract or the 
destroyer under subsection (b).

SEC. 113. AUTHORITY FOR PROCUREMENT OF ADDITIONAL ARLEIGH BURKE CLASS 
 DESTROYER.

 (a) Procurement Authority.--The Secretary of the Navy may procure 
one Arleigh Burke class Flight III guided missile destroyer, in 
addition to any other procurement of such destroyers otherwise 
authorized by law, to be procured either--
 (1) as an addition to the contract covering up to 15 such 
 destroyers authorized to be procured under section 112 of this 
 Act; or
 (2) under a separate contract entered into in fiscal year 
 2023.
 (b) Incremental Funding.--With respect to a contract for the 
procurement of the destroyer authorized under subsection (a), the 
Secretary of the Navy may use incremental funding to make payments 
under the contract.
 (c) Condition for Out-year Contract Payments.--A contract for the 
procurement of the destroyer authorized under subsection (a) shall 
provide that any obligation of the United States to make a payment 
under the contract for a fiscal year after fiscal year 2023 is subject 
to the availability of appropriations or funds for that purpose for 
such later fiscal year.

SEC. 114. AUTHORITY FOR CERTAIN PROCUREMENTS FOR THE SHIP-TO-SHORE 
 CONNECTOR PROGRAM.

 (a) Contract Authority.--The Secretary of the Navy may enter into 
one or more contracts, beginning with fiscal year 2023, for the 
procurement of up to 25 Ship-to-Shore Connector class craft and 
associated material.
 (b) Liability.--Any contract entered into under subsection (a) 
shall provide that--
 (1) any obligation of the United States to make a payment 
 under the contract is subject to the availability of 
 appropriations for that purpose; and
 (2) that total liability of the Federal Government for 
 termination of any contract entered into shall be limited to 
 the total amount of funding obligated to the contract at time 
 of termination.

SEC. 115. AUTHORITY TO PROCURE AIRFRAMES AND ENGINES FOR CH-53K KING 
 STALLION HEAVY-LIFT HELICOPTERS.

 (a) Contract Authority.--During fiscal years 2023 and 2024, the 
Secretary of the Navy may enter into--
 (1) a single contract for the procurement of up to 30 
 airframes in support of the CH-53K heavy-lift helicopter 
 program; and
 (2) a single contract for the procurement of up to 90 
 engines in support of such program.
 (b) Liability.--Any contract entered into under subsection (a) 
shall provide that--
 (1) any obligation of the United States to make a payment 
 under the contract is subject to the availability of 
 appropriations for that purpose; and
 (2) that total liability of the Federal Government for 
 termination of any contract entered into shall be limited to 
 the total amount of funding obligated to the contract at time 
 of termination.

SEC. 116. PROHIBITION ON AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS FOR RETIREMENT OF HSC-85 
 AIRCRAFT.

 (a) Prohibitions.--None of the funds authorized to be appropriated 
by this Act or otherwise made available for fiscal year 2023 for the 
Navy may be obligated or expended--
 (1) to retire, prepare to retire, transfer, or place in 
 storage any Helicopter Sea Combat Squadron 85 aircraft 
 (referred to in this section as an ``HSC-85 aircraft''); or
 (2) to make any changes to manning levels with respect to 
 any HSC-85 aircraft squadron.
 (b) Report Required.--The Secretary of the Navy, in consultation 
with the Commander of the United States Special Operations Command, 
shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report that 
includes--
 (1) an explanation of the operational impact of divestment 
 of HSC-85 aircraft on the training and readiness of Navy 
 special warfare units and missions based in the west coast of 
 the United States;
 (2) the estimated costs of sustaining HSC-85 aircraft at 
 full operational capability from fiscal year 2024 through 
 fiscal year 2028;
 (3) a proposed cost sharing arrangement between the Navy 
 and the United States Special Operations Command for sustaining 
 HSC-85 aircraft at full operational capabilities from fiscal 
 year 2024 through fiscal year 2028;
 (4) identification of a replacement capability that would 
 be available if prioritized and directed by the Secretary of 
 Defense and would meet all operational requirements, including 
 special operational-peculiar requirements of the combatant 
 commands, that are fulfilled by HSC-85 aircraft as of the date 
 of the report; and
 (5) an estimate of the costs and a proposed schedule for 
 establishing the replacement capability identified in paragraph 
 (4) over the period of five years following the date of the 
 report.

SEC. 117. QUARTERLY BRIEFINGS ON THE CH-53K KING STALLION HELICOPTER 
 PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, and on a quarterly basis thereafter through the 
end of fiscal year 2024, the Secretary of the Navy shall provide to the 
Committee on Armed Services of the House of Representatives a briefing 
on the progress of the CH-53K King Stallion helicopter program.
 (b) Elements.--Each briefing under subsection (a) shall include, 
with respect to the CH-53K King Stallion helicopter program, the 
following:
 (1) An overview of the program schedule.
 (2) A statement of the total cost of the program as of the 
 date of the briefing, including the cost of development, 
 testing, and production.
 (3) A comparison of the total cost of the program relative 
 to the original acquisition program baseline and the most 
 recently approved acquisition program baseline as of the date 
 of the briefing.
 (4) An assessment of the flight testing that remains to be 
 conducted under the program, including any testing required for 
 validation of correction of technical deficiencies.
 (5) An update on the status of the correction of technical 
 deficiencies under the program and any effects on the program 
 schedule resulting from the discovery and correction of such 
 deficiencies.
 (c) Conforming Repeal.--Section 132 of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020 (Public Law 116-92; 133 Stat. 
1238) is repealed.

SEC. 118. FUNDING FOR ADDITIONAL JOINT STRIKE FIGHTER AIRCRAFT.

 (a) Increase.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 101 for aircraft procurement, Navy, as specified in the 
corresponding funding table in section 4101, for Joint Strike Fighter 
CV, line 002, is hereby increased by $354,000,000 (with the amount of 
such increase to used for the procurement of three additional Joint 
Strike Fighter aircraft).
 (b) Offsets.--
 (1) Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
 tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated 
 in section 301 for operation and maintenance, Army, as 
 specified in the corresponding funding table in section 4301, 
 for operating forces, maneuver units, line 010, is hereby 
 reduced by $50,000,000.
 (2) Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
 tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated 
 in section 301 for operation and maintenance, Army, as 
 specified in the corresponding funding table in section 4301, 
 for operating forces, aviation assets, line 060, is hereby 
 reduced by $100,000,000.
 (3) Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
 tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated 
 in section 301 for operation and maintenance, Army, as 
 specified in the corresponding funding table in section 4301, 
 for training and recruiting, training support, line 340, is 
 hereby reduced by $16,000,000.
 (4) Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
 tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated 
 in section 301 for operation and maintenance, Army, as 
 specified in the corresponding funding table in section 4301, 
 for administration and service-wide activities, other personnel 
 support, line 480, is hereby reduced by $23,000,000.
 (5) Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
 tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated 
 in section 301 for operation and maintenance, Navy, as 
 specified in the corresponding funding table in section 4301, 
 for operating forces, weapons maintenance, line 250, is hereby 
 reduced by $62,500,000.
 (6) Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
 tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated 
 in section 301 for operation and maintenance, Navy, as 
 specified in the corresponding funding table in section 4301, 
 for administration and service-wide activities, military 
 manpower and personnel management, line 470, is hereby reduced 
 by $30,000,000.
 (7) Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
 tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated 
 in section 301 for operation and maintenance, Marine Corps, as 
 specified in the corresponding funding table in section 4301, 
 for operating forces, operational forces, line 010, is hereby 
 reduced by $16,500,000.
 (8) Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
 tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated 
 in section 301 for operation and maintenance, Air Force, as 
 specified in the corresponding funding table in section 4301, 
 for operating forces, base support, line 090, is hereby reduced 
 by $56,000,000.

SEC. 119. REPORT ON ADVANCE PROCUREMENT FOR CVN-82 AND CVN-83.

 (a) Report.--Not later than February 1, 2023, the Secretary of the 
Navy shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report on 
the plan of the Navy for advance procurement for the aircraft carriers 
designated CVN-82 and CVN-83.
 (b) Elements.--The report required by subsection (a) shall include 
an assessment of--
 (1) the value, cost, and feasibility of a two-year advance 
 procurement for a single aircraft carrier acquisition strategy;
 (2) the value, cost, and feasibility of a three-year 
 advance procurement for a single aircraft carrier acquisition 
 strategy;
 (3) the value, cost, and feasibility of a two-year advance 
 procurement for a two aircraft carrier acquisition strategy;
 (4) the value, cost, and feasibility of a three-year 
 advance procurement for a two aircraft carrier acquisition 
 strategy; and
 (5) the effect of a multiple carrier acquisition plan on 
 force development and fleet capability.

SEC. 119A. REPORT ON APPLICABILITY OF DDG(X) ELECTRIC-DRIVE PROPULSION 
 SYSTEM.

 Not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary of the Navy shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a report that includes an analysis of--
 (1) the power and propulsion requirements for the DDG(X) 
 destroyer;
 (2) how such requirements compare to the power and 
 propulsion requirements for the DDG-1000 Zumwalt class 
 destroyer and the DDG-51 Arleigh Burke class destroyer, 
 respectively;
 (3) the ability of the Navy to leverage existing 
 investments in the electric-drive propulsion system developed 
 for the DDG(X) destroyer to reduce cost and risk; and
 (4) the ability to design and manufacture components for 
 such system in the United States.

SEC. 119B. PROHIBITION ON AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS FOR DISPOSAL OF 
 LITTORAL COMBAT SHIPS.

 (a) Prohibition.--None of the funds authorized to appropriated by 
this Act or otherwise made available for fiscal year 2023 for the Navy 
may be obligated or expended to dispose of or dismantle a Littoral 
Combat Ship.
 (b) Exception.--The prohibition under subsection (a) shall not 
apply to the transfer of a Littoral Combat Ship to the military forces 
of a nation that is an ally or partner of the United States.

 Subtitle C--Air Force Programs

SEC. 121. MODIFICATION OF INVENTORY REQUIREMENTS FOR AIRCRAFT OF THE 
 COMBAT AIR FORCES.

 (a) Total Fighter Aircraft Inventory Requirements.--Section 
9062(i)(1) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by striking 
``1,970'' and inserting ``1,800''.
 (b) A-10 Minimum Inventory Requirements.--
 (1) Section 134(d) of the National Defense Authorization 
 Act for Fiscal Year 2017 (Public Law 114-328; 130 Stat. 2038) 
 is amended by striking ``171'' and inserting ``153''.
 (2) Section 142(b)(2) of the National Defense Authorization 
 Act for Fiscal Year 2016 (Public Law 114-92; 129 Stat. 755 ) is 
 amended by striking ``171'' and inserting ``153''.
 (c) Modification of Limitation on Availability of Funds for 
Destruction of A-10 Aircraft in Storage Status.--Section 135(a) of the 
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017 (Public Law 
114-328; 130 Stat. 2039) is amended by striking ``the report required 
under section 134(e)(2)'' and inserting ``a report that includes the 
information described in section 134(e)(2)(C)''.

SEC. 122. MODIFICATION OF MINIMUM INVENTORY REQUIREMENT FOR AIR 
 REFUELING TANKER AIRCRAFT.

 (a) Minimum Inventory Requirement.--
 (1) In general.--Section 9062(j) of title 10, United States 
 Code, is amended--
 (A) by striking ``effective October 1, 2019,''; and
 (B) by striking ``479'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``466''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraph (1) 
 shall take effect on October 1, 2022.
 (b) Prohibition on Reduction of KC-135 Aircraft in PMAI of the 
Reserve Components.--
 (1) In general.--None of the funds authorized to be 
 appropriated by this Act or otherwise made available for fiscal 
 year 2023 for the Air Force may be obligated or expended to 
 reduce the number of KC-135 aircraft designated as primary 
 mission aircraft inventory within the reserve components of the 
 Air Force.
 (2) Primary mission aircraft inventory defined.--In this 
 subsection, the term ``primary mission aircraft inventory'' has 
 the meaning given that term in section 9062(i)(2)(B) of title 
 10, United States Code.

SEC. 123. REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO F-22 AIRCRAFT.

 Section 9062 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding 
at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(k)(1)(A) The Secretary of the Air Force may not--
 ``(i) retire an F-22 aircraft;
 ``(ii) prepare to retire an F-22 aircraft; or
 ``(iii) keep an F-22 aircraft in a status 
 considered excess to the requirements of the possessing 
 command and awaiting disposition instructions (commonly 
 referred to as `XJ' status).
 ``(B) The prohibition under subparagraph (A) shall not 
 apply to individual F-22 aircraft that the Secretary of the Air 
 Force determines, on a case-by-case basis, to be no longer 
 mission capable and uneconomical to repair because of aircraft 
 accidents or mishaps.
 ``(2)(A) Beginning on October 1, 2022, the Secretary of the Air 
Force shall maintain a total aircraft inventory of F-22 aircraft of not 
less than 186 aircraft.
 ``(B) The Secretary of the Air Force may reduce the number of F-22 
aircraft in the inventory of the Air Force below the minimum number 
specified in subparagraph (A) if the Secretary determines on a case-by-
case basis, that an aircraft is no longer mission capable and 
uneconomical to repair because of aircraft accidents or mishaps.
 ``(3) Not later than October 1, 2029, the Secretary of the Air 
Force shall ensure that all F-22 aircraft of the Air Force are equipped 
with--
 ``(A) Block 30/35 mission systems, sensors, and weapon 
 employment capabilities; or
 ``(B) mission systems, sensors, and weapon employment 
 capabilities more advanced than those described in subparagraph 
 (A).''.

SEC. 124. MODIFICATION OF INVENTORY REQUIREMENTS AND LIMITATIONS 
 RELATING TO CERTAIN AIR REFUELING TANKER AIRCRAFT.

 Section 137 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 135 Stat. 1576) is amended--
 (1) by striking subsection (b); and
 (2) by redesignating subsections (c) and (d) as subsections 
 (b) and (c), respectively.

SEC. 125. REPEAL OF AIR FORCE E-8C FORCE PRESENTATION REQUIREMENT.

 Section 147 of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization 
Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115-232; 132 Stat. 1669) is 
amended by striking subsection (f).

SEC. 126. MINIMUM INVENTORY OF C-130 AIRCRAFT.

 (a) Minimum Inventory Requirement.--
 (1) In general.--During the covered period, the Secretary 
 of the Air Force shall maintain a total inventory of C-130 
 aircraft of not less than 271 aircraft.
 (2) Exception .--The Secretary of the Air Force may reduce 
 the number of C-130 aircraft in the Air Force below the minimum 
 number specified in subsection (a) if the Secretary determines, 
 on a case-by-case basis, that an aircraft is no longer mission 
 capable because of a mishap or other damage.
 (3) Covered period defined.--In this subsection, the term 
 ``covered period'' means the period--
 (A) beginning at the close of the period described 
 in section 138(c) of the National Defense Authorization 
 Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 135 Stat. 
 1577); and
 (B) ending on October 1, 2028.
 (b) Prohibition on Reduction of C-130 Aircraft Assigned to National 
Guard.--
 (1) In general.--During fiscal year 2023, the Secretary of 
 the Air Force may not reduce the total number of C-130 aircraft 
 assigned to the National Guard below the number so assigned as 
 of the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) Exception.--The prohibition under paragraph (1) shall 
 not apply to an individual C-130 aircraft that the Secretary of 
 the Air Force determines, on a case-by-case basis, to be no 
 longer mission capable because of a mishap or other damage.

SEC. 127. AUTHORITY TO PROCURE UPGRADED EJECTION SEATS FOR CERTAIN T-
 38A AIRCRAFT.

 The Secretary of the Air Force is authorized to procure upgraded 
ejection seats for--
 (1) all T-38A aircraft of the Air Force Global Strike 
 Command that have not received an upgraded ejection seat under 
 the T-38 Ejection Seat Upgrade Program; and
 (2) all T-38A aircraft of the Air Combat Command that have 
 not received an upgraded ejection seat as part of such Program.

SEC. 128. PROHIBITION ON AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS FOR RETIREMENT OF C-40 
 AIRCRAFT.

 (a) Prohibition.--None of the funds authorized to be appropriated 
by this Act or otherwise made available for fiscal year 2023 for the 
Air Force may be obligated or expended to retire, prepare to retire, or 
place in storage or on backup aircraft inventory status any C-40 
aircraft.
 (b) Exception.--
 (1) In general.--The limitation under subsection (a) shall 
 not apply to an individual C-40 aircraft that the Secretary of 
 the Air Force determines, on a case-by-case basis, to be no 
 longer mission capable because of a Class A mishap.
 (2) Certification required.--If the Secretary determines 
 under paragraph (1) that an aircraft is no longer mission 
 capable, the Secretary shall submit to the congressional 
 defense committees a certification that the status of such 
 aircraft is due to a Class A mishap and not due to lack of 
 maintenance or repairs or other reasons.

SEC. 129. PROHIBITION ON AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS FOR PROCUREMENT OF 
 BRIDGE TANKER AIRCRAFT.

 None of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this Act or 
otherwise made available for fiscal year 2023 for the Air Force may be 
obligated or expended to enter into a contract for the procurement of 
the bridge tanker aircraft (as defined in section 136(b) of the 
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 
117-81)) unless such contract is awarded using full and open 
competition. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the Secretary of 
the Air Force may enter into a contract for the procurement of the 
bridge tanker aircraft using procedures other than full and open 
competition if the Secretary complies with the requirements of section 
3204 of title 10, United States Code, with respect to the award of such 
contract and provides to the Committee on Armed Services of the House 
of Representatives a briefing that explains the reasons such contract 
cannot be awarded using full and open competition.

SEC. 130. PROHIBITION ON AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS FOR TERMINATION OF 
 PRODUCTION LINES FOR HH-60W AIRCRAFT.

 None of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this Act or 
otherwise made available for fiscal year 2023 for the Air Force may be 
obligated or expended to terminate the operations of, or to prepare to 
terminate the operations of, a production line for HH-60W Combat Rescue 
Helicopters.

SEC. 131. PROHIBITION ON CERTAIN REDUCTIONS TO B-1 BOMBER AIRCRAFT 
 SQUADRONS.

 (a) Prohibition.--During the covered period, the Secretary of the 
Air Force may not--
 (1) modify the designed operational capability statement 
 for any B-1 bomber aircraft squadron, as in effect on the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, in a manner that would reduce the 
 capabilities of such a squadron below the levels specified in 
 such statement as in effect on such date; or
 (2) reduce, below the levels in effect on such date of 
 enactment, the number of personnel assigned to units 
 responsible for the operation and maintenance of B-1 aircraft 
 if such reduction would affect the ability of such units to 
 meet the capability described in paragraph (1).
 (b) Exception.--The prohibition under subsection (a) shall not 
apply to a bomb wing for which the Secretary of the Air Force has 
commenced the process of replacing B-1 bomber aircraft with B-21 bomber 
aircraft.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered period'' means the period beginning 
 on the date of the enactment of this Act and ending on 
 September 30, 2026.
 (2) The term ``designed operational capability statement'' 
 has the meaning given that term in Air Force Instruction 10-
 201.
 (d) Conforming Repeal.--Section 133 of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 135 Stat. 
1574) is repealed.

SEC. 132. LIMITATION ON RETIREMENT OF E-3 AIRBORNE WARNING AND CONTROL 
 SYSTEM AIRCRAFT.

 (a) Limitation.--
 (1) In general.--Secretary of the Air Force may not retire 
 or prepare to retire more than a total of 13 E-3 Airborne 
 Warning and Control System aircraft.
 (2) Retirement conditions.--Of the aircraft authorized to 
 be retired under paragraph (1)--
 (A) up to eight aircraft may be retired at any time 
 during the period beginning on the date of the 
 enactment of this Act and ending on October 1, 2023; 
 and
 (B) up to five aircraft may be retired only after 
 the Secretary of the Air Force enters into a contract 
 for the procurement of an E-7 aircraft.
 (b) Designation as PTAI.--The Secretary of the Air Force shall 
designate two E-3 aircraft as Primary Training Aircraft Inventory.
 (c) Report Required.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Air Force shall 
 submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the 
 airborne warning and control capabilities and capacity of the 
 Air Force.
 (2) Elements.--The report under subsection (a) shall 
 include the following:
 (A) An assessment of--
 (i) the airborne warning and control 
 capabilities and capacity of the Air Force as 
 of the date of the report; and
 (ii) the airborne warning and control 
 capabilities and capacity needed to meet the 
 future requirements of the Air Force.
 (B) Identification of--
 (i) air moving target indicator and battle 
 management and command and control requirements 
 as of the date of the report;
 (ii) the number of such requirements being 
 fulfilled by the current fleet of 31 E-3 
 aircraft or other capabilities; and
 (iii) the number of such requirements that 
 would be fulfilled by a reduced fleet of 16 E-3 
 aircraft.
 (C) An assessment of whether and to what extent a 
 reduced fleet of 16 E-3 aircraft would affect the level 
 of support provided to the operations of the geographic 
 combatant commands.
 (D) A comparison of the capabilities of the E-3 
 aircraft with the capabilities of the E-7 aircraft that 
 is proposed as a replacement for the E-3 aircraft.
 (E) A comparison of the capacity required to 
 satisfy both current and future air moving target 
 indicator and battle management and command and control 
 requirements.
 (F) An acquisition strategy for the E-7 aircraft 
 proposed as a replacement for the E-3 aircraft that 
 is--
 (i) approved by the Secretary of the Air 
 Force; and
 (ii) includes cost and schedule data, plans 
 for training and fielding, and an assessment of 
 possible courses of action to accelerate the 
 proposed acquisition.

SEC. 133. REQUIREMENTS STUDY AND ACQUISITION STRATEGY FOR THE COMBAT 
 SEARCH AND RESCUE MISSION OF THE AIR FORCE.

 (a) Requirements Study.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Air Force shall 
 conduct a study to determine the requirements for the combat 
 search and rescue mission of the Air Force in support of the 
 objectives of the National Defense Strategy.
 (2) Elements.--The study under paragraph (1) shall include 
 the following:
 (A) Identification of anticipated combat search and 
 rescue mission requirements necessary to meet the 
 objectives of the most recent National Defense 
 Strategy, including--
 (i) requirements for short-term, mid-term, 
 and long-term contingency and steady-state 
 operations against adversaries;
 (ii) requirements under the Agile Combat 
 Employment operational scheme of the Air Force;
 (iii) requirements relating to regions and 
 specific geographic areas that are expected to 
 have a need for combat search and rescue forces 
 based on the combat-relevant range and 
 penetration capability of United States air 
 assets and associated weapon systems; and
 (iv) the level of operational risk 
 associated with each likely requirement and 
 scenario.
 (B) An assessment of the rotary, tilt, and fixed 
 wing aircraft and key combat search and rescue enabling 
 capabilities that--
 (i) are needed to meet the requirements 
 identified under subparagraph (A); and
 (ii) have been accounted for in the budget 
 of the Air Force as of the date of the study.
 (C) Identification of any combat search and rescue 
 capability gaps, including an assessment of--
 (i) whether and to what extent such gaps 
 may affect the ability of the Air Force to 
 conduct combat search and rescue operations;
 (ii) any capability gaps that may be 
 created by procuring fewer HH-60W aircraft than 
 planned under the program of record, including 
 any expected changes to the plan for fielding 
 such aircraft for active, reserve, and National 
 Guard units; and
 (iii) any capability gaps attributable to 
 unfunded requirements.
 (D) Identification and assessment of key current, 
 emerging, and future technologies with potential 
 application to the combat search and rescue mission, 
 including electric vertical takeoff and landing, 
 unmanned aerial systems, armed air launched effects or 
 similar armed capabilities, electric short take-off and 
 landing, or a combination of such technologies.
 (E) An assessment of each technology identified 
 under subparagraph (D), including (as applicable) an 
 assessment of--
 (i) technology maturity;
 (ii) suitability to the combat search and 
 rescue mission;
 (iii) range;
 (iv) speed;
 (v) payload capability and capacity;
 (vi) radio frequency and infrared 
 signatures;
 (vii) operational conditions required for 
 the use of such technology, such as runway 
 availability;
 (viii) survivability;
 (ix) lethality;
 (x) potential to support combat missions 
 other than combat search and rescue; and
 (xi) estimated cost.
 (3) Submittal to congress.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than March 30, 2023, the 
 Secretary of the Air Force shall submit to the 
 Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and the 
 House of Representatives a report on the results of the 
 study under paragraph (1).
 (B) Form.--The report required under subparagraph 
 (A) shall be submitted in unclassified form, but may 
 include a classified annex.
 (b) Acquisition Strategy.--
 (1) In general.--Based on the results of the study 
 conducted under subsection (a), the Secretary of the Air Force 
 shall develop a strategy for the acquisition of capabilities to 
 meet the requirements identified under such study.
 (2) Elements.--The acquisition strategy under paragraph (1) 
 shall include--
 (A) A prioritized list of the capabilities needed 
 to meet the requirements identified under subsection 
 (a).
 (B) The estimated costs of such capabilities, 
 including--
 (i) any amounts already budgeted for such 
 capabilities as of the date of the strategy, 
 including amounts already budgeted for emerging 
 and future technologies; and
 (ii) any amounts not already budgeted for 
 such capabilities as of such date.
 (C) An estimate of the date by which the capability 
 is expected to become operational.
 (D) A description of any requirements identified 
 under subsection (a) that the Secretary of the Air 
 Force does not expect to meet as part of the 
 acquisition strategy and an explanation of the reasons 
 such requirements cannot be met.
 (3) Submittal to congress.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than June 1, 2023, the 
 Secretary of the Air Force shall submit to the 
 Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and the 
 House of Representatives a report on the acquisition 
 strategy developed under paragraph (1).
 (B) Form.--The report required under subparagraph 
 (A) shall be submitted in unclassified form, but may 
 include a classified annex.

SEC. 134. PLAN FOR TRANSFER OF KC-135 AIRCRAFT TO THE AIR NATIONAL 
 GUARD.

 (a) Plan Required.--The Secretary of the Air Force shall develop a 
plan to transfer covered KC-135 aircraft to air refueling wings of the 
Air National Guard that are classic associations with active duty units 
of the Air Force.
 (b) Briefing.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Air Force shall provide to 
the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and the House of 
Representatives a briefing on plan developed under subsection (a). The 
briefing shall include an explanation of the effects the plan is 
expected to have on the aerial refueling capability of the Department 
of Defense.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered KC-135 aircraft'' means a KC-135 
 aircraft that the Secretary of the Air Force is in the process 
 of replacing with a KC-46A aircraft.
 (2) The term ``classic association'' means a structure 
 under which a regular Air Force unit retains principal 
 responsibility for an aircraft and shares the aircraft with one 
 or more reserve component units.

SEC. 135. ANNUAL REPORT ON T-7A ADVANCED PILOT TRAINING SYSTEM.

 (a) Annual Report.--Not later than March 1, 2023, and annually 
thereafter for 5 years, the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for 
Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics shall submit to the Committees 
on Armed Services of the Senate and the House of Representatives a 
report on the acquisition efforts of the Department of Defense with 
respect to the T-7A Advanced Pilot Training System (including any 
associated aircraft and ground training systems).
 (b) Elements.--Each report under subsection (a) shall include the 
following:
 (1) An overview of the Assistant Secretary's acquisition 
 strategy for the T-7 Advanced Pilot Training System, including 
 the current status of the acquisition strategy as of the date 
 of the report.
 (2) The cost and schedule estimates for the program.
 (3) In the case of the initial report under this section, 
 the key performance parameters or the equivalent requirements 
 for the program. In the case of subsequent reports, any key 
 performance parameters or the equivalent requirements for the 
 program that have changed since the submission of the previous 
 report under this section.
 (4) The test and evaluation strategy and execution date of 
 the testing program, including any results, and a summary of 
 testing points closed pertaining to the testing program.
 (5) The logistics and sustainment strategy of the program, 
 and the planning, execution, and implementation that has 
 occurred related to that strategy as of the date of the report.
 (6) An explanation of the causes related to any 
 engineering, manufacturing, development, testing, production, 
 delivery, acceptance, and fielding delays incurred by the 
 program as of the date of the report and any associated impacts 
 and subsequent efforts to address such delays.
 (7) The post-production fielding strategy for the program.
 (8) Any other matters regarding the acquisition of the T-7 
 Advanced Pilot Training System that the Assistant Secretary 
 determines to be of critical importance to the long-term 
 viability of the program.

SEC. 136. REPORT ON F-22 AIRCRAFT FORCE LAYDOWN.

 Not later than April 30, 2023, the Secretary of the Air Force shall 
submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and the House 
of Representatives a report on--
 (1) the proposed plan of the Air Force for the movement and 
 basing of 186 F-22 aircraft; and
 (2) the establishment of a new F-22 formal training unit, 
 including--
 (A) the anticipated location of such unit;
 (B) the anticipated schedule for the establishment 
 of such unit; and
 (C) the number of aircraft that are expected to be 
 transferred to such unit.

SEC. 137. LIMITATION ON DIVESTMENT OF F-15 AIRCRAFT.

 (a) Limitation.--Beginning on October 1, 2023, Secretary of the Air 
Force may not divest, or prepare to divest, any covered F-15 aircraft 
until a period of 180 days has elapsed following the date on which the 
Secretary submits the report required under subsection (b).
 (b) Report Required.--The Secretary of the Air Force shall submit 
to the congressional defense committees a report on the following:
 (1) Any plans of the Secretary to divest covered F-15 
 aircraft during the period covered by the most recent future-
 years defense program submitted to Congress under section 221 
 of title 10, United States Code, including--
 (A) a description of each proposed divestment by 
 fiscal year and location;
 (B) an explanation of the anticipated effects of 
 such divestments on the missions, personnel, force 
 structure, and budgeting of the Air Force;
 (C) a description of the actions the Secretary 
 intends to carry out--
 (i) to mitigate any negative effects 
 identified under subparagraph (B); and
 (ii) to modify or replace the missions and 
 capabilities of any units and military 
 installations affected by such divestments; and
 (D) an assessment of how such divestments may 
 affect the ability of the Air Force to maintain minimum 
 tactical aircraft inventories.
 (2) Any plans of the Secretary to procure covered F-15 
 aircraft.
 (3) Any specific plans of the Secretary to deviate from 
 procurement of new F-15EX aircraft as articulated by the 
 validated requirements contained in Air Force Requirements 
 Decision Memorandum, dated February 1, 2019, regarding F-15EX 
 Rapid Fielding Requirements Document, dated January 16, 2019.
 (c) Covered F-15 Aircraft Defined.--In this section, the term 
``covered F-15 aircraft'' means the following:
 (1) F-15C aircraft.
 (2) F-15D aircraft.
 (3) F-15E aircraft.
 (4) F-15EX aircraft.

SEC. 138. FUNDING FOR C-130 MODULAR AIRBORNE FIREFIGHTING SYSTEM.

 (a) Increase.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 101 for aircraft procurement, Air Force, as specified in the 
corresponding funding table in section 4101, for other aircraft, C-130, 
line 049, is hereby increased by $60,000,000 (with the amount of such 
increase to be used for the modular airborne firefighting system).
 (b) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 301 for operation and maintenance, Defense-wide, as specified 
in the corresponding funding table in section 4301, for administration 
and service-wide activities, Office of the Secretary of Defense, line 
440, is hereby reduced by $60,000,000.

SEC. 139. REQUIREMENT TO MAINTAIN FLEET OF MANNED INTELLIGENCE, 
 SURVEILLANCE, AND RECONNAISSANCE AIRCRAFT.

 (a) Manned Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance 
Aircraft.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Air Force, in 
 coordination with Director of the Air National Guard, shall 
 maintain a fleet of fixed wing, manned ISR/IAA aircraft to 
 conduct operations pursuant to the provisions of law specified 
 in paragraph (2).
 (2) Provisions specified.--The provisions of law specified 
 in this paragraph are the following:
 (A) Sections 124 and 284 of title 10, United States 
 Code.
 (B) Section 112 of title 32, United States Code.
 (C) Section 1022 of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2004 (Public Law 108-
 136; 10 U.S.C. 271 note).
 (b) Limitation.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), none 
 of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this Act or 
 otherwise made available for fiscal year 2023 for the Air Force 
 may be obligated or expended to retire, divest, realign, or 
 placed in storage or on backup aircraft inventory status, or to 
 prepare to retire, divest, realign, or place in storage or on 
 backup aircraft inventory status, any RC-26B aircraft.
 (2) Exception.--
 (A) In general.--The limitation in paragraph (1) 
 shall not apply to individual RC-26 aircraft that the 
 Secretary of the Air Force determines, on a case-by-
 case basis, to be no longer mission capable because of 
 a Class A mishap.
 (B) Certification required.--If the Secretary of 
 the Air Force determines under subparagraph (A) that an 
 aircraft is no longer mission capable, the Secretary 
 shall submit to the congressional defense committees a 
 certification that the status of such aircraft is due 
 to a Class A mishap and not due to lack of maintenance 
 or repairs or other reasons.
 (c) Funding for RC-26B Manned Intelligence, Surveillance, and 
Reconnaissance Platform.--
 (1) Of the amount authorized to be appropriated in section 
 301 for operation and maintenance as specified in the 
 corresponding funding in section 4301, for operation and 
 maintenance, Air National Guard, the Secretary of the Air Force 
 shall transfer up to $18,500,000 for the purposes of the RC-26B 
 manned intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance platform.
 (2) Of the amount authorized to be appropriated in section 
 421 for military personnel, as specified in the corresponding 
 finding table in section 4401, the Secretary of the Air Force 
 shall transfer up to $13,000,000 from military personnel, Air 
 National Guard for personnel who operate and maintain the RC-
 26B manned intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance 
 platform.
 (d) Memorandum of Agreement.--Notwithstanding any other provision 
of law, the Secretary of Defense may enter into one or more memoranda 
of agreement or cost sharing agreements with other Federal entities for 
the purposes of assisting with the missions and activities of such 
entities.
 (e) Independent Assessment.--Not later than 30 days after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Director of Cost Assessment and 
Program Evaluation shall conduct an independent assessment to determine 
how the Air Force can--
 (1) provide manned ISR/IAA capabilities for the purposes of 
 conducting operations pursuant to the provisions of law 
 specified in subsection (a)(2); and
 (2) maintain and modernize the manned ISR/IAA aircraft 
 fleet over the period of ten years following the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.
 (f) Comptroller General Study.--
 (1) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States 
 shall conduct an independent study of the platforms used to 
 conduct title 32 operations by manned ISR/IAA aircraft in light 
 of the proposal of the Air Force to retire and divest the RC-
 26B aircraft fleet.
 (2) Briefing.--Not later than September 31, 2023, the 
 Comptroller General shall provide to the congressional defense 
 committees a briefing on the preliminary findings of the study 
 under paragraph (1). The briefing shall include an assessment 
 of--
 (A) the alternatives considered by the Air Force 
 that led to the recommendation to retire the RC-26B 
 aircraft, including the relative costs, benefits, and 
 assumptions associated with the alternatives to such 
 retirement;
 (B) any capability gaps in manned ISR/IAA that 
 would be created by such retirement;
 (C) the extent to which the Department of Defense 
 has plans to address any capability gaps identified 
 under subparagraph (B); and
 (D) any capability gaps in manned ISR/IAA that 
 could be created by the added cost to the Air Force of 
 retaining the RC-26B fleet.
 (3) Report.--As soon as practicable after the date of the 
 briefing under paragraph (2), the Comptroller General shall 
 submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the 
 final results of the study conducted under paragraph (1).
 (g) ISR/IAA Defined.--In this section, the term ``ISR/IAA'' means--
 (1) intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance; and
 (2) incident awareness and assessment.

SEC. 139A. PROCUREMENT AUTHORITY FOR COMMERCIAL ENGINEERING SOFTWARE.

 (a) Procurement Authority.--The Secretary of the Air Force may 
enter into one or more contracts for the procurement of commercial 
engineering software to meet the digital transformation goals and 
objectives of the Department of the Air Force.
 (b) Inclusion of Program Element in Budget Materials.--In the 
materials submitted by the Secretary of the Air Force in support of the 
budget of the President for fiscal year 2024 (as submitted to Congress 
pursuant to section 1105 of title 31, United States Code), the 
Secretary shall include a program element dedicated to the procurement 
and management of the commercial engineering software described in 
subsection (a).
 (c) Review.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Secretary of the 
Air Force shall--
 (1) review the commercial physics-based simulation 
 marketspace; and
 (2) conduct research on providers of commercial software 
 capabilities that have the potential to expedite the progress 
 of digital engineering initiatives across the weapon system 
 enterprise, with a particular focus on capabilities that have 
 the potential to generate significant life-cycle cost savings, 
 streamline and accelerate weapon system acquisition, and 
 provide data-driven approaches to inform investments by the 
 Department of the Air Force.
 (d) Report.--Not later than March 1, 2023, the Secretary of the Air 
Force shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report 
that includes--
 (1) an analysis of specific physics-based simulation 
 capability manufacturers that deliver high mission impact with 
 broad reach into the weapon system enterprise of the Department 
 of the Air Force; and
 (2) a prioritized list of programs and offices of the 
 Department of the Air Force that could better utilize 
 commercial physics-based modeling and simulation and 
 opportunities for the implementation of such modeling and 
 simulation capabilities within the Department.

SEC. 139B. SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING UNITED STATES AIR NATIONAL GUARD 
 REFUELING MISSION.

 It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the refueling mission of the reserve components of the 
 Air Force is essential to ensuring the national security of the 
 United States and our allies;
 (2) this mission provides for aerial aircraft refueling 
 essential to extending the range of aircraft, which is a 
 critical capability when facing the current threats abroad; and
 (3) the Air Force should ensure any plan to retire KC-135 
 aircraft includes equal replacement with KC-46A aircraft.

 Subtitle D--Defense-wide, Joint, and Multiservice Matters

SEC. 141. CHARGING STATIONS AT COMMISSARY STORES AND MILITARY 
 EXCHANGES.

 (a) In General.--Subchapter I of chapter 147 of title 10, United 
States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section:
``Sec. 2486. Electric vehicle charging stations at commissary stores 
 and military exchanges
 ``(a) Authority.--The Secretary of Defense may furnish electric 
vehicle charging stations at a commissary store or military exchange 
for commercial use by individuals authorized to access such facilities.
 ``(b) Rates and Procedures.--If the Secretary of Defense furnishes 
electric vehicle charging stations pursuant to subsection (a)--
 ``(1) the Secretary shall establish rates and procedures 
 that the Secretary determines appropriate for the purchase of 
 electric power from the charging stations; and
 ``(2) such charging stations may be installed and operated 
 by a contractor on a for-profit basis.
 ``(c) Interoperability.--Any vehicle charging station provided 
under this section shall use a charging connector type (or other means 
to transmit electricity to the vehicle) that--
 ``(1) meets applicable industry accepted standards for 
 interoperability and safety; and
 ``(2) is compatible with--
 ``(A) electric vehicles commonly available for 
 purchase by a member of the general public; and
 ``(B) covered nontactical vehicles.
 ``(b) Covered Nontactical Vehicle Defined.--In this section, the 
term `covered nontactical vehicle' means any vehicle--
 ``(1) that is not a tactical vehicle designed for use in 
 combat; and
 ``(2) that is purchased or leased by the Department of 
 Defense, or by another department or agency of the Federal 
 Government for the use of the Department of Defense, pursuant 
 to a contract entered into, renewed, modified, or amended on or 
 after October 1, 2022.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
such subchapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item:

``2486. Electric vehicle charging stations at commissary stores and 
 military exchanges.''.

SEC. 142. INCREASE AIR FORCE AND NAVY USE OF USED COMMERCIAL DUAL-USE 
 PARTS IN CERTAIN AIRCRAFT AND ENGINES.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Air Force, with respect to 
the Air Force, and the Secretary of the Navy, with respect to the Navy, 
shall develop and implement processes and procedures for--
 (1) the acquisition of used, overhauled, reconditioned, and 
 remanufactured commercial dual-use parts; and
 (2) the use of such commercial-dual use parts in all--
 (A) commercial derivative aircraft and engines; and
 (B) aircraft used by the Air Force or Navy that are 
 based on the design of commercial products.
 (b) Procurement of Parts.--The processes and procedures implemented 
under subsection (a) shall provide that commercial dual-use parts shall 
be acquired--
 (1) pursuant to competitive procedures (as defined in 
 section 3012 of title 10, United States Code); and
 (2) only from suppliers that provide parts that possess an 
 Authorized Release Certificate Federal Aviation Administration 
 Form 8130-3 Airworthy Approval Tag from a certified repair 
 station pursuant to part 145 of title 14, Code of Federal 
 Regulations.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Commercial derivative.--The term ``commercial 
 derivative'' means an item procured by the Department of 
 Defense that is or was produced using the same or similar 
 production facilities, a common supply chain, and the same or 
 similar production processes that are used for the production 
 of the item as predominantly used by the general public or by 
 nongovernmental entities for purposes other than governmental 
 purposes.
 (2) Commercial dual-use parts.--The term ``commercial dual-
 use parts'' means a product that is--
 (A) a commercial product;
 (B) dual-use;
 (C) described in subsection (b)(2); and
 (D) not a life limited part.
 (3) Commercial product.--The term ``commercial product'' 
 has the meaning given such term in section 103 of title 41, 
 United States Code.
 (4) Dual-use.--The term ``dual-use'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 4801 of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 143. ASSESSMENT AND REPORT ON MILITARY ROTARY WING AIRCRAFT 
 INDUSTRIAL BASE.

 (a) Assessment Required.--The Under Secretary of Defense for 
Acquisition and Sustainment, in coordination with the Secretaries of 
the Army, Navy, and Air Force, shall conduct an assessment of the 
military rotary wing aircraft industrial base.
 (b) Elements.--The assessment under subsection (a) shall include 
the following:
 (1)(A) Identification of each rotary wing aircraft program 
 of the Department of Defense that is in the research and 
 development or procurement phase.
 (B) A description of any platform-specific or capability-
 specific facility or workforce technical skill requirements 
 necessary for each program identified under subparagraph (A).
 (2) Identification of--
 (A) the rotary wing aircraft capabilities of each 
 Armed Force anticipated for programming beyond the 
 period covered by the most recent future-years defense 
 program submitted to Congress under section 221 of 
 title 10, United States Code (as of the date of the 
 assessment); and
 (B) the technologies, facilities, and workforce 
 skills necessary for the development of such 
 capabilities.
 (3) An assessment of the military industrial base capacity 
 and skills that are available (as of the date of the 
 assessment) to design and manufacture the platforms and 
 capabilities identified under paragraphs (1) and (2) and a list 
 of any gaps in such capacity and skills.
 (4)(A) Identification of each component, subcomponent, or 
 equipment supplier in the military rotary wing aircraft 
 industrial base that is the sole source within such industrial 
 base from which that component, subcomponent, or equipment may 
 be obtained.
 (B) An assessment of any risk resulting from the lack of 
 other suppliers for such components, subcomponents, or 
 equipment.
 (5) Analysis of the likelihood of future consolidation, 
 contraction, or expansion, within the rotary wing aircraft 
 industrial base, including--
 (A) identification of the most probable scenarios 
 with respect to such consolidation, contraction, or 
 expansion; and
 (B) an assessment of how each such scenario may 
 affect the ability of the Armed Forces to acquire 
 military rotary wing aircraft in the future, including 
 any effects on the cost and schedule of such 
 acquisitions.
 (6) Such other matters the Under Secretary of Defense for 
 Acquisition and Sustainment determines appropriate.
 (c) Report.--
 (1) In general.--Concurrently with the submission of the 
 next annual report required to be submitted under section 4814 
 of title 10, United States Code, after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Under Secretary of Defense for 
 Acquisition and Sustainment shall submit to the congressional 
 defense committees a report that includes--
 (A) the results of the assessment conducted under 
 subsection (a); and
 (B) based on such results, recommendations for 
 reducing any risks identified with respect to the 
 military rotary wing aircraft industrial base.
 (2) Form.--The report required under paragraph (1) may be 
 submitted as an appendix to the annual report required to be 
 submitted under section 4814 of title 10, United States Code.
 (d) Rotary Wing Aircraft Defined.--In this section, the term 
``rotary wing aircraft'' includes rotary wing and tiltrotor aircraft.

 TITLE II--RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST, AND EVALUATION

 Subtitle A--Authorization of Appropriations

SEC. 201. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 Funds are hereby authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 2023 
for the use of the Department of Defense for research, development, 
test, and evaluation, as specified in the funding table in section 
4201.

 Subtitle B--Program Requirements, Restrictions, and Limitations

SEC. 211. CLARIFICATION OF ROLE OF SENIOR OFFICIAL WITH PRINCIPAL 
 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND MACHINE 
 LEARNING.

 (a) Joint Artificial Intelligence Research and Development 
Activities.--Section 238 of the John S. McCain National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115-232; 10 U.S.C. 
note prec. 4061) is amended--
 (1) by amending subsection (c) to read as follows:
 ``(c) Organization and Roles.--
 ``(1) In general.--In addition to designating an official 
 under subsection (b), the Secretary of Defense shall assign to 
 appropriate officials within the Department of Defense roles 
 and responsibilities relating to the research, development, 
 prototyping, testing, procurement of, requirements for, and 
 operational use of artificial intelligence technologies.
 ``(2) Appropriate officials.--The officials assigned roles 
 and responsibilities under paragraph (1) shall include--
 ``(A) the Under Secretary of Defense for Research 
 and Engineering;
 ``(B) the Under Secretary of Defense for 
 Acquisition and Sustainment;
 ``(C) one or more officials in each military 
 department;
 ``(D) officials of appropriate Defense Agencies; 
 and
 ``(E) such other officials as the Secretary of 
 Defense determines appropriate.'';
 (2) in subsection (e) in the second sentence, by striking 
 ``Director of the Joint Artificial Intelligence Center'' and 
 inserting ``the official designated under subsection (b)''; and
 (3) by striking subsection (h).
 (b) Personnel Management Authority to Attract Experts in Science 
and Engineering.--Section 4092 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) by amending paragraph (6) of subsection (a) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(6) Joint artificial intelligence research, development, 
 and transition activities.--The official designated under 
 subsection (b) of section 238 of the John S. McCain National 
 Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115-
 232) shall carry out a program of personnel management 
 authority provided in subsection (b) of this section in order 
 to facilitate recruitment of eminent experts in science or 
 engineering to support the activities of such official under 
 such section 238.''.
 (2) in subsection (b)(1)(F)--
 (A) by striking ``Joint Artificial Intelligence 
 Center'' and inserting ``official designated under 
 subsection (b) of section 238 of the John S. McCain 
 National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 
 (Public Law 115-232)''; and
 (B) by striking ``in the Center'' and inserting 
 ``in support of the activities of such official under 
 such section''; and
 (3) in subsection (c)(2), by striking ``the Joint 
 Artificial Intelligence Center'' and inserting ``the activities 
 under section 238 of the John S. McCain National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115-232)''.
 (c) Review of Artificial Intelligence Applications and 
Establishment of Performance Metrics.--Section 226(b) of the National 
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 10 
U.S.C. 4001 note) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``or the official 
 designated under subsection (b) of section 238 of the John S. 
 McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 
 (Public Law 115-232; 10 U.S.C. note prec. 4061)'' after 
 ``Director of the Joint Artificial Intelligence Center'';
 (2) in paragraph (4), by inserting ``or the official 
 designated under subsection (b) of section 238 of the John S. 
 McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 
 (Public Law 115-232; 10 U.S.C. note prec. 4061)'' after 
 ``Director of the Joint Artificial Intelligence Center''; and
 (3) in paragraph (5), by inserting ``or the official 
 designated under subsection (b) of section 238 of the John S. 
 McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 
 (Public Law 115-232; 10 U.S.C. note prec. 4061)'' after 
 ``Director of the Joint Artificial Intelligence Center''.
 (d) Modification of the Joint Common Foundation Program.--Section 
227(a) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 
(Public Law 117-81; 10 U.S.C. 4001 note) is amended by striking ``Joint 
Artificial Intelligence Center'' and inserting ``the office of the 
official designated under subsection (b) of section 238 of the John S. 
McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public 
Law 115-232; 10 U.S.C. note prec. 4061)''.
 (e) Pilot Program on Data Repositories to Facilitate the 
Development of Artificial Intelligence Capabilities for the Department 
of Defense.--Section 232 of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 10 U.S.C. 4001 note) is amended--
 (1) in the section heading, by striking ``pilot program on 
 data repositories'' and inserting ``data repositories'';
 (2) by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
 ``(a) Establishment of Data Repositories.--The Secretary of 
Defense, acting through the official designated under subsection (b) of 
section 238 of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act 
for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115-232; 10 U.S.C. note prec. 4061) 
(and such other officials as the Secretary determines appropriate), 
shall--
 ``(1) establish data repositories containing Department of 
 Defense data sets relevant to the development of artificial 
 intelligence software and technology; and
 ``(2) allow appropriate public and private sector 
 organizations to access such data repositories for the purpose 
 of developing improved artificial intelligence and machine 
 learning software capabilities that may, as determined 
 appropriate by the Secretary, be procured by the Department to 
 satisfy Department requirements and technology development 
 goals.'';
 (3) in subsection (b), by striking ``If the Secretary of 
 Defense carries out the pilot program under subsection (a), the 
 data repositories established under the program'' and inserting 
 ``The data repositories established under subsection (a)''; and
 (4) by amending subsection (c) to read as follows:
 ``(c) Briefing.--Not later than July 1, 2023, the Secretary of 
Defense shall provide to the congressional defense committees a 
briefing on--
 ``(1) the types of information the Secretary determines are 
 feasible and advisable to include in the data repositories 
 established under subsection (a); and
 ``(2) the progress of the Secretary in establishing such 
 data repositories.''.
 (f) Digital Development Infrastructure Plan and Working Group.--
Section 1531(d)(2)(C) of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 135 Stat. 2051) is amended by 
striking ``The Joint Artificial Intelligence Center (JAIC)'' and 
inserting ``The office of the official designated under subsection (b) 
of section 238 of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act 
for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115-232; 10 U.S.C. note prec. 4061)''.
 (g) Application of Artificial Intelligence to the Defense Reform 
Pillar of the National Defense Strategy.--Section 234(b) of the William 
M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
2021 (Public Law 116-283; 10 U.S.C. 113) is amended by striking 
``Director of the Joint Artificial Intelligence Center'' and inserting 
``official designated under subsection (b) of section 238 of the John 
S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 
(Public Law 115-232; 10 U.S.C. note prec. 4061)''.
 (h) Pilot Program on the Use of Electronic Portfolios to Evaluate 
Certain Applicants for Technical Positions.--Section 247(c) of the 
William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283; 10 U.S.C. note prec. 1580) is 
amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``the Joint Artificial 
 Intelligence Center'' and inserting ``the office of the 
 official designated under subsection (b) of section 238 of the 
 John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
 Year 2019 (Public Law 115-232; 10 U.S.C. note prec. 4061)'';
 (2) by striking paragraph (2); and
 (3) by redesignating paragraphs (3) and (4) as paragraphs 
 (2) and (3), respectively.
 (i) Acquisition Authority of the Director of the Joint Artificial 
Intelligence Center.--Section 808 the William M. (Mac) Thornberry 
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 
116-283; 10 U.S.C. 4001 note) is amended--
 (1) in the section heading, by striking ``the director of 
 the joint artificial intelligence center'' and inserting ``the 
 senior official with principal responsibility for artificial 
 intelligence and machine learning'';
 (2) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by striking ``the Director of the Joint 
 Artificial Intelligence Center'' and inserting ``the 
 official designated under subsection (b) of section 238 
 of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization 
 Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115-232; 10 U.S.C. 
 note prec. 4061) (referred to in this section as the 
 `Official')''; and
 (B) by striking ``the Center'' and inserting ``the 
 office of such official (referred to in this section as 
 the `Office')'';
 (3) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in the subsection heading, by striking 
 ``JAIC'';
 (B) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in the matter preceding subparagraph 
 (A),
 (I) by striking ``staff of the 
 Director'' and inserting ``staff of the 
 Official''; and
 (II) by striking ``the Director of 
 the Center'' and inserting ``such 
 Official'';
 (ii) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``the 
 Center'' and inserting ``the Office'';
 (iii) in subparagraph (B), by striking 
 ``the Center'' and inserting ``the Office'';
 (iv) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``the 
 Center'' each place it appears and inserting 
 ``the Office''; and
 (v) in subparagraph (D), by striking ``the 
 Center'' each place it appears and inserting 
 ``the Office'';
 (C) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) by striking ``the Center'' and 
 inserting ``the Office''; and
 (ii) by striking ``the Director'' and 
 inserting ``the Official'';
 (4) in subsection (c)(1)--
 (A) by striking ``the Center'' and inserting ``the 
 Office''; and
 (B) by striking ``the Director'' and inserting 
 ``the Official'';
 (5) in subsection (d), by striking ``the Director'' and 
 inserting ``the Official'';
 (6) in subsection (e)--
 (A) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) in subparagraph (B), by striking 
 ``Center missions'' and inserting ``the 
 missions of the Office''; and
 (ii) in subparagrpah (D), by striking ``the 
 Center'' and inserting ``the Office''; and
 (B) in paragraph (3), by striking ``the Center'' 
 and inserting ``the Office'';
 (7) in subsection (f), by striking ``the Director'' and 
 inserting ``the Official''; and
 (8) in subsection (g)--
 (A) by striking paragraphs (1) and (3); and
 (B) by redesignating paragraphs (4) and (5) as 
 paragraphs (1) and (2), respectively.
 (j) Biannual Report.--Section 260 of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020 (Public Law 116-92; 133 Stat. 
1293) is amended--
 (1) in the section heading, by striking ``joint artificial 
 intelligence center'' and inserting ``office of the senior 
 official with principal responsibility for artificial 
 intelligence and machine learning'';
 (2) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by striking ``2023'' and inserting ``2026''; 
 and
 (B) by striking ``the Joint Artificial Intelligence 
 Center (referred to in this section as the `Center')'' 
 and inserting ``the office of the official designated 
 under subsection (b) of section 238 of the John S. 
 McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
 Year 2019 (Public Law 115-232; 10 U.S.C. note prec. 
 4061) (referred to in this section as the `Office')'';
 (3) in subsection (b)--
 (A) by striking ``Center'' each place it appears 
 and inserting ``Office'';
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``the National 
 Mission Initiatives, Component Mission Initiatives, and 
 any other initiatives'' and inserting ``any 
 initiatives''; and
 (C) in paragraph (7), by striking ``the Center's 
 investments in the National Mission Initiatives and 
 Component Mission Initiatives'' and inserting ``the 
 Office's investments in its initiatives and other 
 activities''; and
 (4) by striking subsection (c).
 (k) Reporting Responsibility.--Section 903(b) of the National 
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020 (Public Law 116-92; 10 
U.S.C. 2223 note) is amended--
 (1) by striking paragraph (3); and
 (2) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (3).
 (l) References in Existing Law.--Any reference in any law, 
regulation, guidance, instruction, or other document of the Federal 
Government to the Director of the Joint Artificial Intelligence Center 
of the Department of Defense or to the Joint Artificial Intelligence 
Center shall be deemed to refer to the official designated under 
section 238(b) of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act 
for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115-232; 10 U.S.C. note prec. 4061) or 
the office of such official, as the case may be.

SEC. 212. ROLE OF THE CHIEF DIGITAL AND ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE OFFICER 
 IN FOSTERING INTEROPERABILITY AMONG JOINT FORCE SYSTEMS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the 
Director of National Intelligence, shall direct the Chief Digital and 
Artificial Intelligence Officer of the Department of Defense to carry 
out the activities described in subsection (b) in support of the Joint 
All Domain Command and Control strategy and the Joint Warfighting 
Concept of the Department.
 (b) Activities Described.--The activities described in this 
subsection are the following:
 (1) To solicit feedback from the combatant commands and the 
 Joint Staff to identify operational challenges that--
 (A) are attributable to a lack of interoperability 
 between the warfighting systems and other technology, 
 including software and data, of such commands and the 
 Joint Staff; and
 (B) could potentially be resolved using mission 
 integration software, including software designed to 
 integrate heterogeneous systems across domains without 
 upgrading hardware or changing existing system 
 software.
 (2) From amounts made available to carry out this section, 
 to allocate funds to entities in the combatant commands and the 
 Joint Staff to address such operational challenges through--
 (A) the development, procurement, or fielding of 
 mission integration software; and
 (B) the development and implementation of related 
 tactics, techniques, and procedures to integrate 
 systems to increase interoperability.
 (3) To identify, acquire, and field existing mission 
 integration capabilities and enhance ongoing research and 
 development.
 (4) To support exercises, experimentation, and 
 demonstrations to highlight and refine mission integration 
 software and address associated interoperability challenges.
 (5) To assist in fielding mission integration software by 
 the military departments to encourage the development and 
 employment of such software on a larger scale.
 (c) Briefing.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall provide to the 
Committee on Armed Services of the House of Representatives a briefing 
on the progress of the Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence 
Officer in carrying out the activities described in subsection (b)).
 (d) Reports.--On a biannual basis during the period of three years 
following the date of the briefing under subsection (c), the Secretary 
of Defense shall submit to the congressional defense committees a 
report that includes, with respect to the period of six months 
preceding the date of the report, the following:
 (1) A description of any operational challenges that were 
 identified under subsection (b)(1).
 (2) Of those operational challenges--
 (A) identification of the challenges the Chief 
 Digital and Artificial Intelligence Officer addressed 
 through the allocation of funds under subsection 
 (b)(2); and
 (B) an explanation of whether and to what extent 
 activities carried out with such funds reduced 
 interoperability challenges.
 (3) Identification of any mission integration software 
 procured, developed, or fielded by the Armed Forces or the 
 combatant commands.
 (4) A description of any exercises, experimentation, and 
 demonstrations performed.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence 
 Officer'' means the official designated under subsection (b) of 
 section 238 of the John S. McCain National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115-232; 10 
 U.S.C. note prec. 4061).
 (2) The term ``mission integration software'' means 
 software that supports military operations by creating 
 interoperability between systems, tools, and applications, 
 including weapons, platforms, intelligence, surveillance, and 
 reconnaissance systems, intelligence fusion systems, tasking 
 systems, tactical data links, cyberspace and electronic warfare 
 systems, communications systems, command and control systems, 
 common operating pictures, and commanders' decision aids.

SEC. 213. MODIFICATION OF DEFENSE LABORATORY MODERNIZATION PILOT 
 PROGRAM.

 Section 2803 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2016 (Public Law 114-92; 10 U.S.C. note prec. 4121) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (e), by striking ``$150,000,000'' and 
 inserting ``$300,000,000'';
 (2) in subsection (f)(2), by striking ``$1,000,000'' and 
 inserting ``$4,000,000''; and
 (3) in subsection (g), by striking ``October 1, 2025'' and 
 inserting ``October 1, 2030''.

SEC. 214. SUPPORT FOR RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT OF BIOINDUSTRIAL 
 MANUFACTURING PROCESSES.

 (a) Authorization.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, 
the Secretary of Defense shall provide support to manufacturing 
innovation institutes for the research and development of innovative 
bioindustrial manufacturing processes and the development of a network 
of bioindustrial manufacturing facilities to improve the ability of the 
industrial base to use such processes for the production of chemicals, 
materials, and other products necessary to support national security or 
secure fragile supply chains.
 (b) Form of Support.--The support provided under subsection (a) may 
consist of--
 (1) the establishment of one or more manufacturing 
 innovation institutes specializing in the research and 
 development of bioindustrial manufacturing processes;
 (2) providing funding to one or more existing manufacturing 
 innovation institutes--
 (A) to support the research and development of 
 bioindustrial manufacturing processes; or
 (B) to otherwise expand the bioindustrial 
 manufacturing capabilities of such institutes;
 (3) the establishment of dedicated facilities within one or 
 more manufacturing innovation institutes to serve as regional 
 hubs for the research, development, and the scaling of 
 bioindustrial manufacturing processes and products to higher 
 levels of production; or
 (4) designating a manufacturing innovation institute to 
 serve as the lead entity responsible for integrating a network 
 of pilot and intermediate scale bioindustrial manufacturing 
 facilities.
 (c) Activities.--A manufacturing innovation institute that receives 
support under subsection (a) shall carry out activities relating to the 
research, development, test, and evaluation of innovative bioindustrial 
manufacturing processes and the scaling of bioindustrial manufacturing 
products to higher levels of production, which may include--
 (1) research on the use of bioindustrial manufacturing to 
 create materials such as polymers, coatings, resins, commodity 
 chemicals, and other materials with fragile supply chains;
 (2) demonstration projects to evaluate bioindustrial 
 manufacturing processes and technologies;
 (3) activities to scale bioindustrial manufacturing 
 processes and products to higher levels of production;
 (4) strategic planning for infrastructure and equipment 
 investments for bioindustrial manufacturing of defense-related 
 materials;
 (5) analyses of bioindustrial manufactured products and 
 validation of the application of biological material used as 
 input to new and existing processes to aid in future investment 
 strategies and the security of critical supply chains;
 (6) the selection, construction, and operation of pilot and 
 intermediate scale bioindustrial manufacturing facilities;
 (7) development and management of a network of facilities 
 to scale production of bioindustrial products;
 (8) activities to address workforce needs in bioindustrial 
 manufacturing;
 (9) establishing an interoperable, secure, digital 
 infrastructure for collaborative data exchange across entities 
 in the bioindustrial manufacturing community, including 
 government agencies, industry, and academia;
 (10) developing and implementing digital tools, process 
 security and assurance capabilities, cybersecurity protocols, 
 and best practices for data storage, sharing and analysis; and
 (11) such other activities as the Secretary of Defense 
 determines appropriate.
 (d) Considerations.--In determining the number, type, and location 
of manufacturing innovation institutes or facilities to support under 
subsection (a), the Secretary of Defense shall consider--
 (1) how the institutes or facilities may complement each 
 other by functioning as a together as a network;
 (2) how to geographically distribute support to such 
 institutes or facilities--
 (A) to maximize access to biological material 
 needed as an input to bioindustrial manufacturing 
 processes;
 (B) to leverage available industrial and academic 
 expertise;
 (C) to leverage relevant domestic infrastructure 
 required to secure supply chains for chemicals and 
 other materials; and
 (D) to complement the capabilities of other 
 manufacturing innovation institutes and similar 
 facilities; and
 (3) how the activities supported under this section can be 
 coordinated with relevant activities of other departments and 
 agencies of the Federal Government.
 (e) Plan Required.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall 
 submit to the appropriate congressional committees and the 
 National Security Commission on Emerging Biotechnology a plan 
 for the implementation of this section that includes--
 (A) a description of types, relative sizes, and 
 locations of the manufacturing innovation institutes or 
 facilities the Secretary intends to establish or 
 support under this section;
 (B) a general description of the focus of each 
 institute or facility, including the types of 
 bioindustrial manufacturing equipment, if any, that are 
 expected to be procured for each such institute or 
 facility;
 (C) a general description of how the institutes and 
 facilities will work as a network to maximize the 
 diversity of bioindustrial products available to be 
 produced by the network;
 (D) an explanation of how the network will support 
 the establishment and maintenance of the bioindustrial 
 manufacturing industrial base; and
 (E) an explanation of how the Secretary intends to 
 ensure that bioindustrial manufacturing activities 
 conducted under this section are modernized digitally, 
 including through--
 (i) the use of a data automation to 
 represent processes and products as models and 
 simulations; and
 (ii) the implementation of measures to 
 address cybersecurity and process assurance 
 concerns.
 (2) Briefings.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the submittal of the plan under paragraph (1), and biannually 
 thereafter for five years, the Secretary of Defense shall 
 provide to the appropriate congressional committees a briefing 
 on the progress toward the implementation of the plan.
 (f) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the congressional defense committees;
 (B) the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and 
 Forestry and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate; and
 (C) the Committee on Agriculture and the Committee 
 on Science, Space, and Technology of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (2) The term ``bioindustrial manufacturing'' means the use 
 of living organisms, cells, tissues, enzymes, or cell-free 
 systems to produce materials and products for non-
 pharmaceutical applications.
 (3) The term ``manufacturing innovation institute'' means a 
 Manufacturing USA institute (as described in section 34(d) of 
 the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 
 U.S.C. 278s(d))) that is funded by the Department of Defense.

SEC. 215. ACTIVITIES TO SUPPORT THE USE OF METAL ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING 
 FOR THE SUBSURFACE FLEET OF THE NAVY.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of the Navy shall carry out 
activities to support--
 (1) the development of additive manufacturing processes for 
 the production of metal components and other metal-based 
 materials for the subsurface fleet of the Navy;
 (2) the testing, evaluation, and qualification of such 
 processes, components, and materials; and
 (3) the use of such processes, components, and materials to 
 meet requirements and milestones applicable to the subsurface 
 fleet of the Navy.
 (b) Funding.--From amounts authorized to be appropriated by this 
Act for shipbuilding concept advance design (PE 0603563N), as reflected 
in division D of this Act, the Secretary of the Navy is authorized to 
use up to $5,000,0000 to carry out the activities required under 
subsection (a).

SEC. 216. DIGITAL MISSION OPERATIONS PLATFORM FOR THE SPACE FORCE.

 The Secretary of the Air Force is authorized to enter into one or 
more contracts for the procurement of a digital mission operations 
platform for the Space Force that--
 (1) is capable of providing systems operators with the 
 ability to analyze system performance in a simulated mission 
 environment; and
 (2) enables collaboration among such operators in a 
 integrated, physics-based environment.

SEC. 217. AIR-BREATHING TEST CAPACITY UPGRADE TO SUPPORT CRITICAL 
 HYPERSONIC WEAPONS DEVELOPMENT.

 The Secretary of the Air Force shall carry out activities to 
upgrade the air breathing test facilities of the Department of the Air 
Force to support critical hypersonic weapons development. The Secretary 
shall seek to complete any upgrade made under this section, subject to 
availability of funds for such upgrade, not later than 24 months after 
the upgrade is commenced.

SEC. 218. INFORMATION ON USE OF COMMERCIAL SOFTWARE FOR THE WARFIGHTER 
 MACHINE INTERFACE OF THE ARMY.

 (a) Certification Required.--Not later than 60 days after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Army shall certify 
to the congressional defense committees that the procurement process 
for increments of the warfighter machine interface procured after the 
date of the enactment of this Act will be carried out in accordance 
with section 3453 of title 10, United States Code.
 (b) Market Research and Report.--
 (1) Market research.--The Secretary of the Army shall 
 conduct market research to identify commercially available 
 software to determine whether such software has the potential 
 to fulfill the applicable requirements of the warfighter 
 machine interface program of the Army.
 (2) Report.--Not later than 30 days after the conclusion of 
 the market research required under paragraph (1), the Secretary 
 of the Army shall submit to the congressional defense 
 committees a report on the on the results of the research, 
 including a list of any commercial software identified as part 
 of the research.

SEC. 219. MEASURES TO INCREASE THE CAPACITY OF HISTORICALLY BLACK 
 COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER MINORITY-SERVING 
 INSTITUTIONS TO ACHIEVE VERY HIGH RESEARCH ACTIVITY 
 STATUS.

 (a) Purpose.--The purpose of the program established under this 
section is to provide additional pathways needed for further increasing 
capacity at historically Black colleges and universities and other 
minority-serving institutions to achieve and maintain very high 
research activity status.
 (b) Program to Increase Capacity Toward Achieving Very High 
Research Activity Status.--
 (1) Program.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary shall establish and 
 carry out, using funds made available for research 
 activities, a pilot program to increase capacity at 
 high research activity status historically Black 
 colleges and universities and other minority-serving 
 institutions toward achieving very high research 
 activity status during the grant period.
 (B) Recommendations.--In establishing such program, 
 the Secretary may consider the recommendations pursuant 
 to section 262 of the National Defense Authorization 
 Act for Fiscal Year 2020 (Public Law 116-92; 10 U.S.C. 
 4144 note) and section 220 of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-
 81; 135 Stat. 1597).
 (2) Grants authorized.--The Secretary shall award, on a 
 competitive basis, grants to eligible institutions to carry out 
 the activities under paragraph (4)(A).
 (3) Application.--An eligible institution seeking a grant 
 under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary 
 at such time, in such manner, and containing such information 
 and assurances as the Secretary may require, including a 
 description of--
 (A) nascent research capabilities with respect to 
 research areas of interest to the Department of 
 Defense;
 (B) a plan for increasing the level of research 
 activity toward achieving very high research activity 
 status classification during the grant period, 
 including measurable milestones such as growth in very 
 high research activity status indicators and other 
 relevant factors;
 (C) how such institution will sustain the increased 
 level of research activity after the conclusion of the 
 grant period; and
 (D) how the institution will evaluate and assess 
 progress with respect to the implementation of the plan 
 under subparagraph (B).
 (4) Program components.--
 (A) Use of funds.--An eligible institution that 
 receives a grant under this section shall use the grant 
 funds to support research activities with respect to 
 research areas for STEM and critical technologies, as 
 determined by the Secretary under subparagraph (B), 
 including--
 (i) faculty professional development;
 (ii) stipends for undergraduate and 
 graduate students and post-doctoral scholars;
 (iii) laboratory equipment and 
 instrumentation;
 (iv) recruitment and retention of faculty 
 and graduate students;
 (v) communication and dissemination of 
 products produced during the grant period;
 (vi) construction, modernization, 
 rehabilitation, or retrofitting of facilities 
 for research purposes; and
 (vii) other activities necessary to build 
 capacity in achieving very high research 
 activity status indicators.
 (B) Strategic areas of scientific research.--The 
 Secretary, in consultation with the Defense Science 
 Board, shall establish and update, on an annual basis, 
 a list of research areas for STEM and critical 
 technologies.
 (C) Research progress reporting.--
 (i) In general.--Not later than 3 years 
 after receiving a grant under this section, and 
 every 3 years thereafter, an eligible 
 institution shall submit to the Secretary--
 (I) a report that includes an 
 assessment by the institution, using 
 the criteria established in clause 
 (ii), of the progress made by such 
 institution with respect to achieving 
 very high research activity indicators; 
 and
 (II) an updated plan described in 
 paragraph (3)(B).
 (ii) Research assessment.--The Secretary, 
 in partnership with the eligible institution, 
 shall establish criteria for the report 
 required under clause (i)(I).
 (D) Grant period.--A grant awarded under this 
 section shall be for a period of not more than 10 
 years, to be determined by the Secretary.
 (E) Expansion of eligibility.--The Secretary may 
 award grants under this section to historically Black 
 colleges and universities and other minority-serving 
 institutions that are not eligible institutions if the 
 Secretary determines that the program can support such 
 colleges, universities, and institutions while 
 achieving the purpose of the program described in 
 subsection (a).
 (5) Evaluation.--Not later than 5 years after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall prepare and 
 submit a report to the Committees on Armed Services of the 
 Senate and the House of Representatives providing an update on 
 the pilot program, including--
 (A) activities carried out under the pilot program;
 (B) an analysis of the growth in very high research 
 activity status indicators of eligible institutions 
 that received a grant under this section; and
 (C) emerging research areas of interest to the 
 Department of Defense conducted by eligible 
 institutions that received a grant under this section.
 (6) Termination.--The authority of the Secretary to award 
 grants under the pilot program established by this section 
 shall terminate 10 years after the date on which the Secretary 
 establishes such program.
 (7) Report to congress.--Not later than 180 days after the 
 termination of the pilot program under paragraph (6), the 
 Secretary shall prepare and submit a report to the Committees 
 on Armed Services of the Senate and the House of 
 Representatives on the pilot program that includes the 
 following:
 (A) An analysis of the growth in very high research 
 activity status indicators of eligible institutions 
 that received a grant under this section.
 (B) An evaluation on the effectiveness of the 
 program in increasing the research capacity of eligible 
 institutions that received a grant under this section.
 (C) An description of how institutions that have 
 achieved very high research activity status plan to 
 sustain that status beyond the duration of the program.
 (D) An evaluation of the maintenance of very high 
 research status by eligible institutions that received 
 a grant under this section.
 (E) An evaluation of the effectiveness of the 
 program in increasing the diversity of students 
 conducting high quality research in unique areas.
 (F) Recommendations with respect to further 
 activities and investments necessary to elevate the 
 research status of historically Black colleges and 
 universities and other minority-serving institutions.
 (G) Recommendations on whether the program 
 established under this section should be renewed or 
 expanded.
 (c) Consultation.--In designing the program under this section, the 
Secretary of Defense may consult with the President's Board of Advisors 
on historically Black colleges and universities.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``eligible institution'' means a historically 
 Black college or university or other minority-serving 
 institution that is classified as a high research activity 
 status institution at the time of application for a grant under 
 subsection (b).
 (2) The term ``high research activity status'' means R2 
 status, as classified by the Carnegie Classification of 
 Institutions of Higher Education.
 (3) The term ``historically Black college or university'' 
 has the meaning given the term ``part B institution'' under 
 section 322 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 1061).
 (4) The term ``other minority-serving institution'' means 
 an institution of higher education specified in paragraphs (2) 
 through (7) of section 371(a) of the Higher Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1067q(a)).
 (5) The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Defense.
 (6) The term ``very high research activity status'' means 
 R1 status, as classified by the Carnegie Classification of 
 Institutions of Higher Education.
 (7) The term ``very high research activity status 
 indicators'' means the categories used by the Carnegie 
 Classification of Institutions of Higher Education to delineate 
 which institutions have very high activity status, including--
 (A) annual expenditures in science and engineering;
 (B) per-capita (faculty member) expenditures in 
 science and engineering;
 (C) annual expenditures in non-science and 
 engineering fields;
 (D) per-capita (faculty member) expenditures in 
 non-science and engineering fields;
 (E) doctorates awarded in science, technology, 
 engineering, and mathematics fields;
 (F) doctorates awarded in social science fields;
 (G) doctorates awarded in the humanities;
 (H) doctorates awarded in other fields with a 
 research emphasis;
 (I) total number of research staff including 
 postdoctoral researchers;
 (J) other doctorate-holding non-faculty researchers 
 in science and engineering and per-capita (faculty) 
 number of doctorate-level research staff including 
 post-doctoral researchers; and
 (K) other categories utilized to determine 
 classification.

SEC. 220. PILOT PROGRAM TO SUPPORT THE DEVELOPMENT OF PATENTABLE 
 INVENTIONS IN THE DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY.

 (a) In General.--Beginning not later than 120 days after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Navy shall carry out 
a pilot program to expand the support available to covered personnel 
who seek to engage in the development of patentable inventions that--
 (1) have applicablity to the job-related functions of such 
 personnel; and
 (2) may have applicability in the civilian sector.
 (b) Activities.--As part of the pilot program under subsection (a), 
the Secretary of the Navy shall--
 (1) expand outreach to covered personnel regarding the 
 availability of patent-related training, legal assistance, and 
 other support for personnel interested in developing patentable 
 inventions;
 (2) expand the availability of patent-related training to 
 covered personnel, including by making such training available 
 online;
 (3) clarify and issue guidance detailing how covered 
 personnel, including personnel outside of the laboratories and 
 other research organizations of the Department of the Navy, 
 may--
 (A) seek and receive support for the development of 
 patentable inventions; and
 (B) receive a portion of any royalty or other 
 payment as an inventor or coinventor such as may be due 
 under section 14(a)(1)(A)(i) of the Stevension-Wylder 
 Technology Innovation Act of 1980 (15 U.S.C. 
 3710c(a)(1)(A)(i)); and
 (4) carry out other such activities as the Secretary 
 determines appropriate in accordance with the purposes of the 
 pilot program.
 (c) Termination.--The authority to carry out the pilot program 
under subsection (a) shall terminate three years after the date of the 
enactment of this Act.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered personnel'' means members of the 
 Navy and Marine Corps and civilian employees of the Department 
 of the Navy, including members and employees whose primary 
 duties do not involve research and development.
 (2) The term ``patentable invention'' means an invention 
 that is patentable under title 35, United States Code.

SEC. 221. PILOT PROGRAM TO FACILITATE THE RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND 
 PRODUCTION OF ADVANCED BATTERY TECHNOLOGIES FOR 
 WARFIGHTERS.

 (a) Establishment.--The Secretary of Defense shall carry out a 
pilot program to be known as the ``American Sustainable Battery 
Production Technologies Program'' (referred to in this section as the 
``Program''). Under the Program, the Secretary shall seek to award 
assistance to eligible entities to facilitate the research, 
development, and production of electric battery technologies that may 
be useful for defense-related purposes.
 (b) Coordination With Related Programs.--The Secretary of Defense 
shall ensure that activities under the Program are coordinated with--
 (1) the Strategic Environmental Research and Development 
 Program under section 2901 of title 10, United States Code; and
 (2) the Department of Energy, including by taking into 
 consideration the potential military application of battery 
 technologies developed by entities awarded grants by the 
 Department under section 40207 of the Infrastructure Investment 
 and Jobs Act (Public law 117-58; 42 U.S.C. 18741).
 (c) Program Activities.--Under the Program, the Secretary of 
Defense shall seek to award assistance to eligible entities--
 (1) to conduct research and development into electric 
 battery technologies and any associated manufacturing and 
 production needs;
 (2) to expand the battery recycling capabilities of the 
 Department of Defense;
 (3) to reduce the reliance of the Department of Defense on 
 foreign competitors for critical materials and technologies, 
 including rare earth materials; and
 (4) to transition battery technologies, including 
 technologies developed from other pilot programs, prototype 
 projects, or other research and development programs, from the 
 prototyping phase to production.
 (d) Form of Assistance.--Assistance awarded to an eligible entity 
under the Program may consist of a grant, a contract, a cooperative 
agreement, other transaction, or such other form of assistance as the 
Secretary of Defense considers appropriate.
 (e) Priority Consideration.--In awarding assistance to eligible 
entities under the Program, the Secretary of Defense shall give 
priority to entities that--
 (1) are located in and operate in the United States, 
 including any manufacturing operations;
 (2) are owned by a United States entity; and
 (3) deploy North American-owned intellectual property and 
 content.
 (f) Data Collection.--The Secretary of Defense shall collect and 
analyze data on the Program for the purposes of--
 (1) developing and sharing best practices for achieving the 
 objectives of the Program;
 (2) providing information to the Secretary on the 
 implementation of the Program, and related policy issues; and
 (3) reporting to the congressional defense committees in 
 accordance with subsection (h).
 (g) Termination.--The Program shall terminate on the date that is 
six years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (h) Reports.--
 (1) Annual reports.--Not later than one year after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act and annually thereafter until the 
 date on which the Program terminates under subsection (g), the 
 Secretary of Defense shall submit to the appropriate 
 congressional committees a report on the use of funds under the 
 Program. Each report shall include the following:
 (A) An explanation of whether and to what extent 
 the assistance awarded to eligible entities under the 
 Program met mission requirements during the period 
 covered by the report, including--
 (i) the value of the assistance awarded, 
 including the value of each grant, contract, 
 cooperative agreement, other transaction, or 
 other form of assistance; and
 (ii) a description of the research, 
 technology, or capabilities funded with such 
 assistance.
 (B) A description of any research, technology, or 
 capabilities being tested under the Program as of the 
 date of the report together with an explanation of how 
 the Secretary has applied, or expects to apply, such 
 research, technology, or capabilities within the 
 Department of Defense.
 (2) Final report.--Not later than one year after the date 
 on which the Program terminates under subsection (g), the 
 Secretary of Defense shall submit to the appropriate 
 congressional committees a final report on the results of the 
 Program. Such report shall include--
 (A) a summary of the objectives achieved by the 
 Program; and
 (B) recommendations regarding the steps that may be 
 taken to promote battery technologies that are not 
 dependent on foreign competitors to meet the needs of 
 the Armed Forces.
 (i) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the congressional defense committees;
 (B) the Committee on Energy and Commerce and the 
 Committee on Science, Space, and Technology of the 
 House of Representatives; and
 (C) the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources 
 and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate.
 (2) The term ``eligible entity'' means a battery producer 
 or other entity involved in the battery production supply 
 chain.

SEC. 222. PILOT PROGRAM ON RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT OF PLANT-BASED 
 PROTEIN FOR THE NAVY.

 (a) Establishment.--Not later than March 1, 2023, the Secretary of 
the Navy shall establish and carry out a pilot program to offer plant-
based protein options at forward operating bases for consumption by 
members of the Navy.
 (b) Locations.--Not later than March 1, 2023, the Secretary shall 
identify not fewer than two naval facilities to participate in the 
pilot program and shall prioritize facilities (such as Joint Region 
Marianas, Guam, Navy Support Facility, Diego Garcia, and U.S. Fleet 
Activities Sasebo, Japan) where livestock-based protein options may be 
costly to obtain or store.
 (c) Authorities.--In establishing and carrying out the pilot 
program under subsection (a), the Secretary of the Navy may use the 
following authorities:
 (1) The authority to carry out research and development 
 projects under section 4001 of title 10, United States Code.
 (2) The authority to enter into transactions other than 
 contracts and grants under section 4021 of such title.
 (3) The authority to enter into cooperative research and 
 development agreements under section 4026 of such title.
 (d) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed 
to prevent offering livestock-based protein options alongside plant-
based protein options at naval facilities identified under subsection 
(b).
 (e) Termination.--The requirement to carry out the pilot program 
established under this section shall terminate three years after the 
date on which the Secretary establishes the pilot program required 
under this section.
 (f) Report.--Not later than one year after the termination of the 
pilot program, the Secretary shall submit to the appropriate 
congressional committees a report on the pilot program that includes 
the following:
 (1) The consumption rate of plant-based protein options by 
 members of the Navy under the pilot program.
 (2) Effective criteria to increase plant-based protein 
 options at naval facilities not identified under subsection 
 (b).
 (3) An analysis of the costs of obtaining and storing 
 plant-based protein options compared to the costs of obtaining 
 and storing livestock-based protein options at selected naval 
 facilities.
 (g) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term 
 ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (A) the Committee on Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Armed Forces of the Senate.
 (2) Plant-based protein options.--The term ``plant-based 
 protein options'' means edible vegan or vegetarian meat 
 alternative products made using plant and other non-livestock-
 based proteins.

SEC. 223. ALLOWABLE USES OF FUNDS UNDER THE COMMERCIAL WEATHER DATA 
 PILOT PROGRAM OF THE AIR FORCE.

 Funds authorized to be appropriated by this Act or otherwise made 
available for fiscal year 2023 for the Air Force for the Commercial 
Weather Data Pilot Program may be used only for the piloting and 
demonstration of radio occultation data for use in weather models.

SEC. 224. PILOT PROGRAM ON USE OF DIGITAL TWIN TECHNOLOGIES IN THE 
 ARMED FORCES.

 (a) In General.--Each Secretary of a military department shall 
carry out a pilot program under which the Secretary identifies, for 
each Armed Force under the jurisdiction of such Secretary, not fewer 
than one and not more than three new areas in which digital twin 
technology may be implemented to improve the operations of the Armed 
Force. To the extent practicable, consideration shall be given to 
operations involving reduced manpower and autonomous systems.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, each Secretary of a military department shall submit to 
the congressional defense committees a report that includes--
 (1) a description of each proposed area in which digital 
 twin technology may be implemented in accordance with 
 subsection (a);
 (2) a plan for such implementation; and
 (3) an explanation of any additional funding required for 
 such implementation.

SEC. 225. FUNDING FOR ADVANCED ABOVE WATER SENSORS.

 (a) Increase.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 201 for research, development, test, and evaluation, Navy, as 
specified in the corresponding funding table in section 4201, for 
system development & demonstration, advanced above water sensors (PE 
0604501N), line 129, is hereby increased by $24,004,000.
 (b) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 301 for operation and maintenance, Defense-wide, as specified 
in the corresponding funding table in section 4301, for administration 
and service-wide activities, Office of the Secretary of Defense, line 
440, is hereby reduced by $24,004,000.

SEC. 226. BIOFUEL AND FUEL CELL VEHICLE RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND 
 DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense shall establish a 
research, development, and demonstration program for a commercially 
viable fuel cell system that uses biofuel as a fuel source for a 
vehicle.
 (b) Research Goals.--The Secretary of Defense shall establish 
interim research and development goals that will result in the 
demonstration of commercially viable fuel cell systems that utilize 
biofuels as a fuel source, including the following:
 (1) Innovative stack designs and components, including--
 (A) catalysts;
 (B) membranes and electrolytes;
 (C) interconnects;
 (D) seals; and
 (E) metal- or electrolyte-supported stack cell 
 designs.
 (2) Variety of renewable energy sources, including ethanol 
 and other biomass.
 (3) Technologies that enable fuel cell durability and fuel 
 cell durability testing.
 (4) Systems designs and component integration that optimize 
 efficiency, cost, transient response, and lifetime.
 (c) Coordination.--In carrying out the activities under this 
section, the Secretary of Defense shall coordinate with--
 (1) appropriate Federal agencies, including the Department 
 of Agriculture and the Department of Transportation;
 (2) National Laboratories; and
 (3) relevant industry stakeholders, non-government 
 organizations, and trade associations.

SEC. 227. RADAR OBSTRUCTION RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST, AND EVALUATION 
 PROGRAM.

 (a) Establishment.--The Secretary of Defense, in conjunction with 
the Director of the National Weather Service, the Administrator of the 
Federal Aviation Administration, the Secretary of Commerce, and the 
Secretary of Energy shall establish a research, development, test, and 
evaluation program (in this Act referred to as the ``Program'') to 
ensure the continued performance of weather radar detection and 
prediction capabilities with physical obstructions in the radar line of 
sight.
 (b) Requirements.--In carrying out the Program, the Secretary of 
Defense, in consultation with the Interagency Council for Advancing 
Meteorological Services, shall--
 (1) partner with industry, academia, Federal, State, and 
 local government entities, and any other entity that the 
 Secretary considers appropriate;
 (2) identify and test existing or near-commercial 
 technologies and solutions that mitigate the potential impact 
 of obstructions on a weather radar;
 (3) research additional solutions that could mitigate the 
 effects of an obstruction on weather radar, including--
 (A) signal processing algorithms;
 (B) short-term forecasting algorithms to replace 
 contaminated data; and
 (C) the use of dual polarization characteristics in 
 mitigating the effects of wind turbines on weather 
 radar; and
 (4) develop commercially viable technical mitigation 
 solutions for obstructions to weather radar capabilities.
 (c) Priority.--In carrying out the requirements described in 
subsection (b), the Secretary of Defense shall prioritize consideration 
of--
 (1) multifunction phased array radar;
 (2) the replacement of contaminated data with commercial 
 radar data;
 (3) the utilization of data from private-sector-associated 
 meteorological towers;
 (4) providing wind farm boundaries and consolidated wind 
 farm areas to display on local forecasting equipment;
 (5) installing and providing access to rain gauges; and
 (6) any other technology-based mitigation solution that the 
 Director of the National Weather Service determines could 
 overcome beam blockage or ghost echoes.
 (d) Termination.--The authority of the Secretary of Defense to 
carry out the Program shall terminate on the earlier of--
 (1) September 30, 2026; or
 (2) 1 year after date on which the final recommendation 
 required by subsection (e)(2) is submitted by the Secretary.
 (e) Report; Recommendation.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this section, and annually thereafter until the 
 Program terminates pursuant to subsection (d), the Secretary of 
 Defense shall submit to Congress a report on the implementation 
 of the Program, including an evaluation of each technology-
 based mitigation solution identified for priority consideration 
 in subsection (c), and a recommendation regarding additional 
 identification and testing of new technologies based on such 
 consideration.
 (2) Final recommendation.--Not later than 5 years after the 
 date of enactment of this section, the Secretary of Defense 
 shall provide to Congress a recommendation on whether 
 additional research, testing, and development through the 
 Program established by subsection (a) is needed, and a 
 determination of whether a cessation of field research, 
 development, testing, and evaluation is appropriate.
 (f) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Beam blockage.--The term ``beam blockage'' means a 
 signal that is partially or fully blocked due to an 
 obstruction.
 (2) Ghost echo.--The term ``ghost echo'' means radar signal 
 reflectivity or velocity return errors in radar data due to the 
 close proximity of an obstruction.
 (3) Obstruction.--The term obstruction includes--
 (A) a wind turbine that could limit the 
 effectiveness of a weather radar system; and
 (B) any building that disrupts or limits the 
 effectiveness of a weather radar system.

SEC. 228. FUNDING FOR RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT RELATING TO RARE EARTH 
 ELEMENTS.

 (a) Increase.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated for the 
National Defense Stockpile Transaction Fund, as specified the funding 
table in section 4501, is hereby increased by $2,000,000 (with the 
amount of such increase to be used strengthen and implement the 
domestic industrial base for rare earth metallization related to 
permanent magnet production and related projects).
 (b) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 201 for research, development, test, and evaluation, Army, as 
specified in the corresponding funding table in section 4201, for 
system development & demonstration, integrated personnel and pay 
system-Army (IPPS-A) (PE 0605018A), line 123, is hereby reduced by 
$2,000,000.

SEC. 229. FUNDING FOR NATIONAL DEFENSE EDUCATION PROGRAM.

 (a) Increase.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 201 for research, development, test, and evaluation, Defense-
wide, as specified in the corresponding funding table in section 4201, 
for basic research, National Defense Education Program, line 006, is 
hereby increased by $5,000,000.
 (b) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 301 for operation and maintenance, Defense-wide, as specified 
in the corresponding funding table in section 4301, for administration 
and service-wide activities, Washington Headquarters Services, line 
500, is hereby reduced by $5,000,000.

SEC. 229A. FUNDING FOR HIGH ENERGY LASER AND CERTAIN EMERGING 
 TECHNOLOGY INITIATIVES.

 (a) Funding for High Energy Laser.--
 (1) Increase.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the 
 funding tables in division D, the amount authorized to be 
 appropriated in section 201 for research, development, test, 
 and evaluation, Army, as specified in the corresponding funding 
 table in section 4201, for advanced technology development, air 
 and missile defense advanced technology (PE 0603466A), line 
 048, Counter-Unmanned Aerial Systems Palatized-High Energy 
 Laser is hereby increased by $25,000,000.
 (2) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the 
 funding tables in division D, the amount authorized to be 
 appropriated in section 201 for research, development, test, 
 and evaluation, Army, as specified in the corresponding funding 
 table in section 4201, for advanced technology development, air 
 and missile defense advanced technology (PE 0603466A), line 
 048, Program Increase is hereby reduced by $25,000,000.
 (b) Funding for Emerging Technology Initiatives.--
 (1) Increase.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the 
 funding tables in division D, the amount authorized to be 
 appropriated in section 201 for research, development, test, 
 and evaluation, Army, as specified in the corresponding funding 
 table in section 4201, for system development & demonstration, 
 emerging technology initiatives (PE 0605054A), line 136, 
 Program Increase (10kw-50kw DE-MSHORAD) is hereby increased by 
 $70,000,000.
 (2) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the 
 funding tables in division D, the amount authorized to be 
 appropriated in section 201 for research, development, test, 
 and evaluation, Army, as specified in the corresponding funding 
 table in section 4201, for system development & demonstration, 
 emerging technology initiatives (PE 0605054A), line 136, 
 Program increase (10kw-50kw DE- MSHORAD) and C-UAS P-HEL is 
 hereby reduced by $70,000,000.

SEC. 229B. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY INVESTMENT 
 INCENTIVE PILOT PROGRAM.

 (a) Establishment.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to the availability of 
 appropriations for this purpose, the Secretary of Defense shall 
 carry out a pilot program to accelerate the development of 
 advanced technology for national security by creating 
 incentives for trusted private capital in domestic small 
 businesses or nontraditional businesses that are developing 
 technology that the Secretary considers necessary to support 
 the modernization of the Department of Defense and national 
 security priorities.
 (2) Purposes.--The purposes of the pilot program required 
 by this subsection are as follows:
 (A) To promote the global superiority of the United 
 States in advanced technologies of importance to 
 national security, which are not adequately supported 
 by private sector investment.
 (B) To accelerate the transition and deployment of 
 advanced technologies into the Armed Forces.
 (C) To support Department spending through a loan 
 guarantee to accelerate development of advanced 
 technology as described in paragraph (1).
 (b) Public-private Partnership.--
 (1) In general.--In carrying out subsection (a), the 
 Secretary shall enter into a public-private partnership with 
 one or more persons using criteria that the Secretary shall 
 establish for purposes of this subsection.
 (2) Criteria.--The criteria established under paragraph (1) 
 for entering into a public-private partnership with a person 
 shall include the following:
 (A) The person shall be independent.
 (B) The person shall be free from foreign 
 oversight, control, influence, or beneficial ownership.
 (C) The person shall have commercial private 
 capital fund experience with technology development in 
 the defense and commercial sectors.
 (D) The person shall be eligible for access to 
 classified information (as defined in the procedures 
 established pursuant to section 801(a) of the National 
 Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3161(a))).
 (3) Operating agreement.--The Secretary and a person with 
 whom the Secretary enters a partnership under paragraph (1) 
 shall enter into an operating agreement that sets forth the 
 roles, responsibilities, authorities, reporting requirements, 
 and governance framework for the partnership and its 
 operations.
 (c) Investment of Equity.--
 (1) Pursuant to a public-private partnership entered into 
 under subsection (c), a person with whom the Secretary has 
 entered the partnership shall invest equity in domestic small 
 businesses or nontraditional businesses consistent with 
 subsection (a).
 (2) Investments under paragraph (1) shall be selected based 
 on their technical merit, economic considerations, and ability 
 to support modernization goals of the Department.
 (d) Briefings and Reports.--
 (1) Initial briefing and report.--Not later than one year 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary 
 shall provide to the congressional defense committees a 
 briefing on the implementation of this section and a report on 
 the feasibility of implementing loan guarantees to enhance the 
 effectiveness of the pilot program under subsection (a), 
 including--
 (A) a detailed description of how loan guarantees 
 would be vetted, approved, and managed, including 
 mechanisms to protect the government's interests; and
 (B) how such loan guarantees would be coordinated 
 with other government invest mechanisms or other 
 private sector financing.
 (2) Final briefing.--Not later than five years after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall provide 
 to the congressional defense committees a briefing on the 
 outcomes of the pilot program under subsection (a) and the 
 feasibility and advisability of making it permanent.
 (e) Termination.--The authority to carry out the pilot program 
under subsection (a) shall terminate on the date that is five years 
after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (f) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``domestic business'' has the meaning given 
 the term ``U.S. business'' in section 800.252 of title 31, Code 
 of Federal Regulations, or successor regulation.
 (2) The term ``domestic small businesses or nontraditional 
 businesses'' means--
 (A) a small businesses that is a domestic business; 
 or
 (B) a nontraditional business that is a domestic 
 business.
 (3) The term ``free from foreign oversight, control, 
 influence, or beneficial ownership'', with respect to a person, 
 means a person who has not raised and managed capital from a 
 person or entity that is not trusted and is otherwise free from 
 foreign oversight, control, influence, or beneficial ownership.
 (4) The term ``independent'', with respect to a person, 
 means a person who lacks a conflict of interest accomplished by 
 not having entity or manager affiliation or ownership with an 
 existing fund.
 (5) The term ``nontraditional business'' has the meaning 
 given the term ``nontraditional defense contractors'' in 
 section 3014 of title 10, United States Code.
 (6) The term ``small business'' has the meaning given the 
 term ``small business concern'' in section 3 of the Small 
 Business Act (15 U.S.C. 632).

SEC. 229C. FUNDING FOR DEVELOPMENT OF MEASURES TO PREVENT INFECTIONS 
 CAUSED BY SEVERE FRACTURES.

 (a) Increase.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 201 for research, development, test, and evaluation, Army, as 
specified in the corresponding funding table in section 4201, for 
advanced technology development, medical advanced technology (PE 
0603002A), line 027, is hereby increased by $5,000,000 (with the amount 
of such increase to be used to support the development of procedures 
and tools to prevent infections in members of the Armed Forces who 
experience severe bone fractures).
 (b) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 301 for operation and maintenance, Defense-wide, as specified 
in the corresponding funding table in section 4301, for administration 
and service-wide activities, Office of the Secretary of Defense, line 
440, is hereby reduced by $5,000,000.

SEC. 229D. FUNDING FOR RESEARCH INTO THE EFFECTS OF HEAD-SUPPORTED MASS 
 ON CERVICAL SPINE HEALTH.

 (a) Increase.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 201 for research, development, test, and evaluation, Army, as 
specified in the corresponding funding table in section 4201, for 
advanced technology development, medical advanced technology (PE 
0603002A), line 027, is hereby increased by $5,000,000 (with the amount 
of such increase to be used to support the advancement of research into 
the effects of head-supported mass on cervical spine health).
 (b) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 301 for operation and maintenance, Defense-wide, as specified 
in the corresponding funding table in section 4301, for administration 
and service-wide activities, Office of the Secretary of Defense, line 
440, is hereby reduced by $5,000,000.

SEC. 229E. REQUIREMENT FOR SEPARATE PROGRAM ELEMENT FOR THE MULTI-
 MEDICINE MANUFACTURING PLATFORM PROGRAM.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) Congress has maintained a strong interest in critical 
 materials subject to significant supply chain disruptions, 
 particularly those for which the predominant supply sources are 
 potential adversaries;
 (2) as a result, Congress wishes to increase transparency 
 regarding funding and progress of the multi-medicine 
 manufacturing platform program of the Office of Naval Research; 
 and
 (3) that program's unique manufacturing platform will 
 ensure that members of the armed forces have access to 
 essential medicines, particularly for those deployed, whether 
 on land or at sea.
 (b) Program Element Required.--In the materials submitted by the 
Secretary of the Navy in support of the budget of the President for 
fiscal year 2025 and each fiscal year thereafter (as submitted to 
Congress pursuant to section 1105 of title 31, United States Code), the 
Secretary shall include a separate program element for the multi-
medicine manufacturing platform program under the accounts of the 
Office of Naval Research.

 Subtitle C--Plans, Reports, and Other Matters

SEC. 231. MODIFICATION OF NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY FOR NATIONAL 
 TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRIAL BASE.

 Section 4811(a) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(12) Providing for the research and development of 
 sustainable and secure food sources, including food innovation 
 and alternative protein development, in consultation with the 
 Secretary of Agriculture.''.

SEC. 232. DEFENSE ADVANCED RESEARCH PROJECTS AGENCY INNOVATION 
 FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--The Director of the Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency shall develop a plan for the establishment of a 
fellowship program (to be known as the ``Innovation Fellowship 
Program'') to expand opportunities for early career scientists to 
participate in the programs, projects, and other activities of the 
Agency.
 (b) Elements.--In developing the plan under subsection (a), the 
Director of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency shall--
 (1) review the programs, projects, and other activities of 
 the Agency that are open to participation from early career 
 scientists to identify opportunities for the expansion of such 
 participation;
 (2) conduct an assessment of the potential costs of the 
 fellowship program described in subsection (a);
 (3) establish detailed plans for the implementation of the 
 fellowship program;
 (4) define eligibility requirements for participants in the 
 fellowship program;
 (5) identify criteria for evaluating applicants to the 
 fellowship program; and
 (6) address such other matters as the Director determines 
 appropriate.
 (c) Submittal to Congress.--Not later than 180 days after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Director of the Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency shall submit to the congressional defense 
committee a report that includes--
 (1) the plan developed under subsection (a); and
 (2) recommendations for expanding opportunities for early 
 career scientists to participate in the programs, projects, and 
 other activities of the Agency.

SEC. 233. REPORT ON EFFORTS TO INCREASE THE PARTICIPATION OF 
 HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER 
 MINORITY-SERVING INSTITUTIONS IN THE RESEARCH AND 
 DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE.

 (a) Report Required.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and 
Engineering shall submit to the congressional defense committees a 
report on measures that may be implemented to increase the 
participation of historically Black colleges and universities and other 
minority-serving institutions in the research, development, test, and 
evaluation activities of the Department of Defense.
 (b) Elements.--The report under subsection (a) shall include the 
following:
 (1) A strategy for the provision of long-term institutional 
 support to historically Black colleges and universities and 
 other minority-serving institutions, including support for--
 (A) the development and enhancement of the physical 
 research infrastructure of such institutions; and
 (B) the research activities of such institutions.
 (2) An evaluation of the feasibility of expanding the 
 support provided by the Department of Defense to historically 
 Black colleges and universities and other minority-serving 
 institutions to include support for the development or 
 enhancement of grant and contract administration capabilities 
 at such institutions.
 (3) An evaluation of options to strengthen support for 
 historically Black colleges and universities and other 
 minority-serving institutions within the military departments 
 and other organizations and elements of the Department, 
 including an evaluation of the need for and feasibility of 
 establishing dedicated organizations within the Army, Navy, 
 Marine Corps, Air Force, and Space Force to increase engagement 
 with such institutions.
 (4) A review of the adequacy of the level of staffing 
 within the Department that is dedicated to engagement with 
 historically Black colleges and universities and other 
 minority-serving institutions.
 (5) A plan to improve data collection and evaluation with 
 respect to historically Black colleges and universities and 
 other minority-serving institutions, including--
 (A) harmonization of standards with respect to the 
 type, detail, and organization of data on such 
 institutions;
 (B) improving the completeness of data submissions 
 regarding such institutions;
 (C) improving the retention of data on such 
 institutions across the Department;
 (D) additional data collection specific to such 
 institutions, including data on--
 (i) the rates at which such institutions 
 submit proposals for grants and contracts from 
 the Department, the success rates of such 
 proposals, and feedback regarding such 
 proposals;
 (ii) the total number of grants and 
 contracts for which such institutions are 
 eligible to apply and the number of 
 applications received from such institutions 
 for such grants and contracts; and
 (iii) formal feedback mechanisms for 
 rejected proposals from first-time applicants 
 from such institutions; and
 (E) as necessary, promulgation of additional or 
 modified regulations, instructions, or guidance 
 regarding the collection, evaluation, and retention of 
 data on such institutions.
 (6) Identification of the types of research facilities, 
 personnel, capabilities, and subject areas that are in-demand 
 within the Department so that historically Black colleges and 
 universities and other minority-serving institutions may 
 prioritize investment in those types of facilities, personnel, 
 capabilities, and subject areas as appropriate.
 (7) Identification of metrics that may be used to evaluate, 
 track, and improve the competitiveness of historically Black 
 colleges and universities and other minority-serving 
 institutions for grants and contracts with the Department.
 (8) An evaluation of options to implement criteria for the 
 award of grants and contracts that assign value to the 
 inclusion of historically Black colleges and universities and 
 other minority-serving institutions as research partners, 
 including such mechanisms as weighted grant solicitation 
 evaluation criteria and longer periods of performance to allow 
 for capacity-building within such institutions.
 (9) An evaluation of options to incentivize the defense 
 industry to support capacity building within historically Black 
 colleges and universities and other minority-serving 
 institutions, including through the incentivization of 
 independent research and development or other activities.
 (10) A plan to compile and maintain data regarding 
 institutions of higher education, including historically Black 
 colleges and universities and other minority-serving 
 institutions, that receive funding from departments and 
 agencies of the Federal Government outside the Department of 
 Defense.
 (11) A review of the programs and practices of departments 
 and agencies of the Federal Government outside the Department 
 of Defense relevant to increasing research capacity at 
 historically Black colleges and universities and other 
 minority-serving institutions for purposes of--
 (A) the potential adoption of best practices within 
 the Department;
 (B) the identification of opportunities to leverage 
 the research capacity of such institutions; and
 (C) increasing the level of collaboration between 
 the Department and such institutions.
 (12) Recommendations for the modification or expansion of 
 the workforce development programs of the Department, including 
 fellowships and internships, to increase the proportion of the 
 workforce hired from historically Black colleges and 
 universities and other minority-serving institutions.
 (13) Such other recommendations as the Under Secretary of 
 Defense for Research and Engineering determines appropriate.
 (14) A plan for the implementation of the recommendations 
 included in the report, as appropriate, including an 
 explanation of any additional funding, authorities, or 
 organizational changes needed for the implementation of such 
 recommendations.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``historically Black college or university'' 
 means a part B institution (as defined in section 322 of the 
 Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1061)).
 (2) The term ``institution of higher education'' has the 
 meaning given that term in section 101 of the Higher Education 
 Act of 1932 (20 U.S.C. 1001).
 (3) The term ``other minority-serving institution'' means 
 an institution of higher education specified in paragraphs (2) 
 through (7) of section 371(a) of the Higher Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1067q(a)).
 (d) Report on Implementation.--Not later than 180 days after the 
date of the submission of the report under subsection (a), the Under 
Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report on the progress of the Under 
Secretary in implementing measures to increase the participation of 
historically Black colleges and universities and other minority-serving 
institutions in the research, development, test, and evaluation 
activities of the Department of Defense, as identified in the report 
under subsection (a).

SEC. 234. ASSESSMENT OF TEST INFRASTRUCTURE AND PRIORITIES RELATED TO 
 HYPERSONIC CAPABILITIES AND RELATED TECHNOLOGIES AND 
 HYPERSONIC TEST STRATEGY.

 (a) Assessment.--The Secretary of Defense shall assess the capacity 
of the Department of Defense to test, evaluate, and qualify the 
hypersonic capabilities and related technologies of the Department.
 (b) Elements.--The assessment under subsection (a) shall include 
the following:
 (1) An identification of facilities of other departments 
 and agencies of the Federal Government and academia and 
 industry testing facilities relevant to the capacity described 
 in subsection (a).
 (2) An analysis of the capability of each test facility to 
 simulate various individual and coupled hypersonic conditions 
 to accurately simulate a realistic flight-like environment with 
 all relevant aero-thermochemical conditions.
 (3) An identification of the coordination, scheduling, 
 reimbursement processes, and requirements needed for the 
 potential use of test facilities of other departments and 
 agencies of the Federal Government, as available.
 (4) An analysis of the test frequency, scheduling lead 
 time, test cost, and capacity of each test facility relating to 
 testing technologies of the Department for hypersonic flight.
 (5) A review of academia, contractor-owned, commercial 
 ground and flight testbeds that could enhance efforts to test 
 flight vehicles of the Department in all phases of hypersonic 
 flight, and other technologies, including sensors, 
 communications, thermal protective shields and materials, 
 optical windows, navigation, and environmental sensors.
 (6) An assessment of any cost- and time-savings that could 
 result from using technologies identified in the strategy under 
 subsection (c).
 (c) Strategy.--
 (1) Requirement.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall 
 submit to the appropriate congressional committees a strategy 
 to coordinate the potential use of test facilities and ranges 
 of other departments and agencies of the Federal Government, as 
 available, and academia, contractor-owned, commercial flight 
 and reentry test capabilities to evaluate hypersonic 
 technologies.
 (2) Elements.--The strategy under paragraph (1) shall--
 (A) be based on the assessment under subsection 
 (a);
 (B) address how the Secretary will coordinate with 
 other departments and agencies of the Federal 
 Government, including the National Aeronautics and 
 Space Administration, to plan for and schedule the 
 potential use of other Federal Government-owned test 
 facilities and ranges, as available, to evaluate the 
 hypersonic technologies of the Department of Defense;
 (C) to the extent practicable, address in what 
 cases the Secretary can use academia, contractor-owned, 
 commercial flight and reentry test capabilities to fill 
 any existing testing requirement gaps to enhance and 
 accelerate flight qualification of critical hypersonic 
 technologies of the Department;
 (D) identify--
 (i) the resources needed to improve the 
 frequency and capacity for testing hypersonic 
 technologies of the Department at ground-based 
 test facilities and flight test ranges;
 (ii) the resources needed to reimburse 
 other departments and agencies of the Federal 
 Government for the use of the test facilities 
 and ranges of those departments or agencies to 
 test the hypersonics technologies of the 
 Department;
 (iii) the requirements, approval processes, 
 and resources needed to enhance, as 
 appropriate, the testing capabilities and 
 capacity of other Federal Government-owned test 
 facilities and flight ranges, in coordination 
 with the heads of the relevant departments and 
 agencies;
 (iv) investments that the Secretary can 
 make to incorporate academia, contractor-owned, 
 commercial ground and flight testbeds into the 
 overall hypersonic test infrastructure of the 
 Department of Defense; and
 (v) the environmental conditions, testing 
 sizes, and duration required for flight 
 qualification of both hypersonic cruise and 
 hypersonic boost-glide technologies of the 
 Department; and
 (E) address all advanced or emerging technologies 
 that could shorten timelines and reduce costs for 
 hypersonic missile testing, including with respect to--
 (i) 3D printing of hypersonic test missile 
 components including the frame, warhead, and 
 propulsion systems;
 (ii) reusable hypersonic test beds, 
 including air-sea-and ground launched options;
 (iii) additive manufacturing solutions;
 (iv) qualified airborne B-52 alternative 
 platforms to provide improved flight schedules; 
 and
 (v) other relevant technologies.
 (3) Coordination.--The Secretary shall develop the strategy 
 under paragraph (1) in coordination with the Joint Hypersonic 
 Transition Office, the Administrator of the National 
 Aeronautics and Space Administration, the research labs of the 
 military departments, and the Defense Test Resource Management 
 Center.
 (d) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--The term 
``appropriate congressional committees'' means the following:
 (1) The congressional defense committees.
 (2) The Committee on Science, Space, and Technology of the 
 House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, 
 Science, and Transportation of the Senate.

SEC. 235. INDEPENDENT REVIEW AND ASSESSMENT OF TEST AND EVALUATION 
 RESOURCE PLANNING.

 (a) Review and Assessment.--Not later than 60 days after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall seek to 
enter into an agreement with a federally funded research and 
development center to conduct an independent review and assessment of 
the Strategic Plan for Test Resources, as prepared by the Department of 
Defense Test Resource Management Center.
 (b) Elements.--The review and assessment under subsection (a) shall 
include the following:
 (1) An assessment of the adequacy of the 30-year planning 
 horizon that serves as the basis for the Strategic Plan for 
 Test Resources.
 (2) An assessment of whether and to what extent prior 
 forecasts of the test and evaluation needs of the Department of 
 Defense align with investments made by the Department in test 
 and evaluation resources.
 (3) An identification and assessment of--
 (A) any shortcomings in the infrastructure, 
 personnel, and equipment of the test and evaluation 
 enterprise of the Department; and
 (B) any risks that the status of such enterprise 
 may pose with respect to the ability of the Department 
 to meet its current and future test and evaluation 
 needs.
 (4) An assessment of whether and to what extent the test 
 and evaluation efforts of the Department sufficiently address 
 software-intensive, multi-domain, and continuously developed 
 capabilities.
 (5) Such other matters as the Secretary of Defense 
 determines appropriate.
 (c) Report Required.--Not later than 180 days after the date on 
which the Secretary of Defense enters into an agreement with a 
federally funded research and development center under subsection (a), 
the center shall submit to the Secretary and the congressional defense 
committees a report on the results of the study conducted under such 
subsection.

SEC. 236. STUDY ON COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH UNDERPERFORMING SOFTWARE AND 
 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY.

 (a) Study Required.--The Secretary of Defense shall seek to enter 
into a contract with a federally funded research and development center 
to conduct an independent study on the impacts, and challenges 
associated with the use of software and information technology, 
including potential solutions to such challenges.
 (b) Elements.--The independent study conducted under subsection (a) 
shall include the following:
 (1) A survey of members of the Armed Forces under the 
 jurisdiction of a Secretary of a military department to 
 identify the most important software and information technology 
 challenges that result in lost working hours, including an 
 estimate of the number and cost of lost working hours for each 
 military department, the impact of each challenge on retention, 
 and the negative impact to any mission.
 (2) A summary of the policy or technical challenges that 
 limit the ability of each Secretary of a military department to 
 implement needed software and information technology reforms, 
 based on interviews conducted with individuals who serve as 
 chief information officer (or an equivalent position) in a 
 military department.
 (3) Recommendations to address the challenges described in 
 paragraph (1) and improve the processes through which the 
 Secretary provides software and information technology 
 Departmentwide.
 (c) Report Required.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, a federally funded research and development 
center described in subsection (a) shall submit to the Secretary of 
Defense and the congressional defense committees a report on any 
independent study conducted under this section.
 (d) Software and Information Technology Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``software and information technology'' does not include 
embedded software and information technology used for weapon systems.

SEC. 237. STUDY AND REPORT ON SUFFICIENCY OF TEST AND EVALUATION 
 RESOURCES FOR CERTAIN MAJOR DEFENSE ACQUISITION PROGRAMS.

 (a) Study.--The Director of Operational Test and Evaluation of the 
Department of Defense shall conduct a study of at least one major 
defense acquisition program within each covered Armed Force to 
determine the sufficiency of the test and evaluation resources 
supporting such program.
 (b) Elements.--The study under subsection (a) shall include, with 
respect to each major defense acquisition program evaluated as part of 
the study, the following:
 (1) Identification of the test and evaluation resources 
 supporting the program as of the date of the study.
 (2) An evaluation of whether and to what extent such 
 resources are sufficient to meet the needs of the program 
 assuming that test and evaluation resources allocated for other 
 purposes will not be reallocated to support the program in the 
 future.
 (3) If the test and evaluation resources identified under 
 paragraph (1) are insufficient to meet the needs of the 
 program, an evaluation of the amount of additional funding 
 required to ensure the sufficiency of such resources.
 (4) The amount of Government-funded, contractor-provided 
 test and evaluation resources that are currently provided or 
 are planned to be provided as part of the program of record.
 (5) The future availability of any resources identified 
 under paragraph (4) for programs, projects, and activities 
 other than the major defense acquisition program evaluated as 
 part of the study.
 (c) Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Director of Operational Test and Evaluation 
shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the 
results of the study conducted under subsection (a).
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered Armed Force'' means the Army, the 
 Navy, the Marine Corps, and the Air Force.
 (2) The term ``major defense acquisition program'' has the 
 meaning given that term in section 4201 of title 10, United 
 States Code.

SEC. 238. PERIODIC REPORTS ON RISK DISTRIBUTION WITHIN RESEARCH, 
 DEVELOPMENT, TEST, AND EVALUATION ACTIVITIES.

 (a) Reports Required.--In accordance with subsection (d), the 
Secretary of Defense, acting through the Under Secretary of Defense for 
Research and Engineering and in consultation with the Secretaries of 
the military departments, shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees periodic reports on the distribution of risk across the 
covered research activities of the Department of Defense.
 (b) Elements.--Each report under subsection (a) shall include, with 
respect to the year covered by the report, the following:
 (1) A list of all covered research activities of the 
 Department of Defense with each such research activity 
 designated as either--
 (A) research activity that is lower risk, such as 
 efforts aimed at the incremental improvement of an 
 existing product; or
 (B) research activity that is higher risk, such as 
 efforts aimed at the development of new technology that 
 could disrupt an entire field (commonly referred to as 
 ``disruptive technology'').
 (2) An assessment of whether the distribution of covered 
 research activities among the risk categories described in 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) is optimal for 
 serving the needs of the Department of Defense.
 (3) Such other information as the Secretary of Defense 
 determines appropriate.
 (c) Covered Research Activity Defined.--In this section, the term 
``covered research activity'' means a program, project, or other 
activity of the Department of Defense designated as budget activity 1 
(basic research), budget activity 2 (applied research), or budget 
activity 3 (advanced technology development), as such budget activity 
classifications are set forth in volume 2B, chapter 5 of the Department 
of Defense Financial Management Regulation (DOD 7000.14-R).
 (d) Submittal of Reports.--
 (1) In general.--The reports required under subsection (a) 
 shall be submitted as follows:
 (A) The first such report shall be submitted by not 
 later than February 1, 2023.
 (B) A report shall be submitted at the same time as 
 each of the first three reports required under section 
 118c(e) of title 10, United States Code, after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) Termination of requirement.--No report shall be 
 required to be submitted under this section after the date of 
 the submittal of the third report under paragraph (1)(B).

SEC. 239. REVIEW AND REPORT ON OFFENSIVE HYPERSONIC WEAPONS PROGRAMS OF 
 THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE.

 (a) Review.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall 
conduct a review of the offensive hypersonic weapons programs of the 
Department of Defense, including the Navy Conventional Prompt Strike 
Program, the Army Long Range Hypersonic Weapon, and the Air Force Air 
Launched Rapid Response Weapon.
 (b) Elements.--The review under subsection (a) shall address--
 (1) cost and schedule estimates for the fielding of 
 offensive hypersonic weapon systems, including any assumptions 
 that underpin such estimates;
 (2) whether and to what extent the hypersonic weapon 
 systems are expect to fully achieve the requirements originally 
 established for such systems;
 (3) the technological and manufacturing maturity of the 
 critical technologies and materials planned for the systems; 
 and
 (4) whether and to what extent the Department has pursued 
 alternatives to the critical technologies identified under 
 paragraph (3).
 (c) Initial Briefing.--Not later than one year after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall provide to the 
congressional defense committees a briefing on the initial results of 
the review conducted under subsection (a).
 (d) Final Report.--Following the briefing under subsection (c), on 
a date mutually agreed upon by the Comptroller General and the 
congressional defense committees, the Comptroller General shall submit 
to the committees a report on the final results of the review conducted 
under subsection (a).

SEC. 240. REPORT ON POTENTIAL FOR INCREASED UTILIZATION OF THE 
 ELECTRONIC PROVING GROUNDS TESTING RANGE.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) The Electronic Proving Grounds located at Fort 
 Huachuca, Arizona is unique within the Department of Defense 
 because of its naturally quiet electromagnetic environment, its 
 specialized facilities, its close relationship with the Army 
 training community, and its access to the expansive real-estate 
 of southern Arizona.
 (2) The Electronic Proving Grounds has access to 70,000 
 acres at Ft. Huachuca, 23,000 acres on Wilcox Dry Lake, more 
 than 100,000 acres at Gila Bend, and with prior coordination, 
 approximately 62 million acres of Federal and State-owned land.
 (3) Live electronic warfare training is not possible at the 
 majority of military installations in the continental United 
 States including the National Training Center.
 (4) The Electronic Proving Grounds has the capacity to 
 handle additional testing as well as the capability for 
 realistic electronic warfare training
 (b) Report Required.--Not later than February 1, 2023, the 
Secretary of the Army shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a report on the Electronic Proving Grounds testing range 
located at Fort Huachuca, Arizona.
 (c) Elements.--The report under subsection (b) shall address--
 (1) the amount and types of testing activities conducted at 
 the Electronic Proving Grounds testing range;
 (2) any shortfalls in the facilities and equipment of the 
 range;
 (3) the capacity of the range to be used for additional 
 testing activities;
 (4) the possibility of using the range for the testing 
 activities of other Armed Forces, Federal agencies, and 
 domestic companies;
 (5) the capacity of the range to be used for realistic 
 electronic warfare training;
 (6) electronic warfare training restrictions at domestic 
 military installations generally; and
 (7) the feasibility and advisability of providing a 
 dedicated training area for electronic warfare units.
 (d) Coordination.--In preparing the report under subsection (b), 
the Secretary of the Army shall coordinate with the following:
 (1) The Director of Operational Test and Evaluation of the 
 Department of Defense.
 (2) The governments of Cochise County and Sierra Vista, 
 Arizona.

SEC. 241. SENSE OF CONGRESS ON THE ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING AND MACHINE 
 LEARNING INITIATIVE OF THE ARMY.

 It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the additive manufacturing and machine learning 
 initiative of the Army has the potential to accelerate the 
 ability to deploy additive manufacturing capabilities in 
 expeditionary settings and strengthen the United States defense 
 industrial supply chain; and
 (2) Congress and the Department of Defense should continue 
 to support the additive manufacturing and machine learning 
 initiative of the Army.

SEC. 242. FUNDING FOR ROBOTICS SUPPLY CHAIN RESEARCH.

 (a) Increase.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 201 for Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation, Defense-
Wide, as specified in the corresponding funding table in section 4201, 
for Defense Wide Manufacturing Science and Technology Program, Line 
054, is hereby increased by $15,000,000, for Robotics Supply Chain 
Research.
 (b) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 201 for Army, as specified in the corresponding funding table 
in section 4201, for Integrated Personnel and Pay System Army, Line 
123, is hereby reduced by $15,000,000.

SEC. 243. FUNDING FOR ENTERPRISE DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION WITH COMMERCIAL 
 PHYSICS SIMULATION.

 (a) Increase.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 201 for Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation, Air Force, 
as specified in the corresponding funding table in section 4201, for 
the Department of the Air Force Tech Architecture, Line 040, is hereby 
increased by $9,000,000, for Enterprise Digital Transformation with 
Commercial Physics Simulation.
 (b) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 201 for Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation, Air Force, 
as specified in the corresponding funding table in section 4201, for 
Stand-In Attack Weapon, Line 096, is hereby reduced by $9,000,000.

SEC. 244. REPORT ON NATIONAL SECURITY APPLICATIONS FOR FUSION ENERGY 
 TECHNOLOGY.

 (a) Report Required.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report on potential national 
security applications for fusion energy technology.
 (b) Elements.--The report under subsection (a) shall include--
 (1) an evaluation of commercial fusion energy technologies 
 under development by private sector companies in the United 
 States to determine if any such technologies have potential 
 national security applications;
 (2) consideration of commercial fusion energy 
 technologies--
 (A) that have met relevant technical milestones:
 (B) that are supported by substantial private 
 sector financing;
 (C) that meet applicable requirements of the 
 Department of Defense; and
 (D) for which prototypes have been constructed;
 (3) a timeline for the potential implementation of fusion 
 energy in the Department;
 (4) a description of any major challenges to such 
 implementation; and
 (5) recommendations to the ensure the effectiveness of such 
 implementation.

 TITLE III--OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE

 Subtitle A--Authorization of Appropriations

SEC. 301. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 Funds are hereby authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 2023 
for the use of the Armed Forces and other activities and agencies of 
the Department of Defense for expenses, not otherwise provided for, for 
operation and maintenance, as specified in the funding table in section 
4301.

SEC. 302. FUNDING FOR ARMY COMMUNITY SERVICES.

 (a) Increase.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 301 for operation and maintenance for Army, base operations 
support, line 110, as specified in the corresponding funding table in 
section 4301, is hereby increased by $20,000,000, for the purpose of 
Army Community Services.
 (b) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 301 for operation and maintenance, Army, as specified in the 
corresponding funding table in section 4301, for Army Administration, 
line 450, is hereby reduced by $10,000,000.
 (c) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 301 for operation and maintenance, Army, as specified in the 
corresponding funding table in section 4301, for Army Other Service 
Support, line 490, is hereby reduced by $10,000,000.

 Subtitle B--Energy and Environment

SEC. 311. EQUIVALENT AUTHORITY FOR ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION PROJECTS 
 AT NATIONAL GUARD TRAINING SITES.

 (a) Clarification of National Guard Training Sites.--Section 2700 
of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the 
following new paragraph:
 ``(4) The term `National Guard training site' means a 
 facility or site when used for the training of the National 
 Guard pursuant to chapter 5 of title 32 with funds provided by 
 the Secretary of Defense or the Secretary of a military 
 department, without regard to--
 ``(A) the owner or operator of the facility or 
 site; or
 ``(B) whether the facility or site is under the 
 jurisdiction of the Department of Defense or a military 
 department.''.
 (b) Inclusion Under Defense Environmental Restoration Program.--
Section 2701(a)(1) of such title is amended by inserting ``and at 
National Guard training sites'' after ``at facilities under the 
jurisdiction of the Secretary''.
 (c) Response Actions at National Guard Training Sites.--Section 
2701(c)(1) of such title is amended by adding at the end the following 
new subparagraph:
 ``(D) Each facility or site which was a National 
 Guard training site at the time of actions leading to 
 contamination by hazardous substances or pollutants or 
 contaminants.''.
 (d) Technical and Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Repeal of provision.--Section 2707 of such title is 
 amended by striking subsection (e).
 (2) Reference update.--Section 345(f)(1) of the National 
 Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-
 81; 135 Stat. 1646; 10 U.S.C. 2715 note) is amended by striking 
 ``facility where military activities are conducted by the 
 National Guard of a State pursuant to section 2707(e) of title 
 10, United States Code'' and inserting ``National Guard 
 training site, as such term is defined in section 2700 of title 
 10, United States Code''.

SEC. 312. AMENDMENT TO BUDGETING OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE RELATING TO 
 EXTREME WEATHER.

 Section 328(a) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2020 (Public Law 116-92; 10 U.S.C. 221 note) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``; and'' and inserting a 
 semicolon;
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following:
 ``(3) a calculation of the annual costs to the Department 
 for assistance provided to--
 ``(A) the Federal Emergency Management Agency or 
 Federal land management agencies--
 ``(i) pursuant to requests for such 
 assistance; and
 ``(ii) approved under the National 
 Interagency Fire Center; and
 ``(B) any State, Territory, or possession under 
 title 10 or title 32, United States Code, regarding 
 extreme weather.''.

SEC. 313. PROTOTYPE AND DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS FOR ENERGY RESILIENCE AT 
 CERTAIN MILITARY INSTALLATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Each Secretary of a military department shall 
ensure that covered prototype and demonstration projects are conducted 
at each military installation designated by that Secretary as an 
``Energy Resilience Testbed'' pursuant to subsection (b).
 (b) Selection of Military Installations.--
 (1) Selection.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, each Secretary of a military 
 department, in consultation with the Secretary of the Defense, 
 shall--
 (A) select at least two military installations 
 under the jurisdiction of that Secretary for 
 designation pursuant to paragraph (3); and
 (B) incorporate the conduct of covered prototype 
 and demonstration projects into the mission of each 
 installation so selected.
 (2) Considerations.--In selecting military installations 
 under paragraph (1), each Secretary of a military department 
 shall, to the extent practicable, take into consideration the 
 following:
 (A) The mission of the installation.
 (B) The geographic terrain of the installation and 
 of the community surrounding the installation.
 (C) The energy resources available to support the 
 installation.
 (D) Any State or local regulations that apply with 
 respect to public or private utilities serving the 
 installation.
 (E) An assessment of any climate or extreme weather 
 risks or vulnerabilities at the installation and the 
 community surrounding the installation.
 (3) Designation as energy resilience testbed.--Each 
 installation selected under paragraph (1) shall be known as an 
 ``Energy Resilience Testbed''.
 (c) Covered Technologies.--Covered prototype and demonstration 
projects conducted at military installations designated pursuant to 
subsection (b) shall include the prototype and demonstration of 
technologies in the following areas:
 (1) Energy storage technologies, including long-duration 
 energy storage systems.
 (2) Technologies that support electric vehicles or the 
 transition to use of electric vehicles, including with respect 
 to tactical vehicles.
 (3) Technologies to improve building energy efficiency in a 
 cyber-secure manner, such as advanced lighting controls, high-
 performance cooling systems, and technologies for waste heat 
 recovery.
 (4) Technologies to improve building energy management and 
 control in a cyber-secure manner.
 (5) Tools and processes for design, assessment, and 
 decision-making on the installation with respect to climate 
 resilience and hazard analysis, energy use, management, and the 
 construction of climate resilient buildings and infrastructure.
 (6) Carbon sequestration technologies.
 (7) Technologies relating to on-site resilient energy 
 generation, including advanced geothermal and advanced nuclear 
 technologies.
 (8) Port electrification and surrounding defense critical 
 infrastructure and related non-Federal infrastructure, 
 including surrounding defense community infrastructure.
 (9) Tidal and wave power technologies.
 (10) Distributed leger technologies.
 (d) Briefing.--Not later than 180 days after the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the Secretaries of 
the military departments, shall provide to the appropriate 
congressional committees a briefing on the conduct of covered prototype 
and demonstration projects at each military installation designated 
pursuant to subsection (b). Such briefing shall include the following:
 (1) An identification of each military installation so 
 designated.
 (2) A justification as to why each military installation so 
 designated was selected for such designation.
 (3) A strategy for commencing the conduct of such projects 
 at each military installation so designated by not later than 
 one year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (e) Deadline for Commencement of Projects.--The Secretary of 
Defense shall ensure that, beginning not later than one year after the 
date of the enactment of this Act, covered prototype and demonstration 
projects are conducted at, and such conduct is incorporated into the 
mission of, each military installation designated pursuant to 
subsection (b).
 (f) Consortiums.--
 (1) In general.--Each Secretary of a military department 
 may enter into a partnership with, or seek to establish, a 
 consortium of industry, academia, and other entities described 
 in paragraph (2) to conduct covered prototype and demonstration 
 projects at a military installation designated by that 
 Secretary pursuant to subsection (b).
 (2) Consortium entities.--The entities described in this 
 paragraph are as follows:
 (A) National laboratories.
 (B) Industry entities the primary work of which 
 relates to energy and climate security technologies and 
 business models.
 (g) Authorities.--
 (1) In general.--Covered prototype and demonstration 
 projects required under this section may be conducted as part 
 of the program for operational energy prototyping established 
 under section 324(c) of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry 
 National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public 
 Law 116-283; 134 Stat. 3523; 10 U.S.C. 2911 note) (including by 
 using funds available under the Operational Energy Prototyping 
 Fund established pursuant to such section), using the other 
 transactions authority under section 4021 or 4022 of title 10, 
 United States Code, or using any other available authority or 
 funding source the Secretary of Defense determines appropriate.
 (2) Follow-on production contracts or transactions.--Each 
 Secretary of a military department shall ensure that, to the 
 extent practicable, any transaction entered into under the 
 other transactions authority under section 4022 of title 10, 
 United States Code, for the conduct of a covered prototype and 
 demonstration project under this section shall provide for the 
 award of a follow-on production contract or transaction 
 pursuant to subsection (f) of such section 4022.
 (h) Interagency Collaboration.--In carrying out this section, to 
the extent practicable, the Secretary of Defense shall collaborate with 
the Secretary of Energy and the heads of such other Federal departments 
and agencies as the Secretary of Defense may determine appropriate, 
including by entering into relevant memoranda of understanding.
 (i) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the Committee on Armed Services and the 
 Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Armed Services and the 
 Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the 
 Senate.
 (2) The term ``community infrastructure'' has the meaning 
 given that term in section 2391(e) of tile 10, United States 
 Code.
 (3) The term ``covered prototype and demonstration 
 project'' means a project to prototype and demonstrate advanced 
 technologies to enhance energy resilience and climate security 
 at a military installation.
 (4) The term ``military installation'' has the meaning 
 given that term in section 2867 of title 10, United States 
 Code.

SEC. 314. PILOT PROGRAM FOR TRANSITION OF CERTAIN NONTACTICAL VEHICLE 
 FLEETS OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE TO ELECTRIC VEHICLES.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the 
Secretaries of the military departments, and in consultation with the 
Secretary of Energy, shall carry out a pilot program to facilitate the 
transition of nontactical vehicle fleets of the Department of Defense 
at certain military installations and distribution centers of the 
Defense Logistics Agency to nontactical vehicle fleets comprised solely 
of electric vehicles, including through the maintenance on the 
installations or centers, as the case may be, of charging stations, 
microgrids, and other covered infrastructure sufficient to cover the 
energy demand of such fleets.
 (b) Selection of Military Installations and Distribution Centers.--
 (1) Selection of military installations.--Not later than 
 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, each 
 Secretary of a military department shall--
 (A) select at least one military installation of 
 each Armed Force under the jurisdiction of that 
 Secretary at which to carry out the pilot program under 
 subsection (a); and
 (B) submit to the Committees on Armed Services of 
 the House of Representatives and the Senate a 
 notification containing an identification of each such 
 selected installation.
 (2) Priority.--In selecting military installations under 
 paragraph (1), each Secretary of a military department shall 
 give priority to the following:
 (A) Military installations with existing third-
 party financed, installed, operated, and maintained 
 charging stations on the installation.
 (B) Military installations with other existing 
 covered infrastructure, including charging stations 
 under ownership methods other than those specified in 
 subparagraph (A), on the installation.
 (C) Military installations located in a geographic 
 region with existing covered infrastructure, including 
 charging stations, proximate to the installation.
 (D) Military installations with respect to which 
 the Secretary determines the future inclusion on the 
 installation of charging stations and other covered 
 infrastructure is feasible and cost effective given the 
 anticipated need for charging stations to service 
 electric vehicles in the nontactical vehicle fleet at 
 the installation (including those with respect to which 
 the Secretary determines there may be an opportunity to 
 enter into a contract for the third-party charging 
 stations specified in subparagraph (A)).
 (E) Military installations at which a project 
 authorized under section 2914 of title 10, United 
 States Code, (known as the Energy Resilience and 
 Conservation Investment Program) and determined by the 
 Secretary to be relevant to the pilot program has been 
 conducted or is planned to be conducted pursuant to the 
 future-years defense program submitted under section 
 221 of such title.
 (3) Considerations.--In determining whether a military 
 installation should receive priority pursuant to paragraph 
 (2)(D), each Secretary of a military department shall take into 
 account the following:
 (A) A calculation of existing loads at the 
 installation and the existing capacity of the 
 installation for the charging of electric vehicles, 
 including (as applicable) light duty trucks.
 (B) The availability of adequate space for vehicles 
 awaiting charging during peak usage times, as 
 determined by the Secretary.
 (C) Any required upgrades to covered infrastructure 
 on the installation, including electrical wiring, 
 anticipated by the Secretary.
 (4) Selection of distribution centers.--
 (A) Selection.--Not later than 180 days after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the Director of the 
 Defense Logistics Agency shall select at least one 
 distribution center of the Defense Logistics Agency at 
 which to carry out the pilot program under subsection 
 (a) and submit to the Committees on Armed Services of 
 the House of Representatives and notification 
 containing an identification of any such selected 
 distribution center.
 (B) Priority.--In selecting a distribution center 
 under subparagraph (A), the Director of the Defense 
 Logistics Agency shall apply the same priorities as the 
 Secretaries of the military departments apply with 
 respect to the selection of a military installation 
 under paragraph (2) (including by taking into account 
 the same considerations specified in paragraph (3)), 
 except that, in addition to the priorities specified in 
 paragraph (2), the Director shall also give priority to 
 the following:
 (i) Distribution centers with significant 
 on-center use by vehicles of class 3 or 
 heavier, as determined pursuant to table II of 
 section 565.15 of title 49, Code of Federal 
 Regulations.
 (ii) Distribution centers at which there 
 is, or are plans to develop, renewable energy 
 resource generation.
 (c) Transition Plans.--
 (1) Military installations.--Not later than one year after 
 the date on which a Secretary of a military department submits 
 a notification identifying a military installation under 
 subsection (b)(1), that Secretary shall submit to the 
 Committees on Armed Services of the House of Representatives 
 and the Senate a plan for--
 (A) the replacement of all vehicles in the 
 nontactical vehicle fleet at the military installation 
 with electric vehicles by January 1, 2025; and
 (B) the maintenance on the military installation of 
 charging stations and other covered infrastructure, 
 including a microgrid, that will be sufficient--
 (i) to cover the anticipated electricity 
 demand of such electric vehicles; and
 (ii) to improve installation energy 
 resilience.
 (2) Elements.--Each plan under paragraph (1) shall include, 
 with respect to the military installation covered by the plan, 
 the following:
 (A) A determination of the type and number of 
 charging stations to include on the installation, 
 taking into account the interoperability of chargers 
 and the potential future needs or applications for 
 chargers, such as vehicle-to-grid or vehicle-to-
 building applications.
 (B) A determination of the optimal ownership method 
 to provide charging stations on the installation, 
 taking into account the following:
 (i) Use of Government-owned (purchased, 
 installed, and maintained) charging stations.
 (ii) Use of third-party financed, 
 installed, operated, and maintained charging 
 stations.
 (iii) Use of financing models in which 
 energy and charging infrastructure operations 
 and maintenance are treated as a service.
 (iv) Cyber and physical security 
 considerations and best practices associated 
 with different ownership, network, and control 
 models.
 (C) A determination of the optimal power source to 
 provide charging stations at the installation, taking 
 into account the following:
 (i) Transformer and substation 
 requirements.
 (ii) Microgrids and distributed energy to 
 support both charging requirements and energy 
 storage.
 (3) Source of services.--Each Secretary of a military 
 department may use expertise within the military department or 
 enter into a contract with a non-Department of Defense entity 
 to make the determinations specified in paragraph (2).
 (4) Distribution centers.--Not later than one year after 
 the date on which the Director of the Defense Logistics Agency 
 submits a notification identifying a distribution center under 
 subsection (b)(1), the Director shall submit to the Committees 
 on Armed Services of the House of Representatives and the 
 Senate a plan specified in paragraph (1) with respect to the 
 distribution center. Such plan shall include, with respect to 
 the distribution center, each of the same elements required 
 under paragraph (2) for a military installation, and the 
 Director may use expertise to the same extent and in the same 
 manner specified in paragraph (3).
 (d) Final Deadline for Replacement.--Beginning not later than 
January 1, 2025, all vehicles in the nontactical vehicle fleet at each 
military installation or distribution center selected under subsection 
(b) shall be electric vehicles.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The terms ``Armed Forces'' and ``military departments'' 
 have the meanings given those terms in section 101 of title 10, 
 United States Code.
 (2) The term ``charging station'' means a collection of one 
 or more electric vehicle supply equipment units.
 (3) The term ``covered infrastructure''--
 (A) means infrastructure that the Secretary of 
 Defense determines may be used to--
 (i) charge electric vehicles, including by 
 transmitting electricity to such vehicles 
 directly; or
 (ii) support the charging of electric 
 vehicles, including by supporting the 
 resilience of grids or other systems for 
 delivering energy to such vehicles (such as 
 through the mitigation of grid stress); and
 (B) includes--
 (i) charging stations;
 (ii) batteries;
 (iii) battery-swapping systems;
 (iv) microgrids;
 (v) off-grid charging systems; and
 (vi) other apparatuses installed for the 
 specific purpose of delivering energy to an 
 electric vehicle or to a battery intended to be 
 used in an electric vehicle, including wireless 
 charging technologies.
 (4) The term ``electric vehicle'' includes--
 (A) a plug-in hybrid electric vehicle that uses a 
 combination of electric and gas powered engine that can 
 use either gasoline or electricity as a fuel source; 
 and
 (B) a plug-in electric vehicle that runs solely on 
 electricity and does not contain an internal combustion 
 engine or gas tank.
 (5) The term ``electric vehicle supply equipment unit'' 
 means the port that supplies electricity to one vehicle at a 
 time.
 (6) The term ``microgrid'' means a group of interconnected 
 loads and distributed energy resources within clearly defined 
 electrical boundaries that acts as a single controllable entity 
 with respect to the grid.
 (7) The term ``military installation'' has the meaning 
 given that term in section 2801 of title 10, United States 
 Code.
 (8) The term ``nontactical vehicle'' means a vehicle other 
 than a tactical vehicle.
 (9) The term ``tactical vehicle'' means a motor vehicle 
 designed to military specification, or a commercial design 
 motor vehicle modified to military specification, to provide 
 direct transportation support of combat or tactical operations, 
 or for the training of personnel for such operations.
 (10) The term ``renewable energy resources'' has the 
 meaning given that term in section 403 of the Renewable Energy 
 Resources Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 7372).
 (11) The term ``wireless charging'' means the charging of a 
 battery by inductive charging or by any means in which a 
 battery is charged without a wire, or plug-in wire, connecting 
 the power source and battery.

SEC. 315. PILOT PROGRAM ON USE OF SUSTAINABLE AVIATION FUEL.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense shall conduct a pilot 
program at two or more geographically diverse Department of Defense 
facilities for the use of sustainable aviation fuel. Such program shall 
be designed to--
 (1) identify any logistical challenges with respect to the 
 use of sustainable aviation fuel by the Department of Defense; 
 and
 (2) explore opportunities for collaboration with nearby 
 commercial airports and sustainable aviation fuel refinery 
 facilities to facilitate such use.
 (b) Selection of Facilities.--
 (1) Selection.--Not later than one year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall 
 select at least two geographically diverse Department 
 facilities at which to carry out the pilot program. At least 
 one such facility shall be a facility with an onsite refinery 
 that is located in proximity to at least one major commercial 
 airport that is also actively seeking to increase the use of 
 sustainable aviation fuel.
 (2) Notice to congress.--Upon the selection of each 
 facility under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall submit to the 
 Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on Transportation 
 and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives notice of 
 the selection, including an identification of the facility 
 selected.
 (c) Certification and Use of Blended Sustainable Aviation Fuel.--
 (1) Plans.--For each facility selected under subsection 
 (b), not later than one year after the selection of the 
 facility, the Secretary shall--
 (A) develop a plan on how to implement, by 
 September 30, 2028, a certification program under which 
 aviation fuel must be certified as blended to contain 
 at least 10 percent sustainable aviation fuel as a 
 requirement for use of the aviation fuel at the 
 facility (in addition to any other fuel certification 
 requirement of the Department of Defense or the Armed 
 Forces);
 (B) submit the plan to the Committee on Armed 
 Services and the Committee on Transportation and 
 Infrastructure of the House of Representatives; and
 (C) provide to such Committees a briefing on the 
 plan that includes, at a minimum--
 (i) a description of any operational, 
 infrastructure, or logistical requirements and 
 recommendations for the blending, 
 certification, and use of sustainable aviation 
 fuel; and
 (ii) a description of any stakeholder 
 engagement in the development of the plan, 
 including any consultations with nearby 
 commercial airport owners or operators.
 (2) Implementation of plans.--For each facility selected 
 under subsection (b), during the period beginning on a date 
 that is not later than September 30, 2028, and for five years 
 thereafter, the Secretary shall require, in accordance with the 
 respective plan developed under paragraph (1), the exclusive 
 use at the facility of aviation fuel that has been certified as 
 blended to contain at least 10 percent sustainable aviation 
 fuel.
 (d) Criteria for Sustainable Aviation Fuel.--Sustainable aviation 
fuel used under the pilot program shall meet the following criteria:
 (1) Such fuel shall be produced in the United States from 
 non-food domestic feedstock sources.
 (2) Such fuel shall constitute drop-in fuel that meets all 
 specifications and performance requirements of the Department 
 of Defense and the Armed Forces.
 (e) Waiver.--The Secretary may waive the requirement for the 
exclusive use at the facility of aviation fuel that has been certified 
as blended to contain at least 10 percent sustainable aviation fuel 
under the pilot program if the Secretary--
 (1) determines such use is not feasible due to a lack of 
 domestic availability of sustainable aviation fuel or a 
 national security contingency; and
 (2) submits to the congressional defense committees notice 
 of such waiver and the reasons for such waiver.
 (f) Final Report.--At the conclusion of the pilot program, the 
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Energy, Installations, and 
Environment shall submit to the Committee on Armed Services and the 
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of 
Representatives a final report on the pilot program. Such report shall 
include each of the following:
 (1) An assessment of the effect of using sustainable 
 aviation fuel on the overall fuel costs of blended fuel.
 (2) A description of any operational, infrastructure, or 
 logistical requirements and recommendations for the blending, 
 certification, and use of sustainable aviation fuel, with a 
 focus on scaling up military-wide adoption of such fuel.
 (3) Recommendations with respect to how military 
 installations can leverage proximity to commercial airports and 
 other jet fuel consumers to increase the rate of use of 
 sustainable aviation fuel, for both military and non-military 
 use, including potential collaboration on innovative financing 
 or purchasing and shared supply chain infrastructure.
 (4) A description of the effects on performance and 
 operation aircraft using sustainable aviation fuel including--
 (A) if used, considerations of various blending 
 ratios and their associated benefits;
 (B) efficiency and distance improvements of flights 
 fuels using sustainable aviation fuel;
 (C) weight savings on large transportation aircraft 
 and other types of aircraft with using blended fuel 
 with higher concentrations of sustainable aviation 
 fuel;
 (D) maintenance benefits of using sustainable 
 aviation fuel, including engine longevity;
 (E) the effect of the use of sustainable aviation 
 fuel on emissions and air quality;
 (F) the effect of the use of sustainable aviation 
 fuel on the environment and on surrounding communities, 
 including environmental justice factors that are 
 created by the demand for and use of sustainable 
 aviation fuel by the Department of Defense; and
 (G) benefits with respect to job creation in the 
 sustainable aviation fuel production and supply chain.
 (g) Sustainable Aviation Fuel Defined.--In this section, the term 
``sustainable aviation fuel'' means liquid fuel that--
 (1) consists of synthesized hydrocarbon;
 (2) meets the requirements of--
 (A) ASTM International Standard D7566 (or such 
 successor standard); or
 (B) the co-processing provisions of ASTM 
 International Standard D1655, Annex A1 (or such 
 successor standard);
 (3) is derived from biomass (as such term is defined in 
 section 45K(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986), waste 
 streams, renewable energy sources, or gaseous carbon oxides;
 (4) is not derived from palm fatty acid distillates; and
 (5) conforms to the standards, recommended practices, 
 requirements and criteria, supporting documents, implementation 
 elements, and any other technical guidance, for sustainable 
 aviation fuels that are adopted by the International Civil 
 Aviation Organization with the agreement of the United States.

SEC. 316. POLICY TO INCREASE DISPOSITION OF SPENT ADVANCED BATTERIES 
 THROUGH RECYCLING.

 (a) Policy Required.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Energy, 
Installations, and Environment, in coordination with the Director of 
the Defense Logistics Agency, shall establish a policy to increase the 
disposition of spent advanced batteries of the Department of Defense 
through recycling (including by updating the Department of Defense 
Manual 4160.21, titled ``Defense Material Disposition: Disposal 
Guidance and Procedures'', or such successor document, accordingly), 
for the purpose of supporting the reclamation and return of precious 
metals, rare earth metals, and elements of strategic importance (such 
as cobalt and lithium) into the supply chain or strategic reserves of 
the United States.
 (b) Considerations.--In developing the policy under subsection (a), 
the Assistant Secretary shall consider, at a minimum, the following 
recycling methods:
 (1) Pyroprocessing.
 (2) Hydroprocessing.
 (3) Direct cathode recycling, relithiation, and upcycling.

SEC. 317. GUIDANCE AND TARGET DEADLINE RELATING TO FORMERLY USED 
 DEFENSE SITES PROGRAMS.

 (a) Guidance Relating to Site Prioritization.--The Assistant 
Secretary of Defense for Energy, Installations, and Environment shall 
issue guidance setting forth how, in prioritizing sites for activities 
funded under the ``Environmental Restoration Account, Formerly Used 
Defense Sites'' account established under section 2703(a)(5) of title 
10, United States Code, the Assistant Secretary shall weigh the 
relative risk or other factors between Installation Restoration Program 
sites and Military Munitions Response Program sites.
 (b) Target Deadline for Military Munitions Response Program.--The 
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Energy, Installations, and 
Environment shall establish a target deadline for the completion of the 
cleanup of all Military Munitions Response Program sites.

SEC. 318. BUDGET INFORMATION FOR ALTERNATIVES TO BURN PITS.

 The Secretary of Defense shall include in the budget materials 
submitted to Congress in support of the Department of Defense budget 
for fiscal year 2024 (as submitted with the budget of the President for 
such fiscal year under section 1105(a) of title 31, United States Code) 
a dedicated budget line item for incinerators and waste-to-energy waste 
disposal alternatives to burn pits.

SEC. 319. PROGRAM TO TRACK AND REDUCE SCOPE 3 EMISSIONS AND ENERGY 
 COSTS.

 (a) Program Authorized.--The Secretary of Defense shall establish a 
program, to be known as the ``Scope 3 Emissions Reduction Program'', 
under which the Secretary shall use innovative software to--
 (1) establish full accountability with respect to the Scope 
 3 greenhouse gas emissions in the supply chain of the 
 Department of Defense; and
 (2) produce actionable data to reduce emissions and save 
 energy costs.
 (b) Goals of the Program.--The goals of the Scope 3 Emissions 
Reduction Program are--
 (1) to prove emerging technologies, methodologies, and 
 capabilities to effectively track and compile transparent and 
 reliable scope 3 emissions data and energy costs in real time;
 (2) to produce actionable emissions and climate data; and
 (3) to increase efficiencies and reduce costs.

SEC. 320. REQUIREMENT TO INCLUDE INFORMATION RELATING TO ELECTRIC 
 VEHICLE CHARGING IN CERTAIN MILITARY CONSTRUCTION PROJECT 
 PROPOSALS.

 (a) Requirement.--As part of the Department of Defense Form 1391 
submitted to the appropriate committees of Congress for a military 
construction project for a facility that includes (or is planned to 
include) parking for covered motor vehicles, the Secretary concerned 
shall include the following:
 (1) A proposal for the provision of charging stations and 
 other covered infrastructure sufficient to cover the 
 anticipated electricity demand of the electric charging, 
 concurrently, for not less than 15 percent of all covered motor 
 vehicles planned to be parked at the facility.
 (2) The cost of constructing such stations and 
 infrastructure in the overall cost of the project.
 (3) An analysis of whether a parking structure or lot will 
 be the primary charging area for covered motor vehicles or if 
 another area, such as public works or the motor pool, will be 
 the primary charging area.
 (b) Applicability.--The requirement under subsection (a) shall 
apply with respect to military construction projects for which a 
Department of Defense Form 1391 is submitted to the appropriate 
committees of Congress beginning on or after the date of the enactment 
of this Act.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The terms ``charging station'' and ``covered 
 infrastructure'' have the meanings given those terms in section 
 314(e).
 (2) The term ``covered motor vehicle'' means a Federal 
 Government motor vehicle, including a motor vehicle leased by 
 the Federal Government.
 (3) The term ``Defense Agency'' has the meaning given that 
 term in section 101(a) of title 10, United States Code.
 (4) The term ``Secretary concerned'' means--
 (A) the Secretary of a military department, with 
 respect to facilities under the jurisdiction of that 
 Secretary; and
 (B) the Secretary of Defense, with respect to 
 matters concerning--
 (i) facilities of the Defense Agencies; or
 (ii) facilities of a reserve component 
 owned by a State rather than the United States.

SEC. 321. SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING ELECTRIC OR ZERO-EMISSION 
 VEHICLES FOR NON-COMBAT VEHICLE FLEET.

 It is the sense of Congress that any new non-tactical Federal 
vehicle purchased by the Department of Defense for use outside of 
combat should, to the greatest extent practicable, be an electric or 
zero-emission vehicles.

SEC. 322. STUDY ON ENVIRONMENTAL CONTAMINATION AND CLEANUP ASSOCIATED 
 WITH THORIUM-230 AND RELATED SUBSTANCES.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 270 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in coordination with 
the Secretary of Energy and the Administrator of the Environmental 
Protection Agency, shall submit to the congressional defense committees 
a report containing the results of a study on the environmental 
contamination and associated remediation efforts at sites in the United 
States where weapons containing Thorium-230 were developed, 
transported, stored, or otherwise used.
 (b) Elements.-- The report required under subsection (a) shall 
include the following:
 (1) A list of sites with known or suspected Thorium-230 
 contamination due to weapons development, transportation or 
 storage, or waste disposal.
 (2) A discussion of the current characterization of each 
 such site as a formerly used defense site, a site subject to a 
 Base Realignment and Closure action, an active site, or other 
 type of site.
 (3) A specific discussion of the area surrounding Coldwater 
 Creek in Saint Louis, Missouri.
 (4) The status of each site identified under paragraph (1) 
 including--
 (A) any environmental remediation that has been 
 completed or is underway at the site, including 
 contamination levels, if known;
 (B) any significant illness cluster associated with 
 the geographic proximity of the site;
 (5) A detailed plan for any necessary environmental 
 remediation as well as site prioritization associated with the 
 sites identified under paragraph (1).

SEC. 323. DESTRUCTION OF MATERIALS CONTAINING PFAS WITH TECHNOLOGIES 
 NOT REQUIRING INCINERATION.

 (a) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition 
and Sustainment shall submit to the congressional defense committees a 
report on the progress of the Department of Defense in implementing on-
site PFAS destruction technologies not requiring incineration. The 
report shall include the following:
 (1) A list of technologies that modify the characteristics 
 of the waste such that it is no longer classified as hazardous 
 waste and can be disposed of through more cost-effective mixed 
 waste protocols.
 (2) An identification of any such technologies that have 
 undergone, are undergoing, or will undergo testing by the 
 Environmental Security Technology Certification Program and the 
 status of such testing.
 (3) The results of any such testing.
 (b) Guidance.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition 
and Sustainment shall prescribe guidance on best practices and 
preferred methods for destruction and disposal of PFAS wastes with an 
emphasis on alternatives to incineration.
 (c) Extension of Moratorium.--The Secretary of Defense shall 
prohibit the incineration of covered materials under section 343 of the 
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (10 U.S.C. 2701 
note) until the date on which the Secretary prescribes the guidance 
required under subsection (b).

SEC. 324. ANALYSIS AND PLAN FOR ADDRESSING HEAT ISLAND EFFECT ON 
 MILITARY INSTALLATIONS.

 (a) Installation Analysis.--At the direction of the Secretary of 
Defense, the commander of each large military installation (as 
determined by the Secretary) shall conduct an analysis of--
 (1) how the effect known as the ``heat island effect'' 
 exacerbates summer heat conditions and necessitates the 
 increased use of air conditioning on the installation; and
 (2) inventory on the percentage of tree cover and plant 
 shade trees on the property of the installation.
 (b) Report.--Not later than September 30, 2023, the commander of 
each large military installation shall submit to the Secretary of the 
analysis conducted by the commander under subsection (a).
 (c) Plan.--The Secretary shall--
 (1) review the reports submitted under subsection (b);
 (2) identify any installation that is a significant heat 
 island with large expanses of concrete or asphalt; and
 (3) direct the commander of any installation so identified 
 to increase the tree coverage on the property of the 
 installation by 10 to 30 percent by not later than September 
 30, 2025.
 (d) Heat Island Defined.--The term ``heat island'' means an area 
with a high concentration of structures (such as building, roads, and 
other infrastructure) that absorb and re-emit the sun's heat more than 
natural landscapes such as forests or bodies of water.

SEC. 325. COMPTROLLER GENERAL REPORT ON ACCELERATION AND IMPROVEMENT OF 
 ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP OF VIEQUES AND CULEBRA, PUERTO 
 RICO.

 (a) Report Required.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States 
shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report 
containing the results of a study conducted by the Comptroller General 
on the status of the Federal cleanup and decontamination process in the 
island-municipalities of Vieques and Culebra, Puerto Rico.
 (b) Contents.--The study shall include a comprehensive analysis of 
the following:
 (1) The pace of ongoing cleanup and environmental 
 restoration efforts in the former military training sites in 
 Vieques and Culebra.
 (2) Any potential alternatives to accelerate the completion 
 of such efforts, including their associated costs.
 (3) Any effects such alternatives might have on the public 
 health and safety of island residents and steps that can be 
 taken to mitigate risks.
 (4) The views of residents of Vieques and Culebra regarding 
 actions that should be taken to achieve the cleanup process 
 more expeditiously and successfully.
 (5) Any adverse health outcomes resulting from toxic matter 
 at the sites or cleanup procedure in and avenues to compensate 
 local communities for economic losses and medical costs 
 incurred.
 (6) The economic impact that the cleanup process has had on 
 local residents due to restricted use of land for tourism and 
 other activities and avenues to compensate local communities 
 for economic losses.

SEC. 326. REPORT ON DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE FLOOD MAPPING EFFORTS.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a report on the flood mapping efforts of the Department of 
Defense. Such report shall address--
 (1) how frequently the Department updates such flood maps;
 (2) the resources used to undertake flood mapping projects; 
 and
 (3) whether, and if so, how, such maps are incorporated 
 into broader flood maps of the Federal Emergency Management 
 Agency.

SEC. 327. BIANNUAL LEAK INSPECTIONS OF NAVY AND AIR FORCE UNDERGROUND 
 STORAGE TANKS ON GUAM.

 (a) Navy.--The Secretary of the Navy shall ensure that underground 
fuel storage tanks owned by the Navy and located on Guam are checked 
for leaks at least once every six months.
 (b) Air Force.--The Secretary of the Air Force shall ensure that 
underground fuel storage tanks owned by the Air Force and located on 
Guam are checked for leaks at least once every six months.

SEC. 328. ADDITIONAL SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ENERGY PERFORMANCE 
 GOALS AND ENERGY PERFORMANCE MASTER PLAN.

 (a) Additional Special Considerations.--Section 2911(e) of title 
10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following 
new paragraphs:
 ``(14) The reliability and security of energy resources in 
 the event of a military conflict.
 ``(15) The value of resourcing energy from partners and 
 allies of the United States.''.
 (b) Report on Feasibility of Terminating Energy Procurement From 
Foreign Entities of Concern.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Assistant Secretary of Defense 
 for Operational Energy Plans and Programs shall submit to the 
 appropriate congressional committees a report on the 
 feasibility and advisability of terminating energy procurement 
 by the Department of Defense from foreign entities of concern.
 (2) Elements.--The report under paragraph (1) shall include 
 the following:
 (A) An assessment of the reliance by the Department 
 of Defense on foreign entities of concern for the 
 procurement of energy.
 (B) An identification of the number of energy 
 contracts in force between the Director of the Defense 
 Logistics Agency and a foreign entity of concern or an 
 entity headquartered in a country that is a foreign 
 entity of concern.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the Committee on Armed Services and the 
 Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Armed Services and the 
 Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the 
 Senate.
 (2) The term ``foreign entity of concern'' has the meaning 
 given that term in section 9901 of the William M. (Mac) 
 Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
 2021 (15 U.S.C. 4651).

SEC. 329. CLARIFICATION AND REQUIREMENT FOR DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 RELATING TO RENEWABLE BIOMASS AND BIOGAS.

 (a) Clarification of Renewable Energy Sources.--Section 2924 of 
title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (6)--
 (A) by redesignating subparagraphs (D) through (I) 
 as subparagraphs (E) through (J), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(D) Biogas.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
 ``(7) The term `biomass' has the meaning given the term 
 `renewable biomass' in section 211(o)(1) of the Clean Air Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 7545(o)(1)), and the regulations thereunder.
 ``(8) The term `biogas' means biogas as such term is used 
 in section 211(o)(1)(B)(ii)(V) of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 
 7545(o)(1)(B)(ii)(V)), and the regulations thereunder.''.
 (b) Requirement.--With respect to any energy-related activity 
carried out pursuant to chapter 173 of title 10, United States Code, 
biomass and biogas (as such terms are defined in section 2924 of such 
title, as amended by subsection (a)) shall be considered an eligible 
energy source for purposes of such activity.

 Subtitle C--Red Hill Bulk Fuel Facility

SEC. 331. DEFUELING OF RED HILL BULK FUEL STORAGE FACILITY.

 (a) Deadline for Completion of Defueling.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to the certification requirement 
 under subsection (e), the Secretary of the Navy, in cooperation 
 with the Director of the Defense Logistics Agency, shall 
 complete the defueling of the Red Hill Bulk Fuel Storage 
 Facility by not later than December 31, 2023.
 (2) Report.--Not later than December 31, 2022, the 
 Secretary of the Navy shall submit to the congressional defense 
 committees, and make publicly available on an appropriate 
 website of the Department of Defense, a report on the status of 
 the defueling of the Red Hill Bulk Fuel Storage Facility.
 (b) Compliance With Applicable Laws.--The Secretary of the Navy, in 
coordination with the Administrator of the Environmental Protection 
Agency and the State of Hawaii, shall plan for and implement the 
defueling of the Red Hill Bulk Fuel Facility in a manner that complies 
with all applicable laws.
 (c) Mitigation Plan.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than one year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Navy shall make 
 publicly available an unclassified report containing the plan 
 of the Secretary for actions to be taken to mitigate the 
 impacts caused by releases at the Red Hill Bulk Fuel Storage 
 Facility, together with cost estimates for such actions.
 (2) Briefing.--Not later than one year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Navy shall 
 provide to the congressional defense committees a briefing on 
 the actions and cost estimates included in the plan required 
 under paragraph (1).
 (d) Oversight Requirements.--
 (1) Review.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall seek to 
 enter into an agreement with an appropriate independent entity 
 under which the entity agrees to conduct a review of the 
 defueling process for the Red Hill Bulk Fuel Storage Facility.
 (2) Reporting requirements.--An agreement entered into 
 under paragraph (1) shall provide that the non-Department of 
 Defense entity shall produce and make publicly available, by 
 not later than 30 days after the completion of the defueling of 
 the Red Hill Bulk Fuel Storage Facility, an unclassified report 
 on the defueling process.
 (e) Certification Requirement.--The Secretary of the Navy may not 
begin the process of defueling the Red Hill Bulk Storage Facility 
before the date on which the Secretary of Defense submits to the 
congressional defense committees certification that such defueling 
would not adversely affect the ability of the Department of Defense to 
provide fuel to support military operations in the area of 
responsibility of the United States Indo-Pacific Command.
 (f) Waiver.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense may waive the 
 deadline under subsection (a)(1) for a period of not more than 
 180 days if the Secretary submits to the congressional defense 
 committees certification in writing that--
 (A) the Red Hill Bulk Fuel Storage Facility cannot 
 be defueled safely and in an environmentally sound 
 manner before the deadline; or
 (B) the State of Hawaii Department of Health 
 objects to the defueling of the Facility.
 (2) Extensions.--The Secretary may extend a waiver issued 
 under paragraph (1) if the Secretary submits to the 
 congressional defense committees an additional certification 
 described in paragraph (1) and a justification for the 
 extension of the waiver.

SEC. 332. ACTIVITIES PRIOR TO DECOMMISSIONING OF RED HILL BULK STORAGE 
 FACILITY.

 (a) Limitation.--None of the funds authorized to be appropriated by 
this Act or otherwise made available for the Department of Defense for 
fiscal year 2023 may be obligated or expended to permanently close the 
Red Hill Bulk Fuel Storage Facility until the date that is one year 
after the date on which the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with 
the Commander of United States Indo-Pacific Command, submits to the 
congressional defense committees--
 (1) the report required under subsection (b); and
 (2) certification that--
 (A) a fuel capacity that is equivalent to the 
 capacity provided by the Red Hill Bulk Fuel Storage 
 Facility has been added to the fuel capacity of United 
 States Indo-Pacific Command; and
 (B) the bulk fuel requirements of United States 
 Indo-Pacific Command have been fully programmed for 
 funding in the five fiscal years following the year in 
 which the certification is submitted.
 (b) Report Required.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than one year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Defense shall 
 submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the 
 costs associated with replacing the Red Hill Bulk Fuel Storage 
 Facility.
 (2) Elements.--The report required by paragraph (1) shall 
 include each of the following:
 (A) Detailed plans for how the Department of 
 Defense will replicate the aggregate bulk fuel storage 
 capacity of the Red Hill Bulk Fuel Storage Facility 
 throughout the Indo-Pacific region, including on United 
 States territories and possessions, as appropriate, in 
 both steady state and in a major conflict lasting not 
 less than 180 days, including through the use of--
 (i) fleet oilers;
 (ii) fuel bladders;
 (iii) above ground storage facilities; and
 (iv) hardened storage facilities.
 (B) An identification of--
 (i) any additional costs to the Department 
 of acquiring or building the assets planned to 
 replicate such fuel storage capacity and of 
 obtaining any required environmental approvals 
 to operate such assets; and
 (ii) the timelines associated with 
 acquiring or building such assets and obtaining 
 such approvals.
 (C) An analysis of the relative survivability, 
 reliability, risks, and any advantages associated with 
 the assets planned to replicate such fuel storage 
 capacity, including any changes necessary for the 
 operational plans of the Department compared to such 
 operational plans as in effect when the Red Hill Bulk 
 Fuel Storage Facility was operational.
 (D) An identification of the cost to the Department 
 of maintaining the Red Hill Bulk Fuel Storage Facility 
 in an empty but rapidly reconstitutable state.
 (E) Any other matters the Secretary of the Defense 
 considers relevant.
 (c) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to affect the authority of the Secretary of Defense or the 
Secretary of the Navy to conduct any of the following at Red Hill Bulk 
Fuel Storage Facility:
 (1) Defueling activities.
 (2) Remedial investigations.
 (3) Site or safety inspections.
 (4) Feasibility studies.
 (5) Safety related repairs.
 (6) Monitoring.
 (7) Transferring of fuel.
 (8) Maintenance and sustainment activities.

SEC. 333. LIMITATION ON USE OF FUNDS PENDING AWARD OF CERTAIN PROJECTS 
 AND IMPLEMENTATION OF CERTAIN RECOMMENDATIONS.

 Of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this Act or otherwise 
made available for fiscal year 2023 for operations and maintenance, 
Navy, Administration line item, Line 440, not more than 25 percent may 
be obligated or expended until the date on which the Secretary of the 
Navy certifies to the congressional defense committees that the Navy 
has awarded the projects listed within Chapter 8.1.1, Table 8-1, and 
implemented the recommendation listed as D1 within Appendix A.1 and 
Appendix A.2, of the document prepared by Simpson Gumpertz & Heger Inc, 
entitled ``Final Assessment Report: Assessment of Red Hill Underground 
Fuel Storage Facility Pearl Harbor, Hawaii'' and dated April 29, 2022.

SEC. 334. PLACEMENT OF SENTINEL OR MONITORING WELLS IN PROXIMITY TO RED 
 HILL BULK FUEL FACILITY.

 (a) In General.--Not later than April 1, 2023, the Secretary of 
Defense, in coordination with the Director of the United States 
Geological Survey and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection 
Agency, shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report 
on the placement of sentinel or monitoring wells in proximity to the 
Red Hill Bulk Fuel Facility for the purpose of monitoring and tracking 
the movement of fuel that has escaped the Facility. Such report shall 
include--
 (1) the number and location of new wells that have been 
 established during the 12-month period preceding the date of 
 the submission of the report;
 (2) an identification of the wells proposed to be 
 established by the aquifer recovery working group;
 (3) an analysis of the need for any wells not recommended 
 by the aquifer recovery working group;
 (4) the proposed number and location of any such additional 
 wells; and
 (5) the priority level of each proposed well based on--
 (A) the optimal locations for new wells; and
 (B) the capability of a proposed well to assist in 
 monitoring and tracking the movement of fuel toward the 
 Halawa shaft, the Halawa Well, and the Aiea Well.
 (b) Quarterly Briefings.--Not later than 30 days after the 
submission of the report under subsection (a), and every 90 days 
thereafter for 12 months, the Secretary of Defense shall provide to the 
congressional defense committees a briefing on the progress of the 
Department toward installing the wells described in paragraphs (2) and 
(3) of subsection (a).

SEC. 335. REPORT ON DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE EFFORTS TO TRACK HEALTH 
 IMPLICATIONS OF FUEL LEAKS AT RED HILL BULK FUEL 
 FACILITY.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with 
the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the 
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, shall submit to 
the appropriate congressional committees a report on the efforts of the 
Secretary to appropriately track the health implications of fuel leaks 
from the Red Hill Bulk Fuel Facility for members of the Armed Forces 
and their dependents, including members and dependents from each Armed 
Force, including the Coast Guard. The report shall include each of the 
following:
 (1) A plan to coordinate with the Centers for Disease 
 Control and Prevention to align with the environmental health 
 assessment and monitoring efforts of the Centers.
 (2) A description of any potential benefits of coordinating 
 and sharing data with the State of Hawaii Department of Health.
 (3) An analysis of the extent to which data from the State 
 of Hawaii Department of Health and data from other non-
 Department of Defense sources can and should be used in any 
 long-term health study relating to fuel leaks from the Red Hill 
 Bulk Fuel Facility.
 (4) A description of the potential health implications of 
 contaminants, including fuel, found in the drinking water 
 distribution system at the Red Hill Bulk Fuel Facility during 
 testing after the fuel leaks that occurred in May and November 
 2021.
 (5) A description of any contaminants, including fuel, 
 detected in the water during the 12-month period preceding the 
 fuel leak that occurred in November 2021.
 (6) A description of any potential benefits of broadening 
 the tracing window to include indications of contaminants, 
 including fuel, in the drinking water supply at the Red Hill 
 Bulk Fuel Facility before May 2021.
 (b) Appropriate Congressional Committees.--In this section, the 
term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the congressional defense committees;
 (2) the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (3) the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the 
 Senate.

SEC. 336. STUDIES RELATING TO WATER NEEDS OF THE ARMED FORCES ON OAHU.

 (a) Study on Future Water Needs of Oahu.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than July 31, 2023, the 
 Secretary of the Defense, in coordination with the Honolulu 
 Board of Water Supply, shall conduct a study on how the 
 Department of Defense can best address the future water needs 
 on the island of Oahu for the Armed Forces. Such study shall 
 include consideration of--
 (A) the construction of a new water treatment plant 
 or plants;
 (B) the construction of a new well for use by 
 members of the Armed Forces and the civilian 
 population;
 (C) the construction of a new well for the 
 exclusive use of members of the Armed Forces;
 (D) transferring ownership and operation of 
 existing Department of Defense utilities to a 
 municipality or existing publicly owned utility;
 (E) conveying the Navy utilities to the Honolulu 
 Board of Water Supply, with consideration; and
 (F) any other water solutions the Secretary 
 determines appropriate.
 (2) Coordination.--In carrying out the study under 
 paragraph (1), the Secretary shall coordinate with the State of 
 Hawaii, the Honolulu Board of Water Supply, the Secretary of 
 the Department in which the Coast Guard is operating, the 
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, and any 
 other individual or entity the Secretary determines 
 appropriate.
 (b) Hydrological Study.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than July 31, 2023, the 
 Secretary of Defense shall enter into an agreement with the 
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency and the 
 Director of the United States Geological Survey, in 
 consultation with the State of Hawaii, to perform a study to 
 model the groundwater flow in the area surrounding the Red Hill 
 Bulk Fuel Storage Facility. The model shall be designed to--
 (A) seek to improve the understanding of the 
 direction and rate of groundwater flow and dissolved 
 constituent migration within the aquifers around the 
 facility;
 (B) reflect site specific data, including available 
 data of the heterogeneous subsurface geologic system; 
 and
 (C) address any previously identified deficiencies 
 in existing groundwater flow models.
 (2) Deadline for completion.--The study under paragraph (1) 
 shall be completed by not later than one year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act.
 (c) Report; Briefing.--
 (1) In general.--Upon completion of the studies under 
 subsections (a) and (b), the Secretary shall--
 (A) submit to the appropriate congressional 
 committees a report on the findings of the studies; and
 (B) provide to such committees a briefing on such 
 findings.
 (2) Appropriate congressional committees.--In this 
 subsection, the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the congressional defense committees;
 (B) the Committee on Transportation and 
 Infrastructure and the Committee on Energy and Commerce 
 of the House of Representatives; and
 (C) the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation and the Committee on Environment and 
 Public Works of the Senate.

SEC. 337. STUDY ON ALTERNATIVE USES FOR RED HILL BULK FUEL FACILITY.

 (a) Study Required.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 30 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall seek 
 to enter into an agreement with a federally funded research and 
 development center that meets the criteria specified in 
 paragraph (2) under which such center will conduct a study to 
 determine the range of feasible alternative Department of 
 Defense uses for the Red Hill Bulk Fuel Facility and provide to 
 the Secretary a report on the findings of the study. The 
 conduct of such study shall include--
 (A) engagement with stakeholders;
 (B) a review of historical alternative uses of 
 facilities with similar characteristics; and
 (C) such other modalities as determined necessary 
 to appropriately identify alternative use options, 
 including data and information collected from various 
 stakeholders and through site visits to physically 
 inspect the facility.
 (2) Criteria for ffrdc.--The federally funded research and 
 development center with which the Secretary seeks to enter into 
 an agreement under paragraph (1) shall meet the following 
 criteria:
 (A) A primary focus on studies and analysis.
 (B) A record of conducting research and analysis 
 using a multidisciplinary approach.
 (C) Demonstrated specific competencies in--
 (i) life cycle cost-benefit analysis;
 (ii) military facilities and how such 
 facilities support missions; and
 (iii) the measurement of environmental 
 impacts.
 (D) A strong reputation for publishing publicly 
 releasable analysis to inform public debate.
 (b) Cost-benefit Analysis.--An agreement entered into pursuant to 
subsection (a) shall specify that the study conducted under the 
agreement will include a cost-benefit analysis of the feasible 
Department of Defense alternative uses considered under the study. Such 
cost-benefit analysis shall cover each of the following for each such 
alternative use:
 (1) The design and construction costs.
 (2) Life-cycle costs, including the operation and 
 maintenance costs of operating the facility, such as annual 
 operating costs, predicted maintenance costs, and any disposal 
 costs at the end of the useful life of the facility.
 (3) Any potential military benefits.
 (4) Any potential benefits for the local economy, including 
 any potential employment opportunities for members of the 
 community.
 (5) A determination of environmental impact analysis 
 requirements.
 (6) The effects of the use on future mitigation efforts.
 (7) Any additional factors determined to be relevant by the 
 federally funded research and development center in 
 consultation with the Secretary.
 (c) Deadline for Completion.--An agreement entered into pursuant to 
subsection (a) shall specify that the study conducted under the 
agreement shall be completed by not later than February 1, 2024.
 (d) Briefing.--Upon completion of a study conducted under an 
agreement entered into pursuant to subsection (a), the Secretary shall 
provide to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of 
Representatives a briefing on the findings of the study.
 (e) Public Availability.--
 (1) FFRDC.--An agreement entered into pursuant to 
 subsection (a) shall specify that the federally funded research 
 and development center shall make an unclassified version of 
 the report provided to the Secretary publicly available on an 
 appropriate website of the center.
 (2) Department of defense.--Upon receipt of such report, 
 the Secretary shall make an unclassified version of the report 
 publicly available on an appropriate website of the Department 
 of Defense.

Subtitle D--Treatment of Perfluoroalkyl Substances and Polyfluoroalkyl 
 Substances

SEC. 341. PRIZES FOR DEVELOPMENT OF NON-PFAS-CONTAINING TURNOUT GEAR.

 Section 330 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283; 134 Stat. 3528; 10 U.S.C. 2661 note 
prec.) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by striking ``of a non-PFAS-containing'' and 
 inserting ``of the following:''
 ``(1) A non-PFAS-containing''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(2) Covered personal protective firefighting equipment 
 that does not contain an intentionally added perfluoroalkyl 
 substance or polyfluoroalkyl substance.''; and
 (2) by amending subsection (f) to read as follows:
 ``(f) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `perfluoroalkyl substance' means a man-made 
 chemical of which all of the carbon atoms are fully fluorinated 
 carbon atoms.
 ``(2) The term `polyfluoroalkyl substance' means a man-made 
 chemical containing at least one fully fluorinated carbon atom 
 and at least one non-fully fluorinated carbon atom.
 ``(3) The term `covered personal protective firefighting 
 equipment'' means the following:
 ``(A) Turnout gear jacket or coat.
 ``(B) Turnout gear pants.
 ``(C) Turnout coveralls.
 ``(D) Any other personal protective firefighting 
 equipment, as determined by the Secretary of Defense, 
 in consultation with the Administrator of the United 
 States Fire Administration.''.

SEC. 342. MODIFICATION TO RESTRICTION ON DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 PROCUREMENT OF CERTAIN ITEMS CONTAINING PERFLUOROOCTANE 
 SULFONATE OR PERFLUOROOCTANOIC ACID.

 (a) Modification.--Section 333 of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry 
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 
116-283; 134 Stat. 3531, 10 U.S.C. 3063 note) is amended--
 (1) in the section heading, by striking ``perfluorooctane 
 sulfonate or perfluorooctanoic acid'' and inserting 
 ``perfluoroalkyl substances or polyfluoroalkyl substances'';
 (2) in subsection (a), by striking ``perfluorooctane 
 sulfonate (PFOS) or perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA)'' and 
 inserting ``any perfluoroalkyl substance or polyfluoroalkyl 
 substance''; and
 (3) by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
 ``(b) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `covered item' means the following:
 ``(A) Nonstick cookware or food service ware for 
 use in galleys or dining facilities.
 ``(B) Food packaging materials.
 ``(C) Cleaning products, including floor waxes.
 ``(D) Carpeting.
 ``(E) Rugs, curtains, and upholstered furniture.
 ``(F) Sunscreen.
 ``(G) Shoes and clothing for which treatment with a 
 perfluoroalkyl substance or polyfluoroalkyl substance 
 is not necessary for an essential function.
 ``(2) The term `perfluoroalkyl substance' means a man-made 
 chemical of which all of the carbon atoms are fully fluorinated 
 carbon atoms.
 ``(3) The term `polyfluoroalkyl substance' means a man-made 
 chemical containing at least one fully fluorinated carbon atom 
 and at least one nonfluorinated carbon atom.''.
 (b) Reports on Procurement of Certain Items Without Intentionally 
Added Perfluoroalkyl Substances or Polyfluoroalkyl Substances.--Not 
later than 270 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and 
annually thereafter, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
Committees on Armed Services of the House of Representatives and the 
Senate a report containing a detailed description of the following:
 (1) Steps taken to identify covered items with any 
 intentionally added perfluoroalkyl substance or polyfluoroalkyl 
 substance procured by the Department of Defense.
 (2) Steps taken to identify covered items without any 
 intentionally added perfluoroalkyl substance or polyfluoroalkyl 
 substance, and the vendors of such covered items, for 
 procurement by the Department.
 (3) Steps taken to limit the procurement by the Department 
 of covered items with any intentionally added perfluoroalkyl 
 substance or polyfluoroalkyl substance.
 (4) Planned steps of the Department to limit the 
 procurement of items with any intentionally added 
 perfluoroalkyl substance or polyfluoroalkyl substance.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered item'' includes the following:
 (A) Nonstick cookware or food service ware for use 
 in galleys or dining facilities.
 (B) Food packaging materials.
 (C) Cleaning products, including floor waxes.
 (D) Carpeting.
 (E) Rugs, curtains, and upholstered furniture.
 (F) Sunscreen.
 (G) Shoes and clothing for which treatment with a 
 perfluoroalkyl substance or polyfluoroalkyl substance 
 is not necessary for an essential function.
 (H) Such other items as may be determined by the 
 Secretary of Defense.
 (2) The terms ``perfluoroalkyl substance'' and 
 ``polyfluoroalkyl substance'' have the meaning given such terms 
 in section 333 of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National 
 Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-
 283; 134 Stat. 3531, 10 U.S.C. 3063 note), as amended by 
 subsection (a).

SEC. 343. PROHIBITION ON PURCHASE BY DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE OF 
 FIREFIGHTING EQUIPMENT CONTAINING PER- AND 
 POLYFLUOROALKYL SUBSTANCES.

 (a) Prohibition on Procurement.--Except as provided in subsection 
(d), beginning October 1, 2025, the Secretary of Defense may not enter 
into any contract for the purchase of personal protective firefighting 
equipment for use by firefighters of the Department of Defense if such 
equipment contains a per- or polyfluoroalkyl substance.
 (b) Implementation.--The Secretary of Defense shall include the 
prohibition under subsection (a) in any contract for the purchase of 
personal protective firefighting equipment for use by firefighters of 
the Department of Defense.
 (c) Savings Clause.--Nothing in this section shall be construed--
 (1) to require the Secretary of Defense to test any piece 
 of covered personal protective firefighting equipment to 
 confirm the absence of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances; or
 (2) to affect existing inventories of personal protective 
 firefighting equipment.
 (d) Lack of Availability.--
 (1) In general.--If the Secretary of Defense determines 
 that equipment described in paragraph (2) is not available for 
 purchase by the Department of Defense, the requirement under 
 subsection (a) shall not apply until such date as the Secretary 
 determines that such equipment is available for purchase.
 (2) Equipment described.--The equipment described in this 
 paragraph is personal protective firefighting equipment that--
 (A) does not contain a per- or polyfluoroalkyl 
 substance;
 (B) meets every applicable standard for personal 
 protective firefighting equipment (other than a 
 standard specifically relating to per- or 
 polyfluoroalkyl substances); and
 (C) is at least as protective as current personal 
 protective firefighting equipment containing a per- or 
 polyfluoroalkyl substance.

SEC. 344. STANDARDS FOR RESPONSE ACTIONS WITH RESPECT TO PFAS 
 CONTAMINATION.

 (a) In General.--In conducting a response action to address 
perfluoroalkyl or polyfluoroalkyl substance contamination from 
Department of Defense or National Guard activities, the Secretary of 
Defense shall conduct such actions to achieve a level of such 
substances in the environmental media that meets or exceeds the most 
stringent of the following standards for each applicable covered PFAS 
substance in any environmental media:
 (1) A State standard, as described in section 
 121(d)(2)(A)(ii) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
 Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 
 9621(d)(2)(A)(ii)), that is in effect in the State in which the 
 response action is being conducted, regardless of whether any 
 agency has made a determination under section 300.400(g) of 
 title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, with respect to such 
 standard for purposes of the response action.
 (2) A Federal standard, as described in section 
 121(d)(2)(A)(i) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
 Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 
 9621(d)(2)(A)(i)).
 (3) A health advisory under section 1412(b)(1)(F) of the 
 Safe Drinking Water Act (42 U.S.C. 300g-1(b)(1)(F)).
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered PFAS substance'' means any of the 
 following:
 (A) Perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA).
 (B) Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA).
 (C) Perfluorohexanoic acid (PFHxA).
 (D) Perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS).
 (E) Perfluorohexane sulfonate (PFHxS).
 (F) Perfluorobutane sulfonic acid (PFBS).
 (G) Perfluoroheptanoic acid (PFHpA).
 (H) Perfluorodecanoic acid (PFDA).
 (I) Fluorotelomer sulfonamide betaine.
 (2) The term ``response action'' means an action taken 
 pursuant to section 104 of the Comprehensive Environmental 
 Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 
 9604).
 (c) Savings Clause.--Except with respect to the specific level 
required to be met under subsection (a), nothing in this section 
affects the application of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq.).

SEC. 345. LIST OF CERTAIN PFAS USES DEEMED ESSENTIAL; BRIEFINGS ON 
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE PROCUREMENT OF CERTAIN ITEMS 
 CONTAINING PFOS OR PFOA.

 (a) List of PFAS Uses Deemed Essential.--Not later than June 1, 
2023, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the Committees on Armed 
Services of the House of Representatives and the Senate a list of each 
known use of per- or polyfluoroalkyl substances that the Secretary has 
deemed an essential use for which use of a replacement substance is 
impossible or impracticable. For each use so listed, the Secretary 
shall--
 (1) identify why the use is essential; and
 (2) provide a brief explanation as to why such replacement 
 is impossible or impracticable, as the case may be.
 (b) Annual Briefings.--Not later than 270 days after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary of 
Defense shall provide to the Committees on Armed Services of the House 
of Representatives and the Senate a briefing that includes a 
description of each of the following:
 (1) Steps taken to identify covered items procured by the 
 Department of Defense that contain perfluorooctane sulfonate 
 (PFOS) or perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA).
 (2) Steps taken to identify products and vendors of covered 
 items that do not contain PFOS or PFOA.
 (3) Steps taken to limit the procurement by the Department 
 of covered items that contain PFOS or PFOA.
 (4) Steps the Secretary intends to take to limit the 
 procurement of covered items that contain PFOS or PFOA.
 (c) Covered Item Defined.--In this section, the term ``covered 
item'' means--
 (1) nonstick cookware or cooking utensils for use in 
 galleys or dining facilities; and
 (2) upholstered furniture, carpets, and rugs that have been 
 treated with stain-resistant coatings.

 Subtitle E--Logistics and Sustainment

SEC. 351. RESOURCES REQUIRED FOR ACHIEVING MATERIEL READINESS METRICS 
 AND OBJECTIVES FOR MAJOR DEFENSE ACQUISITION PROGRAMS.

 (a) In General.--Section 118 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended:
 (1) in subsection (d)(2), by striking ``objectives'' and 
 inserting ``objectives, such as infrastructure, workforce, or 
 supply chain considerations'';
 (2) redesignating subsection (e) as subsection (f); and
 (3) inserting after subsection (d) the following new 
 subsection (e):
 ``(e) Funding Estimates.--Not later than five days after the date 
on which the Secretary of Defense submits to Congress the materials in 
support of the budget of the President for a fiscal year, the Director 
of Cost Assessment and Performance Evaluation shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a comprehensive estimate of the funds 
necessary to meet the materiel readiness objectives required by 
subsection (c) through the period covered by the most recent future-
years defense program. At a minimum, the Director shall provide, for 
each major weapon system, by designated mission design series, variant, 
or class, a comprehensive estimate of the funds necessary to meet such 
objectives that--
 ``(1) have been obligated by subactivity group within the 
 operation and maintenance accounts for the second fiscal year 
 preceding the budget year;
 ``(2) the Director estimates will have been obligated by 
 subactivity group within the operation and maintenance accounts 
 by the end of the fiscal year preceding the budget year; and
 ``(3) have been budgeted and programmed across the future 
 years defense program within the operation and maintenance 
 accounts by subactivity group.''.
 (b) Phased Implementation.--The Director of Cost Assessment and 
Performance Evaluation, may meet the requirements of subsection (e) of 
section 118 of title 10, United States Code, as added by subsection 
(a), through a phased submission of the funding estimates required 
under such subsection. In conducting a phased implementation, the 
Director shall ensure that--
 (1) for the budget request for fiscal year 2024, funding 
 estimates are provided for a representative sample by military 
 department of at least one-third of the major weapon systems;
 (2) for the budget request for fiscal year 2025, funding 
 estimates are provided for an additional one-third of the major 
 weapon systems; and
 (3) full implementation for all major weapons systems is 
 completed not later than five days after the date on which the 
 Secretary of Defense submits to Congress the materials in 
 support of the budget of the President for fiscal year 2026.

SEC. 352. ANNUAL PLAN FOR MAINTENANCE AND MODERNIZATION OF NAVAL 
 VESSELS.

 (a) Annual Plan.--Section 231 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) in the heading, by inserting ``, maintenance, and 
 modernization'' after ``construction'';
 (2) by redesignating subsections (d) through (f) as 
 subsections (e) through (g), respectively;
 (3) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(d) Annual Plan for Maintenance and Modernization of Naval 
Vessels.--In addition to the plan included under subsection (a)(1), the 
Secretary of Defense shall include with the defense budget materials 
for a fiscal year each of the following:
 ``(1) A plan for the maintenance and modernization of naval 
 vessels that includes the following:
 ``(A) A forecast of the maintenance and 
 modernization requirements for both the naval vessels 
 in the inventory of the Navy and the vessels required 
 to be delivered under the naval vessel construction 
 plan under subsection (a)(1).
 ``(B) A description of the initiatives of the 
 Secretary of the Navy to ensure that activities key to 
 facilitating the maintenance and modernization of naval 
 vessels (including with respect to increasing workforce 
 and industrial base capability and capacity, shipyard 
 level-loading, and facility improvements) receive 
 sufficient resourcing, and are including in appropriate 
 planning, to facilitate the requirements specified in 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(2) A certification by the Secretary that both the budget 
 for that fiscal year and the future-years defense program 
 submitted to Congress in relation to such budget under section 
 221 of this title provide for funding for the maintenance and 
 modernization of naval vessels at a level that is sufficient 
 for such maintenance and modernization in accordance with the 
 plan under paragraph (1).''; and
 (4) in subsection (f), as redesignated by paragraph (2), by 
 inserting `` and the plan and certification under subsection 
 (d)'' after ``subsection (a)''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
chapter 9 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by striking the 
item relating to section 231 and inserting the following new item:

``231. Budgeting for construction, maintenance, and modernization of 
 naval vessels: annual plan and 
 certification.''.

SEC. 353. INDEPENDENT STUDY RELATING TO FUEL DISTRIBUTION LOGISTICS 
 ACROSS UNITED STATES INDO-PACIFIC COMMAND.

 (a) Study.--Not later than the 30 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall seek to enter 
into a contract with a federally funded research and development center 
to conduct a study on fuel distribution logistics in the area of 
responsibility of the United States Indo-Pacific Command.
 (b) Criteria for FFRDC.--The federally funded research and 
development center with which the Secretary seeks to enter into an 
contract under subsection (a) shall meet the following criteria, as 
determined by the Secretary:
 (1) A primary focus on the conduct of studies and analysis.
 (2) A demonstrated record of conducting research and 
 analysis using a multidisciplinary approach.
 (3) A strong reputation for publishing publicly releasable 
 analysis to inform public debate.
 (c) Elements.--The study conducted pursuant to subsection (a) shall 
include, with respect to the area of responsibility of the United 
States Indo-Pacific Command, the following:
 (1) An evaluation of the vulnerabilities associated with 
 the production, refinement, and distribution of fuel by the 
 Armed Forces during periods of conflict and in contested 
 logistics environments within the area, including with respect 
 to the capability of the Armed Forces to sustain operational 
 flights by aircraft and joint force distributed operations.
 (2) An assessment of potential adversary capabilities to 
 disrupt such fuel distribution in the area through a variety of 
 means, including financial means, cyber means, and conventional 
 kinetic attacks.
 (3) An assessment of any gaps in the capability or capacity 
 of inter- or intra-theater fuel distribution, including any 
 gaps relating to storage, transfer platforms, manning for 
 platforms, command and control, or fuel handling.
 (4) An evaluation of the positioning of defense fuel 
 support points in the area, including with respect to 
 operational suitability and vulnerability to a variety of 
 kinetic threats.
 (5) An assessment of the readiness of allies and partners 
 of the United States to support the supply, storage, and 
 distribution of fuel by the Armed Forces in the area, including 
 a review of any relevant security cooperation agreements 
 entered into between the United States and such allies and 
 partners.
 (6) An assessment of potential actions to mitigate any 
 vulnerabilities identified pursuant to the study.
 (d) Report.--
 (1) Submission to secretary of defense.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary of Defense shall 
 require, as a term of any contract entered into with a 
 federally funded research and development center to 
 conduct a study pursuant to subsection (a), that not 
 later than one year after the date of entering into 
 such contract, the federally funded research and 
 development center shall submit to the Secretary a 
 report containing the findings of the study.
 (B) Form.--The report under subparagraph (A) shall 
 be submitted in an unclassified and publicly releasable 
 form, but may contain a classified annex.
 (2) Submission to congress.--Not later than 30 days after 
 the date on which the Secretary of Defense receives the report 
 under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall submit to the 
 appropriate congressional committees a copy of such report, 
 submitted without change.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the congressional defense committees;
 (B) the Committee on Transportation and 
 Infrastructure of the House of Representatives; and
 (C) the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate.
 (2) The term ``contested logistics environment'' has the 
 meaning given that term in section 2926 of title 10, United 
 States Code.

SEC. 354. PROGRAMS OF MILITARY DEPARTMENTS ON REDUCTION OF FUEL 
 RELIANCE AND PROMOTION OF ENERGY-AWARE BEHAVIORS.

 (a) Establishment.--Subchapter III of chapter 173 of title 10, 
United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new 
section:
``Sec. 2928. Programs on reduction of fuel reliance and promotion of 
 energy-aware behaviors
 ``(a) Establishment.--Each Secretary of a military department shall 
establish a program for the promotion of energy-aware behaviors within 
that military department and the reduction of unnecessary fuel 
consumption in support of the goals under subsection (b).
 ``(b) Goals.--The goals of the programs established under 
subsection (a) shall be as follows:
 ``(1) To reduce the reliance of the Department of Defense 
 on fossil fuels.
 ``(2) To decrease energy-related strategic vulnerabilities 
 and enhance military readiness.
 ``(3) To integrate sustainability features for new and 
 existing military installations and other facilities of the 
 Department.
 ``(c) Minimum Required Elements.--Under the program of a military 
department under subsection (a), the Secretary of such military 
department shall carry out, with respect to the military department, 
and at a minimum, the following:
 ``(1) The development and implementation of a strategy for 
 the collection and analysis of data on fuel consumption, to 
 identify operational inefficiencies and enable data-driven 
 decision-making with respect to the reduction of fuel 
 consumption and fuel logistics.
 ``(2) The fostering of an energy-aware culture across the 
 military department to reduce fuel consumption, including 
 through--
 ``(A) the provision of educational and training 
 materials, including such materials that provide 
 information on the importance of operational energy 
 security and energy-aware behavior for military 
 readiness and combat capability; and
 ``(B) the pursuit of relevant research 
 opportunities with civilian institutions of higher 
 education and postsecondary educational institutions 
 within the Department of Defense.
 ``(3) The integration of operational energy factors into 
 the wargaming of the military department and other related 
 training activities that involve the modeling of scenarios, in 
 accordance with subsection (d), to provide to participants in 
 such activities realistic data on the risks and challenges 
 relating to operational energy and fuel logistics.
 ``(4) The implementation of data-driven operations planning 
 and logistics, to optimize cargo transport, streamline 
 operations, and reduce fuel demand and reliance within the 
 military department.
 ``(d) Wargaming Elements.--In integrating operational energy 
factors into the wargaming and related training activities of a 
military department under subsection (c)(4), the Secretary of the 
military department shall seek to ensure that the planning, design, and 
execution of such activities include--
 ``(1) coordination with the elements of the military 
 department responsible for fuel and logistics matters, to 
 ensure the modeling of energy demand and network risk during 
 such activities are accurate, taking into account shortfalls 
 and the direct and indirect effects of the efforts of foreign 
 adversaries to target fuel supply chains; and
 ``(2) a focus on improving integrated life-cycle management 
 processes and fuel supply logistics.''.
 (b) Deadline for Establishment.--The programs required under 
section 2928 of title 10, United States Code, as added by subsection 
(a), shall be established by not later than 180 days after the date of 
the enactment of this Act.
 (c) Briefing.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment 
of this Act, each Secretary of a military department shall provide to 
the congressional defense committees a briefing on the establishment of 
the program of the military department required under such section 
2928.

 Subtitle F--Matters Relating to Depots and Ammunition Production 
 Facilities

SEC. 361. BUDGETING FOR DEPOT AND AMMUNITION PRODUCTION FACILITY 
 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR: ANNUAL REPORT.

 Chapter 9 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at 
the end the following new section (and conforming the table of sections 
at the beginning of such chapter accordingly):
``Sec. 239d. Budgeting for depot and ammunition production facility 
 maintenance and repair: annual report
 ``(a) Annual Report.--The Secretary of Defense, in coordination 
with the Secretaries of the military departments, shall include with 
the defense budget materials for each fiscal year a report regarding 
the maintenance and repair of covered facilities.
 ``(b) Elements.--Each report required under subsection (a) shall 
include, at a minimum, the following (disaggregated by military 
department):
 ``(1) With respect to each of the three fiscal years 
 preceding the fiscal year covered by the defense budget 
 materials with which the report is included, revenue data for 
 that fiscal year for the maintenance, repair, and overhaul 
 workload funded at all the depots of the military department.
 ``(2) With respect to the fiscal year covered by the 
 defense budget materials with which the report is included and 
 each of the two fiscal years prior, an identification of the 
 following:
 ``(A) The amount of appropriations budgeted for 
 that fiscal year for depots, further disaggregated by 
 the type of appropriation.
 ``(B) The amount budgeted for that fiscal year for 
 working-capital fund investments by the Secretary of 
 the military department for the capital budgets of the 
 covered depots of the military department, shown in 
 total and further disaggregated by whether the 
 investment relates to the efficiency of depot 
 facilities, work environment, equipment, equipment 
 (non-capital investment program), or processes.
 ``(C) The total amount required to be invested by 
 the Secretary of the military department for that 
 fiscal year for the capital budgets of covered depots 
 pursuant to section 2476(a) of this title.
 ``(D) A comparison of the budgeted amount 
 identified under subparagraph (B) with the total 
 required amount identified under subparagraph (C).
 ``(E) For each covered depot of the military 
 department, of the total required amount identified 
 under subparagraph (C), the percentage of such amount 
 allocated, or projected to be allocated, to the covered 
 depot for that fiscal year.
 ``(3) For each covered facility of the military department, 
 the following:
 ``(A) Information on the average facility 
 condition, average critical facility condition, 
 restoration and maintenance project backlog, and 
 average equipment age, including a description of any 
 changes in such metrics from previous years.
 ``(B) Information on the status of the 
 implementation at the covered facility of the plans and 
 strategies of the Department of Defense relating to 
 covered facility improvement, including, as applicable, 
 the implementation of the strategy required under 
 section 359 of the National Defense Authorization Act 
 for Fiscal Year 2020 (Public Law 116-92; 133 Stat. 
 1323; 10 U.S.C. 2460 note).
 ``(c) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `ammunition production facility' means an 
 ammunition organic industrial base production facility.
 ``(2) The terms `budget' and `defense budget materials' 
 have the meaning given those terms in section 234 of this 
 title.
 ``(3) The term `covered depot' has the meaning given that 
 term in section 2476 of this title.
 ``(4) The term `covered facility' means a covered depot or 
 an ammunition production facility.''.

SEC. 362. EXTENSION OF AUTHORIZATION OF DEPOT WORKING CAPITAL FUNDS FOR 
 UNSPECIFIED MINOR MILITARY CONSTRUCTION.

 Section 2208(u)(4) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
striking ``2023'' and inserting ``2025''.

SEC. 363. MODIFICATION TO MINIMUM CAPITAL INVESTMENT FOR CERTAIN 
 DEPOTS.

 (a) Modification.--Section 2476 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by striking ``six'' and inserting ``eight''; 
 and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 sentence: ``Of such total amount required to be 
 invested, an amount equal to not less than two percent 
 of such average total for the preceding three fiscal 
 years shall be invested from funds authorized for 
 Facilities Sustainment, Restoration, and Modernization 
 activities of the military department.''; and
 (2) in subsection (b), by inserting `` including through 
 the rebuilding of property following the end of the economic 
 useful life of the property and the restoration of property or 
 equipment to like-new condition,'' after ``operations,'';
 (3) by redesignating subsections (c) through (e) as 
 subsections (d) through (f); and
 (4) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(c) Compliance With Certain Requirements.--In identifying amounts 
to invest pursuant to the requirement under subsection (a), the 
Secretary of a military department shall comply with all applicable 
requirements of sections 129 and 129a of this title.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 2861(b) of such title is amended 
by striking ``subsection (e) of section 2476'' and inserting 
``subsection (f) of section 2476''.
 (c) Applicability.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
apply with respect to fiscal years beginning on or after October 1, 
2023.

SEC. 364. CONTINUATION OF REQUIREMENT FOR BIENNIAL REPORT ON CORE 
 DEPOT-LEVEL MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.

 (a) In General.--Section 1080(a) of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 (Public Law 114-92; 129 Stat. 
1000; 10 U.S.C. 111 note) does not apply to the report required to be 
submitted to Congress under section 2464(d) of title 10, United States 
Code.
 (b) Conforming Repeal.--Section 1061(c) of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017 (Public Law 114-328; 130 Stat. 
2401; 10 U.S.C. 111 note) is amended by striking paragraph (45).

SEC. 365. CONTINUATION OF REQUIREMENT FOR ANNUAL REPORT ON FUNDS 
 EXPENDED FOR PERFORMANCE OF DEPOT-LEVEL MAINTENANCE AND 
 REPAIR WORKLOADS.

 (a) In General.--Section 1080(a) of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 (Public Law 114-92; 129 Stat. 
1000; 10 U.S.C. 111 note) does not apply to the report required to be 
submitted to Congress under section 2466(d) of title 10, United States 
Code.
 (b) Conforming Repeal.--Section 1061(c) of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017 (Public Law 114-328; 130 Stat. 
2401; 10 U.S.C. 111 note) is amended by striking paragraph (46).

SEC. 366. FIVE-YEAR PLANS FOR IMPROVEMENTS TO DEPOT AND AMMUNITION 
 PRODUCTION FACILITY INFRASTRUCTURE.

 (a) Five-year Plans Required.--Concurrent with the submission to 
Congress of the budget of the President for each of fiscal years 2024, 
2025, 2026, 2027, and 2028 pursuant to section 1105(a) of title 31, 
United States Code, each Secretary of a military department shall 
submit to the congressional defense committees a report containing a 
description of the plan of that Secretary to improve depot and 
ammunition production facility infrastructure during the five fiscal 
years following the fiscal year for which such budget is submitted, 
with the objective of ensuring that all covered facilities have the 
capacity and capability to support the readiness and material 
availability goals of current and future weapon systems of the 
Department of Defense.
 (b) Elements.--Each plan required pursuant to subsection (a) shall 
include, with respect to the depots and ammunition production 
facilities of the military department for which the plan is submitted, 
the following:
 (1) A comprehensive review of the conditions and 
 performance of each covered facility, including the following:
 (A) An assessment of the current status of the 
 following elements:
 (i) Cost and schedule performance of the 
 covered facility.
 (ii) Material availability of weapon 
 systems supported at the covered facility and 
 the impact of the performance of the covered 
 facility on that availability.
 (iii) Work in progress and non-operational 
 items awaiting covered facility maintenance.
 (iv) The condition of the covered facility.
 (v) The backlog of restoration and 
 modernization projects at the covered facility.
 (vi) The condition of equipment at the 
 covered facility.
 (vii) The vulnerability of the covered 
 facility to adverse environmental conditions 
 and, if necessary, the investment required to 
 withstand those conditions.
 (B) With respect to the five-year period covered by 
 the plan, an identification of the major lines of 
 effort, milestones, and specific goals over such period 
 to address the elements specified in subparagraph (A) 
 and a description of how such goals serve the long-term 
 strategies of the Department of Defense relating to 
 covered facility improvement, including, as applicable, 
 the strategy required under section 359 of the National 
 Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020 (Public 
 Law 116-92; 133 Stat. 1323; 10 U.S.C. 2460 note).
 (2) The estimated costs of necessary depot and ammunition 
 production facility improvements and a description of how such 
 costs would be addressed by the Department of Defense budget 
 request submitted during the same year as the plan and the 
 applicable future-years defense program.
 (3) Information regarding the plan of the Secretary of the 
 military department to initiate such environmental and 
 engineering studies as may be necessary to carry out planned 
 depot and ammunition production facility improvements.
 (4) Detailed information regarding how depot improvement 
 projects and ammunition production facility improvement 
 projects will be paced and sequenced to ensure continuous 
 operations.
 (c) Incorporation of Results-oriented Management Practices.--Each 
plan required pursuant to subsection (a) shall incorporate the leading 
results-oriented management practices identified in the report of the 
Comptroller General of the United States titled ``Actions Needed to 
Improve Poor Conditions of Facilities and Equipment that Affect 
Maintenance Timeliness and Efficiency'' (GAO-19-242), or any successor 
report, including--
 (1) analytically based goals;
 (2) results-oriented metrics;
 (3) the identification of required resources, risks, and 
 stakeholders; and
 (4) regular reporting on progress to decision-makers.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``ammunition production facility'' means an 
 ammunition organic industrial base production facility.
 (2) The term ``covered depot'' has the meaning given that 
 term in section 2476 of title 10, United States Code.
 (3) The term ``covered facility'' means a covered depot or 
 an ammunition production facility.

SEC. 367. CLARIFICATION OF CALCULATION FOR CERTAIN WORKLOAD CARRYOVER 
 OF DEPARTMENT OF ARMY.

 For purposes of calculating the amount of workload carryover with 
respect to the depots and arsenals of the Department of the Army, the 
Secretary of Defense shall authorize the Secretary of the Army to use a 
calculation for such carryover that applies a material end of period 
exclusion.

 Subtitle G--Reports

SEC. 371. ANNUAL REPORTS BY DEPUTY SECRETARY OF DEFENSE ON ACTIVITIES 
 OF JOINT SAFETY COUNCIL.

 Section 184(k) of title 10, United States Code is amended--
 (1) by striking ``Report.--The Chair'' and inserting 
 ``Reports.--(1) The Chair''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(2) Not later than December 31, 2022, and on an annual basis 
thereafter, the Deputy Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report containing--
 ``(A) a summary of the goals and priorities of the Deputy 
 Secretary for the year following the date of the submission of 
 the report with respect to the activities of the Council; and
 ``(B) an assessment by the Deputy Secretary of the 
 activities of the Council carried out during the year preceding 
 the date of such submission.''.

SEC. 372. QUARTERLY REPORTS ON EXPENDITURES FOR ESTABLISHMENT OF FUEL 
 DISTRIBUTION POINTS IN INDOPACOM AREA OF RESPONSIBILITY.

 (a) Quarterly Reports Required.--The Commander of United States 
Indo-Pacific Command shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees quarterly reports on the use of the funds described in 
subsection (c) until the date on which all such funds are expended.
 (b) Contents of Report.--Each report required under subsection (a) 
shall include an expenditure plan for the establishment of fuel 
distribution points in the area of responsibility of United States 
Indo-Pacific Command relating to the defueling and closure of the Red 
Hill Bulk Fuel Storage Facility.
 (c) Funds Described.--The funds described in this subsection are 
the amounts authorized to be appropriated or otherwise made available 
for fiscal year 2023 for Military Construction, Defense-wide for 
Planning and Design for United States Indo-Pacific Command.

SEC. 373. SECRETARY OF DEFENSE REPORT ON ESTABLISHING PROCEDURE FOR 
 ALERTING ABOUT EXPOSURE TO PERFLUOROALKYL SUBSTANCES.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit a report 
to Congress detailing how to establish a process for alerting active 
and retired members of the Armed Forces (and their families) about any 
applicable exposure of such individuals to perfluoroalkyl substances, 
and any potential health risks resulting from such exposure.
 (b) Applicable Exposure Defined.--For purposes of subsection (a), 
``applicable exposure'' means exposure while serving on a military base 
that contains perfluoroalkyl substance contamination of more than the 
acceptable exposure limits provided by the Environmental Protection 
Agency (0.004 parts per trillion (ppt) for perfluorooctanoic acid 
(PFOA) and 0.02 ppt for perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS)).

SEC. 374. REPORT ON EFFECTS OF WILDFIRE AND DROUGHT CONDITIONS ON 
 MILITARY READINESS AT UNITED STATES NAVAL OBSERVATORY 
 FLAGSTAFF STATION.

 Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a report on the effects of wildfire and persistent drought 
conditions at the United States Naval Observatory Flagstaff Station. 
Such report shall include the following:
 (1) A detailed description of the threat that such 
 conditions pose to the United States Naval Observatory 
 Flagstaff Station, including with respect to the mission of the 
 facility, continued operations, military readiness, military 
 and civilian workforce, housing, and access to water at the 
 facility.
 (2) Recommendations for actions to be taken by the 
 Secretary of Defense, and by Congress, to ensure the continued 
 and safe operations of the facility.

SEC. 375. REPORTS RELATING TO AQUEOUS FILM-FORMING FOAM SUBSTITUTES AND 
 PFAS CONTAMINATION AT CERTAIN INSTALLATIONS.

 (a) Report on Progress Towards AFFF Substitutes.--Not later than 
one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Under 
Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment shall submit to 
the congressional defense committees a report on the progress made 
towards, and the status of any certification efforts relating to, the 
replacement of fluorinated aqueous film-forming foam with a fluorine-
free fire-fighting agent, as required under section 322 of the National 
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020 (Public Law 116-92; 133 
Stat. 1307; 10 USC 2661 note prec.).
 (b) Report on Non-AFFF PFAS Contamination at Certain Military 
Installations.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and 
Sustainment shall submit to the congressional defense committees a 
report on known or suspected contamination on or around military 
installations located in the United States resulting from the release 
of any perfluoroalkyl substance or polyfluoroalkyl substance 
originating from a source other than aqueous film-forming foam.

SEC. 376. BRIEFINGS ON IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS RELATING TO 
 SAFETY AND ACCIDENT PREVENTION.

 Beginning not later than 45 days after the date of the enactment of 
this Act, and on a biannual basis thereafter until such time as each 
recommendation referred to in this section has been implemented, the 
Secretary of Defense shall provide to the Committees on Armed Services 
of the House of Representatives and the Senate a briefing on the status 
of the implementation of recommendations relating to safety and the 
prevention of accidents and mishaps (including fatal accidents) with 
respect to members of the Armed Forces, including--
 (1) the recommendations of the Comptroller General of the 
 United States in the Government Accountability Office report of 
 July 2021, titled ``Military Vehicles: Army and Marine Corps 
 Should Take Additional Actions to Mitigate and Prevent Training 
 Accidents'' (relating to vehicle safety);
 (2) the recommendations of the National Commission on 
 Military Aviation Safety under section 1087 of the John S. 
 McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 
 (Public Law 115-232; 132 Stat. 1992); and
 (3) the 117 recommendations of the Readiness Reform 
 Oversight Committee of the Department of the Navy following the 
 deaths of 17 members of the Armed Forces on the USS John McCain 
 and the USS Fitzgerald.

 Subtitle H--Other Matters

SEC. 381. ACCOUNTABILITY FOR MILITARY WORKING DOGS.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 50 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new section (and conforming 
the table of sections at the beginning of such chapter accordingly):
``Sec. 995. Accountability for military working dogs
 ``(a) Annual Reporting Requirement for Contractors.--
 ``(1) Requirement.--The Secretary of Defense shall require 
 that each covered contractor submit to the Under Secretary of 
 Defense (Comptroller), on an annual basis for the contract 
 period, a report containing an identification of--
 ``(A) the number of military working dogs that are 
 in the possession of the covered contractor and located 
 outside of the continental United States in support of 
 a military operation, if any; and
 ``(B) the primary location of any such military 
 working dogs.
 ``(2) Guidance.--The Under Secretary of Defense 
 (Comptroller) shall issue guidance on the annual reporting 
 requirement under paragraph (1) for purposes of carrying out 
 this section.
 ``(b) Annual Report to Congress.--Not later than March 1, 2023, and 
on an annual basis thereafter, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to 
the congressional defense a committees a report on the implementation 
of this section.
 ``(c) Covered Contractor Defined.--The term `covered contractor' 
means a contractor of the Department of Defense the contract of which 
the Secretary determines involves military working dogs.''.
 (b) Applicability.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
apply with respect to contracts entered into on or after the date of 
the enactment of this Act.
 (c) Deadline for Guidance.--Not later than 180 days after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Under Secretary of Defense 
(Comptroller) shall issue the guidance specified in section 995(a)(2) 
of title 10, United States Code, as added by subsection (a).
 (d) Regulations to Prohibit Abandonment.--Not later than 2 years 
after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense 
shall issue regulations to prohibit the abandonment of military working 
dogs used in support of a military operation outside of the continental 
United States.

SEC. 382. MEMBERSHIP OF COAST GUARD ON JOINT SAFETY COUNCIL.

 Section 184(b)(1) of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraph (D) as subparagraph (E); 
 and
 (2) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(D) During periods in which the Coast Guard is not 
 operating as a service in the Department of the Navy, an 
 officer of the Coast Guard, appointed by the Secretary of 
 Homeland Security.''.

SEC. 383. REQUIREMENT OF SECRETARY OF DEFENSE TO REIMBURSE STATE COSTS 
 OF FIGHTING CERTAIN WILDLAND FIRES.

 (a) Requirement.--Section 2691(d) of title 10, United States Code, 
is amended by striking ``may'' and inserting ``shall''.
 (b) Applicability.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply with respect to any lease, permit, license, or other grant of 
access that the Secretary of Defense enters into, or grants, on or 
after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 384. EXPANDED CONSULTATION IN TRAINING OF NATIONAL GUARD PERSONNEL 
 ON WILDFIRE RESPONSE.

 Section 351 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2018 (Public Law 115-91) is amended by inserting ``and the 
National Interagency Fire Center'' after ``Bureau''.

SEC. 385. INTERAGENCY COLLABORATION AND EXTENSION OF PILOT PROGRAM ON 
 MILITARY WORKING DOGS AND EXPLOSIVES DETECTION.

 (a) Extension of Pilot Program.--Section 381(b) of the National 
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 135 
Stat. 1672; 10 U.S.C. 3062 note) is amended by striking ``2024'' and 
inserting ``2025''.
 (b) Review of Research Efforts of Department of Defense and 
Department of Homeland Security.--
 (1) Review.--The Secretary of Defense, in coordination with 
 the Secretary of Homeland Security, shall conduct a review of 
 the recent and ongoing research, testing, and evaluation 
 efforts of the Department of Defense and the Department of 
 Homeland Security, respectively, regarding explosives detection 
 working dogs.
 (2) Matters.--The review under paragraph (1) shall include 
 an analysis of the following:
 (A) Any recent or ongoing research efforts of the 
 Department of Defense or the Department of Homeland 
 Security, respectively, relating to explosives 
 detection working dogs, and any similarities between 
 such efforts.
 (B) Any recent or ongoing veterinary research 
 efforts of the Department of Defense or the Department 
 of Homeland Security, respectively, relating to working 
 dogs, canines, or other areas that may be relevant to 
 the improvement of the breeding, health, performance, 
 or training of explosives detection working dogs.
 (C) Any research areas relating to explosives 
 detection working dogs in which there is a need for 
 ongoing research but no such ongoing research is being 
 carried out by either the Secretary of Defense or the 
 Secretary of Homeland Security, particularly with 
 respect to the health, domestic breeding, and training 
 of explosives detection working dogs.
 (D) How the recent and ongoing research efforts of 
 the Department of Defense and the Department of 
 Homeland Security, respectively, may improve the 
 domestic breeding of working dogs, including explosives 
 detection working dogs, and the health outcomes and 
 performance of such domestically bred working dogs, 
 including through coordination with academic or 
 industry partners with experience in research relating 
 to working dogs.
 (E) Potential opportunities for the Secretary of 
 Defense to collaborate with the Secretary of Homeland 
 Security on research relating to explosives detection 
 working dogs.
 (F) Any research partners of the Department of 
 Defense or the Department of Homeland Security, or 
 both, that may be beneficial in assisting with the 
 research efforts and areas described in this 
 subsection.
 (c) Plan Required.--Not later than 180 days of the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a plan for the Secretary of Defense to 
collaborate, as appropriate, with the Secretary of Homeland Security on 
research relating to explosives detection working dogs and other 
relevant matters. Such plan shall include the following:
 (1) An analysis of potential opportunities for 
 collaboration between the Secretary of Defense and the 
 Secretary of Homeland Security on the research efforts and 
 areas described in subsection (a)(2).
 (2) An identification of specific programs or areas of 
 research for such collaboration.
 (3) An identification of any additional agreements or 
 authorities necessary for the Secretaries to carry out such 
 collaboration.
 (4) An identification of additional funding necessary to 
 carry out such collaboration.
 (5) An analysis of potential coordination on the research 
 efforts and areas described in subsection (a)(2) with academic 
 and industry partners with experience in research relating to 
 working dogs, including an identification of potential 
 opportunities for such coordination in carrying out the 
 collaboration described in paragraph (1).
 (6) A proposed timeline for the Secretary of Defense to 
 engage in such collaboration, including specific proposed 
 deadlines.
 (7) Any other matters the Secretary of Defense considers 
 appropriate.
 (d) Explosives Detection Working Dog.--In this section, the term 
``explosives detection working dog'' means a canine that, in connection 
with the work duties of the canine performed for a Federal department 
or agency, is certified and trained to detect odors indicating the 
presence of explosives in a given object or area, in addition to the 
performance of such other duties for the Federal department or agency 
as may be assigned.

SEC. 386. ESTABLISHMENT OF ARMY AND AIR FORCE SAFETY COMMANDS; 
 IMPLEMENTATION OF ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION RECOMMENDATIONS.

 (a) Safety Commands.--
 (1) Army safety command.--
 (A) Establishment.--Not later than 180 days after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of 
 the Army shall establish within the Department of the 
 Army an ``Army Safety Command''.
 (B) Commander.--There is a Commander of the Army 
 Safety Command. The Commander shall be selected by the 
 Secretary of the Army from among the general officers 
 of the Army who hold a rank of major general or higher.
 (C) Duties.--The duties of the Army Safety Command 
 shall include, with respect to the Army, the 
 formulation of safety policy, the development of risk 
 management strategies, the monitoring of risk 
 adjudication processes, the provision of safety-related 
 training, and such other duties as the Secretary of the 
 Army may determine appropriate.
 (2) Air force safety command.--
 (A) Establishment.--Not later than 180 days after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of 
 the Air Force shall establish within the Department of 
 the Air Force an ``Air Force Safety Command''.
 (B) Commander.--There is a Commander of the Air 
 Force Safety Command. The Commander shall be selected 
 by the Secretary of the Air Force from among the 
 general officers of the Air Force who hold a rank of 
 major general or higher.
 (C) Duties.--The duties of the Air Force Safety 
 Command shall include, with respect to the Air Force, 
 the formulation of safety policy, the development of 
 risk management strategies, the monitoring of risk 
 adjudication processes, the provision of safety-related 
 training, and such other duties as the Secretary of the 
 Air Force may determine appropriate.
 (3) Transfer of preexisting organizational elements.--As of 
 the date on which the Safety Command of a military department 
 is established under this subsection, any element of that 
 military department responsible for the duties of such Safety 
 Command as of the day before the date of such establishment 
 (including the duties, responsibilities, and personnel of any 
 such element) shall be transferred to such Safety Command.
 (4) Briefings.--Not later than 90 days after the date on 
 which the Safety Command of a military department is 
 established under this subsection, the Secretary of that 
 military department shall provide to the congressional defense 
 committees a briefing on the duties, assigned personnel, key 
 lines of effort, and organizational structure of such Safety 
 Command.
 (b) Implementation of Accident Investigation Recommendation.--
 (1) Establishment of responsible entities.--
 (A) Army.--Not later than 180 days of enactment of 
 this Act, the Secretary of the Army shall establish 
 within the Department of the Army an entity the primary 
 responsibility of which is to ensure the implementation 
 across the Army of recommended actions arising from 
 accident investigations conducted by the Department of 
 Defense.
 (B) Air force.--Not later than 180 days of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Air Force 
 shall establish within the Department of the Air Force 
 an entity the primary responsibility of which is to 
 ensure the implementation across the Air Force of 
 recommended actions arising from accident 
 investigations conducted by the Department of Defense.
 (2) Briefings.--Not later than 90 days after the date on 
 which the Secretary of a military department establishes a 
 responsible entity under paragraph (1), that Secretary shall 
 provide to the congressional defense committees a briefing on 
 the duties, assigned personnel, key lines of effort, and 
 organizational structure of such entity.

SEC. 387. NATIONAL STANDARDS FOR FEDERAL FIRE PROTECTION AT MILITARY 
 INSTALLATIONS.

 (a) Standards Required.--The Secretary of Defense shall ensure 
that--
 (1) members of the Armed Forces and employees of Defense 
 Agencies who provide fire protection services to military 
 installations shall comply with the National Consensus 
 Standards developed by the National Fire Protection Association 
 pursuant to section 12(d) of the National Technology Transfer 
 and Advancement Act of 1995 (Pub. L. 104-113; 15 U.S.C. 272 
 note);
 (2) the minimum staffing requirement for any firefighting 
 vehicle responding to a structural building emergency at a 
 military installation is not less than four firefighters per 
 vehicle; and
 (3) the minimum staffing requirement for any firefighting 
 vehicle responding to an aircraft or airfield incident at a 
 military installation is not less than three firefighters per 
 vehicle.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The terms ``Armed Forces'' and ``Defense Agency'' have 
 the meanings given such terms in section 101 of title 10, 
 United States Code.
 (2) The term ``firefighter'' has the meaning given that 
 term in section 707(b) of the National Defense Authorization 
 Act for Fiscal Year 2020 (Pub. L. 116-92; 10 U.S.C. 1074m 
 note).
 (3) The term ``military installation'' has the meaning 
 given that term in section 2801 of title 10, United States 
 Code.

SEC. 388. PILOT PROGRAM FOR TACTICAL VEHICLE SAFETY DATA COLLECTION.

 (a) In General.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Army and the Secretary of 
the Navy shall jointly carry out a pilot program to evaluate the 
feasibility of using data recorders to monitor, assess, and improve the 
readiness and safety of the operation of military tactical vehicles (in 
this section referred to as the ``pilot program'').
 (b) Purposes.--The purposes of the pilot program are--
 (1) to allow for the automated identification of hazards 
 and potential hazards on and off military installations;
 (2) to mitigate and increase awareness of hazards and 
 potential hazards on and off military installations;
 (3) to identify near-miss accidents;
 (4) to create a standardized record source for accident 
 investigations;
 (5) to assess individual driver proficiency, risk, and 
 readiness;
 (6) to increase consistency in the implementation of 
 military installation and unit-level range safety programs 
 across military installations and units;
 (7) to evaluate the feasibility of incorporating metrics 
 generated from data recorders into the safety reporting systems 
 and to the Defense Readiness Reporting System as a measure of 
 assessing safety risks, mitigations, and readiness;
 (8) to determine the costs and benefits of retrofitting 
 data recorders on legacy platforms and including data recorders 
 as a requirement in acquisition of military tactical vehicles; 
 and
 (9) any other matters as determined by the Secretary 
 concerned.
 (c) Requirements.--In carrying out the pilot program, the Secretary 
of the Army and the Secretary of the Navy shall--
 (1) assess the feasibility of using commercial technology, 
 such as smartphones or technologies used by insurance 
 companies, as a data recorder;
 (2) test and evaluate a minimum of two data recorders that 
 meet the pilot program requirements;
 (3) select a data recorder capable of collecting and 
 exporting the telemetry data, event data, and driver 
 identification during operation and accidents;
 (4) install and maintain a data recorder on a sufficient 
 number of each of the military tactical vehicles listed under 
 subsection (f) at installations selected by the Secretary 
 concerned under subsection (e) for statistically significant 
 results;
 (5) establish and maintain a database that contains 
 telemetry data, driver data, and event data captured by the 
 data recorder;
 (6) regularly generate for each installation selected under 
 subsection (e) a dataset that is viewable in widely available 
 mapping software of hazards and potential hazards based on 
 telemetry data and event data captured by the data recorders;
 (7) generate actionable data sets and statistics on 
 individual, vehicle, and military installation;
 (8) require commanders at the installations selected under 
 subsection (e) to incorporate the actionable data sets and 
 statistics into the installation range safety program;
 (9) require unit commanders at the installations selected 
 under subsection (e) to incorporate the actionable data sets 
 and statistics into the unit driver safety program;
 (10) evaluate the feasibility of integrating data sets and 
 statistics to improve driver certification and licensing based 
 on data recorded and generated by the data recorders;
 (11) use open architecture to the maximum extent 
 practicable; and
 (12) carry out any other activities determined by the 
 Secretary as necessary to meet the purposes under subsection 
 (b).
 (d) Implementation Plan.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Army and the Secretary 
of the Navy shall develop a plan for implementing the pilot program.
 (e) Locations.--Each Secretary concerned shall carry out the pilot 
program at not fewer than one military installation in the United 
States selected by the Secretary concerned that meets the following 
conditions:
 (1) Contains the necessary force structure, equipment, and 
 maneuver training ranges to collect driver and military 
 tactical vehicle data during training and routine operation.
 (2) Represents at a minimum one of the five training ranges 
 identified in the study by the Comptroller General of the 
 United States titled ``Army and Marine Corps Should Take 
 Additional Actions to Mitigate and Prevent Training Accidents'' 
 that did not track unit location during the training events.
 (f) Covered Military Tactical Vehicles.--The pilot program shall 
cover the following military tactical vehicles:
 (1) Army Strykers.
 (2) Marine Corps Light Armored Vehicles.
 (3) Army Family of Medium Tactical Vehicles.
 (4) Marine Corps Medium Tactical Vehicle Replacements.
 (5) Army and Marine Corps High Mobility Multipurpose 
 Wheeled Vehicles.
 (6) Army and Marine Corps Joint Light Tactical Vehicles.
 (7) Army and United States Special Operations Command 
 Ground Mobility Vehicles.
 (8) Army Infantry Squad Vehicles.
 (9) Army Heavy Tactical Wheeled Vehicles.
 (g) Metrics.--The Secretaries shall develop metrics to evaluate the 
effectiveness of the pilot program in monitoring, assessing, and 
improving vehicle safety, driver readiness, and mitigation of risk.
 (h) Reports.--
 (1) Initial.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Army and the 
 Secretary of the Navy shall jointly submit to the congressional 
 defense committees a report on the pilot program that addresses 
 the plan for implementing the requirements under subsection 
 (c), including the established metrics under subsection (g).
 (2) Interim.--Not later than three years after the 
 commencement of the pilot program, the Secretary of the Army 
 and the Secretary of the Navy shall jointly submit to the 
 congressional defense committees a report on the status of the 
 pilot program, including the preliminary results in carrying 
 out the pilot program, the metrics generated during the pilot 
 program, disaggregated by military tactical vehicle, location, 
 and service, and the implementation plan under subsection (d).
 (3) Final.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the 
 termination of the pilot program, the Secretary of the 
 Army and the Secretary of the Navy shall jointly submit 
 to the congressional defense committees a report on the 
 results of the program.
 (B) Elements.--The report required by subparagraph 
 (A) shall--
 (i) assess the effectiveness of the pilot 
 program in meeting the purposes under 
 subsection (b);
 (ii) include the metrics generated during 
 the pilot program, disaggregated by military 
 tactical vehicle, location, and service;
 (iii) include the views of range personnel, 
 unit commanders, and tactical vehicle operators 
 involved in the pilot program on the level of 
 effectiveness of the technology selected;
 (iv) provide a cost estimate for equipping 
 legacy military tactical vehicles with data 
 recorders;
 (v) determine the instances in which data 
 recorders should be a requirement in the 
 acquisition of military tactical vehicles;
 (vi) recommend whether the pilot program 
 should be expanded or made into a program of 
 record; and
 (vii) recommend any statutory, regulatory, 
 or policy changes required to support the 
 purposes under subsection (b).
 (i) Termination.--The authority to carry out the pilot program 
under subsection (a) shall terminate five years after the date of the 
enactment of this Act.
 (j) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``accident'' means a collision, rollover, or 
 other mishap involving a motor vehicle.
 (2) The term ``data recorder'' means technologies installed 
 in a motor vehicle to record driver identification, telemetry 
 data, and event data related to the operation of the motor 
 vehicle.
 (3) The term ``driver identification'' means data enabling 
 the unique identification of the driver operating a motor 
 vehicle.
 (4) The term ``event data'' includes data related to--
 (A) the start and conclusion of each vehicle 
 operation;
 (B) a vehicle accident;
 (C) a vehicle acceleration, velocity, or location 
 with an increased potential for an accident; or
 (D) a vehicle orientation with an increased 
 potential for an accident.
 (5) The term ``Secretary concerned'' means--
 (A) the Secretary of the Army with respect to 
 matters concerning the Army; and
 (B) the Secretary of the Navy with respect to 
 matters concerning the Navy and Marine Corps.
 (6) The term ``tactical vehicle'' means a motor vehicle 
 designed to military specification, or a commercial design 
 motor vehicle modified to military specification, to provide 
 direct transportation support of combat or tactical operations, 
 or for the training of personnel for such operations.
 (7) The term ``telemetry data'' includes--
 (A) time;
 (B) vehicle distance traveled;
 (C) vehicle acceleration and velocity;
 (D) vehicle orientation, including roll, pitch, and 
 yaw; and
 (E) vehicle location in a geographic coordinate 
 system, including elevation.

SEC. 389. REQUIREMENT FOR PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF RESULTS OF DEPARTMENT OF 
 DEFENSE LEAD TESTING.

 Section 345 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 135 Stat. 1645; 10 U.S.C. 2715 note) is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``or lead'' 
 after ``(commonly referred to as `PFAS')''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``or lead'' 
 after ``substances''; and
 (2) in subsections (b), (d), and (e), by inserting ``or 
 lead'' after ``polyfluoroalkyl substances'' each place such 
 term appears.

SEC. 390. BRIEFING RELATING TO USE OF RECYCLED RUBBER WASTE PRODUCTS BY 
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE.

 Not later than February 1, 2023, the Deputy Assistant Secretary of 
Defense for Environment and Energy Resilience shall provide to the 
Committees on Armed Services of the House of Representatives and the 
Senate a briefing on the use, and potential use, by the Department of 
recycled and recyclable rubber products, including an assessment of the 
utility of such use.

SEC. 391. REVIVAL OF REPORT ON NON-FEDERALIZED NATIONAL GUARD 
 PERSONNEL, TRAINING, AND EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.

 Section 10504(c)(1) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
striking ``years 2018 through 2020'' and inserting ``years 2023 through 
2025''.

SEC. 392. USE OF AMOUNTS AVAILABLE TO DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE FOR 
 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE FOR REMOVAL OF MUNITIONS AND 
 EXPLOSIVES OF CONCERN IN GUAM.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense may use amounts available 
to the Department of Defense for operation and maintenance to remove 
munitions and explosives of concern from military installations in 
Guam.
 (b) Monitoring of Removal.--The Secretary shall monitor and assess 
the removal by the Department of munitions and explosives of concern 
from military installations in Guam and shall constantly update 
processes for such removal to mitigate any issues relating to such 
removal.
 (c) Report on Amounts Necessary.--Not later than 180 days after the 
date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall 
submit to the congressional defense committees a report indicating the 
amounts necessary to conduct removal of munitions and explosives of 
concern from military installations in Guam.
 (d) Definition.--In this section, the term ``munitions and 
explosives of concern'' has the meaning given that term in section 
179.3 of title 32, Code of Federal Regulations, or successor 
regulations.

SEC. 393. FUNDING FOR UTILITY HELICOPTER MODS.

 (a) Increase.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 101 for Aircraft Procurement, Army, as specified in the 
corresponding funding table in section 4101, for Utility Helicopter 
Mods, Line 026, is hereby increased by $10,000,000 for 60kVA 
Generators.
 (b) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 301 for Operations and Maintenance, Army, as specified in the 
corresponding funding table in section 4301, for Other Service Support, 
Line 490, is hereby reduced by $10,000,000.

SEC. 394. SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING THE USE OF WORKING DOGS TO DETECT 
 EARLY STAGES OF DISEASES.

 It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the ongoing research effort conducted by the Department 
 of the Army, in partnership with the University of 
 Pennsylvania, titled Training Aid Delivery Device 2.0 Training 
 Support for COVID-19 Detection, is exploring the effectiveness 
 of using scent detection working dogs to detect the early 
 stages of diseases, including the coronavirus disease 2019 
 (COVID-19);
 (2) this research effort will soon complete Phase 2 and has 
 shown promising results, including an accuracy rate of 89 
 percent in COVID-19 detection from t-shirt samples; and
 (3) it is important that the Department of Defense funds 
 Phase 3 of this research effort to determine whether the use of 
 working dogs is a feasible method of responding to emerging 
 disease threats in a low-cost, low-burden, timely, and widely 
 applicable manner.

SEC. 395. REQUIREMENTS TO REDUCE OUT-OF-POCKET COSTS OF MEMBERS OF THE 
 ARMED FORCES FOR UNIFORM ITEMS.

 (a) Tracking Requirement.--The Secretary of Defense shall take such 
steps as may be necessary to track the expected useful life of uniform 
items for officers and enlisted members of the Armed Forces, for the 
purposes of--
 (1) estimating the rate at which such uniform items are 
 replaced; and
 (2) determining the resulting out-of-pocket costs for such 
 members over time.
 (b) Uniform Replacement Allowance for Certain Officers.--
 (1) Establishment.--The Secretary of Defense shall 
 establish a uniform replacement allowance under which each 
 officer of the Armed Forces, upon promotion to the grade of O-
 4, and once every three years thereafter for such time as the 
 officer is in a grade of O-4 or above, shall be eligible to 
 receive the allowance described in paragraph (2) for the 
 purpose of replacing required uniform items that have exceeded 
 the useful life of such items.
 (2) Allowance.--The allowance described in this paragraph 
 is a cash allowance that the Secretary shall calculate by 
 multiplying the annual replacement cost of each required 
 uniform item of an officer (taking into account the expected 
 useful life of the item pursuant to subsection (a) and the 
 price of the item set by the Defense Logistics Agency as of the 
 date of the calculation) by three.
 (c) Report.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report on the expected useful life 
of required uniform items, projected changes to such required uniform 
items, and related costs anticipated by the Secretary (disaggregated by 
Armed Force). Such report shall include pricing information for each 
such item, including items that are not considered uniquely military.

SEC. 396. RECOGNITION OF SERVICE OF MILITARY WORKING DOGS.

 Section 1125 of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(a) General Authority.--'' before ``The 
 Secretary of Defense''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(b) Recognition of Service of Military Working Dogs.--The 
Secretary of Defense shall develop a decoration or other appropriate 
recognition to recognize military working dogs under the jurisdiction 
of the Secretary that are killed in action or that perform an 
exceptionally meritorious or courageous act in service to the United 
States.''.

SEC. 397. MAINTENANCE OF PUBLICLY ACCESSIBLE WEBSITE BY JOINT SAFETY 
 COUNCIL.

 Section 184(d) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(10) Developing and maintaining (including by updating on 
 a basis that is not less frequent than once every 180 days) a 
 publicly accessible Internet website that contains the 
 following:
 ``(A) Information for the families of deceased 
 members of the armed forces who died in a fatal 
 operational or training accident.
 ``(B) Information on the findings of each review or 
 assessment conducted by the Council.
 ``(C) An identification of any recommendation of 
 the Council relating to the prevention of fatal 
 accidents among members of the Armed Forces, and 
 information on the progress of the implementation of 
 any such recommendation.''.

 TITLE IV--MILITARY PERSONNEL AUTHORIZATIONS

 Subtitle A--Active Forces

SEC. 401. END STRENGTHS FOR ACTIVE FORCES.

 The Armed Forces are authorized strengths for active duty personnel 
as of September 30, 2023, as follows:
 (1) The Army, 473,000.
 (2) The Navy, 348,220.
 (3) The Marine Corps, 177,000.
 (4) The Air Force, 323,400.
 (5) The Space Force, 8,600.

SEC. 402. REVISIONS IN PERMANENT ACTIVE DUTY END STRENGTH MINIMUM 
 LEVELS.

 Section 691(b) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
striking paragraphs (1) through (5) and inserting the following new 
paragraphs:
 ``(1) For the Army, 473,000.
 ``(2) For the Navy, 348,220.
 ``(3) For the Marine Corps, 177,000.
 ``(4) For the Air Force, 323,400.
 ``(5) For the Space Force, 8,600.''.

 Subtitle B--Reserve Forces

SEC. 411. END STRENGTHS FOR SELECTED RESERVE.

 (a) In General.--The Armed Forces are authorized strengths for 
Selected Reserve personnel of the reserve components as of September 
30, 2023, as follows:
 (1) The Army National Guard of the United States, 336,000.
 (2) The Army Reserve, 189,500.
 (3) The Navy Reserve, 57,700.
 (4) The Marine Corps Reserve, 33,000.
 (5) The Air National Guard of the United States, 108,400.
 (6) The Air Force Reserve, 70,000.
 (7) The Coast Guard Reserve, 7,000.
 (b) End Strength Reductions.--The end strengths prescribed by 
subsection (a) for the Selected Reserve of any reserve component shall 
be proportionately reduced by--
 (1) the total authorized strength of units organized to 
 serve as units of the Selected Reserve of such component which 
 are on active duty (other than for training) at the end of the 
 fiscal year; and
 (2) the total number of individual members not in units 
 organized to serve as units of the Selected Reserve of such 
 component who are on active duty (other than for training or 
 for unsatisfactory participation in training) without their 
 consent at the end of the fiscal year.
 (c) End Strength Increases.--Whenever units or individual members 
of the Selected Reserve of any reserve component are released from 
active duty during any fiscal year, the end strength prescribed for 
such fiscal year for the Selected Reserve of such reserve component 
shall be increased proportionately by the total authorized strengths of 
such units and by the total number of such individual members.

SEC. 412. END STRENGTHS FOR RESERVES ON ACTIVE DUTY IN SUPPORT OF THE 
 RESERVES.

 Within the end strengths prescribed in section 411(a), the reserve 
components of the Armed Forces are authorized, as of September 30, 
2023, the following number of Reserves to be serving on full-time 
active duty or full-time duty, in the case of members of the National 
Guard, for the purpose of organizing, administering, recruiting, 
instructing, or training the reserve components:
 (1) The Army National Guard of the United States, 30,845.
 (2) The Army Reserve, 16,511.
 (3) The Navy Reserve, 10,077.
 (4) The Marine Corps Reserve, 2,388.
 (5) The Air National Guard of the United States, 26,630.
 (6) The Air Force Reserve, 6,286.

SEC. 413. END STRENGTHS FOR MILITARY TECHNICIANS (DUAL STATUS).

 The minimum number of military technicians (dual status) as of the 
last day of fiscal year 2023 for the reserve components of the Army and 
the Air Force (notwithstanding section 129 of title 10, United States 
Code) shall be the following:
 (1) For the Army National Guard of the United States, 
 22,294.
 (2) For the Army Reserve, 6,492.
 (3) For the Air National Guard of the United States, 9,892.
 (4) For the Air Force Reserve, 6,696.

SEC. 414. MAXIMUM NUMBER OF RESERVE PERSONNEL AUTHORIZED TO BE ON 
 ACTIVE DUTY FOR OPERATIONAL SUPPORT.

 During fiscal year 2023, the maximum number of members of the 
reserve components of the Armed Forces who may be serving at any time 
on full-time operational support duty under section 115(b) of title 10, 
United States Code, is the following:
 (1) The Army National Guard of the United States, 17,000.
 (2) The Army Reserve, 13,000.
 (3) The Navy Reserve, 6,200.
 (4) The Marine Corps Reserve, 3,000.
 (5) The Air National Guard of the United States, 16,000.
 (6) The Air Force Reserve, 14,000.

 Subtitle C--Authorization of Appropriations

SEC. 421. MILITARY PERSONNEL.

 (a) Authorization of Appropriations.--Funds are hereby authorized 
to be appropriated for fiscal year 2023 for the use of the Armed Forces 
and other activities and agencies of the Department of Defense for 
expenses, not otherwise provided for, for military personnel, as 
specified in the funding table in section 4401.
 (b) Construction of Authorization.--The authorization of 
appropriations in the subsection (a) supersedes any other authorization 
of appropriations (definite or indefinite) for such purpose for fiscal 
year 2023.

 TITLE V--MILITARY PERSONNEL POLICY

 Subtitle A--Officer Personnel Policy

SEC. 501. DISTRIBUTION OF COMMISSIONED OFFICERS ON ACTIVE DUTY IN 
 GENERAL OFFICER AND FLAG OFFICER GRADES.

 Section 525 of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by 
 striking ``as follows:'' and inserting an em dash;
 (B) in paragraph (4)(C), by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(5) in the Space Force, if that appointment would result 
 in more than--
 ``(A) 2 officers in the grade of general;
 ``(B) 7 officers in a grade above the grade of 
 major general; or
 ``(C) 6 officers in the grade of major 
 general.'';'';
 (2) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking ``and Marine 
 Corps'' and inserting ``Marine Corps, and Space 
 Force''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``or Marine 
 Corps'' and inserting ``Marine Corps, or Space Force''; 
 and
 (3) in subsection (d), by striking ``or Commandant of the 
 Marine Corps'' and inserting ``Commandant of the Marine Corps, 
 or Chief of Space Operations''.

SEC. 502. AUTHORIZED STRENGTH AFTER DECEMBER 31, 2022: GENERAL OFFICERS 
 AND FLAG OFFICERS ON ACTIVE DUTY.

 Section 526a of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by 
 striking ``and Marine Corps'' and inserting ``Marine 
 Corps, and Space Force'';
 (B) in paragraph (1), by striking ``220'' and 
 inserting ``218'';
 (C) in paragraph (2), by striking ``151'' and 
 inserting ``149'';
 (D) in paragraph (3), by striking ``187'' and 
 inserting ``170''; and
 (E) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(5) For the Space Force, 21.''; and
 (2) in subsection (b)(2), by adding at the end the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(E) For the Space Force, 6.''.

SEC. 503. EXCLUSION OF LEAD SPECIAL TRIAL COUNSEL FROM LIMITATIONS ON 
 GENERAL OFFICERS AND FLAG OFFICERS ON ACTIVE DUTY.

 Section 526a of title 10, United States Code, as amended by section 
502, is further amended--
 (1) by redesignating the second subsection (i) as 
 subsection (j);
 (2) by redesignating subsections (g), (h), (i), and (j) as 
 subsections (h), (i), (j), and (k), respectively; and
 (3) by inserting after subsection (f) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(g) Exclusion of Officers Serving as Lead Special Trial 
Counsel.--The limitations in subsection (a) do not apply to a general 
or flag officer serving in the position of lead special trial counsel 
pursuant to an appointment under section 1044f(a)(2) of this title.''.

SEC. 504. CONSTRUCTIVE SERVICE CREDIT FOR CERTAIN OFFICERS OF THE ARMED 
 FORCES: AUTHORIZATION; SPECIAL PAY.

 (a) Constructive Service Credit for Warrant Officers.--Section 572 
of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(a)'' before ``For the purposes''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(b)(1) The Secretary concerned shall credit a person who is 
receiving an original appointment as a warrant officer in the regular 
component of an armed force under the jurisdiction of such Secretary 
concerned, and who has advanced education or training or special 
experience, with constructive service for such education, training, or 
experience, as follows:
 ``(A) For special training or experience in a particular 
 warrant officer field designated by the Secretary concerned, if 
 such training or experience is directly related to the 
 operational needs of the armed force concerned, as determined 
 by such Secretary concerned.
 ``(B) For advanced education in a warrant officer field 
 designated by the Secretary concerned, if such education is 
 directly related to the operational needs of the armed force 
 concerned, as determined by such Secretary concerned.
 ``(2) The authority under this subsection expires on December 31, 
2027.''.
 (b) Special Pay for Certain Officers Commissioned or Appointed With 
Constructive Service Credit.--
 (1) Establishment.--Subchapter II of chapter 5 of title 37, 
 United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 336 
 the following new section:
``Sec. 337. Special pay: certain officers of the armed forces 
 commissioned or appointed with constructive service 
 credit
 ``(a) Special Pay Authorized.--The Secretary concerned may pay 
monthly special pay to an eligible officer under this section.
 ``(b) Eligible Officer Defined.--In this section, the term 
`eligible officer' means an officer who--
 ``(1)(A) received an original appointment in a commissioned 
 grade on or after the date of the enactment of the National 
 Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023; and
 ``(B) was credited by the Secretary of the military 
 department concerned with constructive service under section 
 533(b)(1)(D) of title 10; or
 ``(2)(A) was originally appointed in a warrant officer 
 grade on or after the date of the enactment of the National 
 Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023; and
 ``(B) was credited by the Secretary concerned with 
 constructive service under section 572(b) of title 10.
 ``(c) Amount of Pay.--The Secretary concerned shall determine an 
amount of monthly special pay to pay to an eligible officer under this 
section. Such amount may not exceed $5,000 per month.
 ``(d) Relationship to Other Incentives.--Special pay under this 
section is in addition to any other pay or allowance to which an 
eligible officer is entitled.
 ``(e) Sunset.--No special pay may be paid under this section after 
December 31, 2027.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the 
 beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the 
 item relating to section 336 the following:

``337. Special pay: certain officers of the armed forces commissioned 
 or appointed with constructive service 
 credit.''.
 (c) Regulations.--The Secretaries concerned shall prescribe 
regulations to carry out the amendments made by this section not later 
than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (d) Report.--Not later than February 1, 2027, the Secretary of 
Defense, in consultation with the Secretary of Homeland Security, shall 
submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report on the 
amendments made by this section. Such report shall include--
 (1) the evaluation of such amendments by the Secretary; and
 (2) the recommendation of the Secretary whether such 
 amendments should be made permanent.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means 
 the following:
 (A) The congressional defense committees.
 (B) The Committee on Transportation and 
 Infrastructure of the House of Representatives.
 (C) The Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate.
 (2) The terms ``congressional defense committees'' and 
 ``Secretary concerned'' have the meanings given such terms in 
 section 101 of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 505. CLARIFICATION OF GRADE OF SURGEON GENERAL OF THE NAVY.

 Section 8077 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding 
at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(c) Grade.--The Surgeon General, while so serving, shall hold the 
grade of O-9.''.

SEC. 506. ASSESSMENTS OF STAFFING IN THE OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF 
 DEFENSE AND OTHER DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE HEADQUARTERS 
 OFFICES.

 (a) Office of the Secretary of Defense.--The Secretary of Defense 
shall conduct an assessment of staffing of the Office of the Secretary 
of Defense. Such assessment shall including the following elements:
 (1) A validation of every military staff billet assigned to 
 the Office of the Secretary of Defense against existing 
 military personnel requirements.
 (2) The estimated effect of returning 15 percent of such 
 military staff billets to operational activities of the Armed 
 Forces concerned, over a period of 36 months, would have on the 
 office of the Secretary of Defense and other Department of 
 Defense Headquarters Offices.
 (3) A plan and milestones for how reductions described in 
 paragraph (2) would occur, a schedule for such reductions, and 
 the process by which the billets would be returned to the 
 operational activities of the Armed Forces concerned.
 (b) Office of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.--The Chairman of the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff shall conduct an assessment of staffing of the Office 
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Such assessment shall including the 
following elements:
 (1) A validation of every military staff billet assigned to 
 the Office of the Joint Chiefs of Staff against existing 
 military personnel requirements.
 (2) The estimated effect of returning 15 percent of such 
 military staff billets to operational activities of the Armed 
 Forces concerned, over a period of 36 months, would have on the 
 office of the Joint Staff and the Chairman's Controlled 
 Activities and other related Joint Staff Headquarters Offices.
 (3) A plan and milestones for how reductions described in 
 paragraph (2) would occur, a schedule for such reductions, and 
 the process by which the billets would be returned to the 
 operational activities of the Armed Forces concerned.
 (c) Interim Briefing and Report.--
 (1) Interim briefing.--Not later than April 1, 2023, the 
 Secretary shall provide to the Committees on Armed Services of 
 the Senate and House of Representatives an interim briefing on 
 the assessments under subsections (a) and (b).
 (2) Final report.--Not later than one year after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the 
 Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of 
 Representatives a report on the assessments under subsections 
 (a) and (b). Such report shall include the following:
 (A) A validation of every military staff billet 
 assigned to the Office of the Secretary of Defense and 
 the Joint Staff to include the Chairman's Controlled 
 Activities against existing military personnel 
 requirements.
 (B) The methodology and process through which such 
 validation was performed.
 (C) Relevant statistical analysis on military 
 billet fill rates against validated requirements.
 (D) An analysis of unvalidated military billets 
 currently performing staff support functions,
 (E) The rationale for why unvalidated military 
 billets may be required.
 (F) The cost of military staff filling both 
 validated and unvalidated billets.
 (G) Lessons learned through the military billet 
 validation process and statistical analysis under 
 subparagraphs (B) through (F).
 (H) Any other matters the Secretary determines 
 relevant to understanding the use of military staff 
 billets described in subsections (a) and (b).
 (I) Any legislative, policy or budgetary 
 recommendations of the Secretary related to the subject 
 matter of the report.

SEC. 507. SURVEY OF CHAPLAINS.

 (a) Development.--The Secretary of Defense shall seek to enter into 
an agreement with a nonprofit entity or a federally funded research and 
development center to develop an anonymous survey of chaplains of the 
covered Armed Forces. The survey shall include questions regarding the 
following:
 (1) Chaplain job satisfaction.
 (2) The tools available for chaplains to minister to 
 members of the covered Armed Forces.
 (3) Resources available to support religious programs.
 (4) Inclusion of chaplains in resiliency and wellness 
 programs.
 (5) The role of chaplains in embedded units, headquarters 
 activities. and military treatment facilities.
 (6) Recruitment and retention of chaplains.
 (7) Any challenges in the ability of chaplains to offer 
 ministry services.
 (b) Administration.--The Secretary shall administer the survey not 
later than 180 days after development.
 (c) Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit a report 
to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of 
Representatives on the findings from the survey.
 (d) Covered Armed Force Defined.--The term ``covered Armed Force'' 
means the following:
 (1) The Army.
 (2) The Navy.
 (3) The Marine Corps.
 (4) The Air Force.
 (5) The Space Force.

SEC. 508. INDEPENDENT REVIEW OF ARMY OFFICER PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS.

 (a) Study Required.--Not later than six months after the enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of the Army shall seek to enter into an 
agreement with a private entity that the Secretary determines 
appropriate to--
 (1) study the fitness report system used for the 
 performance evaluation of Army officers; and
 (2) provide to the Secretary recommendations regarding how 
 to improve such system.
 (b) Elements.--The study required under subsection (a) shall 
include the following:
 (1) An analysis of the effectiveness of the fitness report 
 system at evaluating and documenting the performance of Army 
 officers.
 (2) A comparison of the fitness report system for Army 
 officers with best practices for performance evaluations used 
 by public- and private-sector organizations.
 (3) An analysis of the value of Army fitness reports in 
 providing useful information to officer promotion boards.
 (4) An analysis of the value of Army fitness reports in 
 providing useful feedback to Army officers being evaluated.
 (5) Recommendations to improve the Army fitness report 
 system to--
 (A) increase its effectiveness at accurately 
 evaluating and documenting the performance of Army 
 officers;
 (B) align with best practices for performance 
 evaluations used by public- and private-sector 
 organizations;
 (C) provide more useful information to officer 
 promotion boards; and
 (D) provide more useful feedback regarding 
 evaluated officers.
 (c) Access to Data and Records.--The Secretary of the Army shall 
ensure that the entity selected under subsection (a) has sufficient 
resources and access to technical data, individuals, organizations, and 
records necessary to complete the study required under this section.
 (d) Submission to Department of the Army.--Not later than one year 
after entering into an agreement under subsection (a), the entity that 
conducts the study under subsection (a) shall submit to the Secretary 
of the Army a report on the results of the study.
 (e) Submission to Congress.--Not later than 30 days after the date 
on which the Secretary of the Army receives the report under subsection 
(d), the Secretary shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees--
 (1) an unaltered copy of such report; and
 (2) any comments of the Secretary regarding such report.

 Subtitle B--Reserve Component Management

SEC. 511. GRADES OF CERTAIN CHIEFS OF RESERVE COMPONENTS.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Chief of army reserve.--Section 7038(b) of title 10, 
 United States Code, is amended by striking paragraph (4) and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(4) The Chief of Army Reserve, while so serving, holds the grade 
of lieutenant general.''.
 (2) Chief of navy reserve.--Section 8083(b) of such title 
 is amended by striking paragraph (4) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(4) The Chief of Navy Reserve, while so serving, holds the grade 
of vice admiral.''.
 (3) Commander, marine forces reserve.--Section 8084(b) of 
 such title is amended by striking paragraph (4) and inserting 
 the following:
 ``(4) The Commander, Marine Forces Reserve, while so serving, holds 
the grade of lieutenant general.''.
 (4) Chief of air force reserve.--Section 9038(b) of such 
 title is amended by striking paragraph (4) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(4) The Chief of Air Force Reserve, while so serving, holds the 
grade of lieutenant general.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
take effect on the day that is one year after the date of the enactment 
of this Act and shall apply to appointments made after such date.

SEC. 512. GRADE OF VICE CHIEF OF THE NATIONAL GUARD BUREAU.

 Section 10505 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding 
at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(c) Grade.--(1) The Vice Chief of the National Guard Bureau shall 
be appointed to serve in the grade of general.
 ``(2) The Secretary of Defense shall designate, pursuant to 
subsection (b) of section 526 of this title, the position of Vice Chief 
of the National Guard Bureau as one of the general officer and flag 
officer positions to be excluded from the limitations in subsection (a) 
of such section.''.

SEC. 513. BACKDATING OF EFFECTIVE DATE OF RANK FOR RESERVE OFFICERS IN 
 THE NATIONAL GUARD DUE TO UNDUE DELAYS IN FEDERAL 
 RECOGNITION.

 Paragraph (2) of section 14308(f) of title 10, United States Code, 
is amended to read as follows:
 ``(2) If there is a delay in extending Federal recognition in the 
next higher grade in the Army National Guard or the Air National Guard 
to a reserve commissioned officer of the Army or the Air Force that 
exceeds 100 days from the date the National Guard Bureau deems such 
officer's application for Federal recognition to be completely 
submitted by the State and ready for review at the National Guard 
Bureau, and the delay was not attributable to the action or inaction of 
such officer--
 ``(A) in the event of State promotion with an effective 
 date before January 1, 2024, the effective date of the 
 promotion concerned under paragraph (1) may be adjusted to a 
 date determined by the Secretary concerned, but not earlier 
 than the effective date of the State promotion; and
 ``(B) in the event of State promotion with an effective 
 date on or after January 1, 2024, the effective date of the 
 promotion concerned under paragraph (1) shall be adjusted by 
 the Secretary concerned to the later of--
 ``(i) the date the National Guard Bureau deems such 
 officer's application for Federal recognition to be 
 completely submitted by the State and ready for review 
 at the National Guard Bureau; and
 ``(ii) the date on which the officer occupies a 
 billet in the next higher grade.''.

SEC. 514. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM FOR SPECIALLY SELECTED MEMBERS: 
 ARMY RESERVE AND ARMY NATIONAL GUARD.

 Section 2107a of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by amending paragraph (1) to read as follows:
 ``(1) The Secretary of the Army may appoint as a cadet in the Army 
Reserve or Army National Guard of the United States any eligible member 
of the program who--
 ``(A)(i) is enrolled in the Advanced Course of the Army 
 Reserve Officers' Training Corps at a military college or a 
 military junior college; or
 ``(ii)(I) is enrolled in the Advanced Course of the Army 
 Reserve Officers' Training Corps at a civilian institution; and
 ``(II) has completed the second year of a course of study 
 in science, technology, engineering, mathematics, or a related 
 field at such institution; and
 ``(B) will be under 31 years of age on December 31 of the 
 calendar year in which the member eligible under this section 
 for appointment as a second lieutenant in the Army Reserve or 
 Army National Guard.'';
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(3) The Secretary of the Army may prescribe regulations 
specifying--
 ``(A) the courses of study that may be pursued by a member 
 of the program for purposes of meeting the requirement under 
 paragraph (1)(A)(ii); and
 ``(B) the level of academic achievement needed to meet such 
 requirement.''.
 (2) in subsection (b)(3)(B)(i), by inserting ``or civilian 
 institution'' after ``military junior college'';
 (3) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``or civilian 
 institution'' after ``military junior college'';
 (B) in paragraph (4)(A), by inserting ``or civilian 
 institution'' after ``military junior college'';
 (4) by amending subsection (h) to read as follows:
 ``(h)(1) The Secretary of the Army may appoint each year under this 
section not less than 22 cadets at each military junior college at 
which there are not less than 22 members of the program eligible under 
subsection (b) for such an appointment. At any military junior college 
at which in any year there are fewer than 22 such members, the 
Secretary shall appoint each such member as a cadet under this section.
 ``(2) The Secretary of the Army may appoint each year under this 
section the number of cadets from civilian institutions that the 
Secretary determines to be appropriate based on the needs of the 
Army.''; and
 (5) in subsection (j), by inserting ``or civilian 
 institution'' after ``military junior college''.

SEC. 515. INSPECTIONS OF NATIONAL GUARD.

 (a) Establishment.--Chapter 1 of title 32, United States Code, is 
amended by inserting, after section 105, the following new section:
``Sec. 105A. Additional inspections
 ``(a) Regular Inspections Required.--The Secretary of the Army and 
the Secretary of the Air Force shall each prescribe regulations 
pursuant to which the National Guard of each State shall be inspected 
not less frequently than once every five years.
 ``(b) Authorized Inspectors.--An inspection of the National Guard 
of a State under subsection (a) shall be conducted by--
 ``(1) in the case of the Air National Guard, by a qualified 
 member of the regular component of the Air Force or by the 
 inspector general of the Department of the Air Force; or
 ``(2) in the case of the Army National Guard, by a 
 qualified member of the regular component of the Army or by the 
 inspector general of the Department of the Army.
 ``(c) Elements and Recommendations.--Each inspection under 
subsection (a) shall include--
 ``(1) a review and assessment of--
 ``(A) the command climate of the National Guard of 
 the State;
 ``(B) the extent to which members of such National 
 Guard are treated with dignity and respect; and
 ``(C) the compliance of such National Guard with 
 statutory, regulatory, and other applicable 
 requirements relating to--
 ``(i) reporting and addressing sex-related 
 offenses and sexual harassment;
 ``(ii) training in sexual assault 
 prevention and response; and
 ``(iii) training in suicide prevention; and
 ``(2) the inspector's recommendation as to whether the 
 Secretary of the military department concerned should designate 
 the performance of such National Guard as unsatisfactory, 
 satisfactory, or excellent.
 ``(d) Performance Grade.--Following the conclusion of an inspection 
of a National Guard of a State under subsection (a), the Secretary of 
the military department concerned shall--
 ``(1) based on the results of the inspection, designate the 
 performance of such National Guard as unsatisfactory, 
 satisfactory, or excellent; and
 ``(2) post such designation on a publicly accessible 
 website of the Department of Defense.
 ``(e) Mandatory Reinspection.--A National Guard of a State that 
receives a designation of unsatisfactory under subsection (d) shall be 
reinspected in accordance with this section not later one year after 
the conclusion of the inspection that resulted in such designation.
 ``(f) Reports.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 90 days, after the 
 conclusion of each inspection under this section, the Secretary 
 of the military department concerned shall submit a report on 
 the results of such inspection--
 ``(A) to the Secretary of Defense; and
 ``(B) to the Committees on Armed Services of the 
 Senate and the House of Representatives.
 ``(2) Elements.--Each report under paragraph (1) shall--
 ``(A) summarize the results of the inspection with 
 respect to each element specified in subsection (c);
 ``(B) indicate the designation issued for the 
 National Guard of the State under subsection (d); and
 ``(C) in the case of a National Guard of a State 
 that received a designation of unsatisfactory under 
 subsection (d) after a reinspection under subsection 
 (e), include the Secretary's recommendation as to 
 whether--
 ``(i) Federal funds should be withheld from 
 such National Guard; or
 ``(ii) such National Guard unit should be 
 transferred to another State.
 ``(g) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `sex-related offense' means an alleged sex-
 related offense (as defined in section 1044e(h) of this title).
 ``(2) The term `sexual harassment' means the offense of 
 sexual harassment as punishable under section 934 of this title 
 (article 134 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice) pursuant 
 to the regulations prescribed by the Secretary of Defense for 
 purposes of such section (article).
 ``(3) The term `State' has the meaning given such term in 
 section 901 of this title.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 
105 the following new item:

``105A. Additional inspections.''.

SEC. 516. REQUIREMENT OF CONSENT OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER FOR 
 CERTAIN FULL-TIME NATIONAL GUARD DUTY PERFORMED IN A 
 STATE, TERRITORY, OR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.

 Section 502(f)(2)(A) of title 32, United States Code, is amended to 
read as follows:
 ``(A) Support of operations or missions undertaken by the 
 member's unit at the request of the President or Secretary of 
 Defense, with the consent of--
 ``(i) the chief executive officer of each State (as 
 that term is defined in section 901 of this title) in 
 which such operations or missions shall take place; and
 ``(ii) if such operations or missions shall take 
 place in the District of Columbia, the Mayor of the 
 District of Columbia.''.

SEC. 517. EXTENSION OF NATIONAL GUARD SUPPORT FOR FIREGUARD PROGRAM.

 Section 515 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81) is amended by striking ``September 30, 
2026'' and inserting ``September 30, 2029''.

SEC. 518. NOTICE TO CONGRESS BEFORE CERTAIN ACTIONS REGARDING UNITS OF 
 CERTAIN RESERVE COMPONENTS.

 (a) Notice Required; Elements.--The Secretary of a military 
department may not take any covered action regarding a covered unit 
until the day that is 60 days after the Secretary of a military 
department submits to Congress notice of such covered action. Such 
notice shall include the following elements:
 (1) An analysis of how the covered action would improve 
 readiness.
 (2) A description of how the covered action would align 
 with the National Defense Strategy and the supporting 
 strategies of each military departments.
 (3) A description of any proposed organizational change 
 associated with the covered action and how the covered action 
 will affect the relationship of administrative, operational, or 
 tactical control responsibilities of the covered unit.
 (4) The projected cost and any projected long-term cost 
 savings of the covered action.
 (5) A detailed description of any requirements for new 
 infrastructure or relocation of equipment and assets necessary 
 for the covered action.
 (6) An analysis whether the covered action would 
 facilitate--
 (A) total force integration; and
 (B) general officer progression.
 (7) A description of how the covered activity will affect 
 the ability of the covered unit to accomplish its current 
 mission.
 (b) Applicability.--This section shall apply to any step to perform 
covered action regarding a covered unit on or after the date of the 
enactment of this Act.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered action'' means any of the following:
 (A) To deactivate.
 (B) To reassign.
 (C) To move the home station.
 (D) To reassign any responsibility.
 (E) To integrate, in the case of--
 (i) a covered unit and a unit of the 
 regular component of a covered Armed Force; or
 (ii) more than one covered unit.
 (2) The term ``covered Armed Force'' means the following:
 (A) The Army.
 (B) The Navy.
 (C) The Marine Corps.
 (D) The Air Force.
 (E) The Space Force.
 (3) The term ``covered unit'' means a unit of a reserve 
 component of a covered Armed Force.

SEC. 519. PLAN TO ENSURE REASONABLE ACCESS TO THE JUNIOR RESERVE 
 OFFICERS' TRAINING CORPS.

 (a) Plan Required.--The Secretary of Defense, in consultation with 
the Secretaries of the military departments, shall develop a plan to 
increase the total number of units of the Junior Reserve Officers' 
Training Corps to ensure that there is reasonable access to such units 
in each geographic region of the United States by not later than 
September 30, 2031.
 (b) Elements.--The plan required under subsection (a) shall include 
the following:
 (1) A proposal to increase the total number of units of the 
 Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps to ensure reasonable 
 access for students throughout the United States.
 (2) The estimated cost of implementing the proposed 
 increase in the number of such units.
 (3) A prioritized list of the States and regions in which 
 the Secretary proposes adding additional units.
 (4) Actions the Secretary expects to carry out to ensure 
 adequate representation and fair access to such units for 
 students in all regions of the United States, including rural 
 and remote areas and in underrepresented States.
 (5) To the extent appropriate, modifications to the 
 requirements for such units, including the requirements 
 applicable to instructors, to accommodate units in rural areas 
 and small schools.
 (6) A plan to increase school and community awareness of 
 Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps programs in 
 underrepresented areas.
 (c) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and the House of 
Representatives a report that includes the plan developed under 
subsection (a).
 (d) Reasonable Access Defined.--In this section, the term 
``reasonable access'', when used with respect to units of the Junior 
Reserve Officers' Training Corps, means a level of access determined by 
the Secretary of Defense be reasonable taking into account the demand 
for student participation, the availability of instructors, and the 
physical distance between units.

SEC. 519A. INCLUSION OF ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ON THE SENIOR RESERVE 
 OFFICERS' TRAINING CORPS IN REPORTS ACCOMPANYING THE 
 NATIONAL DEFENSE STRATEGY.

 Section 113(m) of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by redesignating the second paragraph (8) as paragraph 
 (11);
 (2) by redesignating the first paragraph (8), as paragraph 
 (10);
 (3) by redesignating paragraphs (5), (6), and (7) 
 paragraphs (7), (8), and (9), respectively; and
 (4) by inserting after paragraph (4) the following new 
 paragraphs:
 ``(5) The number of Senior Reserve Officers' Training Corps 
 scholarships awarded during the fiscal year covered by the 
 report, disaggregated by gender, race, and ethnicity, for each 
 military department.
 ``(6) The program completion rates and program withdrawal 
 rates of Senior Reserve Officers' Training Corps scholarship 
 recipients during the fiscal year covered by the report, 
 disaggregated by gender, race, and ethnicity, for each military 
 department.''.

SEC. 519B. ADDITIONAL MATTERS RELATING TO SUPPORT FOR FIREGUARD 
 PROGRAM.

 Section 515 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81), as amended by section 517, is further 
amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(a) in general.--'' before ``Until'';
 (2) by striking ``support'' and inserting ``carry out'';
 (3) by striking ``personnel of the California National 
 Guard'' and inserting ``National Guard personnel (including 
 from the Colorado National Guard and the California National 
 Guard)''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(b) Transfer.--Until the date specified in subsection (a), no 
component (including any analytical responsibility) of the FireGuard 
program may be transferred from the Department of Defense to another 
entity. If the Secretary seeks to make such a transfer, the Secretary 
shall, at least three years before such transfer, provide to the 
appropriate congressional committees a written report and briefing that 
detail--
 ``(1) plans of the Secretary for such transfer; and
 ``(2) how such transfer will sustain and improve detection 
 and monitoring of wildfires.
 ``(c) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this 
section, the term `appropriate congressional committees' means the 
following:
 ``(1) The Committee on Armed Services of the Senate.
 ``(2) The Committee on Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives.
 ``(3) The Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate.
 ``(4) The Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the 
 House of Representatives.''.

SEC. 519C. DIVESTITURE OF TACTICAL CONTROL PARTY.

 No divestiture of any Tactical Control Party specialist force 
structure from the Air National Guard may occur until the Chief of the 
National Guard Bureau provides a report to the congressional defense 
committees describing--
 (1) the capability gaps caused by divestiture of Tactical 
 Control Party force structure from the Air National Guard and 
 its impact on the Department of Defense to execute the National 
 Defense Strategy; and
 (2) the impacts of such divestiture to the operational 
 capabilities of the Army National Guard.

SEC. 519D. RECOGNITION OF THE ARMY INTERAGENCY TRAINING AND EDUCATION 
 CENTER AS A JOINT ACTIVITY OF THE NATIONAL GUARD; REPORT.

 (a) Findings.--Congress makes the following findings:
 (1) AITEC has been designated by the National Guard Bureau 
 as a joint activity of the Army and Air National Guard 
 responsible for the following activities:
 (A) Mission assurance and other critical 
 infrastructure protection activities in support of the 
 Department of Defense and Department of Homeland 
 Security entities.
 (B) All-hazards disaster response training and 
 exercises for the National Guard in partnership with 
 Federal, State, local, territorial, and Tribal response 
 enterprise organizations.
 (2) AITEC is composed of members of the Army and Air 
 National Guard who possess relevant private-sector critical 
 skills and experience in the fields of emergency response, 
 engineering, cybersecurity, electric power, logistics, 
 telecommunications, utilities, medical, rescue, or such other 
 fields as determined by evolving mission requirements.
 (3) The National Guard Bureau has designated AITEC as 
 having the following duties:
 (A) Providing the Department of Defense with--
 (i) unique civilian expertise and 
 experience of critical infrastructure 
 protection, Chemical, Biological, Radiological, 
 and Nuclear response, emergency management, 
 control systems cybersecurity, and incident 
 management;
 (ii) training and exercise support of Joint 
 Interagency Training Capability, including 
 Joint Force Headquarters-State and Joint Task 
 Force-State Headquarters elements, National 
 Guard Reaction Forces, Weapons of Mass 
 Destruction Civil Support Teams, and Chemical, 
 Biological, Radiological, Nuclear, or High-
 Yield Explosive Emergency Response Force 
 Packages, and Homeland Response Forces; and
 (iii) personnel to conduct Mission 
 Assurance, Cybersecurity, Port Security & 
 Resiliency, and other critical infrastructure 
 assessments and training along with Counter-IED 
 and bombing prevention training to 
 intergovernmental partners and first 
 responders.
 (B) On an ongoing basis, partnering with the 
 military departments, the combatant commands, other 
 Department of Defense agencies, the Department of 
 Homeland Security, and State, local, territorial, and 
 Tribal governments to conduct--
 (i) all-threats, all-hazards Mission 
 Assurance assessments in the areas of Mission 
 Assurance Related Programs and Activities, 
 including cyber supply chain risk management, 
 position, navigation, and timing, and unmanned 
 systems on Defense Critical Infrastructure;
 (ii) all-hazards and disaster response 
 training and exercise support;
 (iii) infrastructure protection assessment 
 activities, cybersecurity, and counter-IED and 
 bombing prevention training for the Department 
 of Homeland Security; and
 (iv) Port Security & Resiliency assessments 
 for the Coast Guard.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with 
the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Global 
Security and the Chief of the National Guard Bureau, shall submit to 
the appropriate congressional committees a report that includes--
 (1) an organizational plan and an estimate of the annual 
 costs necessary for AITEC to complete its duties as described 
 in subsection (a)(3); and
 (2) the manpower requirements needed to adequately staff 
 such duties.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``AITEC'' means the Army Interagency Training 
 and Education Center.
 (2) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee 
 on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, and the 
 Committee on Appropriations of the Senate; and
 (B) the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee 
 on Homeland Security, and the Committee on 
 Appropriations of the House of Representatives.
 (3) The term ``critical infrastructure'' has the meaning 
 given the term in section 702 of the Defense Production Act of 
 1950 (50 U.S.C. 4552).

SEC. 519E. ENHANCEMENT OF NATIONAL GUARD YOUTH CHALLENGE PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--During fiscal year 2023, the Secretary of Defense 
may provide assistance in addition to assistance under subsection (d) 
of section 509 of title 32, United States Code, to a National Guard 
Youth Challenge Program of a State for the following purposes:
 (1) New program start-up costs.
 (2) Special projects.
 (3) Workforce development programs.
 (4) Emergency costs.
 (b) Limitations.--
 (1) Matching.--Before the Secretary may use the authority 
 under this section, the State shall comply with the matching 
 requirement under such subsection.
 (2) Total assistance.--Total assistance under this section 
 may not exceed $5,000,000.
 (c) Reporting.--Any assistance provided under this section shall be 
included in the annual report under subsection (k) of such section.

 Subtitle C--General Service Authorities and Military Records

SEC. 521. NOTIFICATION TO NEXT OF KIN UPON THE DEATH OF A MEMBER OF THE 
 ARMED FORCES.

 Subchapter II of chapter 75 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new section (and the table 
of sections at the beginning of such subchapter is amended 
accordingly):
``Sec. 1493. Notification to next of kin or other appropriate person: 
 timing; training
 ``(a) In General.--In the event of a death that requires the 
Secretary of the military department concerned to provide a death 
benefit under this subchapter, such Secretary shall notify the next of 
kin or other appropriate person not later than four hours after such 
death.
 ``(b) Death Outside the United States.--If a death described in 
subsection (a) occurs outside the United States, the Secretary of 
Defense, in coordination with the Secretary of State, shall attempt to 
delay reporting, by the media of the country in which such death 
occurs, of the name of the decedent until after the Secretary of the 
military department concerned has notified the next of kin or other 
appropriate person pursuant to subsection (a).
 ``(c) Training.--The Secretary of the military department concerned 
shall include a training exercise regarding a death described in this 
section in each major exercise or planning conference conducted by such 
Secretary or the Secretary of Defense.''.

SEC. 522. DIRECT ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS FROM CERTAIN SOURCES BY ENLISTED 
 MEMBERS.

 (a) Authority.--Section 2601a of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (1) through (3) as 
 subparagraphs (A) through (C), respectively;
 (B) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), as 
 redesignated, by striking ``This section applies to'' 
 and inserting ``(1) A member described in this 
 paragraph is'';
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(2) A member described in this paragraph is an enlisted member of 
the armed forces.''; and
 (2) in subsection (d)--
 (A) by inserting ``(1)'' before ``The 
 regulations''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(2) A member described in subsection (b)(2) may not accept a 
gift--
 ``(A) from a source described in paragraph (1);
 ``(B) solicited by the member;
 ``(C) that a reasonable person would believe was intended 
 to influence the member in the performance of duties as a 
 member; or
 ``(D) that a reasonable person would believe was intended 
 to supplement the pay of the member.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--Such section is further amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)(1)(C), as redesignated, by striking 
 ``paragraph (1)'' and inserting ``subparagraph (A)'';
 (2) in subsection (c), by striking ``, (2) or (3)''; and
 (3) in subsection (e), by striking ``subsection (b)(2)'' 
 and inserting ``subsection (b)(1)(B)''.

SEC. 523. LIMITATION OF EXTENSION OF PERIOD OF ACTIVE DUTY FOR A MEMBER 
 WHO ACCEPTS A FELLOWSHIP, SCHOLARSHIP, OR GRANT.

 (a) Limitation.--Subsection (b) of section 2603 of title 10, United 
States Code, is amended by adding at the end ``No such period may 
exceed five years''.
 (b) Retroactive Effect.--An agreement under such subsection, made 
by a member of the Armed Forces on or before the date of the enactment 
of this Act, may not require such member to serve on active duty for a 
period longer than five years.

SEC. 524. BRIEFING AND REPORT ON ADMINISTRATIVE SEPARATION BOARDS.

 Subsection (c) of section 529B of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81) is amended 
to read as follows:
 ``(c) Briefing; Report.--The Comptroller General shall submit to 
the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of 
Representatives--
 ``(1) a briefing on preliminary results of the study 
 conducted under subsection (a) not later than December 27, 
 2022; and
 ``(2) a report on the final results of the study conducted 
 under subsection (a) not later than May 31, 2023.''.

SEC. 525. ELIMINATION OF TIME LIMIT FOR MANDATORY CHARACTERIZATIONS OF 
 ADMINISTRATIVE DISCHARGES OF CERTAIN MEMBERS ON THE BASIS 
 OF FAILURE TO RECEIVE COVID-19 VACCINE.

 Section 736(a) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 10 U.S.C. 1161 note) is amended in the 
matter preceding paragraph (1) by striking ``During the time period 
beginning on August 24, 2021, and ending on the date that is two years 
after the date of the enactment of this Act, any'' and inserting 
``Any''.

SEC. 526. PROHIBITION ON USE OF PHOTOGRAPHS BY CERTAIN MILITARY 
 PROMOTION BOARDS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense shall ensure that no 
military promotion record of a covered Armed Force includes any 
official or unofficial photographs.
 (b) Covered Armed Force Defined.--In this section, the term 
``covered Armed Force'' means the following:
 (1) The Army.
 (2) The Navy.
 (3) The Marine Corps.
 (4) The Air Force.
 (5) The Space Force.

SEC. 527. GENDER-NEUTRAL FITNESS STANDARDS FOR COMBAT MILITARY 
 OCCUPATIONAL SPECIALTIES OF THE ARMY.

 (a) Establishment.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Army shall--
 (1) establish gender-neutral fitness standards for combat 
 MOSs that are higher than those for non-combat MOSs; and
 (2) provide a briefing to the Committees on Armed Services 
 of the Senate and House of Representatives setting forth--
 (A) the list of combat MOSs described in paragraph 
 (1); and
 (B) the methodology used to determine whether to 
 include an MOS on such list.
 (b) MOS Defined.--In this section, the term ``MOS'' means a 
military occupational specialty.

SEC. 528. RETENTION AND RECRUITMENT OF MEMBERS OF THE ARMY WHO 
 SPECIALIZE IN AIR AND MISSILE DEFENSE SYSTEMS.

 (a) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall 
study efforts to retain and recruit members with military occupational 
specialties regarding air and missile defense systems of the Army.
 (b) Report.--Not later than six months after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall submit to the 
Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of Representatives 
a report that identifies steps the Secretary of the Army may take to 
improve such retention and recruitment.
 (c) Implementation.--Not later than September 30, 2023, the 
Secretary of the Army shall implement the steps identified in the 
report under subsection (b).

SEC. 529. PILOT PROGRAM ON REMOTE PERSONNEL PROCESSING IN THE ARMY.

 (a) Pilot Program.--Not later than January 1, 2024, the Secretary 
of the Army shall implement a pilot program to test the use of a 
software application to expedite in-processing and out-processing at 
one or more military installations--
 (1) under the jurisdiction of such Secretary; and
 (2) located within the continental United States.
 (b) Application Requirements.--The software application shall 
perform the following functions:
 (1) Enable the remote in-processing and out-processing of 
 covered personnel, including by permitting covered personnel to 
 electronically sign forms.
 (2) Reduce the number of hours required of covered 
 personnel for in-processing and out-processing.
 (3) Provide, to covered personnel and the commander of a 
 military installation concerned, electronic copies of records 
 related to in-processing and out-processing.
 (c) Selection of Location.--In selecting a military installation 
for the pilot program, the Secretary shall give priority to the 
military installation that is the least popular according to 
preferences of Army officers in the Active Duty Officer Assignment 
Interactive Module.
 (d) Termination.--The pilot program shall terminate on January 1st, 
2027.
 (e) Report.--Not later than January 1, 2026, the Secretary shall 
submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of 
Representatives a report regarding the pilot program, including the 
recommendation of the Secretary whether to make the pilot program 
permanent.
 (f) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered personnel'' includes members of the 
 Army and civilian employees of the Department of the Army.
 (2) The term ``in-processing'' means the administrative 
 activities that covered personnel undertake pursuant to a 
 permanent change of station.
 (3) The term ``out-processing'' means the administrative 
 activities that covered personnel undertake pursuant to a 
 permanent change of station, separation from the Army, or end 
 of employment with the Department of the Army.

SEC. 529A. IMPROVING OVERSIGHT OF MILITARY RECRUITMENT PRACTICES IN 
 PUBLIC SECONDARY SCHOOLS.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a report on military recruitment practices in public 
secondary schools during calendar years 2018 through 2022, including--
 (1) the zip codes of public secondary schools visited by 
 military recruiters; and
 (2) the number of recruits from public secondary schools by 
 zip code and local education agency.

SEC. 529B. ENLISTMENTS: COMPILATION OF DIRECTORY AND OTHER PROSPECTIVE 
 RECRUIT INFORMATION.

 (a) Compilation of Prospective Recruit Information.--Section 503 of 
title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by striking the section designation and heading and 
 inserting the following:
``Sec. 503. Enlistments: recruiting campaigns; compilation of directory 
 and other prospective recruit information'';
 (2) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ``Regular Army'' and 
 all that follows before the period at the end and inserting 
 ``regular and reserve components of the armed forces'';
 (3) by redesignating subsections (c) and (d) as subsections 
 (d) and (e), respectively; and
 (4) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(c) Compilation of Other Prospective Recruit Information.--(1) 
The Secretary of Defense may collect and compile other prospective 
recruit information pertaining to individuals who are--
 ``(A) 17 years of age or older or in the eleventh 
 grade (or its equivalent) or higher; and
 ``(B) enrolled in a secondary school in the United 
 States (including its territories and possessions) or 
 the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
 ``(2) The Secretary may make prospective recruit 
 information collected and compiled under this subsection 
 available to the armed forces for military recruiting purposes. 
 Such information may not be disclosed for any other purpose.
 ``(3) Other prospective recruit information collected and 
 compiled under 1 this subsection shall be confidential, and a 
 person who has had access to such information may not disclose 
 the information except for the purposes described in paragraph 
 (2).
 ``(4) In this subsection, the term `prospective recruit 
 information' means information for use in identifying 
 prospective recruits, tailoring marketing efforts to reach the 
 primary recruit market, and measuring the return on investment 
 of ongoing marketing efforts. Citizens will be made aware of 
 the categories of personally identifiable information (PII), as 
 well as non-PII information, to be collected and the purposes 
 for which the categories of personal information are collected 
 and used. Categories of information may include, but are not 
 limited to--
 ``(A) identifiers (such as Internet Protocol 
 address, social media handles);
 ``(B) information about your connected devices and 
 how you interact with our apps and websites (such as 
 browser type, unique device identifier, cookie data, 
 and associated identifying and usage information);
 ``(C) demographic (such as date of birth, high 
 school or college graduation year, grade currently 
 enrolled in, citizenship, marital status, household 
 composition, or veteran or military status);
 ``(D) protected classification characteristics 
 under state or federal law (such as age and gender);
 ``(E) audio or video information (social media 
 content, photographs and videos shared on recruitment 
 digital properties, images and likeness captured at 
 events);
 ``(F) fitness activity data (for example, exercise 
 length, duration, activities); and
 ``(G) login and profile information, including 
 screen name, password and unique user ID for 
 recruitment digital properties.
 ``(5) The collection, use, and retention of a citizen's 
 personal information shall be reasonably necessary and 
 proportionate to military recruitment objectives.
 ``(6) Where possible, citizens will have the ability to 
 manage and/or opt-out of data collection via a clear and easy 
 to access process in compliance with state legislation.''.
 (c) Regulations.--The Secretary of Defense shall prescribe 
regulations to carry out the amendments made by this section.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
chapter 31 of such 10 title is amended by striking the item relating to 
section 503 and inserting the following new item:

``503. Enlistments: recruiting campaigns; compilation of directory and 
 other prospective recruit information.''.

SEC. 529C. CONTINUING MILITARY SERVICE FOR CERTAIN MEMBERS ELIGIBLE FOR 
 CHAPTER 61 RETIREMENT.

 (a) In General.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this act, the Secretary of Defense shall prescribe 
regulations that allow a covered member to continue to elect to serve 
in the Armed Forces--
 (1) in the current military occupational specialty of such 
 covered member, for which the covered member may not be 
 deployable; or
 (2) in a military occupational specialty for which the 
 covered member is deployable.
 (b) Rule of Construction.--A covered member who completes 20 years 
of service computed under section 1208 of title 10, United States Code 
shall not be denied any benefit under laws administered by the 
Secretary of Defense or the Secretary of Veterans Affairs solely on the 
basis that the covered member elected to continue to serve in the Armed 
Forces instead of taking retirement under chapter 61 of title 10, 
United States Code.
 (c) Covered Member Defined.--In this section, the term ``covered 
member'' means a member of the Armed Forces--
 (1) whom the Secretary concerned determines possesses skill 
 or experience vital to the Armed Force concerned;
 (2) who incurs a disability--
 (A) while eligible for special pay under section 
 310 of title 37, United States Code; and
 (B) that renders the member eligible for retirement 
 under chapter 61 of title 10, United States Code; and
 (3) who elects to continue to serve in the Armed Forces 
 instead of such retirement.

SEC. 529D. SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING THE PORT CHICAGO 50.

 It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the American people should recognize the role of racial 
 bias in the prosecution and convictions of the Port Chicago 50 
 following the deadliest home front disaster in World War II;
 (2) the military records of each of the Port Chicago 50 
 should reflect such exoneration of any and all charges brought 
 against them in the aftermath of the explosion; and
 (3) the Secretary of the Navy should upgrade the general 
 and summary discharges of each of the Port Chicago 50 sailors 
 to honorable discharges.

SEC. 529E. TREATMENT OF PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION REGARDING 
 PROSPECTIVE RECRUITS.

 Section 503(a) of title 10, United States Code, is amended adding 
at the end the following new paragraphs:
 ``(3) PII regarding a prospective recruit collected or 
 compiled under this subsection shall be kept confidential, and 
 a person who has had access to such PII may not disclose the 
 information except for purposes of this section or other 
 purpose authorized by law.
 ``(4) In the course of conducting a recruiting campaign, 
 the Secretary concerned shall--
 ``(A) notify a prospective recruit of data 
 collection policies of the armed force concerned; and
 ``(B) permit the prospective recruit to elect not 
 to participate in such data collection.
 ``(5) In this subsection, the term `PII' means personally 
 identifiable information.''.

SEC. 529F. IMPLEMENTATION OF CERTAIN RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING 
 SCREENING INDIVIDUALS WHO SEEK TO ENLIST IN THE ARMED 
 FORCES AND COUNTERING EXTREMIST ACTIVITY IN THE 
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE.

 (a) Enlistment Screening.--Not later than 60 days after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall implement the 
seven recommendations of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel 
and Readiness on page 2 of the report titled ``Screening Individuals 
Who Seek to Enlist in the Armed Forces'', submitted to the Committees 
on Armed Services of the Senate and House of Representatives on October 
14, 2020.
 (b) Countering Extremism.--Not later than 180 days after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall implement 
six recommendations of the Countering Extremist Activity Working Group 
on pages 15 through 18 on the report entitled ``Report on Countering 
Extremist Activity Within the Department of Defense'' published in 
December 2021.

SEC. 529G. BEST PRACTICES FOR THE RETENTION OF CERTAIN FEMALE MEMBERS 
 OF THE ARMED FORCES.

 The Secretaries of the military departments shall share and 
implement best practices (including use of civilian industry best 
practices) regarding the use of retention and exit survey data to 
identify barriers and lessons learned to improve the retention of 
female members of the Armed Forces under the jurisdiction of such 
Secretaries.

SEC. 529H. RECORD OF MILITARY SERVICE FOR MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES.

 (a) Standard Record of Service Required.--Chapter 59 of title 10, 
United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1168 the 
following new sections:
``Sec. 1168a. Discharge or release: record of military service
 ``(a) Record of Service Required.--(1) The Secretary of Defense 
shall establish and implement a standard record of military service for 
all members of the armed forces (including the reserve components), 
regarding all duty under this title, title 32, and title 14.
 ``(2) The record established under this section shall be known as 
the `Certificate of Military Service'.
 ``(b) Nature and Scope.--A Certificate of Military Service shall--
 ``(1) provide a standardized summary of the service, in any 
 Federal duty status or on State active duty, in the armed 
 forces of a member of the armed forces;
 ``(2) be the same document for all members of the armed 
 forces; and
 ``(3) serve as the discharge certificate or certificate of 
 release from active duty for purposes of section 1168 of this 
 title.
 ``(c) Coordination.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary of 
Defense shall coordinate with other Federal officers, including the 
Secretary of Veterans Affairs, to ensure that a Certificate of Military 
Service serves as acceptable proof of military service for receipt of 
benefits under the laws administered by such Federal officers.''.
 (b) Issuance to Members of Reserve Components.--Chapter 59 of such 
title, as amended by subsection (a), is further amended by inserting 
after section 1168a the following new section:
``Sec. 1168b. Record of military service: issuance to members of 
 reserve components
 ``An up-to-date record of military service under section 1168a of 
this title shall be issued to a member of a reserve component as 
follows:
 ``(1) Upon permanent change to duty status (including 
 retirement, resignation, expiration of a term of service, 
 promotion or commissioning as an officer, or permanent transfer 
 to active duty).
 ``(2) Upon discharge or release from temporary active duty 
 orders (minimum of 90 days on orders or 30 days for a 
 contingency operation).
 ``(3) Upon promotion to each grade beginning with--
 ``(A) O-3 for commissioned officers;
 ``(B) W-3 for warrant officers; and
 ``(C) E-4 for enlisted members.
 ``(4) In the case of a member of the National Guard, upon 
 any transfer to the National Guard of another State or 
 territory (commonly referred to as an `Interstate 
 Transfer').''.
 (c) Conforming Amendments Related to Current Discharge Certificate 
Authorities.--
 (1) In general.--Subsection (a) of section 1168 of title 
 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (A) by striking ``his discharge certificate or 
 certificate of release from active duty, respectively, 
 and his final pay'' and inserting ``the member's record 
 of military service under section 1168a of this title, 
 and the member's final pay''; and
 (B) by striking ``him or his'' and inserting ``the 
 member or the member's''.
 (2) Heading amendment.--The heading of such section 1168 is 
 amended to read as follows:
``Sec. 1168. Discharge or release from active duty: limitations; 
 issuance of record of military service''.
 (d) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
chapter 59 of such title is amended by striking the item relating to 
section 1168 and inserting the following new items:

``1168. Discharge or release from active duty: limitations; issuance of 
 record of military service.
``1168a. Discharge or release: record of military service.
``1168b. Record of military service: issuance to members of reserve 
 components.''.

 Subtitle D--Military Justice

SEC. 531. SEXUAL HARASSMENT INDEPENDENT INVESTIGATIONS AND PROSECUTION.

 (a) Inclusion of Sexual Harassment in Offenses Subject to Authority 
of Special Trial Counsel.--
 (1) Definition of covered offense.--Section 801(17)(A) of 
 title 10, United States Code (article 1(17)(A) of the Uniform 
 Code of Military Justice), as added by section 533 of the 
 National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public 
 Law 117-81), is amended--
 (A) by striking ``or''; and
 (B) by striking ``of this title'' and inserting ``, 
 or the standalone offense of sexual harassment 
 punishable under section 934 (article 134) of this 
 title''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) 
 shall take effect two years after the coming into effect of the 
 amendments made by section 533 of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81) as 
 provided in section 539C of that Act.
 (b) Independent Investigation of Sexual Harassment.--
 (1) Definitions.--Section 1561 of title 10, United States 
 Code, as amended by section 543 of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81), is 
 amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)--
 (i) by striking ``or Space Force'' and 
 inserting ``Space Force, or Coast Guard''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``or the Department of 
 Homeland Security (in the case of a matter 
 involving the Coast Guard when not operating as 
 a service in the Navy)'' after ``Department of 
 Defense''; and
 (B) by amending subsection (e) to read as follows:
 ``(e) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `independent investigator' means a member of 
 the armed forces or a civilian employee of the Department of 
 Defense or the Department of Homeland Security (in the case of 
 a matter involving the Coast Guard when not operating as a 
 service in the Navy) who--
 ``(A) is outside the chain of command of the 
 complainant and the subject of the investigation; and
 ``(B) is trained in the investigation of sexual 
 harassment, as determined by--
 ``(i) the Secretary concerned, in the case 
 of a member of the armed forces;
 ``(ii) the Secretary of Defense, in the 
 case of a civilian employee of the Department 
 of Defense; or
 ``(iii) the Secretary of Homeland Security, 
 in the case of a civilian employee of the 
 Department of Homeland Security.
 ``(2) The term `sexual harassment' means conduct that 
 constitutes the offense of sexual harassment as punishable 
 under section 934 of this title (article 134) pursuant to the 
 regulations prescribed by the Secretary of Defense for purposes 
 of such section (article).''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraph (1) 
 shall take effect immediately after the coming into effect of 
 the amendments made by section 543 of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81) as 
 provided in subsection (c) of that section.

SEC. 532. MATTERS IN CONNECTION WITH SPECIAL TRIAL COUNSEL.

 (a) Definition of Covered Offense.--
 (1) In general.--Paragraph (17)(A) of section 801 of title 
 10, United States Code (article 1 of the Uniform Code of 
 Military Justice), as added by section 533 of the National 
 Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-
 81; 135 Stat. 1695) and amended by section 531, is further 
 amended by striking ``section 920 (article 120)'' and inserting 
 ``section 919a (article 119a), section 920 (article 120), 
 section 920a (article 120a)''.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraph (1) 
 shall--
 (A) take effect on the date that is two years after 
 the date of the enactment of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-
 81); and
 (B) apply with respect to any offenses that occur 
 after that date.
 (b) Residual Prosecutorial Duties and Other Judicial, Functions of 
Convening Authorities in Covered Cases.--The President shall prescribe 
regulations to ensure that residual prosecutorial duties and other 
judicial functions of convening authorities, including but not limited 
to granting immunity, ordering depositions, and hiring experts, with 
respect to charges and specifications over which a special trial 
counsel exercises authority pursuant to section 824a of title 10, 
United States Code (article 24a of the Uniform Code of Military 
Justice), are transferred to the military judge, the special trial 
counsel, or other authority as appropriate in such cases by no later 
than the effective date established in section 539C of the National 
Defense Authorization Act for fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 10 
U.S.C. 801 note), in consideration of due process for all parties 
involved in such a case.
 (c) Amendments to the Rules for Courts Martial.--The President 
shall prescribe in regulation such modifications to Rule 813 of the 
Rules for Courts-Martial and other Rules as appropriate to ensure that 
at the beginning of each court-martial convened, the presentation of 
orders does not in open court specify the name, rank, or position of 
the convening authority convening such court, unless such convening 
authority is the Secretary concerned, the Secretary of Defense, or the 
President.
 (d) Briefing Required.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall provide to 
the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and the House of 
Representatives a briefing on the progress of the Department of Defense 
in implementing this section, including an identification of--
 (1) the duties to be transferred under subsection (b);
 (2) the positions to which those duties will be 
 transferred; and
 (3) any provisions of law or Rules for Courts Martial that 
 must be amended or modified to fully complete the transfer.
 (e) Additional Reporting Relative to Implementation of Subtitle D 
of Title V of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
2022.--Not later than February 1, 2025, and annually thereafter for 
five years, the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of the 
department in which the Coast Guard is operating (with respect to the 
Coast Guard) shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a 
report assessing the holistic effect of the reforms contained in 
subtitle D of title V of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81) on the military justice system. 
The report shall include the following elements:
 (1) An overall assessment of the effect such reforms have 
 had on the military justice system and the maintenance of good 
 order and discipline in the ranks.
 (2) The percentage of caseload and courts-martial assessed 
 as meeting, or having been assessed as potentially meeting, the 
 definition of ``covered offense'', disaggregated by offense and 
 military service where possible.
 (3) An assessment of prevalence and data concerning 
 disposition of cases by commanders after declination of 
 prosecution by special trial counsel, disaggregated by offense 
 and military service when possible.
 (4) Assessment of the effect, if any, the reforms contained 
 in such subtitle have had on non-judicial punishment concerning 
 covered and non-covered offenses.
 (5) A description of the resources and personnel required 
 to maintain and execute the reforms made by such subtitle 
 during the reporting period relative to fiscal year 2022.
 (6) A description of any other factors or matters 
 considered by the Secretary to be important to a holistic 
 assessment of these reforms on the military justice system.
 (f) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the following:
 (1) The Committee on Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (2) The Committee on Armed Services of the Senate.
 (3) The Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of 
 the House of Representatives.
 (4) The Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation 
 of the Senate.

SEC. 533. STANDARDS FOR IMPOSITION OF COMMANDING OFFICER'S NON-JUDICIAL 
 PUNISHMENT.

 (a) Commanding Officer's Non-judicial Punishment.--
 (1) In general.--Section 815 of title 10, United States 
 Code (article 15 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice), is 
 amended--
 (A) by redesignating subsections (c) through (g) as 
 subsections (d) through (h), respectively;
 (B) by inserting after subsection (b), the 
 following new subsection:
 ``(c)(1) Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3), a commanding 
officer may not impose a punishment authorized in subsection (b) 
unless, before the imposition of such punishment, the commanding 
officer--
 ``(A) requests and receives legal guidance regarding the 
 imposition of such punishment from a judge advocate or other 
 legal officer of the armed force of which the commanding 
 officer is a member; and
 ``(B) provides the member who may be subject to such 
 punishment with an opportunity to consult appropriate legal 
 counsel.
 ``(2) Paragraph (1) shall not apply to the punishments specified in 
subparagraphs (E) and (F) of subsection (b)(2).
 ``(3) A commanding officer may waive the requirements set forth in 
subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1), on a case by case basis, if 
the commanding officer determines such a waiver is necessary on the 
basis of operational necessity.''; and
 (C) in subsection (f), as so redesignated, by 
 striking ``subsection (d)'' and inserting ``subsection 
 (e)''.
 (2) Effective date and applicability.--The amendments made 
 by paragraph (1) shall take effect 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act and shall apply with respect to 
 punishments imposed under section 815 of title 10, United 
 States Code (article 15 of the Uniform Code of Military 
 Justice), on or after such effective date.
 (3) Additional guidance required.--Not later than one year 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act, each Secretary 
 concerned shall prescribe regulations or issue other written 
 guidance with respect to non-judicial punishment under section 
 815 of title 10, United States Code (article 15 of the Uniform 
 Code of Military Justice) that--
 (A)(i) identifies criteria to be considered when 
 determining whether a member of the armed forces is 
 attached to or embarked in a vessel for the purposes of 
 determining whether such member may demand trial by 
 court-martial in lieu of punishment under such section 
 (article); and
 (ii) establishes a policy about the appropriate and 
 responsible invocation of such exception; and
 (B) establishes criteria commanders must consider 
 when evaluating whether to issue a waiver under 
 subsection (c)(3) of such section (article) (as added 
 by paragraph (1) of this subsection) on the basis of 
 operational necessity.
 (b) Modification of Annual Reports on Racial and Ethnic 
Demographics in the Military Justice System.--Section 486(b) of title 
10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (7), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in paragraph (8), by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting a semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
 ``(9) with respect to principals on sea duty who were not 
 attached to or embarked in a vessel (as determined by the 
 Secretary of the Navy or the Secretary of the department in 
 which the Coast Guard is operating), the number of non-judicial 
 punishments proposed and finalized under section 815 of this 
 title (article 15 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice), in 
 total and disaggregated by--
 ``(A) whether the commanding officer imposing non-
 judicial punishment requested and received legal 
 guidance regarding the imposition of such punishment 
 from a judge advocate or other legal officer of the 
 armed force of which the commanding officer is a 
 member;
 ``(B) whether the principal was provided the 
 opportunity to consult appropriate legal counsel; and
 ``(C) statistical category as related to the 
 principal; and
 ``(10) with respect to principals on sea duty who were 
 attached to or embarked in a vessel (as determined by the 
 Secretary of the Navy or the Secretary of the department in 
 which the Coast Guard is operating), the number of non-judicial 
 punishments proposed and finalized under section 815 of this 
 title (article 15 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice), in 
 total and disaggregated by--
 ``(A) whether the commanding officer imposing non-
 judicial punishment requested and received legal 
 guidance regarding the imposition of such punishment 
 from a judge advocate or other legal officer of the 
 armed force of which the commanding officer is a 
 member;
 ``(B) whether the principal was provided the 
 opportunity to consult appropriate legal counsel; and
 ``(C) statistical category as related to the 
 principal.''.

SEC. 534. SPECIAL TRIAL COUNSEL OF THE AIR FORCE.

 (a) In General.--Section 1044f of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), in the matter preceding paragraph 
 (1), by striking ``The policies shall'' and inserting ``Subject 
 to subsection (c), the policies shall'';
 (2) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d); and
 (3) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(c) Special Trial Counsel of Department of the Air Force.--In 
establishing policies under subsection (a), the Secretary of Defense 
shall--
 ``(1) in lieu of providing for separate offices for the Air 
 Force and Space Force under subsection (a)(1), provide for the 
 establishment of a single dedicated office from which office 
 the activities of the special trial counsel of the Department 
 of the Air Force shall be supervised and overseen; and
 ``(2) in lieu of providing for separate lead special trial 
 counsels for the Air Force and Space Force under subsection 
 (a)(2), provide for the appointment of one lead special trial 
 counsel who shall be responsible for the overall supervision 
 and oversight of the activities of the special trial counsel of 
 the Department of the Air Force.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made subsection (a) shall take 
effect immediately after the coming into effect of the amendments made 
by section 532 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81) as provided in section 539C of that Act.

SEC. 535. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR VICTIMS OF OFFENSES UNDER THE 
 UNIFORM CODE OF MILITARY JUSTICE.

 (a) Military Crime Victims Financial Assistance Fund.--Chapter 53 
of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting before section 
1045 the following new section:
``Sec. 1044g. Military Crime Victims Financial Assistance Fund
 ``(a) Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the 
United States a fund to be known as the `Military Crime Victims 
Financial Assistance Fund' (referred to in this section as the `Fund').
 ``(b) Administration of Fund.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall 
administer the Fund consistent with the provisions of this section.
 ``(c) Deposits.--There shall be deposited in the Fund the 
following:
 ``(1) Any amounts appropriated to the Fund.
 ``(2) Any amounts donated to the Fund.
 ``(d) Availability and Use of Fund.--Amounts in the Fund shall, to 
the extent provided in appropriations Acts, be available solely for the 
payment of financial assistance to victims of covered violent offenses 
in accordance with the regulations prescribed under subsection (e).
 ``(e) Regulations.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this section, the Secretary of Defense shall prescribe 
regulations pursuant to which a victim of a covered violent offense may 
apply for and receive financial assistance payments from the Fund. Such 
regulations shall provide as follows:
 ``(1) A victim of a covered violent offense may apply to 
 the Fund for--
 ``(A) a standard payment;
 ``(B) a reimbursement payment; or
 ``(C) a standard payment and a reimbursement 
 payment.
 ``(2) A standard payment to a victim shall be a fixed 
 amount determined by the Secretary of Defense for each covered 
 violent offense.
 ``(3) A reimbursement payment to a victim shall be an 
 amount determined by the Secretary of Defense that is 
 sufficient to reimburse the victim for health care expenses, 
 travel expenses, and expenses for property damage resulting 
 from the covered violent offense, subject to such limits as the 
 Secretary may prescribe. A reimbursement payment may not be 
 made for any expenses for which a victim receives reimbursement 
 from other sources, including insurance claims.
 ``(4) An individual victim may receive not more than 
 $50,000 from the Fund per incident.
 ``(5) The eligibility of a victim to receive payments from 
 the Fund shall be subject to such terms, conditions, and other 
 requirements as the Secretary may prescribe.
 ``(6) The Secretary may not make a payment from the Fund if 
 the amount of such payment would exceed the amounts available 
 in the fund.
 ``(f) Annual Reports.--Not later than February 1 of each year, the 
Secretaries concerned, in consultation with the Secretary of the 
Treasury, shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a 
report that includes--
 ``(1) a summary of the amounts deposited to and paid from 
 the Fund during the preceding year;
 ``(2) the number of victims who received payments from the 
 Fund during the preceding year, set forth separately for each 
 covered violent offense; and
 ``(3) an estimate of the amount of appropriations required, 
 if any, to maintain the solvency of the fund for the period of 
 two fiscal years following the date of the report.
 ``(g) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `appropriate congressional committees' means 
 the following:
 ``(A) The congressional defense committees.
 ``(B) The Committee on Transportation and 
 Infrastructure of the House of Representatives.
 ``(C) The Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate.
 ``(2) The term `covered violent offense' means--
 ``(A) an offense under section 918 (article 118), 
 section 919 (article 119), section 919a (article 119a), 
 section 920 (article 120), section 920b (article 120b), 
 section 920c (article 120c), section 922 (article 122), 
 section 925 (article 125), section 928 (article 128), 
 section 928a (article 128a), section 928b (article 
 128b), section 930 (article 130), or the standalone 
 offense of sexual harassment as punishable under 
 section 934 (article 134) of this title; or
 ``(B) an attempt to commit an offense specified in 
 subparagraph (A) as punishable under section 880 of 
 this title (article 880).
 ``(3) The term `victim' means individual who has suffered 
 direct physical, emotional, or pecuniary harm as a result of 
 the commission of a covered violent offense.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
such chapter is amended by inserting before the item relating to 
section 1045 the following new item:

``1044g. Military Crime Victims Financial Assistance Fund.''.
 (c) Applicability.--Eligibility to receive a payment from the 
Military Crime Victims Financial Assistance Fund under section 1044g of 
title 10, United States Code (as added by subsection (a)), shall be 
limited to individuals who--
 (1) are victims of covered violent offenses that occur on 
 or after the date of the enactment of this Act; and
 (2) apply for payment from the Fund after the effective 
 date of the regulations prescribed under subsection (e) of such 
 section 1044g.
 (d) Progress Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall 
 submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report on 
 plans of the Secretary for implementing the Military Crime 
 Victims Financial Assistance Fund under section 1044g of title 
 10, United States Code (as added by subsection (a)).
 (2) Appropriate congressional committees defined.--In this 
 subsection, the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means the following:
 (A) The congressional defense committees.
 (B) The Committee on Transportation and 
 Infrastructure of the House of Representatives.
 (C) The Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate.

SEC. 536. ADDRESSING SEX-RELATED OFFENSES AND SEXUAL HARASSMENT 
 INVOLVING MEMBERS OF THE NATIONAL GUARD.

 (a) Addressing Certain Sex-related Offenses.--
 (1) In general.--Chapter 80 of title 10, United States 
 Code, is amended by inserting after section 1561b the following 
 new section:
``Sec. 1561c. Addressing sex-related offenses and sexual harassment 
 involving members of the National Guard
 ``(a) In General.--An adjutant general who receives notice of an 
allegation of a sex-related offense or sexual harassment committed by a 
member of the National Guard under the jurisdiction of the adjutant 
general shall, not later than 72 hours after receiving such notice--
 ``(1) report the allegation to the Chief of the National 
 Guard Bureau; and
 ``(2) ensure that the alleged victim is informed of the 
 availability of Special Victims' Counsel in accordance with 
 section 1044e of this title, as applicable.
 ``(b) Initial Report.--
 ``(1) Elements.--Each report under subsection (a)(1) shall 
 include the following:
 ``(A) A summary of the allegation.
 ``(B) Identification of--
 ``(i) the individual who is alleged to have 
 committed the offense;
 ``(ii) the alleged victim of the offense; 
 and
 ``(iii) the individual or entity that is 
 investigating the allegation.
 ``(C) A statement indicating whether the alleged 
 victim has been informed of the availability of legal 
 counsel in accordance with subsection (a)(2).
 ``(2) Late reports.--In the event that an adjutant general 
 submits a report required under subsection (a) after the 
 expiration of the 72-hour period specified in such subsection, 
 the report shall include--
 ``(A) the information specified in paragraph (1); 
 and
 ``(B) an explanation of the reasons the report was 
 not timely submitted.
 ``(c) Final Report.--Not later than 30 days after determining 
whether or not to take action against a member of the National guard 
accused of a sex-related offense or sexual harassment, the adjutant 
general shall submit to the Chief of the National Guard Bureau a report 
that includes--
 ``(1) the information described in subparagraphs (A) and 
 (B) of subsection (b)(1);
 ``(2) a description of any administrative, judicial, or 
 other action taken against the member; and
 ``(3) if no such action was taken, an explanation of the 
 reasons the adjutant general declined to take such action.
 ``(d) Applicability.--The requirements of this section shall apply 
with respect to an allegation of a sex-related offense or sexual 
harassment of which an adjutant general receives notice after the date 
of the enactment of this section without regard to--
 ``(1) the jurisdiction in which the offense occurred; or
 ``(2) whether prosecution for the offense would be time 
 barred by a statute of limitations.
 ``(e) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `sex-related offense' means an alleged sex-
 related offense (as defined in section 1044e(h) of this title).
 ``(2) The term `sexual harassment' means the offense of 
 sexual harassment as punishable under section 934 of this title 
 (article 134 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice) pursuant 
 to the regulations prescribed by the Secretary of Defense for 
 purposes of such section (article).''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the 
 beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the 
 item relating to section 1561b the following new item:

``1561c. Addressing sex-related offenses and sexual harassment 
 involving members of the National Guard.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
take effect immediately after the effective date of the amendments made 
by part 1 of subtitle D of title V of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81) as provided 
in section 539C of that Act.
 (c) Implementation.--The Secretary of Defense shall prescribe 
regulations implementing section 1561c of title 10, United States Code, 
as added by subsection (a).

SEC. 537. PROHIBITION ON SHARING OF INFORMATION ON DOMESTIC VIOLENCE 
 INCIDENTS.

 Section 1562 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding 
at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(c) Prohibition on Sharing of Certain Information.--
 ``(1) In general.--In a case in which the information 
 maintained and reported by the Secretary of a military 
 department under subsection (b) includes the findings of an 
 Incident Determination Committee, the Secretary may not share 
 such findings with any party other than the administrator of 
 the database under subsection (a).
 ``(2) Waiver.--The Secretary of Defense may waive the 
 prohibition under paragraph (1) on a case-by-case basis if the 
 Secretary determines that it is necessary to share the findings 
 of an Incident Determination Committee with a member of the 
 Armed Forces or a civilian employee of the Department of 
 Defense acting within the scope of their official duties.
 ``(3) Incident determination committee defined.--In this 
 subsection, the term `Incident Determination Committee' means a 
 committee established at a military installation that is 
 responsible for reviewing a reported incident of domestic 
 violence and determining whether such incident constitutes 
 serious harm to the victim according to the applicable criteria 
 of the Department of Defense.''.

SEC. 538. MANDATORY NOTIFICATION OF MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES 
 IDENTIFIED IN CERTAIN RECORDS OF CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 80 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new section:
``Sec. 1567b. Mandatory notification of members of the armed forces and 
 reserve components identified in certain records of 
 criminal investigations
 ``(a) Notification of Inclusion in MCIO Records.--As soon as 
practicable after the conclusion of a criminal investigation for which 
a military criminal investigative organization is the lead 
investigative agency, the head of such organization shall provide, to 
any member or a former member of the armed forces and reserve 
components who is designated in the records of the organization as a 
subject of such investigation, written notice of such designation.
 ``(b) Initial Notification of Previous Inclusion in MCIO Records.--
Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
section, the head of each military criminal investigative organization 
shall provide, to any member or former member of the armed forces and 
reserve components who is designated after January 1, 2011 in the 
records of the organization as a subject of a criminal investigation 
that is closed as of such date, written notice of such designation.
 ``(c) Contents of Notice.--Each notice provided under subsection 
(a) and (b) shall include the following information--
 ``(1) The date on which the member was designated as a 
 subject of a criminal investigation in the records of the 
 military criminal investigative organization.
 ``(2) Identification of each crime for which the member was 
 investigated, including a citation to each provision of chapter 
 47 of this title (the Uniform Code of Military Justice) that 
 the member was suspected of violating, if applicable.
 ``(3) Instructions on how the member may seek removal of 
 the record in accordance with subsection (d).
 ``(d) Removal of Record.--The Secretary of Defense shall--
 ``(1) establish a process through which a member of the 
 armed forces and reserve components who receives a notice under 
 subsection (a) or (b) may request the removal of the record 
 that is the subject of such notice; and
 ``(2) issue uniform guidance, applicable to all military 
 criminal investigative organizations, specifying the conditions 
 under which such a record may be removed.
 ``(f) On-going and Sensitive Investigations.--The head of a 
military criminal investigative organization may waive the notification 
requirements of this section if such head determines that a 
notification made pursuant to this section would--
 ``(1) endanger any witness or victim of the offense under 
 investigation;
 ``(2) disclose the existence of an intelligence or 
 counterintelligence investigation; or
 ``(3) compromise or reveal any other on-going criminal 
 investigation.
 ``(e) Military Criminal Investigative Organization Defined.--In 
this section, the term `military criminal investigative organization' 
means any organization or element of the Department of Defense or an 
armed force that is responsible for conducting criminal investigations, 
including--
 ``(1) the Army Criminal Investigation Command;
 ``(2) the Naval Criminal Investigative Service;
 ``(3) the Air Force Office of Special Investigations;
 ``(4) the Coast Guard Investigative Service; and
 ``(5) the Defense Criminal Investigative Service.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item:

``1567b. Mandatory notification of members of the armed forces and 
 reserve components identified in certain 
 records of criminal investigations.''.

SEC. 539. SENTENCING PARAMETERS UNDER THE UNIFORM CODE OF MILITARY 
 JUSTICE FOR HATE CRIMES.

 Section 539E(e)(2)(A)(ii) of the National Defense Authorization Act 
for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 10 U.S.C. 856 note) is amended 
by inserting ``(including whether the offense is described in section 
249 of title 18)'' after ``district court''.

SEC. 539A. LIMITATION ON AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS FOR RELOCATION OF ARMY 
 CID SPECIAL AGENT TRAINING COURSE.

 (a) Limitation.--None of the funds authorized to be appropriated by 
this Act or otherwise made available for fiscal year 2023 for the Army 
may be obligated or expended to relocate an Army CID special agent 
training course until--
 (1)(A) the Secretary of the Army submits to the Committees 
 on Armed Services of the Senate and the House of 
 Representatives--
 (i) the evaluation and plan required by subsection 
 (a) of section 549C of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-
 81; 135 Stat. 1724);
 (ii) the implementation plan required by subsection 
 (b) of such section; and
 (iii) a separate report on any plans of the 
 Secretary to relocate an Army CID special agent 
 training course, including an explanation of the 
 business case for any transfer of training personnel 
 proposed as part of such plan;
 (B) the Secretary provides to the Committee on Armed 
 Services of the House of Representatives a briefing on the 
 contents of each report specified in subparagraph (A); and
 (C) a period of 90 days has elapsed following the briefing 
 under subparagraph (B); and
 (2) the Secretary submits a written certification to the 
 Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and the House of 
 Representatives indicating that the Army has fully complied 
 with subsection (c) of section 549C of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 135 
 Stat. 1724) with regard to locations at which military criminal 
 investigative training is conducted.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``relocate'', when used with respect to an 
 Army CID special agent training course, means the transfer of 
 such course to a location different than the location used for 
 such course as of the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) The term ``Army CID special agent training course'' 
 means a training course provided to members of the Army to 
 prepare such members for service as special agents in the Army 
 Criminal Investigation Division.

SEC. 539B. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR SENTENCING OF MARIJUANA-BASED OFFENSES 
 UNDER THE UNIFORM CODE OF MILITARY JUSTICE.

 (a) Recommendations.--The Military Justice Review Panel shall 
develop recommendations specifying appropriate sentencing ranges for 
offenses involving the use and possession of marijuana under chapter 47 
of title 10, United States Code (the Uniform Code of Military Justice). 
In developing such recommendations, the Military Justice Review Panel 
shall consider--
 (1) how the sentences typically imposed for marijuana-based 
 offenses under such chapter compare to the sentences typically 
 imposed for other comparable offenses, such as offenses 
 involving the misuse of alcohol;
 (2) the overall burden on the military justice system of 
 the current approach of the Department of Defense to sentencing 
 marijuana-based offenses under such chapter; and
 (3) the historically discriminatory manner in which laws 
 related to marijuana offenses have been enforced, the potential 
 for the continued discriminatory application of the law 
 (whether intentional or unintentional), and recommendations for 
 actions that can be taken to minimize the risk of such 
 discrimination.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Military Justice Review Panel shall submit 
to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and the House of 
Representatives a report that includes the recommendations developed 
under subsection (a).

SEC. 539C. REPORT ON SHARING INFORMATION WITH COUNSEL FOR VICTIMS OF 
 OFFENSES UNDER THE UNIFORM CODE OF MILITARY JUSTICE.

 (a) Report Required.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Defense Advisory Committee on Investigation, 
Prosecution, and Defense of Sexual Assault in the Armed Forces 
(referred to in this section as the ``Advisory Committee'') shall 
submit to the appropriate congressional committees and each Secretary 
concerned a report on the feasibility and advisability of establishing 
a uniform policy for the sharing of the information described in 
subsection (c) with a Special Victims' Counsel, Victims' Legal Counsel, 
or other counsel representing a victim of an offense under chapter 47 
of title 10, United States Code (the Uniform Code of Military Justice).
 (b) Elements.--The report under subsection (a) shall include the 
following:
 (1) An assessment of the feasibility and advisability of 
 establishing the uniform policy described in subsection (a), 
 including an assessment of the potential effects of such a 
 policy on--
 (A) the privacy of individuals;
 (B) the criminal investigative process; and
 (C) the military justice system generally.
 (2) If the Advisory Committee determines that the 
 establishment of such a policy is feasible and advisable, a 
 description of--
 (A) the stages of the military justice process at 
 which the information described in subsection (c) 
 should be made available to counsel representing a 
 victim; and
 (B) any circumstances under which some or all of 
 such information should not be shared.
 (3) Such recommendations for legislative or administrative 
 action as the Advisory Committee considers appropriate.
 (c) Information Described.--The information described in this 
subsection is the following:
 (1) Any recorded statements of the victim to investigators.
 (2) The record of any forensic examination of the person or 
 property of the victim, including the record of any sexual 
 assault forensic exam of the victim that is in possession of 
 investigators or the Government.
 (3) Any medical record of the victim that is in the 
 possession of investigators or the Government.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section--
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the congressional defense committees;
 (B) the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate; and
 (C) the Committee on Transportation and 
 Infrastructure of the House of Representatives.
 (2) The term ``Secretary concerned'' has the meaning given 
 that term in section 101(a)(9) of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 539D. PUBLIC AVAILABILITY OF MILITARY COMMISSION PROCEEDINGS.

 Section 949d(c) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) In the case of any proceeding of a military commission under 
this chapter that is made open to the public, the military judge may 
order arrangements for the availability of the proceeding to be watched 
remotely by the public through the internet.''.

SEC. 539E. REVIEW AND REPORT ON THE DEFINITION OF CONSENT FOR PURPOSES 
 OF THE OFFENSES OF RAPE AND SEXUAL ASSAULT UNDER THE 
 UNIFORM CODE OF MILITARY JUSTICE.

 (a) Evaluation and Review.--Not later than 30 days after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Joint Service Committee on Military 
Justice shall commission a comprehensive evaluation and review of the 
definition of consent, as set forth in section 920(g)(7) of title 10, 
United States Code (article 120(g)(7) of the Uniform Code of Military 
Justice).
 (b) Elements.--The review and evaluation conducted under subsection 
(a) shall assess how the definition of consent set forth in section 
920(g)(7) of title 10, United States Code (article 120(g)(7) of the 
Uniform Code of Military Justice) can be--
 (1) expanded to require knowledgeable and informed 
 agreement, freely entered into, without any malicious factors 
 or influences such as force, coercion, fear, fraud or false 
 identity, or exploitation of a person's incapacity;
 (2) enhanced through consultation with other recognized 
 standards for the definition of such term; and
 (3) clarified to state clearly that--
 (A) the circumstances surrounding an incident of 
 sexual contact are irrelevant when malicious factors 
 induced compliance;
 (B) consent for a sexual act does not constitute 
 consent for all sexual acts; and
 (C) consent is revocable by either party during 
 sexual conduct.
 (c) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the commencement of the 
evaluation and review under subsection (a), the Joint Service Committee 
on Military Justice shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a report on the results of the evaluation and review.

SEC. 539F. STANDARDS AND REPORTS RELATING TO CASES OVERSEEN BY MILITARY 
 CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIVE ORGANIZATIONS.

 (a) Standards Required.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense, in consultation 
 with the Secretaries of the military departments, shall develop 
 and implement uniform standards applicable to the military 
 criminal investigative organizations of the Department of 
 Defense that--
 (A) establish processes and procedures for the 
 handling of cold cases;
 (B) specify the circumstances under which a case 
 overseen by such an organization shall be referred to 
 the Inspector General of the Department of Defense for 
 review; and
 (C) establish procedures to ensure that, in the 
 event an investigator transfers out of such an 
 organization or otherwise ceases to be an investigator, 
 the cases overseen by such investigator are transferred 
 to a new investigator within the organization.
 (2) Report.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act the Secretary of Defense shall submit to 
 Congress a report on the standards developed under paragraph 
 (1).
 (3) Implementation.--Following the submittal of the report 
 under paragraph (2), but not later than 120 days after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall 
 implement the standards developed under paragraph (1).
 (b) Report Establishment of Cold Case Unit in the Army.--Not later 
than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
Secretary of the Army shall submit to Congress a report on the 
feasibility of establishing a cold case unit in the Army Criminal 
Investigation Division that is similar to the cold case units operating 
within the Naval Criminal Investigative Service and the Air Force 
Office of Special Investigations.

 Subtitle E--Other Legal Matters

SEC. 541. CLARIFICATIONS OF PROCEDURE IN INVESTIGATIONS OF PERSONNEL 
 ACTIONS TAKEN AGAINST MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES IN 
 RETALIATION FOR PROTECTED COMMUNICATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Subparagraphs (D) and (E) of paragraph (4) of 
section 1034(c) of title 10, United States Code, is amended to read as 
follows:
 ``(D)(i) Upon determining that an investigation of an allegation 
under paragraph (1) is warranted, the Inspector General making the 
determination shall expeditiously investigate the allegation to 
determine whether the protected communication or activity under 
subsection (b) was a contributing factor in the personnel action 
prohibited under subsection (b) that was taken or withheld (or 
threatened to be taken or withheld) against a member of the armed 
forces.
 ``(ii) In the case of a determination made by the Inspector General 
of the Department of Defense, that Inspector General may delegate 
responsibility for the investigation to an appropriate Inspector 
General of a military department.
 ``(iii) The member alleging the prohibited personnel action may use 
circumstantial evidence to demonstrate that the protected communication 
or activity under subsection (b) was a contributing factor in the 
personnel action prohibited under subsection (b). Such circumstantial 
evidence may include that the person taking such prohibited personnel 
action knew of the protected communication or activity, and that the 
prohibited personnel action occurred within a period of time such that 
a reasonable person could conclude that the communication or protected 
activity was a contributing factor in the personnel action.
 ``(iv) If the Inspector General determines it likelier than not 
that the member made a communication or participated in an activity 
protected under subsection (b) that was a contributing factor in a 
personnel action described in such subsection, the Inspector General 
shall presume such personnel action to be prohibited under such 
subsection unless the Inspector General determines there is clear and 
convincing evidence that the same personnel action would have occurred 
in the absence of such protected communication or activity.
 ``(E) If the Inspector General preliminarily determines in an 
investigation under subparagraph (D) that a personnel action prohibited 
under subsection (b) has occurred and that such personnel action shall 
result in an immediate hardship to the member alleging the personnel 
action, the Inspector General shall promptly notify the Secretary of 
the military department concerned or the Secretary of Homeland 
Security, as applicable, of the hardship, and such Secretary shall take 
such action as such Secretary determines appropriate.''.
 (b) Technical Amendments.--Such paragraph is further amended in 
subparagraphs (A) and (B) by striking ``subsection (h)'' both places it 
appears and inserting ``subsection (i)''.

SEC. 542. PRIMARY PREVENTION OF VIOLENCE.

 (a) Annual Primary Prevention Research Agenda.--Section 549A(c) of 
the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 
117-81l 10 U.S.C. 1561 note) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) as 
 paragraphs (5), (6), and (7), respectively;
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new 
 paragraphs:
 ``(2) include a focus on whether and to what extent sub-
 populations of the military community may be targeted for 
 sexual assault, sexual harassment, or domestic violence more 
 than others;
 ``(3) seek to identify factors that influence the 
 prevention, perpetration, and victimization of sexual assault, 
 sexual harassment, and domestic violence;
 ``(4) seek to improve the collection and dissemination of 
 data on hazing and bullying related to sexual assault, sexual 
 harassment, and domestic violence;''; and
 (3) in paragraph (6), as redesignated by paragraph (1) of 
 this section, by amending the text to read as follows:
 ``(6) incorporate collaboration with other Federal 
 departments and agencies, including the Department of Health 
 and Human Services and the Centers for Disease Control and 
 Prevention, State governments, academia, industry, federally 
 funded research and development centers, nonprofit 
 organizations, and other organizations outside of the 
 Department of Defense, including civilian institutions that 
 conduct similar data-driven studies, collection, and analysis; 
 and''.
 (b) Primary Prevention Workforce.--Section 549B of the National 
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 10 
U.S.C. 501 note) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (c), by adding at the end the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(3) Comptroller general report.--Not later than one year 
 after the date of the enactment of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023, the Comptroller General 
 of the United States shall submit to the appropriate 
 congressional committees a report comparing the sexual 
 harassment and prevention training of the Department of Defense 
 with similar programs at other Federal departments and agencies 
 and including data collected by colleges and universities and 
 other relevant outside entities.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsections:
 ``(e) Incorporation of Research and Findings.--The Primary 
Prevention Workforce established under subsection (a) shall, on a 
regular basis, incorporate findings and conclusions from the primary 
prevention research agenda established under section 549A, as 
appropriate, into the work of the workforce.
 ``(f) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this 
section, the term `appropriate congressional committees' means the 
following:
 ``(1) The Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and 
 House of Representatives.
 ``(2) The Committees on Appropriations of the Senate and 
 House of Representatives.
 ``(3) The Committee on Committee on Homeland Security and 
 Governmental Affairs of the Senate.
 ``(4) The Committee on Oversight and Reform of the House of 
 Representatives.''.

SEC. 543. TREATMENT OF CERTAIN COMPLAINTS FROM MEMBERS OF THE ARMED 
 FORCES.

 (a) Regulations Required.--Not later than 180 days after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, each Secretary of a military department 
shall issue regulations implementing subsections (b) and (c).
 (b) Mandatory IG Investigation of Certain Complaints.--
 (1) Inspector general investigation.--A complaint described 
 in paragraph (2) from a member an Armed Force under the 
 jurisdiction of the Secretary of a military department--
 (A) may be investigated only by the Inspector 
 General of the Armed Force or military department 
 concerned; and
 (B) may not be referred to an individual in the 
 chain of command of the complainant for investigation.
 (2) Complaint described.--A complaint described in this 
 paragraph--
 (A) is a complaint alleging that there was a 
 violation of a Department of Defense policy relating to 
 the investigation, processing, or other administrative 
 treatment of a report sexual assault, sexual 
 harassment, or domestic violence; and
 (B) does not include a complaint alleging an actual 
 act of sexual harassment, sexual assault, or domestic 
 violence.
 (c) Opportunity to Withdraw Complaints Before Referral to Chain of 
Command.--
 (1) Notice an opportunity to withdraw.--An Inspector 
 General of an Armed Force or military department who is in 
 receipt of a complaint that is eligible for referral to the 
 chain of command of the complainant may refer such complaint to 
 the chain of command only if the Inspector General--
 (A) notifies the complainant of the intent of the 
 Inspector General to make such referral; and
 (B) provides the complainant with the opportunity 
 to withdraw the complaint during the period of 10 days 
 following the issuance of such notice.
 (2) Effect of withdrawal.--If a complainant withdraws a 
 complaint pursuant to paragraph (1)(B), the Inspector General 
 may not refer the complaint to an individual in the 
 complainant's chain of command and there shall be no further 
 investigation of the complaint.

SEC. 544. PILOT PROGRAM ON FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC 
 VIOLENCE.

 (a) In General.--Beginning not later than one year after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall carry out 
a pilot program under which the Secretary makes grants, on a 
discretionary basis, to qualified victims of domestic violence to 
assist such victims in seeking refuge from an abuser.
 (b) Disbursement.--A grant under subsection (a) may be disbursed--
 (1) as a single, lump sum payment; or
 (2) in multiple payments at such times and in such amounts 
 as the Secretary determines appropriate.
 (c) Maximum Amount.--A qualified victim of domestic violence may 
receive not more than a total of $7,500 in grants under subsection (a) 
during the victim's lifetime.
 (d) Report.--Not later than one year prior to the termination date 
specified in subsection (e), the Secretary of Defense shall submit to 
the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and the House of 
Representatives a report that--
 (1) evaluates the effectiveness of the pilot program under 
 this section;
 (2) indicates whether the pilot program should be continued 
 or expanded;
 (3) takes into account voluntary feedback from program 
 recipients and relevant Department staff, including direct 
 testimonials about their experiences with the program and ways 
 in which they think it could be improved; and
 (4) examines other potential actions that arise during the 
 course of the program that the Department could take to further 
 protect the safety of program participants and eligible 
 individuals, as the Secretary determines appropriate.
 (e) Termination.--The authority to carry out the pilot program 
under this section shall terminate six years after the date of the 
enactment of this Act.
 (f) Regulations.--The Secretary of Defense shall prescribe 
regulations implementing this section.
 (g) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``domestic violence'' means an act described 
 in section 928b of title 10, United States Code (article 128b 
 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice).
 (2) The term ``qualified victim of domestic violence'' 
 means an individual who meets the following criteria:
 (A) The individual is a member of an Armed Force or 
 a spouse, intimate partner, or immediate family member 
 of a member of an Armed Force.
 (B) The individual reported an incident of domestic 
 violence to an organization or element of the 
 Department of Defense or to a civilian law enforcement 
 organization.
 (C) The individual or a dependent of that 
 individual was an alleged victim of such incident.
 (D) The individual demonstrates--
 (i) an intent to seek refuge from the 
 alleged abuser; and
 (ii) a need for financial assistance.

SEC. 545. AGREEMENTS WITH CIVILIAN VICTIM SERVICE AGENCIES.

 (a) Guidance Required.--The Secretary of Defense, in consultation 
with the Secretaries of the military departments and the Secretary of 
the department in which the Coast Guard is operating (with respect to 
the Coast Guard), shall issue guidance pursuant to which installation 
commanders may enter into memoranda of understanding with qualified 
victim service agencies for purposes of providing services to victims 
of sexual assault in accordance with subsection (b).
 (b) Contents of Agreement.--A memorandum of understanding entered 
into under subsection (a) shall provide that personnel of the sexual 
assault prevention and response program at a military installation may 
refer a victim of sexual assault to a qualified civilian victim service 
agency if such personnel determine that such a referral would benefit 
the victim.
 (c) Victim Service Agency Defined.--In this section, the term 
``victim service agency'' means an agency which may provide legal 
services, counseling, or safe housing.

SEC. 546. ACTIVITIES TO IMPROVE INFORMATION SHARING AND COLLABORATION 
 ON MATTERS RELATING TO THE PREVENTION OF AND RESPONSE TO 
 DOMESTIC ABUSE AND CHILD ABUSE AND NEGLECT AMONG MILITARY 
 FAMILIES.

 (a) Enhancement of Activities for Awareness of Military Families 
Regarding Family Advocacy Programs and Other Similar Services.--
 (1) Pilot program on information on faps for families.--The 
 Secretary of Defense shall carry out a pilot program to assess 
 the feasibility and advisability of various mechanisms to 
 inform families about the Family Advocacy Programs and 
 resiliency training of the covered Armed Forces during command 
 orientation and during enrollment in the Defense Enrollment 
 Eligibility Reporting System. The matters assessed by the pilot 
 program shall include the following:
 (A) An option for training of family members on the 
 Family Advocacy Programs.
 (B) The provision to families of information on the 
 resources available through the Family Advocacy 
 Programs.
 (C) The availability through the Family Advocacy 
 Programs of both restricting and unrestricted reporting 
 on incidents of domestic abuse.
 (D) The provision to families of information on the 
 Military OneSource program of the Department of 
 Defense.
 (E) The provision to families of information on 
 resources relating to domestic abuse and child abuse 
 and neglect that are available through local community 
 service organizations.
 (F) The availability of the Military and Family 
 Life Counseling Program.
 (2) Outreach on fap and similar services for military 
 families.--Each Secretary of a military department shall 
 improve the information available to military families under 
 the jurisdiction of such Secretary that are the victim of 
 domestic abuse or child abuse and neglect in order to provide 
 such families with comprehensive information on the services 
 available to such families in connection with such violence and 
 abuse and neglect. The information so provided shall include a 
 complete guide to the following:
 (A) The Family Advocacy Program of the covered 
 Armed Force or military department concerned.
 (B) Military law enforcement services, including 
 the process following a report of an incidence of 
 domestic abuse or child abuse or neglect.
 (C) Other applicable victim services.
 (b) Improvement of Collaboration in Domestic Abuse Prevention 
Services.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, Department of Defense Instruction 
 6400.01, relating to the Family Advocacy Program of the 
 Department of Defense, shall be modified to enhance 
 collaboration among the programs and entities specified in 
 paragraph (2) for the purpose of leveraging the expertise and 
 resources of such programs and components to order to improve 
 the availability and scope of domestic abuse prevention 
 services for military families.
 (2) Programs and entities.--The programs and entities 
 specified in this paragraph are the following:
 (A) The Family Advocacy Program of the Department 
 of Defense.
 (B) The Sexual Assault Prevention and Response 
 Office of the Department of Defense.
 (C) The Defense Suicide Prevention Office.
 (D) The Defense Equal Opportunity Management 
 Institute.
 (E) The Defense Health Agency.
 (F) The substance abuse prevention programs and 
 entities of the covered Armed Forces.
 (G) Relevant programs and entities of the 
 Department of Veterans Affairs.
 (H) Civilian organizations with missions relevant 
 to domestic abuse prevention, including community 
 health and social services organizations.
 (I) Such other programs and entities as the 
 Secretary of Defense considers appropriate.
 (c) Covered Armed Force Defined.--In this section, the term 
``covered Armed Force'' means the following:
 (1) The Army.
 (2) The Navy.
 (3) The Marine Corps.
 (4) The Air Force.
 (5) The Space Force.

SEC. 547. INSPECTOR GENERAL INVESTIGATION INTO DISCRIMINATION AGAINST 
 MEMBERS AND EMPLOYEES OF MIDDLE EASTERN AND NORTH AFRICAN 
 DESCENT.

 (a) Investigation.--The Assistant Inspector General for Diversity 
and Inclusion of the Department of Defense shall conduct an 
investigation into discrimination faced by members of the Armed Forces, 
and civilian employees of the Department, who are of Middle Eastern or 
North African descent.
 (b) Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, Assistant Inspector General shall submit to the 
Committees on Armed Services of the House of Representatives and Senate 
a report containing the results of such investigation.

SEC. 548. TIME LIMIT FOR PROCESSING CERTAIN ADMINISTRATIVE COMPLAINTS.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 80 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended by inserting after section 1561b the following new section:
``Sec. 1561c. Processing a harassment or military equal opportunity 
 complaint
 ``(a) Time Limit.--An official authorized to take final action on a 
complaint from a member of the armed forces of harassment or prohibited 
discrimination shall ensure the procedures and requirements for the 
complaint are completed within 180 days after the date on which any 
supervisor or designated office received the complaint.
 ``(b) Judicial Review.--
 ``(1) Pursuant to section 706(1) of title 5, United States 
 Code, a member of the armed forces may seek an order in a court 
 of the United States directing the Secretary concerned to take 
 final action or provide a written explanation no later than 30 
 days after the court enters its order, if an authorized 
 official does not--
 ``(A) take final action on a complaint under 
 subsection (a) within 180 days; or
 ``(B) provide the member a written explanation of 
 the final action taken on a complaint under subsection 
 (a).
 ``(2) Pursuant to section 706(2) of title 5, United States 
 Code, and no later than 30 days after a member of the armed 
 forces receives a written explanation of the final action taken 
 on a complaint under subsection (a), the member may seek review 
 of the action in a court of the United States.
 ``(c) Report.--Not later than April 1 each year, the Secretary 
concerned shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a 
report of the total number of court orders sought under subsection (b) 
and orders granted by such courts.
 ``(d) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `appropriate congressional committees' means 
 the following:
 ``(A) The Committee on Armed Services of the House 
 of Representatives.
 ``(B) The Committee on Armed Services of the 
 Senate.
 ``(C) The Committee on Transportation and 
 Infrastructure of the House of Representatives.
 ``(D) The Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate.
 ``(2) The term `complaint' means an allegation or report of 
 harassment or prohibited discrimination.
 ``(3) The term `designated office' means a military equal 
 opportunity office or an office of the inspector general or 
 staff judge advocate, and any other departmental office 
 authorized by the Secretary concerned to receive harassment and 
 prohibited discrimination complaints.
 ``(4) The term `harassment' means behavior that is 
 unwelcome or offensive to a reasonable person, whether oral, 
 written, or physical, that creates an intimidating, hostile, or 
 offensive environment.
 ``(5) The term `prohibited discrimination' means unlawful 
 discrimination, including disparate treatment, of an individual 
 or group on the basis of race, color, national origin, 
 religion, sex (including pregnancy), gender identity, or sexual 
 orientation.
 ``(6) The term `member of the armed forces' means a member 
 of an armed force serving on active duty.
 ``(7) The term `supervisor' means a member of the armed 
 forces in charge or command of other members of the armed 
 forces or a civilian employee (as defined in section 2105 of 
 title 5, United States Code) authorized to direct and control 
 service members.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 
1561b the following new item:

``1561c. Processing a harassment or military equal opportunity 
 complaint.''.

SEC. 549. REVIEW AND REPORT ON ADMINISTRATION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT 
 CLAIMS.

 (a) Review.--The Secretary of Defense shall review the practices of 
the Department of Defense pertaining to the administration of sexual 
harassment claims. As part of the review, the Secretary shall--
 (1) assess the efforts of the Department to prevent sexual 
 harassment and protect members of the Armed Forces who submit 
 sexual harassment claims; and
 (2) compile data and research on the prevalence of sexual 
 harassment in the military, including--
 (A) the number of sexual harassment incidents 
 reported;
 (B) the number and percentage of such reports that 
 resulted in the initiation of legal proceedings against 
 the alleged perpetrator; and
 (C) the number and percentage of such cases leading 
 to convictions or other adverse action against the 
 alleged perpetrator.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report on the results of the review 
conducted under subsection (a).

SEC. 549A. INTERAGENCY TASK FORCE TO PROTECT MEMBERS, VETERANS, AND 
 MILITARY FAMILIES FROM FINANCIAL FRAUD.

 (a) Establishment.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with 
the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, shall establish an Interagency Task 
Force on Financial Fraud targeting members of the Armed Forces and 
veterans (referred to in this section as the ``Task Force'').
 (b) Membership.--The Task Force established under this section 
shall include representatives from the following:
 (1) The Department of Defense.
 (2) The Department of Veterans Affairs,
 (3) The Federal Trade Commission.
 (4) The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.
 (5) The Department of Justice.
 (6) The Federal Communications Commission.
 (7) The Postal Inspection Service.
 (8) Three representatives, appointed by the Secretary of 
 Defense in consultation with the Secretary of the Department of 
 Veterans Affairs, of non-governmental organizations (at least 
 one of whom is a representative of a veterans' service 
 organization) with expertise in identifying, preventing, and 
 combatting financial fraud targeting members of the Armed 
 Forces, veterans, and military families.
 (c) Consultation.--The Task Force shall regularly consult with the 
following:
 (1) Members of the Armed Forces, veterans, and members of 
 military families that have been victims of financial fraud.
 (2) Relevant Federal agencies and departments that are not 
 represented on the Task Force.
 (3) Other relevant public and private sector stakeholders, 
 including State and local law enforcement agencies, financial 
 services providers, technology companies, and social media 
 platforms.
 (d) Meetings.--The Task Force shall not meet less frequently than 
three times per calendar year.
 (e) Purpose.--The purpose of the Task Force is to identify and 
examine current and developing methods of financial fraud targeting 
members of the Armed Forces, veterans, and military families and issue 
recommendations to enhance efforts undertaken by Federal agencies to 
identify, prevent, and combat such financial fraud.
 (f) Duties.--The duties of the Task Force shall include the 
following:
 (1) Collecting and reviewing robust data pertaining to 
 medical billing, credit reporting, debt collection, and other 
 serious financial challenges facing members of the Armed 
 Forces, veterans, and military families.
 (2) Identifying and reviewing current methods of financial 
 exploitation targeting members of the Armed Forces, veterans, 
 and military families, including--
 (A) imposter or phishing scams;
 (B) investment-related fraud;
 (C) pension poaching;
 (D) veterans benefit fraud;
 (E) fraudulent offers pertaining to employment or 
 business opportunities;
 (F) predatory lending;
 (G) veteran charity schemes;
 (H) foreign money offers and fake check scams;
 (I) mortgage foreclosure relief and debt management 
 fraud;
 (J) military allotment system abuse; and
 (K) military records fraud.
 (3) Identifying and evaluating the new financial risks that 
 emerging financial technologies, including buy-now-pay-later 
 credit and digital payment ecosystems, may present to members 
 of the Armed Forces, veterans, and military families.
 (4) Evaluating the efficacy of current Federal programs, 
 educational campaigns, policies, and statutes, including the 
 Military Lending Act and the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act, 
 in preventing and combatting financial fraud targeting members 
 of the Armed Forces, veterans, and military families.
 (5) Developing recommendations to enhance efforts of 
 Federal agencies to detect, prevent, and combat financial fraud 
 targeting members of the Armed Forces, veterans, and military 
 families.
 (g) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act and annually thereafter, the Task Force shall 
submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report on its 
findings to date and recommendations to enhance the efforts of Federal 
agencies to identify, prevent, and combat financial fraud targeting 
members of the Armed Forces, veterans, and military families.
 (h) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the following:
 (1) The Committee on Oversight and Reform of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (2) The Committee on Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (3) The Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (4) The Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental 
 Affairs of the Senate.
 (5) The Committee on Armed Services of the Senate.
 (6) The Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate.

SEC. 549B. EXCLUSION OF EVIDENCE OBTAINED WITHOUT PRIOR AUTHORIZATION.

 Section 271 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding 
at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(d) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any information 
obtained by or with the assistance of a member of the Armed Forces in 
violation of section 1385 of title 18, shall not be received in 
evidence in any trial, hearing, or other proceeding in or before any 
court, grand jury, department, officer, agency, regulatory body, 
legislative committee, or other authority of the United States, a 
State, or a political subdivision thereof.''.

 Subtitle F--Member Education

SEC. 551. INCREASE IN MAXIMUM NUMBER OF STUDENTS ENROLLED AT UNIFORMED 
 SERVICES UNIVERSITY OF THE HEALTH SCIENCES.

 Section 2114(f)(2) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
striking ``40'' and inserting ``60''.

SEC. 552. AUTHORIZATION OF CERTAIN SUPPORT FOR MILITARY SERVICE ACADEMY 
 FOUNDATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Subchapter I of chapter 134 of title 10, United 
States Code, is amended by inserting after section 2245 the end the 
following new section:
``Sec. 2246. Authorization of certain support for military service 
 academy foundations
 ``(a) Authority.--Subject to subsection (b), the Secretary of the 
military department concerned may provide the following support to a 
covered foundation:
 ``(1) The use, on an unreimbursed basis, of facilities or 
 equipment of the United States by the covered foundation, 
 authorized by any--
 ``(A) general or flag officer;
 ``(B) Senior Executive Service employee assigned to 
 the Service Academy supported by that covered 
 foundation; or
 ``(C) official designated by the Secretary 
 concerned.
 ``(2) Endorsement by an individual described in paragraph 
 (1) of--
 ``(A) the covered foundation;
 ``(B) an event of the covered foundation; or
 ``(C) an activity of the covered foundation.
 ``(b) Limitations.--Support under subsection (a) may be provided 
only if such support--
 ``(1) is without any liability of the United States to the 
 covered foundation;
 ``(2) does not affect the ability of any official or 
 employee of the military department concerned, or any member of 
 the armed forces, to carry out any responsibility or duty in a 
 fair and objective manner;
 ``(3) does not compromise the integrity or appearance of 
 integrity of any program of the military department concerned, 
 or any individual involved in such a program; and
 ``(4) does not include the participation of any cadet or 
 midshipman, other than participation in an honor guard at an 
 event of the covered foundation.
 ``(c) Briefing.--In any fiscal year during which support is 
provided under subsection (a), the Secretary of the military department 
concerned shall provide a briefing not later than the last day of that 
fiscal year to the congressional defense committees regarding the 
number of events or activities of a covered foundation in which an 
individual described in subsection (a)(1) participated during such 
fiscal year.
 ``(d) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `covered foundation' means a charitable, 
 educational, or civic nonprofit organization under section 
 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, that the 
 Secretary concerned determines operates exclusively to support, 
 with respect to a Service Academy, any of the following:
 ``(A) Recruiting.
 ``(B) Parent or alumni development.
 ``(C) Academic, leadership, or character 
 development.
 ``(D) Institutional development.
 ``(E) Athletics.
 ``(2) The term `Service Academy' has the meaning given such 
 term in section 347 of this title.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
such subchapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to item 
2245 the following new item:

``2246. Authorization of certain support for military service academy 
 foundations.''.

SEC. 553. AGREEMENT BY A CADET OR MIDSHIPMAN TO PLAY PROFESSIONAL SPORT 
 CONSTITUTES A BREACH OF SERVICE OBLIGATION.

 (a) United States Military Academy.--Section 7448 of title 10, 
United States Code, is amended as follows:
 (1) Paragraph (5) of subsection (a) is amended to read as 
 follows:
 ``(5) The cadet may not obtain employment, including as a 
 professional athlete, until after completing the cadet's 
 commissioned service obligation.''.
 (2) Subsection (b) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(4) A cadet who violates paragraph (5) of subsection (a) by 
obtaining employment as a professional athlete is not eligible for the 
alternative obligation under paragraph (1).''.
 (3) Subsection (c) is amended--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (2) and (3) as 
 paragraphs (3) and (4), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting, after paragraph (1), the 
 following new paragraph (2):
 ``(2) that a cadet who obtains employment as a professional 
 athlete before completing the cadet's commissioned service 
 obligation has breached an agreement under such subsection;''.
 (4) Subsection (d) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``with respect to an officer who is 
 a graduate of the Academy'' and inserting ``with 
 respect to a cadet''; and
 (B) by striking ``officer's'' and inserting 
 ``cadet's''.
 (5) Subsection (f) is amended by striking ``the terms'' and 
 inserting ``each term''.
 (b) United States Naval Academy.--Section 8459 of title 10, United 
States Code, is amended as follows:
 (1) Paragraph (5) of subsection (a) is amended to read as 
 follows:
 ``(5) The midshipman may not obtain employment, including 
 as a professional athlete, until after completing the 
 midshipman's commissioned service obligation.''.
 (2) Subsection (b) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(4) A midshipman who violates paragraph (5) of subsection (a) by 
obtaining employment as a professional athlete is not eligible for the 
alternative obligation under paragraph (1).''.
 (3) Subsection (c) is amended--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (2) and (3) as 
 paragraphs (3) and (4), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting, after paragraph (1), the 
 following new paragraph (2):
 ``(2) that a midshipman who obtains employment as a 
 professional athlete before completing the midshipman's 
 commissioned service obligation has breached an agreement under 
 such subsection;''.
 (4) Subsection (d) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``with respect to an officer who is 
 a graduate of the Academy'' and inserting ``with 
 respect to a midshipman''; and
 (B) by striking ``officer's'' and inserting 
 ``midshipman's''.
 (5) Subsection (f) is amended by striking ``the terms'' and 
 inserting ``each term''.
 (c) United States Air Force Academy.--Section 9448 of title 10, 
United States Code, is amended as follows:
 (1) Paragraph (5) of subsection (a) is amended to read as 
 follows:
 ``(5) The cadet may not obtain employment, including as a 
 professional athlete, until after completing the cadet's 
 commissioned service obligation.''.
 (2) Subsection (b) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(4) A cadet who violates paragraph (5) of subsection (a) by 
obtaining employment as a professional athlete is not eligible for the 
alternative obligation under paragraph (1).''.
 (3) Subsection (c) is amended--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (2) and (3) as 
 paragraphs (3) and (4), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting, after paragraph (1), the 
 following new paragraph (2):
 ``(2) that a cadet who obtains employment as a professional 
 athlete before completing the cadet's commissioned service 
 obligation has breached an agreement under such subsection;''.
 (4) Subsection (d) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``with respect to an officer who is 
 a graduate of the Academy'' and inserting ``with 
 respect to a cadet''; and
 (B) by striking ``officer's'' and inserting 
 ``cadet's''.
 (5) Subsection (f) is amended by striking ``the terms'' and 
 inserting ``each term''.

SEC. 554. NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL: ATTENDANCE BY ENLISTED MEMBERS.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that:
 (1) The demands of the future operating environment need to 
 be met by the most professional, intelligent, innovative, and 
 capable servicemembers our nation has ever produced.
 (2) Though officers comprise roughly 18% of the armed 
 forces, they receive significantly higher investments into 
 their education up to the PhD level than that of their enlisted 
 counterparts.
 (3) Investing in enlisted advanced education will 
 strengthen the lethality of the armed forces by producing 
 higher quantities of noncommissioned officers able to operate 
 through the intellectual demands of complex contingencies, 
 producing military leaders at rates higher than is otherwise 
 feasible with the pool of eligible officers.
 (4) Conducting research and analysis on the impact of 
 advanced education on enlisted servicemembers performance, 
 promotion rate, misconduct, and retention is critical to 
 propelling the Department of Defense's initiatives for a 
 modern, state-of-the art approach to education and research to 
 create and sustain an intellectual overmatch in today's 
 warfighting domains.
 (5) The Naval Postgraduate School serves as a converging 
 point for all branches of the United States military while 
 simultaneously offering innovative learning environments that, 
 combined, offers an ideal testing ground to evaluate the 
 potential benefits of expanding enlisted higher education 
 across the Joint Force.
 (b) In General.--Subsection (a)(2)(D)(iii) of section 8545 of title 
10, United States Code, is amended by striking ``only on a space-
available basis'' and inserting ``at a rate of acceptance not to be 
conditioned by the number of officer applications''.
 (c) Briefing.--Six years after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Defense shall brief the Committees on Armed 
Services of the Senate and House of Representatives on the effects of 
increasing enrollment of enlisted members at the Naval Postgraduate 
School pursuant to the amendment made by subsection (a). Such briefing 
shall include the following elements:
 (1) Any increase to the lethality of the Armed Forces.
 (2) Effects on rates of recruitment, promotion (including 
 compensation to members), and retention.
 (3) Effects on malign behavior by members of the Armed 
 Forces.

SEC. 555. AUTHORITY TO WAIVE TUITION AT UNITED STATES AIR FORCE 
 INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY FOR CERTAIN PRIVATE SECTOR 
 CIVILIANS.

 Section 9414a(e)(1) of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in by striking ``The United'' and inserting ``Subject 
 to paragraph (3), the United''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) The Director and Chancellor of the United States Air Force 
Institute of Technology may waive tuition for a student, enrolled under 
this section, who attends a course for professional continuing 
education.''.

SEC. 556. TERMS OF PROVOST AND ACADEMIC DEAN OF THE UNITED STATES AIR 
 FORCE INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (2) of subsection (b) of section 9414b 
of title 10, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``An 
individual selected for the position of Provost and Chief Academic 
Officer shall serve in that position for a term of not more than five 
years and may be continued in that position for an additional term of 
up to five years''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Paragraph (1) of such subsection is 
amended by striking ``appointed'' and inserting ``selected''.

SEC. 557. ESTABLISHMENT OF CONSORTIUM FOR CURRICULA IN MILITARY 
 EDUCATION.

 (a) Establishment.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in coordination with 
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and in coordination with the 
Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, shall establish 
a consortium of the institutions of military education and covered 
entities.
 (b) Activities.--The duties of the consortium shall be to conduct 
research and develop common, research-based curricula for the 
institutions of military education in order to improve military 
education for students of the consortium members.
 (c) Curricula.--
 (1) In general.--Curricula developed by the consortium 
 shall--
 (A) be more responsive to new opportunities and 
 challenges in an era of great power competition, and in 
 which security requires knowledge of economics, new 
 technologies (including artificial intelligence), 
 supply chains, and adversarial governments;
 (B) creatively apply military power to inform 
 national strategy, conduct globally integrated 
 operations, and fight under conditions of disruptive 
 change; and
 (C) include non-military topics, such as diplomacy, 
 economics, information, intelligence, and culture.
 (2) Applied design for innovation of the defense analysis 
 department at the naval postgraduate school.--The Secretary may 
 make permanent the curriculum of the Applied Design for 
 Innovation of the Defense Analysis Department at the Naval 
 Postgraduate School and use such curriculum as a model to be 
 replicated at other institutions of military education.
 (d) Director.--The Director of the consortium shall be the 
President of National Defense University.
 (e) Meetings.--The consortium shall meet at the call of the 
Director, in accordance with the following:
 (1) The consortium and the Chiefs of the Armed Forces shall 
 meet not less than once annually to establish or revise 
 curricula.
 (2) The consortium shall meet not less than twice annually 
 to establish a plan of action and milestones to prepare 
 curricula.
 (f) Reports.--
 (1) Interim report.--Not later than 180 days after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the 
 Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of 
 Representative an interim report on the organization, 
 activities, funding, actions and milestones of the consortium.
 (2) Annual report.--Not later than September 30 of each 
 year, beginning in 2024 and ending in 2028, the Secretary shall 
 submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and 
 House of Representative a report describing the activities, 
 funding, curricula created, and research conducted by the 
 consortium during the preceding year.
 (g) Termination.--The consortium shall terminate on September 30, 
2028.
 (h) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``institutions of military education'' means--
 (A) the professional military education schools;
 (B) the senior level service schools;
 (C) the intermediate level service schools;
 (D) the joint intermediate level service school;
 (E) the Naval Postgraduate School; and
 (F) the military service academies.
 (2) The term ``covered entity'' means--
 (A) an institution of higher education that the 
 Secretary determines has an established program of 
 education regarding national security or technology 
 relevant to the Department of Defense; or
 (B) an entity that the Secretary determines 
 conducts research in policy relevant to the Department 
 of Defense.
 (3) The term ``institution of higher education'' has the 
 meaning given that term in section 101 of the Higher Education 
 Act of 1965 (Public Law 89-329; 20 U.S.C. 1001).
 (4) The terms ``intermediate level service school'', 
 ``joint intermediate level service school'', and ``senior level 
 service school'' have the meaning given such terms in section 
 2151 of title 10, United States Code.
 (5) The term ``military service academy'' means the 
 following:
 (A) The United States Military Academy.
 (B) The United States Naval Academy.
 (C) The United States Air Force Academy.
 (6) The term ``professional military education schools'' 
 means the schools specified in section 2162 of title 10, United 
 States Code.

SEC. 558. ESTABLISHMENT OF CONSORTIUM OF INSTITUTIONS OF MILITARY 
 EDUCATION FOR CYBERSECURITY MATTERS.

 (a) Establishment.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in coordination with 
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Under Secretary of 
Defense for Personnel and Readiness, shall establish a consortium of 
the institutions of military education and covered entities.
 (b) Functions.--The functions of the consortium include the 
following:
 (1) To provide a forum for members of the consortium to 
 share information regarding matters of education on 
 cybersecurity, including--
 (A) education of cyber mission forces;
 (B) lessons learned;
 (C) the intersection of cybersecurity across all 
 warfighting domains; and
 (D) other matters of cybersecurity related to 
 national security.
 (2) To develop a cybersecurity research agenda to--
 (A) identify gaps in cybersecurity of the 
 Department of Defense; and
 (B) study offensive threats, defensive threats, and 
 active deterrence in the cyber domain.
 (3) To provide the Secretary, the consortium members, and 
 other entities determined appropriate by the Secretary, access 
 to the expertise of the members of the consortium on matters 
 relating to cybersecurity.
 (4) To align the efforts of the members of the consortium 
 to support cybersecurity of the Department of Defense.
 (c) Director.--The Director of the consortium shall be the 
President of National Defense University. The Director shall consult 
and coordinate with representatives of the institutions of military 
education and covered entities.
 (d) Meetings.--The consortium shall meet at the call of the 
Director, including--
 (1) not less than once annually with the Chiefs of the 
 Armed Forces; and
 (2) not less than once annually to conduct cyber space war 
 games wherein members of the consortium compete.
 (e) Coordination With Other Entities.--The Consortium shall, to the 
maximum extent practicable, coordinate on matters of mutual interest 
and align its efforts with the consortium established under section 
1659 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020 
(Public Law 116-92; 10 U.S.C. 391 note).
 (f) Reports.--
 (1) Interim report.--Not later than 180 days after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the 
 Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of 
 Representative an interim report on the organization, 
 activities, funding, actions and milestones of the consortium.
 (2) Annual report.--Not later than September 30 of each 
 year, beginning in 2024 and ending in 2028, the Secretary shall 
 submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and 
 House of Representative a report describing the activities, 
 funding, research conducted by the consortium, and other 
 matters determined by the Secretary, during the preceding year.
 (g) Termination.--The consortium shall terminate on September 30, 
2028.
 (h) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``institutions of military education'' means--
 (A) the professional military education schools;
 (B) the senior level service schools;
 (C) the intermediate level service schools;
 (D) the joint intermediate level service school;
 (E) the Naval Postgraduate School; and
 (F) the military service academies.
 (2) The term ``covered entity'' means--
 (A) an institution of higher education that the 
 Secretary determines has an established program of 
 education regarding cybersecurity or technology 
 relevant to the Department of Defense; or
 (B) an entity that the Secretary determines 
 conducts research in cybersecurity relevant to the 
 Department of Defense.
 (3) The term ``institution of higher education'' has the 
 meaning given that term in section 101 of the Higher Education 
 Act of 1965 (Public Law 89-329; 20 U.S.C. 1001).
 (4) The terms ``intermediate level service school'', 
 ``joint intermediate level service school'', and ``senior level 
 service school'' have the meaning given such terms in section 
 2151 of title 10, United States Code.
 (5) The term ``military service academy'' means the 
 following:
 (A) The United States Military Academy.
 (B) The United States Naval Academy.
 (C) The United States Air Force Academy.
 (6) The term ``professional military education schools'' 
 means the schools specified in section 2162 of title 10, United 
 States Code.

SEC. 559. COMMISSION ON PROFESSIONAL MILITARY EDUCATION.

 (a) Establishment.--There is established a commission to examine 
the purpose, implementation, outcomes, and relevance of professional 
military education programs operated by the Department of Defense. The 
commission shall be known as the ``Commission on Professional Military 
Education'' (referred to in this section as the ``Commission'').
 (b) Membership.--
 (1) Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of the 
 following members:
 (A) Two members appointed by the Chairman of the 
 Committee on Armed Services of the Senate, one of whom 
 shall be a Senator and one who may not be a Senator.
 (B) Two members appointed by the Ranking Minority 
 Member of the Committee on Armed Services of the 
 Senate, one of whom shall be a Senator and one who may 
 not be a Senator.
 (C) Two members appointed by the Chair of the 
 Committee on Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives, one of whom shall be a Member of the 
 House of Representatives and one who may not be a 
 Member of the House of Representatives.
 (D) Two members appointed by the Ranking Minority 
 Member of the Committee on Armed Services of the House 
 of Representatives, one of whom shall be a Member of 
 the House of Representatives and one who may not be a 
 Member of the House of Representatives.
 (2) Chair.--The Commission shall have one Chair, selected 
 by the members of the Commission.
 (c) Appointment; Initial Meeting.--
 (1) Appointment.--Members of the Commission shall be 
 appointed not later than 60 days after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.
 (2) Initial meeting; notice.--The Commission shall hold its 
 initial meeting on or before the date that is 90 days after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act. In lieu of publication in 
 the Federal Register, the Commission shall post a notice of 
 such meeting on a publicly accessible website of the Commission 
 at least 15 days before such meeting.
 (d) Meetings; Notice; Quorum; Vacancies.--
 (1) In general; notice.--After its initial meeting, the 
 Commission shall meet--
 (A) upon the call of the Chair of the Commission; 
 and
 (B) not fewer than 15 days after posting a notice 
 of such meeting on a publicly accessible website of the 
 Commission, in lieu of publication in the Federal 
 Register.
 (2) Quorum.--Five members of the Commission shall 
 constitute a quorum for purposes of conducting business, except 
 that two members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum 
 for purposes of receiving testimony.
 (3) Vacancies.--Members shall be appointed for the life of 
 the Commission. Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect 
 its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the 
 original appointment.
 (4) Quorum with vacancies.--If vacancies in the Commission 
 occur on any day after 60 days after the date of the enactment 
 of this Act, a quorum shall consist of a majority of the 
 members of the Commission as of such day.
 (e) Actions of Commission.--
 (1) In general.--The Commission shall act by resolution 
 agreed to by a majority of the members of the Commission voting 
 and present.
 (2) Subcommittees.--The Commission may establish 
 subcommittees composed of less than the full membership of the 
 Commission for purposes of carrying out the duties of the 
 Commission under this section. The actions of any such 
 subcommittee shall be subject to the review and control of the 
 Commission. Any findings and determinations made by such a 
 subcommittee shall not be considered the findings and 
 determinations of the Commission unless approved by the 
 Commission.
 (3) Delegation.--Any member, agent, or staff of the 
 Commission may, if authorized by the Chair of the Commission, 
 take any action which the Commission is authorized to take 
 pursuant to this section.
 (f) Duties.--The duties of the Commission are as follows:
 (1) To--
 (A) review the purpose and desired outcomes, as 
 indicated in Department of Defense Instruction 1322.35, 
 of professional military education in support of the 
 National Defense Strategy; and
 (B) evaluate whether the Armed Forces are achieving 
 such purpose and outcomes.
 (2) To review and evaluate the means by which faculty 
 assigned to teach professional military education are selected, 
 managed, promoted, evaluated, and afforded academic freedom, 
 including--
 (A) members serving on active duty;
 (B) civilian instructors who are military retirees; 
 and
 (C) civilian instructors who are not military 
 retirees.
 (3) To--
 (A) review how members are selected for residential 
 and non-residential professional military education;
 (B) evaluate whether students are adequately 
 prepared for professional military education programs; 
 and
 (C) whether additional entrance requirements, such 
 as a writing assessment and academic prerequisites, 
 should be established.
 (4) To--
 (A) review and assess how the performance of 
 professional military education students is evaluated 
 during the academic year;
 (B) how such performance is reflected in the 
 service records of such students; and
 (C) consider whether students assigned to 
 residential professional military education at the war 
 colleges should be objectively evaluated by the faculty 
 for potential at more senior ranks.
 (5) To review and evaluate whether and how professional 
 military education prepares graduates for senior-level 
 operational and strategic assignments.
 (6) To review and evaluate whether and how the Armed Forces 
 consider and fully leverage professional military education in 
 subsequent assignments.
 (7) To consider whether professional military education 
 tracks focused on China, Russia, or other key adversaries or 
 topics of importance to the National Defense Strategy would 
 provide value for the Armed Forces.
 (8) With respect to professional military education 
 curriculum, to review and evaluate--
 (A) relevance to the National Defense Strategy and 
 current and future defense needs, including topics 
 covered and modalities of instruction, such as 
 interactive seminars, wargaming, and other simulations; 
 and
 (B) the process for developing and modifying the 
 curriculum.
 (9) To evaluate whether the Armed Forces have established a 
 system of accountability to ensure that professional military 
 education meets the defense needs of the United States at a 
 reasonable cost.
 (10) To review and evaluate the appropriateness of the 
 service commitments imposed by the Armed Forces for members 
 selected for professional military education.
 (g) Powers of Commission.--
 (1) In general.--The Commission or, on the authorization of 
 the Commission, any subcommittee or member thereof, may, for 
 the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this section hold 
 such hearings and sit and act at such times and places, take 
 such testimony, receive such evidence, and administer such 
 oaths.
 (2) Contracting.--The Commission may, to such extent and in 
 such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriation Acts, 
 enter into contracts to enable the Commission to discharge its 
 duties under this section.
 (3) Information from federal agencies.--
 (A) In general.--The Commission may secure directly 
 from any executive department, agency, bureau, board, 
 commission, office, independent establishment, or 
 instrumentality of the Government information, 
 suggestions, estimates, and statistics for the purposes 
 of this section.
 (B) Compliance.--Except for the intelligence 
 community (as such term is defined in section 3 of the 
 National Security Act of 1947 (Chapter 343; 61 Stat. 
 496; 50 U.S.C. 3003)), each such department, agency, 
 bureau, board, commission, office, establishment, or 
 instrumentality shall, to the extent authorized by law, 
 furnish such information, suggestions, estimates, and 
 statistics directly to the Commission, upon request of 
 the Chair of the Commission.
 (C) Classified information.--The Commission shall 
 handle and protect all classified information provided 
 to it under this section in accordance with applicable 
 statutes and regulations.
 (4) Assistance from department of defense.--The Secretary 
 of Defense shall provide to the Commission, on a 
 nonreimbursable basis, such administrative services, funds, 
 staff, facilities, and other support services as are necessary 
 for the performance of the Commission's duties under this 
 section.
 (5) Postal services.--The Commission may use the United 
 States postal services in the same manner and under the same 
 conditions as the departments and agencies of the United 
 States.
 (6) Gifts.--No member or staff of the Commission may 
 receive a gift or benefit by reason of the service of such 
 member or staff to the Commission.
 (h) Staff of Commission.--
 (1) Director.--The Chair of the Commission, in accordance 
 with rules agreed upon by the Commission, shall appoint and fix 
 the compensation of a staff director and such other personnel 
 as may be necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its 
 duties, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United 
 States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, 
 and without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and 
 subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to 
 classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that no 
 rate of pay fixed under this subsection may exceed the 
 equivalent of that payable to a person occupying a position at 
 level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such 
 title.
 (2) Detailees.--Any Federal Government employee may be 
 detailed to the Commission without reimbursement from the 
 Commission, and such detailee shall retain the rights, status, 
 and privileges of his or her regular employment without 
 interruption.
 (3) Consultant services.--The Commission may procure the 
 services of experts and consultants in accordance with section 
 3109 of title 5, United States Code, but at rates not to exceed 
 the daily rate paid a person occupying a position at level IV 
 of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of such title.
 (i) Compensation and Travel Expenses.--
 (1) Compensation.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph 
 (2), each member of the Commission may be compensated 
 at not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual 
 rate of basic pay in effect for a position at level IV 
 of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 
 5, United States Code, for each day during which that 
 member is engaged in the actual performance of the 
 duties of the Commission under this section.
 (B) Federal officers or employees.--Members of the 
 Commission who are officers or employees of the United 
 States or Members of Congress shall receive no 
 additional pay by reason of their service on the 
 Commission.
 (2) Travel expenses.--While away from their homes or 
 regular places of business in the performance of services for 
 the Commission, members of the Commission may be allowed travel 
 expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in the 
 same manner as persons employed intermittently in the 
 Government service are allowed expenses under section 5703 of 
 title 5, United States Code.
 (j) Final Report; Termination.--
 (1) Final report.--Not later than 18 months after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit to 
 the congressional defense committees and the Secretary of 
 Defense an unclassified report (that may include a classified 
 annex) containing the findings and recommendations of the 
 Commission.
 (2) Termination.--
 (A) In general.--The Commission, and all the 
 authorities of this section, shall terminate at the end 
 of the 120-day period beginning on the date on which 
 the final report under paragraph (1) is submitted to 
 the congressional defense committees.
 (B) Winding down.--The Commission may use the 120-
 day period referred to in subparagraph (A) for the 
 purposes of concluding its activities, including 
 providing testimony to Congress concerning the final 
 report referred to in that subparagraph and 
 disseminating the report.

SEC. 559A. INCREASE IN THE NUMBER OF INDIVIDUALS FROM THE DISTRICT OF 
 COLUMBIA WHO MAY BE APPOINTED TO MILITARY SERVICE 
 ACADEMIES.

 (a) United States Military Academy.--Section 7442 of title 10, 
United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(5), by striking ``Five'' and 
 inserting ``Fifteen''; and
 (2) in subsection (b)(5), by striking ``paragraphs (3) and 
 (4)'' and inserting ``paragraphs (3), (4), and (5)''.
 (b) United States Naval Academy.--Section 8454 of title 10, United 
States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(5), by striking ``Five'' and 
 inserting ``Fifteen''; and
 (2) in subsection (b)(5), by striking ``paragraphs (3) and 
 (4)'' and inserting ``paragraphs (3), (4), and (5)''.
 (c) United States Air Force Academy.--Section 9442 of title 10, 
United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(5), by striking ``Five'' and 
 inserting ``Fifteen''; and
 (2) in subsection (b)(5), by striking ``paragraphs (3) and 
 (4)'' and inserting ``paragraphs (3), (4), and (5)''.

SEC. 559B. MODIFICATION OF ANNUAL REPORT ON DEMOGRAPHICS OF MILITARY 
 SERVICE ACADEMY APPLICANTS.

 Subsection (c)(2) of section 575 of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry 
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 
116-283; 10 U.S.C. 7442 note) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subparagraph:
 ``(C) Any significant disparity in gender, race, 
 ethnicity, or other demographic category described in 
 subsection (b), and any suspected cause of such 
 disparity within the application or nominating 
 process.''.

SEC. 559C. REPORT ON TREATMENT OF CHINA IN CURRICULA OF PROFESSIONAL 
 MILITARY EDUCATION.

 (a) In General.--Not later than December 1, 2022, the Secretary of 
Defense shall submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate 
and House of Representatives a report regarding the treatment of China 
in the curricula of institutions of military education, including 
changes to such treatment implemented in the five years preceding the 
date of such report.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``institutions of military education'' means--
 (A) the professional military education schools;
 (B) the senior level service schools;
 (C) the intermediate level service schools;
 (D) the joint intermediate level service school; 
 and
 (E) the Naval Postgraduate School.
 (2) The terms ``intermediate level service school'', 
 ``joint intermediate level service school'', and ``senior level 
 service school'' have the meaning given such terms in section 
 2151 of title 10, United States Code.
 (3) The term ``professional military education schools'' 
 means the schools specified in section 2162 of title 10, United 
 States Code.

SEC. 559D. SPEECH DISORDERS OF CADETS AND MIDSHIPMEN.

 (a) Testing.--The Superintendent of a military service academy 
shall provide testing for speech disorders to incoming cadets or 
midshipmen under the jurisdiction of that Superintendent.
 (b) No Effect on Admission.--The testing under subsection (a) may 
not have any affect on admission to a military service academy.
 (c) Results.--The Superintendent shall provide each cadet or 
midshipman under the jurisdiction of that Superintendent the result of 
the testing under subsection (a) and a list of warfare unrestricted 
line officer positions and occupation specialists that require 
successful performance on the speech test.
 (d) Therapy.--The Superintendent shall furnish speech therapy to a 
cadet or midshipman under the jurisdiction of that Superintendent at 
the election of the cadet or midshipman.
 (e) Retaking.--A cadet or midshipman whose testing indicate a 
speech disorder or impediment may elect to retake the testing once each 
academic year while enrolled at the military service academy.

SEC. 559E. AMENDMENTS TO PATHWAYS FOR COUNSELING IN THE TRANSITION 
 ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.

 Section 1142(c)(1) of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (E), by striking ``Disability'' and 
 inserting ``Potential or confirmed disability'';
 (2) in subparagraph (F), by striking ``Character'' and 
 inserting ``Potential or confirmed character'';
 (3) by redesignating subparagraph (M) as subparagraph (R); 
 and
 (4) by inserting after subparagraph (L) the following:
 ``(M) Child care requirements of the member (including 
 whether a dependent of the member is enrolled in the 
 Exceptional Family Member Program).
 ``(N) The employment status of other adults in the 
 household of the member.
 ``(O) The location of the duty station of the member 
 (including whether the member was separated from family while 
 on duty).
 ``(P) The effects of operating tempo and personnel tempo on 
 the member and the household of the member.
 ``(Q) Whether the member is an Indian or urban Indian, as 
 those terms are defined in section 4 of the Indian Health Care 
 Improvement Act (Public Law 94-437; 25 U.S.C. 1603).''.

 Subtitle G--Member Training and Transition

SEC. 561. INFORMATION REGARDING APPRENTICESHIPS FOR MEMBERS DURING 
 INITIAL ENTRY TRAINING.

 (a) Requirement.--Chapter 31 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended by inserting after section 510 the following new section:
``Sec. 510a. Provision of information regarding apprenticeships during 
 initial entry training
 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary concerned shall provide to a 
member, during initial entry training, information regarding registered 
apprenticeship programs related to the military occupational specialty 
or career field of such member.
 ``(b) Registered Apprenticeship Program Defined.--In this section, 
the term `registered apprenticeship program' means an apprenticeship 
program registered under the Act of August 16, 1937 (commonly known as 
the `National Apprenticeship Act'; 50 Stat. 664, chapter 663; 29 U.S.C. 
50 et seq.).''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
such chapter is amended by inserting, after the item relating to 
section 510, the following new item:

``510a. Provision of information regarding apprenticeships during 
 initial entry training.''.

SEC. 562. EXTREMIST ACTIVITY BY A MEMBER OF THE ARMED FORCES: NOTATION 
 IN SERVICE RECORD; TAP COUNSELING.

 (a) TAP Counseling.--Subsection (b) of section 1142 of title 10, 
United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph (20):
 ``(20) In the case of a member who has violated Department 
 of Defense Instruction 1325.06 (or successor document), 
 relating to extremist activity, in-person counseling, developed 
 by the Secretary of Defense in consultation with the Secretary 
 of Homeland Security, that includes--
 ``(A) information regarding why extremist activity 
 is inconsistent with service in the armed forces and 
 with national security;
 ``(B) information regarding the dangers associated 
 with involvement with an extremist group; and
 ``(C) methods for the member to recognize and avoid 
 information that may promote extremist activity.''.
 (b) Service Record.--In the case of a member described in paragraph 
(20) of such subsection, as added by subsection (a) of this section, 
the Secretary concerned shall ensure that the commanding officer of 
such member notes such violation in the service record of such member.
 (c) Implementation Date.--The Secretary of Defense shall complete 
development of counseling under such paragraph not later than the day 
that is one year after the date of the enactment of this Act. The 
Secretary concerned shall ensure that such counseling is carried out on 
and after such day.

SEC. 563. CODIFICATION OF SKILLBRIDGE PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--Section 1143(e) of title 10, United States Code, 
is amended--
 (1) in the heading, by adding ``; Skillbridge'' after 
 ``Training''; and
 (2) in paragraph (1), by adding at the end ``Such a program 
 shall be known as `Skillbridge'.''.
 (b) Regulations.--To carry out Skillbridge, the Secretary of 
Defense shall, not later than September 30, 2023--
 (1) update Department of Defense Instruction 1322.29, 
 titled ``Job Training, Employment Skills Training, 
 Apprenticeships, and Internships (JTEST-AI) for Eligible 
 Service Members''; and
 (2) develop a funding plan for Skillbridge that includes 
 funding lines across the future-years defense program under 
 section 221 of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 564. TRAINING ON DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP AND MEDIA LITERACY IN ANNUAL 
 CYBER AWARENESS TRAINING FOR CERTAIN MEMBERS.

 (a) In General.--The annual cyber awareness training provided to 
members of the covered Armed Forces shall include a digital literacy 
module regarding digital citizenship, media literacy, and protection 
against cyber threats (such as influenced or digitally altered 
information).
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered Armed Force'' means the following:
 (A) The Army.
 (B) The Navy.
 (C) The Marine Corps.
 (D) The Air Force.
 (E) The Space Force.
 (2) The term ``digital citizenship'' means the ability to 
 safely, responsibly, and ethically use communication 
 technologies and digital information technology tools and 
 platforms; create and share media content using principles of 
 social and civic responsibility and with awareness of the legal 
 and ethical issues involved; and participate in the political, 
 economic, social, and cultural aspects of life related to 
 technology, communications, and the digital world by consuming 
 and creating digital content, including media.
 (3) The term ``media literacy'' means the ability to access 
 relevant and accurate information through media in a variety of 
 forms; critically analyze media content and the influences of 
 different forms of media; evaluate the comprehensiveness, 
 relevance, credibility, authority, and accuracy of information; 
 make educated decisions based on information obtained from 
 media and digital sources; operate various forms of technology 
 and digital tools; and reflect on how the use of media and 
 technology may affect private and public life.

SEC. 565. PILOT GRANT PROGRAM TO SUPPLEMENT THE TRANSITION ASSISTANCE 
 PROGRAM OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE.

 (a) Establishment.--The Secretary of Defense, in consultation with 
the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, shall carry out a pilot grant 
program under which the Secretary of Defense provides enhanced support 
and funding to eligible entities to supplement TAP to provide job 
opportunities for industry recognized certifications, job placement 
assistance, and related employment services directly to covered 
individuals.
 (b) Services.--Under the pilot grant program, the Secretary of 
Defense shall provide grants to eligible entities to provide to covered 
individuals the following services:
 (1) Using an industry-validated screening tool, assessments 
 of prior education, work history, and employment aspirations of 
 covered individuals, to tailor appropriate and employment 
 services.
 (2) Preparation for civilian employment through services 
 like mock interviews and salary negotiations, training on 
 professional networking platforms, and company research.
 (3) Several industry-specific learning pathways--
 (A) with entry-level, mid-level and senior 
 versions;
 (B) in fields such as project management, 
 cybersecurity, and information technology;
 (C) in which each covered individual works with an 
 academic advisor to choose a career pathway and 
 navigate coursework during the training process; and
 (D) in which each covered individual can earn 
 industry-recognized credentials and certifications, at 
 no charge to the covered individual.
 (4) Job placement services.
 (c) Program Organization and Implementation Model.--The pilot grant 
program shall follow existing economic opportunity program models that 
combine industry-recognized certification training, furnished by 
professionals, with online learning staff.
 (d) Consultation.--In carrying out the program, the Secretary of 
Defense shall seek to consult with private entities to assess the best 
economic opportunity program models, including existing economic 
opportunity models furnished through public-private partnerships.
 (e) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under the pilot 
grant program, an entity shall--
 (1) follow a job training and placement model;
 (2) have rigorous program evaluation practices;
 (3) have established partnerships with entities (such as 
 employers, governmental agencies, and non-profit entities) to 
 provide services described in subsection (b);
 (4) have online training capability to reach rural 
 veterans, reduce costs, and comply with new conditions forced 
 by COVID-19; and
 (5) have a well-developed practice of program measurement 
 and evaluation that evinces program performance and efficiency, 
 with data that is high quality and shareable with partner 
 entities.
 (f) Coordination With Federal Entities.--A grantee shall coordinate 
with Federal entities, including--
 (1) the Office of Transition and Economic Development of 
 the Department of Veterans Affairs; and
 (2) the Office of Veteran Employment and Transition 
 Services of the Department of Labor.
 (g) Metrics and Evaluation.--Performance outcomes shall be 
verifiable using a third-party auditing method and include the 
following:
 (1) The number of covered individuals who receive and 
 complete skills training.
 (2) The number of covered individuals who secure 
 employment.
 (3) The retention rate for covered individuals described in 
 paragraph (2).
 (4) Median salary of covered individuals described in 
 paragraph (2).
 (h) Site Locations.--The Secretary of Defense shall select five 
military installations in the United States where existing models are 
successful.
 (i) Assessment of Possible Expansion.--A grantee shall assess the 
feasibility of expanding the current offering of virtual training and 
career placement services to members of the reserve components of the 
Armed Forces and covered individuals outside the United States.
 (j) Duration.--The pilot grant program shall terminate on September 
30, 2025.
 (k) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the termination of the 
pilot grant program, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report that includes--
 (1) a description of the pilot grant program, including a 
 description of specific activities carried out under this 
 section; and
 (2) the metrics and evaluations used to assess the 
 effectiveness of the pilot grant program.
 (l) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered individual'' means--
 (A) a member of the Armed Forces participating in 
 TAP; or
 (B) a spouse of a member described in subparagraph 
 (A).
 (2) The term ``military installation'' has the meaning 
 given such term in section 2801 of title 10, United States 
 Code.
 (3) The term ``TAP'' means the transition assistance 
 program of the Department of Defense under sections 1142 and 
 1144 of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 566. FEMALE MEMBERS OF CERTAIN ARMED FORCES AND CIVILIAN EMPLOYEES 
 OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE IN STEM.

 (a) Study on Members and Civilians.--Not later than September 30, 
2023, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the Committees on Armed 
Services of the Senate and House of Representatives a report containing 
the results of a study on how to increase participation of covered 
individuals in positions in the covered Armed Forces or Department of 
Defense and related to STEM.
 (b) Study on Skillbridge.--Not later than September 30, 2023, the 
Secretary shall submit to such Committees a report containing the 
results of a study on how to change Skillbridge to help covered 
individuals, eligible for Skillbridge, find civilian employment in 
positions related to STEM.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered Armed Force'' means an Armed Force 
 under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of a military 
 department.
 (2) The term ``covered individual'' means a female--
 (A) member of a covered Armed Force; or
 (B) civilian employee of the Department of Defense.
 (3) The term ``Skillbridge'' means an employment skills 
 training program under section 1143(e) of title 10, United 
 States Code, as amended by section 563 of this Act.
 (4) The term ``STEM'' means science, technology, 
 engineering, and mathematics.

SEC. 567. SKILLBRIDGE: APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAMS.

 (a) Study.--Not later than September 30, 2023, the Secretary of 
Defense, in consultation with the Secretary of the Department in which 
the Coast Guard is operating, shall conduct a study to identify the 
private entities participating in Skillbridge that offer positions in 
registered apprenticeship programs to covered members.
 (b) Recruitment.--The Secretary shall consult with officials and 
employees of the Department of Labor who have experience with 
registered apprenticeship programs to facilitate the Secretary entering 
into agreements with entities that offer positions described in 
subsection (a) in areas where the Secretary determines few such 
positions are available to covered members.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered member'' means a member of the Armed 
 Forces eligible for Skillbridge.
 (2) The term ``registered apprenticeship program'' means an 
 apprenticeship program registered under the Act of August 16, 
 1937 (commonly known as the ``National Apprenticeship Act''; 50 
 Stat. 664, chapter 663; 29 U.S.C. 50 et seq.).
 (3) The term ``Skillbridge'' means an employment skills 
 training program under section 1143(e) of title 10, United 
 States Code, as amended by section 563 of this Act.

SEC. 568. TRAINING ON CONSEQUENCES OF COMMITTING A CRIME IN 
 PRESEPARATION COUNSELING OF THE TRANSITION ASSISTANCE 
 PROGRAM.

 (a) Establishment.--Subsection (b) of section 1142 of title 10, 
United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(20) Training regarding the consequences to such a member 
 who is convicted of a crime, specifically regarding the loss of 
 benefits from the Federal Government to such member.''.
 (b) Implementation Date.--The Secretary concerned shall carry out 
paragraph (20) of such subsection, as added by subsection (a), not 
later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (c) Development.--The Secretary of Defense shall develop the 
training under such paragraph.
 (d) Progress Briefing.--Not later than 180 days of the enactment of 
this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall provide a briefing to the 
Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of Representatives 
regarding progress of the Secretary in preparing the training under 
such paragraph.

SEC. 569. PARTICIPATION OF MEMBERS OF THE RESERVE COMPONENTS OF THE 
 ARMED FORCES IN THE SKILLBRIDGE PROGRAM.

 Section 1143(e)(2) of title 10, United States Code, is amended to 
read as follows:
 ``(2) A member of the armed forces is eligible for a 
 program under this subsection if--
 ``(A) the member--
 ``(i) has completed at least 180 days on 
 active duty in the armed forces; and
 ``(ii) is expected to be discharged or 
 released from active duty in the armed forces 
 within 180 days of the date of commencement of 
 participation in such a program; or
 ``(B) the member is a member of a reserve 
 component.''.

SEC. 569A. ANNUAL REPORT ON MEMBERS SEPARATING FROM ACTIVE DUTY WHO 
 FILE CLAIMS FOR DISABILITY BENEFITS.

 (a) Report Required.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, and not later than each January 1 thereafter, 
the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, shall 
jointly submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report on 
members of the Armed Forces who file claims for disability benefits.
 (b) Elements.--The report under this section shall include, for the 
period beginning on October 1, 2019, through the month that ended most 
recently before the date of the report, the number of members serving 
on active duty, disaggregated by Armed Force, who filed a claim for 
disability benefits--
 (1) more than 180 days before the discharge or release of 
 such member from active duty;
 (2) between 180 and 90 days before the discharge or release 
 of such member from active duty;
 (3) fewer than 90 days before the discharge or release of 
 such member from active duty;
 (4) before separation and was issued a decision letter 
 before the discharge or release of such member from active 
 duty;
 (5) before separation and was issued a decision letter 
 after the discharge or release of such member from active duty;
 (6) completed a mental health evaluation before the 
 discharge or release of such member from active duty; and
 (7) did not complete a mental health evaluation before the 
 discharge or release of such member from active duty.
 (c) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the following:
 (1) The Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and 
 House of Representatives.
 (2) The Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and 
 House of Representatives.

SEC. 569B. OUTREACH TO MEMBERS REGARDING POSSIBLE TOXIC EXPOSURE.

 (a) Establishment.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with 
the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, shall establish--
 (1) a new risk assessment for toxic exposure for members of 
 the Armed Forces assigned to work near burn pits; and
 (2) an outreach program to inform such members regarding 
 such toxic exposure. Such program shall include information 
 regarding benefits and support programs furnished by the 
 Secretary (including eligibility requirements and timelines) 
 regarding toxic exposure.
 (b) Promotion.--The Secretary shall promote the program to members 
described in subsection (a) by direct mail, email, text messaging, and 
social media.
 (c) Publication.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall publish on a website of the 
Department of Defense a list of resources furnished by the Secretary 
for--
 (1) members and veterans who experienced toxic exposure in 
 the course of serving as a member of the Armed Forces;
 (2) dependents and caregivers of such members and veterans; 
 and
 (3) survivors of such members and veterans who receive 
 death benefits under laws administered by the Secretary.
 (d) Toxic Exposure Defined.--In this section, the term ``toxic 
exposure'' has the meaning given such term in section 631 of the Jeff 
Miller and Richard Blumenthal Veterans Health Care and Benefits 
Improvement Act of 2016 (Public Law 114-315; 38 U.S.C. 1116 note).

SEC. 569C. ACTIVITIES TO ASSIST THE TRANSITION OF MEMBERS OF THE ARMED 
 FORCES AND VETERANS INTO CAREERS IN EDUCATION.

 (a) Veterans-to-Classrooms Program.--
 (1) Modification and redesignation of program.--Section 
 1154 of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (A) in the section heading, by striking: 
 ``employment as teachers: Troops-to-Teachers Program'' 
 and inserting ``employment in schools: Veterans-to-
 Classrooms Program'';
 (B) in subsection (a)--
 (i) by redesignating paragraphs (2) through 
 (8) as paragraphs (4) through (10), 
 respectively;
 (ii) by inserting after paragraph (1) the 
 following new paragraphs:
 ``(2) Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the Secretary 
 of Defense.
 ``(3) Covered position.--
 ``(A) The term `covered position' means a full-time 
 position in an eligible school as--
 ``(i) a teacher, including an elementary 
 school teacher, a secondary school teacher, and 
 a career and technical education teacher;
 ``(ii) a school leader;
 ``(iii) a school administrator;
 ``(iv) a nurse;
 ``(v) a principal;
 ``(vi) a counselor;
 ``(vii) a teaching aide;
 ``(viii) specialized instructional support 
 personnel;
 ``(ix) a school resource officer; or
 ``(x) a contractor who performs the 
 functions of a position described in any of 
 clauses (i) through (viii).'';
 (iii) by amending paragraph (4), as so 
 redesignated, to read as follows:
 ``(4) Eligible school.--The term `eligible school' means--
 ``(A) a public elementary school, including a 
 public elementary charter school;
 ``(B) a public secondary school, including a public 
 secondary charter school; or
 ``(C) a Bureau-funded school as defined in section 
 1141(3) of the Education Amendments of 1978 (25 U.S.C. 
 2021(3)).'';
 (iv) in paragraph (8), as so redesignated, 
 by striking ``Troops-to-Teachers'' and 
 inserting ``Veterans-to-Classrooms'';
 (v) by striking paragraph (9), as so 
 redesignated, and inserting the following new 
 paragraph (9):
 ``(9) School resource officer.--The term `school resource 
 officer' has the meaning given that term in section 1709(4) of 
 the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (34 
 U.S.C. 10389(4)).''; and
 (vi) in paragraph (10), as so redesignated, 
 by striking ``and `State''' and inserting 
 ```specialized instructional support 
 personnel', and `State''';
 (C) in subsection (b)--
 (i) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), 
 by striking ``Secretary of Defense may carry 
 out a Troops-to-Teachers Program'' and 
 inserting ``The Secretary of Defense, in 
 consultation with the Secretary of Education, 
 may carry out a Veterans-to-Classrooms 
 Program'';
 (ii) in paragraph (1), by striking ``become 
 a teacher'' and inserting ``obtain a covered 
 position''; and
 (iii) by amending subparagraph (A) of 
 paragraph (2) to read as follows:
 ``(A) by local educational agencies or charter 
 schools in States with a shortage of individuals to 
 fill covered positions, as determined by the Secretary 
 of Education.'';
 (D) in subsection (d)(4)(A)--
 (i) in clause (i), by striking ``or career 
 or technical subjects'' and inserting ``career 
 and technical education, or subjects relating 
 to a covered position''; and
 (ii) in clause (ii), by inserting ``in a 
 covered position or'' after ``seek 
 employment'';
 (E) in subsection (e)--
 (i) in paragraph (1)(A)--
 (I) in clause (i), by striking 
 ``become a teacher'' and inserting 
 ``obtain a covered position''; and
 (II) in clause (ii), by striking 
 ``as an elementary school teacher'' and 
 all that follows through the period at 
 the end and inserting ``in a covered 
 position for not less than three school 
 years in an eligible school to begin 
 the school year after the member 
 obtains the professional credentials 
 required for the position involved''; 
 and
 (ii) in paragraph (2)(E), by striking ``as 
 a teacher in an eligible elementary school or 
 secondary school or as a career or technical 
 teacher'' and inserting ``in a covered 
 position''; and
 (iii) in paragraph (3)--
 (I) in subparagraph (A)--
 (aa) in the first sentence, 
 by striking ``educational 
 level, certification, or 
 licensing'' and inserting 
 ``educational level, 
 certification, licensing, or 
 other professional 
 credentials''; and
 (bb) in the second 
 sentence, by striking 
 ``$5,000'' and inserting 
 ``$9,000 (except as adjusted by 
 the Secretary in accordance 
 with subparagraph (D))'';
 (II) in subparagraph (B)--
 (aa) in clause (i), by 
 striking ``as an elementary 
 school teacher, secondary 
 school teacher, or career or 
 technical teacher'' and 
 inserting ``in a covered 
 position''; and
 (bb) in clause (ii), by 
 striking ``may not exceed 
 $5,000, unless the eligible 
 school is a high-need school, 
 in which case the amount of the 
 bonus may not exceed $10,000'' 
 and inserting ``may not exceed 
 $9,000 (except as adjusted by 
 the Secretary in accordance 
 with subparagraph (D)), unless 
 the eligible school is a high-
 need school, in which case the 
 amount of the bonus may not 
 exceed $18,000 (except as so 
 adjusted)'';
 (III) in subparagraph (C)--
 (aa) in clause (i), by 
 striking ``5,000'' and 
 inserting ``20,000'';
 (bb) in clause (ii), by 
 striking ``3,000'' and 
 inserting ``5,000''; and
 (cc) in clause (iv), by 
 striking ``$10,000'' and 
 inserting ``$18,000 (except as 
 adjusted by the Secretary in 
 accordance with subparagraph 
 (D))''; and
 (IV) by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(D)(i) The Secretary may adjust the dollar amounts set 
 forth in subparagraphs (A), (B)(ii), and (C)(iv) to reflect 
 changes in the Consumer Price Index over the applicable period.
 ``(ii) In this subparagraph, the term `applicable period' 
 means--
 ``(I) with respect to an initial adjustment under 
 clause (i), the period that has elapsed since the date 
 of the enactment of the TEAMS Act; or
 ``(II) with respect to any adjustment after the 
 initial adjustment, the period that has elapsed since 
 the date of the most recent adjustment under clause 
 (i).'';
 (F) in subsection (f)(1)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A)--
 (I) by striking ``become a 
 teacher'' and inserting ``obtain a 
 covered position''; and
 (II) by striking ``as an elementary 
 school teacher, secondary school 
 teacher, or career or technical 
 teacher'' and insert ``in a covered 
 position''; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``, 
 employment as an elementary school teacher, 
 secondary school teacher, or career or 
 technical teacher'' and inserting ``employment 
 in a covered position'';
 (G) in subsection (h)(2)(A), by striking ``as 
 elementary school teachers, secondary school teachers, 
 and career or technical teachers'' and inserting ``in 
 covered positions'';
 (H) by adding at the end the following new 
 subsections:
 ``(j) Partnerships.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may enter into one or more 
 partnerships with States, local educational agencies, or 
 covered entities--
 ``(A) to help sustain and expand the reach of the 
 Veterans-to-Classrooms Program to promote careers in 
 education among current and future veterans under this 
 section;
 ``(B) to provide information on the Program in 
 accordance with subsection (k)(2) in widely available, 
 user-friendly formats;
 ``(C) to help recruit more veterans, including 
 veterans who are retired law enforcement officers, and 
 service members who are within 6 months of 
 transitioning out of the military into new careers in 
 education;
 ``(D) to promote careers in education among current 
 and future veterans by providing veterans with 
 information on other employment transition programs, 
 including--
 ``(i) the Veterans' Employment & Training 
 Service and the National Veterans' Training 
 Institute of the Department of Labor;
 ``(ii) the transition assistance programs 
 established under section 1144 of this title;
 ``(iii) the SkillBridge and Career Skills 
 Programs of the Department of Defense;
 ``(iv) the AmeriCorps program carried out 
 under subtitle C of title I of the National and 
 Community Service Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12571 
 et seq.); and
 ``(v) other transitional or educational 
 programs; and
 ``(E) to promote careers in education by helping 
 veterans learn about educational benefits available to 
 them, including Post-9/11 Educational Assistance, 
 certification programs, and applicable on-the-job 
 training and apprenticeship programs, to help veterans 
 get into an educational career field.
 ``(2) Covered entity defined.--In this subsection, the term 
 `covered entity' means--
 ``(A) an entity qualifying as an exempt 
 organization under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986; or
 ``(B) an veterans service organization recognized 
 by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs for the 
 representation of veterans under section 5902 of title 
 38.
 ``(k) Program Information.--
 ``(1) Information from secretary.--The Secretary shall make 
 available, on a publicly accessible website of the Department 
 of Defense, the information described in paragraph (3).
 ``(2) Information from covered entities.--Each State, local 
 educational agency, and covered entity that enters into a 
 partnership with the Secretary under paragraph (1) shall make 
 available, on a publicly accessible website, the information 
 described in paragraph (3).
 ``(3) Information described.--The information described in 
 this subparagraph is information on the Veterans-to-Classrooms 
 program authorized under this section, including a description 
 of the application process for the program and the potential 
 benefits of participating in the program.
 ``(l) Biennial Review.--Not less frequently than once every two 
years, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the Veterans-
to-Classrooms Program. At minimum, the report shall include a 
comparison of the number of participants in the Program during the 
period covered by the report relative to the number of stipends 
authorized under the Program during such period.
 ``(m) Process to Streamline Applications.--Not later than one year 
after the date of the enactment of the TEAMS Act, the Secretary shall 
implement a process to simplify the submission of applications under 
subsection (d)(2).''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the 
 beginning of chapter 58 of such title is amended by striking 
 the item relating to section 1154 and inserting the following 
 new item:

``1154. Assistance to eligible members and former members to obtain 
 employment in schools: Veterans-to-
 Classrooms Program.''.
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraphs (1) 
 and (2) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this 
 Act.
 (4) References.--Beginning on the effective date specified 
 in paragraph (3), any reference in Federal law (other than this 
 Act), regulations, guidance, instructions, or other documents 
 of the Federal Government to the Troops-to-Teachers Program 
 shall be deemed to be a reference to the Veterans-to-Classrooms 
 Program.
 (b) Veterans Employable as School Resource Officers.--Section 
1709(4) of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (34 
U.S.C. 10389(4)) is amended by inserting after ``a career law 
enforcement officer, with sworn authority,'' the following: ``or a 
veteran (as such term is defined in section 101(2) of title 38, United 
States Code) who is hired by a State or local public agency as a law 
enforcement officer for purposes of serving as a school resource 
officer, who is''.
 (c) Task Force on Education Careers for Veterans.--
 (1) Task force.--Not later than 120 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the President shall convene a task 
 force to identify strategies that may be used to assist 
 veterans in obtaining employment in the field of education.
 (2) Responsibilities.--The task force convened under 
 paragraph (1) shall--
 (A) consult regularly with veterans service 
 organizations in performing the duties of the task 
 force; and
 (B) coordinate administrative and regulatory 
 activities and develop proposals to--
 (i) identify State licensing and 
 certification requirements that are excessive 
 and unnecessarily burdensome for veterans 
 seeking to transition into careers in 
 education;
 (ii) identify potential compensation 
 structures for educational employment that 
 include salary credit for prior military and 
 law enforcement experience;
 (iii) recommend incentives to encourage 
 educational employers to hire veterans;
 (iv) assess the feasibility of establishing 
 dedicated military veteran liaison positions in 
 school districts;
 (v) examine how funds made available for 
 the Veterans-to-Classrooms Program under 
 section 1154 of title 10, United States Code, 
 may be used to conduct outreach, provide 
 certification support, and help States 
 establish outreach centers for veterans; and
 (vi) explore how partnerships entered by 
 the Secretary under subsection (j) of such 
 section may be used to promote careers in 
 education among veterans through collaboration 
 with relevant employment transition programs, 
 including the Transition Assistance Program, 
 the SkillBridge and Career Skills Programs of 
 the Department of Defense, and the AmeriCorps 
 program.
 (3) Membership.--The task force shall consist of--
 (A) the Secretary of Defense, or the designee of 
 the Secretary, who shall be the head of the task force;
 (B) the Secretary of Education, or the designee of 
 the Secretary;
 (C) the Attorney General, or the designee of the 
 Attorney General;
 (D) the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, or the 
 designee of the Secretary;
 (E) the Secretary of Labor, or the designee of the 
 Secretary;
 (F) the Director of the Office of Management and 
 Budget, or the designee of the Director;
 (G) four representatives from a veterans service 
 organization, selected by the President;
 (H) a representative of the Administrative 
 Conference of the United States; and
 (I) representatives of State and local governments 
 selected by the President, which may include 
 representatives of State boards of education and 
 relevant State licensing agencies.
 (4) Report.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than one year after the 
 date on which the task force is convened under 
 paragraph (1), the task force shall submit to Congress 
 a report that includes--
 (i) a description of actions that may be 
 carried out by State and local governments to 
 reduce barriers that interfere with the ability 
 of veterans to transition into careers in 
 education; and
 (ii) recommendations for specific 
 legislative and regulatory actions that may be 
 carried out to reduce such barriers.
 (B) Public availability.--The report under 
 subparagraph (A) shall be made available on a publicly 
 accessible website of the Department of Defense.
 (5) Definition.--In this subsection, the term ``veterans 
 service organization'' means any organization recognized by the 
 Secretary of Veterans Affairs for the representation of 
 veterans under section 5902 of title 38, United States Code.
 (d) Funding.--
 (1) Authorization.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth 
 in the funding tables in division D, there are authorized to be 
 appropriated $240,000,000 to carry out the Veterans-to-
 Classrooms Program under section 1154 of title 10, United 
 States Code (as amended by subsection (a)).
 (2) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the 
 funding tables in division D, the amount authorized to be 
 appropriated in section 301 for Operation and Maintenance, 
 Defense-wide, Administration and Service-wide Activities, Line 
 500A, as specified in the corresponding funding table in 
 section 4301, is hereby reduced by $240,000,000.

SEC. 569D. FUNDING FOR SKILLBRIDGE.

 (a) Increase.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 4301, line 440 for Office of Secretary of Defense, as specified 
in the corresponding funding table in section 4301, is hereby increased 
by $5,000,000 for the Skillbridge program.
 (b) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 301 for Operation and Maintenance, Defense-wide, for Washington 
Headquarters Services, Line 500, as specified in the corresponding 
funding table in section 4301, is hereby reduced by $5,000,000.

SEC. 569E. FUNDING FOR SKILLBRIDGE FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT TRAINING.

 (a) Increase.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 4301, line 440 for Office of Secretary of Defense, as specified 
in the corresponding funding table in section 4301, is hereby increased 
by $5,000,000. Such additional amounts shall be for the Skillbridge 
program under section 1143(e) of title 10, United States Code, to 
provide training to members of the Armed Forces to become law 
enforcement officers.
 (b) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 301 for Operation and Maintenance, Defense-wide, for Washington 
Headquarters Services, Line 500, as specified in the corresponding 
funding table in section 4301, is hereby reduced by $5,000,000.

SEC. 569F. NUMBERS OF CERTAIN NOMINATIONS FOR CADETS AT THE UNITED 
 STATES MILITARY ACADEMY.

 Section 7442 of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), in the matter following paragraph 
 (10), by striking ``10'' and inserting ``15''; and
 (2) in subsection (b)(5), by striking ``150'' and inserting 
 ``200''.

SEC. 569G. PILOT TRANSITION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM FOR MILITARY SPOUSES.

 (a) Establishment.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall establish a pilot 
transition assistance program for covered individuals (in this section 
referred to as the ``pilot program'').
 (b) Services.--The Secretary of Defense shall provide to a covered 
individual, who elects to participate in the pilot program, services 
similar to those available under TAP to members of the Armed Forces, 
including the following:
 (1) Assessments of prior education, work history, and 
 employment aspirations of covered individuals, to tailor 
 appropriate employment services.
 (2) Preparation for employment through services like mock 
 interviews and salary negotiations, training on professional 
 networking platforms, and company research.
 (3) Job placement services.
 (4) Services offering guidance on available health care 
 resources, mental health resources, and financial assistance 
 resources.
 (5) Training in mental health first aid to learn how to 
 assist someone experiencing a mental health or substance use-
 related crisis.
 (c) Locations.--The Secretary shall carry out the pilot program at 
12 military installations located in the United States.
 (d) Duration.--The pilot program shall terminate five years after 
enactment.
 (e) Report.--Not later than two years after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the Committees on 
Armed Services of the and House of Representatives a report that 
includes--
 (1) a description of the pilot program, including a 
 description of specific activities carried out under this 
 section; and
 (2) the metrics and evaluations used to assess the 
 effectiveness of the pilot program.
 (f) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered individual'' means a spouse of a 
 member of the Armed Forces eligible for TAP.
 (2) The term ``military installation'' has the meaning 
 given such term in section 2801 of title 10, United States 
 Code.
 (3) The term ``TAP'' means the Transition Assistance 
 Program under sections 1142 and 1144 of title 10, United States 
 Code.

SEC. 569H. GUIDELINES FOR ACTIVE DUTY MILITARY ON POTENTIAL RISKS AND 
 PREVENTION OF TOXIC EXPOSURES.

 Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, in 
consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services and the 
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, shall jointly 
coordinate and establish guidelines to be used during training of 
members of the Armed Forces serving on active duty to provide the 
members awareness of the potential risks of toxic exposures and ways to 
prevent being exposed during combat.

SEC. 569I. GAO REPORT ON USE OF TRANSITION PROGRAMS BY MEMBERS OF 
 SPECIAL OPERATIONS FORCES.

 (a) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall 
review the use of DOD transition programs by members assigned to 
special operations forces.
 (b) Briefing.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall provide to the 
Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of Representatives 
a briefing on the preliminary findings of such review.
 (c) Report.--The Comptroller General shall submit to the committees 
identified in paragraph (b) a report containing the final results of 
such review on a date agreed to at the time of the briefing. The GAO 
review shall include an examination of the following:
 (1) The extent to which members assigned to special 
 operations forces participate in DOD transition programs.
 (2) What unique challenges such members face in make the 
 transition to civilian life and the extent to which existing 
 DOD transition programs address those challenges.
 (3) The extent to which the Secretary directs such members 
 to transition resources provided by non-governmental entities.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``DOD transition programs'' means programs 
 (including TAP and Skillbridge) under laws administered by the 
 Secretary of Defense that help members of the Armed Forces make 
 the transition to civilian life.
 (2) The term ``Skillbridge'' means an employment skills 
 training program under section 1143(e) of title 10, United 
 States Code
 (3) The term ``special operations forces'' means the forces 
 described in section 167(j) of title 10, United States Code.
 (4) The term ``TAP'' means the Transition Assistance 
 Program under sections 1142 and 1144 of title 10, United States 
 Code.

SEC. 569J. GAO REPORT ON SCREENINGS INCLUDED IN THE HEALTH ASSESSMENT 
 FOR MEMBERS SEPARATING FROM THE ARMED FORCES.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to the 
Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of Representatives 
a report on screenings included in the health assessment administered 
to members separating from the the Armed Forces. Such report shall 
include the following elements:
 (1) A list of screenings are included in such assessment.
 (2) Whether such screenings--
 (A) are uniform across the Armed Forces;
 (B) include questions to assess if the member is at 
 risk for social isolation, homelessness, or substance 
 abuse; and
 (C) include questions about community.
 (3) How many such screenings result in referral of a member 
 to--
 (A) community services;
 (B) community services other than medical services; 
 and
 (C) a veterans service organization.
 (4) An assessment of the effectiveness of referrals 
 described in paragraph (3).
 (5) How organizations, including veterans service 
 organizations, perform outreach to members in underserved 
 communities.
 (6) The extent to which organizations described in 
 paragraph (5) perform such outreach.
 (7) The effectiveness of outreach described in paragraph 
 (6).
 (8) The annual amount of Federal funding for services and 
 organizations described in paragraphs (3) and (5).

SEC. 569K. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE REPORT ON THIRD-PARTY JOB SEARCH 
 TECHNOLOGY.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary of Defense shall submit to Congress a report on potential 
partnership opportunities with companies that provide third-party job 
search software to assist active duty service members and veterans up 
to two years post-separation from the military find employment 
following their active duty service. Such report shall include the 
potential use and effectiveness of any such partnerships.

 Subtitle H--Military Family Readiness and Dependents' Education

SEC. 571. CLARIFICATION AND EXPANSION OF AUTHORIZATION OF SUPPORT FOR 
 CHAPLAIN-LED PROGRAMS FOR MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES.

 Section 1789 of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by striking ``chaplain-led programs'' and 
 inserting ``a chaplain-led program'';
 (B) by striking ``members of the armed forces'' and 
 all that follows through ``status and their immediate 
 family members,'' and inserting ``a covered 
 individual''; and
 (C) by inserting ``, or to support the resiliency, 
 suicide prevention, or holistic wellness of such 
 covered individual'' after ``structure'';
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) by striking ``members of the armed forces and 
 their family members'' and inserting ``a covered 
 individual'';
 (B) by striking ``programs'' and inserting ``a 
 program''; and
 (C) by striking ``retreats and conferences'' and 
 inserting ``a retreat or conference''; and
 (3) by striking subsection (c) and inserting the following:
 ``(c) Covered Individual Defined.--In this section, the term 
`covered individual' means--
 ``(1) a member of the armed forces on active duty;
 ``(2) a member of the reserve components in an active 
 status; or
 ``(3) a dependent of an individual described in 
 subparagraph (A) or (B).''.

SEC. 572. RIGHTS OF PARENTS OF CHILDREN ATTENDING SCHOOLS OPERATED BY 
 THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE EDUCATION ACTIVITY.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 108 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended by inserting after section 2164 the following new section:
``Sec. 2164a. Rights of parents of children attending schools operated 
 by the Department of Defense Education Activity
 ``(a) In General.--The parent of a child who attends a school 
operated by the Department of Defense Education Activity has the 
following rights:
 ``(1) The right to review the curriculum of the school.
 ``(2) The right to be informed if the school or Department 
 of Defense Education Activity alters the school's academic 
 standards or learning benchmarks.
 ``(3) The right to meet with each teacher of their child 
 not less than twice during each school year.
 ``(4) The right to review the budget, including all 
 revenues and expenditures, of the school.
 ``(5) The right to review all instructional materials and 
 teacher professional development materials used by the school.
 ``(6) The right to inspect a list of the books and other 
 reading materials contained in the library of the school.
 ``(7) The right to address the school advisory committee or 
 the school board.
 ``(8) The right to information about the school's 
 discipline policy and any violent activity in the school.
 ``(9) The right to information about any plans to eliminate 
 gifted and talented programs or accelerated coursework at the 
 school.
 ``(10) The right to be informed of the results of drinking 
 water testing at school facilities.
 ``(b) Disclosures and Notifications.--Consistent with the parental 
rights specified in subsection (a), a school operated by the Department 
of Defense Education Activity shall--
 ``(1) post on a publicly accessible website of the school--
 ``(A) the curriculum for each course and grade 
 level;
 ``(B) the academic standards or other learning 
 benchmarks used by the school;
 ``(C) notice of any proposed revisions to such 
 standards or benchmarks and a copy of any such 
 revisions;
 ``(D) the budget for the school year, including all 
 revenues and expenditures (including expenditures made 
 for items and services provided by private entities); 
 and
 ``(E) the results of drinking water testing at 
 school facilities;
 ``(2) provide the parents of a child attending the school 
 with--
 ``(A) the opportunity to meet in-person with each 
 teacher of their child not less frequently than twice 
 during each school year at a time mutually agreed upon 
 by both parties; and
 ``(B) notice of such opportunity at the beginning 
 of each school year;
 ``(3) make all instructional and educator professional 
 development materials, including teachers' manuals, films, 
 tapes, books or other reading materials, or other supplementary 
 materials used in any survey, analysis, or evaluation, 
 available for inspection by the parents of children attending 
 the school;
 ``(4) at the beginning of each school year, provide parents 
 a list of reading materials in the school library, including a 
 list of any reading materials that were added to or removed 
 from the list of materials from the prior year;
 ``(5) notify parents in a timely manner of any plans to 
 eliminate gifted and talented programs or accelerated 
 coursework at the school;
 ``(6) except as provided in paragraph (7), notify parents 
 of any medical examinations or screenings the school may 
 administer to their child and receive written consent from 
 parents for any such examination or screening prior to 
 conducting the examination or screening;
 ``(7) in the event of an emergency that requires a medical 
 examination or screening without time for parental 
 notification, promptly notify parents of such examination or 
 screening and, not later than 24 hours after the incident 
 occurs, provide an explanation of the emergency that prevented 
 notification prior to such examination or screening;
 ``(8) notify parents of any medical information that will 
 be collected on their child, receive written parental consent 
 prior to collecting such information, and provide parents an 
 opportunity to inspect such information at the parent's 
 request; and
 ``(9) notify parents of any policy changes involving their 
 reporting obligations under the Family Advocacy Program of the 
 Department of Defense.
 ``(c) School Advisory Committees and Boards.--Not less frequently 
than twice per year, a school advisory committee or school board for a 
school operated by the Department of Defense Education Activity shall 
provide parents of children attending the school with the opportunity 
to address the advisory committee or school board on any matters 
relating to the school or the educational services provided to their 
children.
 ``(d) Definition.--In this section, the term `school operated by 
the Department of Defense Education Activity' means--
 ``(1) a Department of Defense domestic dependent elementary 
 or secondary school, as described in section 2164 of this 
 title; or
 ``(2) any elementary or secondary school or program for 
 dependents operated by the Department of Defense Education 
 Activity.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 
2164 the following new item:

``2164a. Rights of parents of children attending schools operated by 
 the Department of Defense Education 
 Activity.''.

SEC. 573. EXPANSION OF PILOT PROGRAM TO PROVIDE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO 
 MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES FOR IN-HOME CHILD CARE.

 Section 589(b) of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283; 10 U.S.C. 
1791 note) is amended by striking ``five locations'' and inserting 
``six locations''.

SEC. 574. EXTENSION OF PILOT PROGRAM TO EXPAND ELIGIBILITY FOR 
 ENROLLMENT AT DOMESTIC DEPENDENT ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY 
 SCHOOLS.

 Section 589C(e) of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283; 10 U.S.C. 
2164 note) is amended by striking ``four years'' and inserting ``eight 
years''.

SEC. 575. ADVISORY PANEL ON COMMUNITY SUPPORT FOR MILITARY FAMILIES 
 WITH SPECIAL NEEDS.

 Section 563(d) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2010 (Public Law 111-84; 10 U.S.C. 1781c note) is amended--
 (1) by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows:
 ``(2) Members.--The advisory panel shall consist of the 
 following members, appointed by the Secretary of Defense:
 ``(A) Nine individuals from military families with 
 special needs, with respect to whom the Secretary shall 
 ensure that--
 ``(i) one individual is the spouse of an 
 enlisted member;
 ``(ii) one individual is the spouse of an 
 officer in a grade below O-6;
 ``(iii) one individual is a junior enlisted 
 member;
 ``(iv) one individual is a junior officer;
 ``(v) individuals reside in different 
 geographic regions;
 ``(vi) one individual is a member serving 
 at a remote installation or is a member of the 
 family of such a member; and
 ``(vii) at least two individuals are 
 members serving on active duty, each with a 
 dependent who--
 ``(I) is enrolled in the 
 Exceptional Family Member Program; and
 ``(II) has an individualized 
 education program.
 ``(B) One representative of the Defense Health 
 Agency.
 ``(C) One representative of the Department of 
 Defense Education Activity.
 ``(D) One representative of the Office of Special 
 Needs of the Department of Defense.
 ``(E) One or more representatives of advocacy 
 groups with missions relating to the Exceptional Family 
 Member Program of the Department of Defense.
 ``(F) One or more adult dependents enrolled in the 
 Exceptional Family Member Program of the Department of 
 Defense.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(5) Transparency and accessibility.--The advisory panel 
 shall--
 ``(A) provide advice that is relevant, objective, 
 and transparent;
 ``(B) ensure that any meetings or other proceedings 
 of the advisory panel are accessible to the public; and
 ``(C) make available on a publicly accessible 
 website--
 ``(i) meeting announcements;
 ``(ii) minutes of meetings;
 ``(iii) the names of council 
 representatives; and
 ``(iv) regular updates on the progress of 
 the panel in fulfilling the duties specified in 
 paragraph (3).''.

SEC. 576. CERTAIN ASSISTANCE TO LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCIES THAT BENEFIT 
 DEPENDENTS OF MILITARY AND CIVILIAN PERSONNEL.

 (a) Continuation of Authority to Assist Local Educational Agencies 
That Benefit Dependents of Members of the Armed Forces and Department 
of Defense Civilian Employees.--Of the amount authorized to be 
appropriated for fiscal year 2023 by section 301 and available for 
operation and maintenance for Defense-wide activities as specified in 
the funding table in section 4301, $53,000,000 shall be available only 
for the purpose of providing assistance to local educational agencies 
under subsection (a) of section 572 of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2006 (Public Law 109-163; 20 U.S.C. 
7703b).
 (b) Impact Aid for Children With Severe Disabilities.--Of the 
amount authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 2023 pursuant to 
section 301 and available for operation and maintenance for Defense-
wide activities as specified in the funding table in section 4301, 
$22,000,000 shall be available for payments under section 363 of the 
Floyd D. Spence National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2001 
(as enacted into law by Public Law 106-398; 114 Stat. 1654A-77; 20 
U.S.C. 7703a).
 (c) Local Educational Agency Defined.--In this section, the term 
``local educational agency'' has the meaning given that term in section 
7013(9) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 7713(9)).

SEC. 577. VERIFICATION OF REPORTING OF ELIGIBLE FEDERALLY CONNECTED 
 CHILDREN FOR PURPOSES OF FEDERAL IMPACT AID PROGRAMS.

 (a) Certification.--On an annual basis, each commander of a 
military installation under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of a 
military department shall submit to such Secretary a written 
certification verifying whether the commander has confirmed the 
information contained in all impact aid source check forms received 
from local educational agencies as of the date of such certification.
 (b) Report.--Not later June 30 of each year, each Secretary of a 
military department shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a report, based on the information received under subsection 
(a), that identifies--
 (1) each military installation under the jurisdiction of 
 such Secretary that has confirmed the information contained in 
 all impact aid source check forms received from local 
 educational agencies as of the date of the report; and
 (2) each military installation that has not confirmed the 
 information contained in such forms as of such date.

SEC. 578. EFMP GRANT PROGRAM.

 (a) Establishment.--The Secretary of Defense shall establish a 
program to award grants to, and enter into agreements with, eligible 
entities under which participating eligible entities shall provide, to 
covered members assigned to PRIs, services described in subsection (b).
 (b) Services.--Services described in this subsection are the 
provision of--
 (1) training and information that help a covered 
 dependent--
 (A) meet developmental, functional, and academic 
 goals; and
 (B) prepare to lead a productive and independent 
 adult life;
 (2) training and information that help a covered member--
 (A) better understand the disabilities and 
 educational, developmental, and transitional needs of 
 the covered dependent of such covered member;
 (B) participate in the development of an 
 individualized education program for the covered 
 dependent;
 (C) communicate effectively and work 
 collaboratively with individuals responsible for 
 providing, to covered dependents, special education, 
 early intervention services, transition services, and 
 related services; and
 (D) resolve a dispute, regarding education or 
 services described in subparagraph (C), as 
 expeditiously and effectively as possible, including 
 encouraging the use, and explaining the benefits, of 
 alternative methods of dispute resolution; and
 (3) if an eligible entity is not a PTI--
 (A) information regarding services offered by the 
 local PTI (about which the eligible entity shall 
 consult with the local PTI not less than once each 
 quarter year); and
 (B) referrals of covered members to the local PTI.
 (c) Co-location.--To the extent practical, the Secretary shall 
ensure that an eligible entity that participates in the program under 
this section shall provide services described in subsection (b) at a 
location on the military installation concerned where the Secretary 
furnishes other services under the EFMP.
 (d) Implementation.--The Secretary shall implement the program 
under this section at--
 (1) six PRIs (one PRI for each covered Armed Force and one 
 joint PRI) not later than two years after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act; and
 (2) all PRIs not later than four years after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act.
 (e) Plan.-- Not later than one year after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the appropriate 
congressional committees the plan of the Secretary to implement the 
program under this section.
 (f) Report.--Not later than two years after the Secretary 
implements the program under this section, the Secretary shall submit 
to the appropriate congressional committees a report on implementation 
of the program. Such report shall include evaluations of the following:
 (1) Satisfaction of covered members and covered dependents 
 who receive services under such program.
 (2) Adherence of schools, with respect to covered 
 dependents described in paragraph (1), to--
 (A) individualized education programs; and
 (B) plans under section 504 of the Rehabilitation 
 Act of 1973 (Public Law 93-112; 29 U.S.C. 794).
 (g) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means 
 the following:
 (A) The congressional defense committees.
 (B) The Committee on Transportation and 
 Infrastructure of the House of Representatives.
 (C) The Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate.
 (2) The term ``congressional defense committees'' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 101 of title 10, United 
 States Code.
 (3) The term ``covered Armed Force'' means an Armed Force 
 under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of a military 
 department.
 (4) The term ``covered dependent'' means a dependent--
 (A) of a member of a covered Armed Force;
 (B) who is a minor; and
 (C) who is enrolled in the EFMP.
 (5) The term ``covered member'' means a member--
 (A) of a covered Armed Force; and
 (B) with a covered dependent.
 (6) The term ``EFMP'' means an Exceptional Family Member 
 Program of the Department of Defense under section 1781c(e) of 
 title 10, United States Code.
 (7) The term ``eligible entity'' means a private, nonprofit 
 entity, or an institution of higher education, that the 
 Secretary of Defense determines appropriate to provide services 
 described in subsection (b).
 (8) The term ``individualized education program'' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 614 of the Individuals with 
 Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1414).
 (9) The term ``institution of higher education'' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 101 of the Higher Education 
 Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001).
 (10) The term ``PRI'' means a primary receiving 
 installation, as that term is used in section 582 of the 
 William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act 
 for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283; 10 U.S.C. 1781c 
 note).
 (11) The term ``PTI'' means a parent training and 
 information center, as that term is defined in section 602 of 
 the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (Public Law 91-
 230; 20 U.S.C. 1401).

SEC. 579. PROMOTION OF CERTAIN CHILD CARE ASSISTANCE.

 (a) In General.--Each Secretary concerned shall promote, to members 
of the Armed Forces under the jurisdiction of such Secretary concerned, 
awareness of child care assistance available under--
 (1) section 1798 of title 10, United States Code; and
 (2) section 589 of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National 
 Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-
 283; 10 U.S.C. 1791 note).
 (b) Reporting.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, each Secretary concerned shall submit to the 
appropriate congressional committees a report summarizing activities 
taken by such Secretary concerned to carry out subsection (a).
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means 
 the following:
 (A) The Committees on Armed Services of the Senate 
 and House of Representatives.
 (B) The Committees on Appropriations of the Senate 
 and House of Representatives.
 (C) The Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate.
 (D) The Committee on Transportation and 
 Infrastructure of the House of Representatives.
 (2) The term ``Secretary concerned'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 101 of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 579A. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE IMPROVEMENT OF THE MILITARY 
 INTERSTATE CHILDREN'S COMPACT.

 (a) Recommendations Required.--The Secretaries concerned, in 
consultation with States through the Defense-State Liaison Office, 
shall develop recommendations to improve and fully implement the 
Military Interstate Children's Compact.
 (b) Considerations.--In carrying out subsection (a), the 
Secretaries concerned shall--
 (1) identify any barriers--
 (A) to the ability of a parent of a transferring 
 military-connected child to enroll the child, in 
 advance, in an elementary or secondary school in the 
 State in which the child is transferring, without 
 requiring the parent or child to be physically present 
 in the State; and
 (B) to the ability of a transferring military-
 connected child who receives special education services 
 to gain access to such services and related supports in 
 the State to which the child transfers within the 
 timeframes required under the Individuals with 
 Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 1400 et seq.);
 (2) consider the feasibility and advisability of--
 (A) tracking and reporting the number of families 
 who use advanced enrollment in States that offer 
 advanced enrollment to military-connected children;
 (B) States clarifying in legislation that 
 eligibility for advanced enrollment requires only 
 written evidence of a permanent change of station 
 order, and does not require a parent of a military-
 connected child to produce a rental agreement or 
 mortgage statement; and
 (C) the Secretary of Defense, in coordination with 
 the Military Interstate Children's Compact, developing 
 a letter or other memorandum that military families may 
 present to local educational agencies that outlines the 
 protections afforded to military-connected children by 
 the Military Interstate Children's Compact; and
 (3) identify any other actions that may be taken by the 
 States (acting together or separately) to improve the Military 
 Interstate Children's Compact.
 (c) Report Required.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretaries concerned shall submit to the 
appropriate congressional committees and to the States a report setting 
forth the recommendations developed under subsection (a).
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the congressional defense committees;
 (B) the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and 
 Pensions and the Committee on Homeland Security and 
 Governmental Affairs of the Senate; and
 (C) the Committee on Education and Labor and the 
 Committee on Homeland Security of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (2) The terms ``child'', ``elementary school'', ``local 
 educational agency'', ``secondary school'', ``parent'', and 
 ``State'' have the meanings given those terms in section 8101 
 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 7801).
 (3) The terms ``armed forces'', ``active duty'' and 
 ``congressional defense committees'' have the meanings given 
 those terms in section 101 of title 10, United States Code.
 (4) The term ``transferring military-connected child'' 
 means the child of a parent who--
 (A) is serving on active duty in the Armed Forces;
 (B) is changing duty locations due to a permanent 
 change of station order; and
 (C) has not yet established an ongoing physical 
 presence in the State to which the parent is 
 transferring.
 (5) The term ``Military Interstate Children's Compact'' 
 means the Interstate Compact on Educational Opportunity for 
 Military Children as described in Department of Defense 
 Instruction 1342.29, dated January 31, 2017 (or any successor 
 to such instruction).
 (6) The term ``Secretary concerned'' means--
 (A) the Secretary of Defense, with respect to 
 matters concerning the Department of Defense; and
 (B) the Secretary of the department in which the 
 Coast Guard is operating, with respect to matters 
 concerning the Coast Guard when it is not operating as 
 a service in the Department of the Navy.

SEC. 579B. INDUSTRY ROUNDTABLE ON MILITARY SPOUSE HIRING.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and 
Readiness shall seek to convene an industry roundtable to discuss the 
hiring of military spouses. Such discussion shall include the following 
elements:
 (1) The value of, and opportunities to, private entities 
 that hire military spouses.
 (2) Career opportunities for military spouses.
 (3) Understanding the challenges that military spouses 
 encounter in the labor market.
 (4) Gaps and opportunities in the labor market for military 
 spouses.
 (5) Best hiring practices from industry leaders in human 
 resources.
 (6) The benefits of portable licenses and interstate 
 licensure compacts for military spouses.
 (b) Participants.--The participants in the roundtable shall include 
the following:
 (1) The Under Secretary.
 (2) The Assistant Secretary for Manpower and Reserve 
 Affairs of each military department.
 (3) The Director of the Defense Human Resources Activity.
 (4) Other officials of the Department of Defense the 
 Secretary of Defense determines appropriate.
 (5) Private entities that elect to participate.
 (c) Notice.--The Under Secretary shall publish notice of the 
roundtable in multiple private sector forums and the Federal Register 
to encourage participation in the roundtable by private entities and 
entities interested in the hiring of military spouses.
 (d) Briefing.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall provide a 
briefing to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of 
Representatives on the lessons learned from the roundtable, including 
the recommendation of the Secretary whether to convene the roundtable 
annually.

SEC. 579C. FEASIBILITY STUDY AND REPORT ON PILOT PROGRAM TO PROVIDE 
 POTFF SERVICES TO SEPARATING MEMBERS OF SPECIAL 
 OPERATIONS FORCES AND CERTAIN FAMILY MEMBERS.

 (a) Report Required.--Not later than March 1, 2023, the Secretary 
shall submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and 
House of Representatives a report on the feasibility of a pilot program 
to provide, to covered individuals, services under POTFF. The report 
shall include the following elements:
 (1) An outline of the tools, resources, and personnel the 
 Secretary determines necessary to carry out the pilot program.
 (2) An assessment of the potential benefits, implications, 
 and effects of the pilot program.
 (3) The POTFF services that the Secretary could provide to 
 covered individuals under the pilot program.
 (4) An assessment of how best to carry out the separation 
 of covered members, including any additional resources the 
 Secretary determines necessary.
 (5) Any legislative or administrative action that the 
 Secretary determines necessary to carry the such pilot program.
 (6) Any other information the Secretary determines 
 appropriate.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered individual'' means--
 (A) a covered member;
 (B) an immediate family of a covered member; or
 (C) an individual eligible for a gold star lapel 
 button under section 1126 of title 10, United States 
 Code, on the basis of the relationship of such 
 individual to a deceased member of special operations 
 forces.
 (2) The term ``covered member'' means a member of the Armed 
 Forces--
 (A) assigned to special operations forces; and
 (B) who is separating from the Armed Forces.
 (3) The term ``immediate family member'' has the meaning 
 given that term in section 1789 of title 10, United States 
 Code.
 (4) The term ``POTFF'' means the Preservation of the Force 
 and Family Program of United States Special Operations Command 
 under section 1788a of title 10, United States Code.
 (5) The term ``special operations forces'' means the forces 
 described in section 167(j) of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 579D. MYSTEP: PROVISION ONLINE AND IN MULTIPLE LANGUAGES.

 The Secretary concerned shall provide all services of the Military 
Spouse Transition Program (commonly referred to as ``MySTeP'') online 
and in English, Spanish, Tagalog, and the rest of the 10 most commonly 
spoken languages in the United States.

SEC. 579E. ASSISTANCE TO LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCIES THAT BENEFIT 
 DEPENDENTS OF MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES WITH ENROLLMENT 
 CHANGES DUE TO BASE CLOSURES, FORCE STRUCTURE CHANGES, OR 
 FORCE RELOCATIONS.

 (a) Assistance Authorized.--To assist communities in making 
adjustments resulting from changes in the size or location of the Armed 
Forces, the Secretary of Defense shall provide financial assistance to 
an eligible local educational agency described in subsection (b) if, 
during the period between the end of the school year preceding the 
fiscal year for which the assistance is authorized and the beginning of 
the school year immediately preceding that school year, the local 
educational agency--
 (1) had (as determined by the Secretary of Defense in 
 consultation with the Secretary of Education) an overall 
 increase or reduction of--
 (A) not less than five percent in the average daily 
 attendance of military dependent students in the 
 schools of the local educational agency; or
 (B) not less than 500 military dependent students 
 in average daily attendance in the schools of the local 
 educational agency; or
 (2) is projected to have an overall increase, between 
 fiscal years 2023 and 2028, of not less than 500 military 
 dependent students in average daily attendance in the schools 
 of the local educational agency as the result of a signed 
 record of decision.
 (b) Eligible Local Educational Agencies.--A local educational 
agency is eligible for assistance under subsection (a) for a fiscal 
year if--
 (1) 20 percent or more of students enrolled in schools of 
 the local educational agency are military dependent students; 
 and
 (2) in the case of assistance described in subsection 
 (a)(1), the overall increase or reduction in military dependent 
 students in schools of the local educational agency is the 
 result of one or more of the following:
 (A) The global rebasing plan of the Department of 
 Defense.
 (B) The official creation or activation of one or 
 more new military units.
 (C) The realignment of forces as a result of the 
 base closure process.
 (D) A change in the number of housing units on a 
 military installation.
 (E) A signed record of decision.
 (c) Calculation of Amount of Assistance.--
 (1) Pro rata distribution.--The amount of the assistance 
 provided under subsection (a) to a local educational agency 
 that is eligible for such assistance for a fiscal year shall be 
 equal to the product obtained by multiplying--
 (A) the per-student rate determined under paragraph 
 (2) for that fiscal year; by
 (B) the net of the overall increases and reductions 
 in the number of military dependent students in schools 
 of the local educational agency, as determined under 
 subsection (a).
 (2) Per-student rate.--For purposes of paragraph (1)(A), 
 the per-student rate for a fiscal year shall be equal to the 
 dollar amount obtained by dividing--
 (A) the total amount of funds made available for 
 that fiscal year to provide assistance under subsection 
 (a); by
 (B) the sum of the overall increases and reductions 
 in the number of military dependent students in schools 
 of all eligible local educational agencies for that 
 fiscal year under that subsection.
 (3) Maximum amount of assistance.--A local educational 
 agency may not receive more than $15,000,000 in assistance 
 under subsection (a) for any fiscal year.
 (d) Duration.--Assistance may not be provided under subsection (a) 
after September 30, 2028.
 (e) Notification.--Not later than June 30, 2023, and June 30 of 
each fiscal year thereafter for which funds are made available to carry 
out this section, the Secretary of Defense shall notify each local 
educational agency that is eligible for assistance under subsection (a) 
for that fiscal year of--
 (1) the eligibility of the local educational agency for the 
 assistance; and
 (2) the amount of the assistance for which the local 
 educational agency is eligible.
 (f) Disbursement of Funds.--The Secretary of Defense shall disburse 
assistance made available under subsection (a) for a fiscal year not 
later than 30 days after the date on which notification to the eligible 
local educational agencies is provided pursuant to subsection (e) for 
that fiscal year.
 (g) Briefing Required.--Not later than March 1, 2023, the Secretary 
of Defense shall brief the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate 
and the House of Representatives on the estimated cost of providing 
assistance to local educational agencies under subsection (a) through 
September 30, 2028.
 (h) Eligible Uses.--Amounts disbursed to a local education agency 
under subsection (f) may be used by such local educational agency for--
 (1) general fund purposes;
 (2) special education;
 (3) school maintenance and operation;
 (4) school expansion; or
 (5) new school construction.
 (i) Funding.--
 (1) Increase.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the 
 funding tables in division D, the amount authorized to be 
 appropriated in section 301 for Operation and Maintenance, 
 Defense-wide, Department of Defense Education Activity, Line 
 390, as specified in the corresponding funding table in section 
 4301, is hereby increased by $15,000,000 for purposes of this 
 section.
 (2) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the 
 funding tables in division D, the amount authorized to be 
 appropriated in section 301 for Operation and Maintenance, 
 Defense-wide, for Washington Headquarters Services, Line 500, 
 as specified in the corresponding funding table in section 
 4301, is hereby reduced by $15,000,000.
 (j) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Base closure process.--The term ``base closure 
 process'' means any base closure and realignment process 
 conducted after the date of the enactment of this Act under 
 section 2687 of title 10, United States Code, or any other 
 similar law enacted after that date.
 (2) Local educational agency.--The term ``local educational 
 agency'' has the meaning given that term in section 7013(9) of 
 the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 7713(9)).
 (3) Military dependent students.--The term ``military 
 dependent students'' means--
 (A) elementary and secondary school students who 
 are dependents of members of the Armed Forces; and
 (B) elementary and secondary school students who 
 are dependents of civilian employees of the Department 
 of Defense.
 (4) State.--The term ``State'' means each of the 50 States 
 and the District of Columbia.

SEC. 579F. SURVEYS REGARDING MILITARY SPOUSES.

 (a) Surveys.--The Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the 
Commissioner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, shall determine the 
feasibility of--
 (1) measuring labor market outcomes and characteristics of 
 military spouses with existing data from surveys conducted by 
 the Department of Defense and Bureau of Labor Statistics; and
 (2) modifying such surveys to capture more information 
 about military spouses.
 (c) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report 
containing--
 (1) determinations under subsection (a);
 (2) ways to implement modifications described in subsection 
 (a) that comport with the Employment Situation Report of the 
 Bureau of Labor Statistics.
 (3) and estimated costs to implement such modifications.

SEC. 579G. REVIEW OF POLICIES REGARDING SINGLE PARENTS SERVING AS 
 MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES.

 Not later than September 30, 2023, the Secretary of Defense shall 
review regulations and rules of the Department of Defense regarding 
single parents serving as members of the Armed Forces.

SEC. 579H. PUBLIC REPORTING ON CERTAIN MILITARY CHILD CARE PROGRAMS.

 Not later than September 30, 2023, and each calendar quarter 
thereafter, the Secretary of Defense shall post, on a publicly 
accessible website of the Department of Defense, information regarding 
the Military Child Care in Your Neighborhood and Military Child Care in 
Your Neighborhood-Plus programs. Such information shall include the 
following elements, disaggregated by State, ZIP code, month, and Armed 
Force:
 (1) The number of children, military families, and child 
 care providers who benefit from each program.
 (2) Whether such providers are nationally accredited or 
 rated by the Quality Rating and Improvement System of the 
 State.
 (3) The amounts of subsidy paid.

SEC. 579I. FEASIBILITY OF INCLUSION OF AU PAIRS IN PILOT PROGRAM TO 
 PROVIDE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO MEMBERS OF THE ARMED 
 FORCES FOR IN-HOME CHILD CARE.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that members of 
the Armed Forces who participate in the au pair exchange visitor 
program should be eligible for assistance under the pilot program of 
the Department of Defense to provide financial assistance to members of 
the Armed Forces for in-home child care.
 (b) Feasibility Assessment.--Not later than one year after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in coordination 
with the Secretary of State, shall submit to the appropriate 
congressional committees a report containing the assessment of the 
Secretary of Defense of the feasibility, advisability, and 
considerations of expanding eligibility for the pilot program under 
section 589 of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283; 10 U.S.C. 
1791 note) to members of the Armed Forces who participate in an 
exchange visitor program under section 62.31 of title 22, Code of 
Federal Regulations, or successor regulation.
 (c) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--The term 
``appropriate congressional committees'' means:
 (1) The Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and 
 House of Representatives.
 (2) The Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (3) The Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate.

SEC. 579J. REPORT ON THE EFFECTS OF ECONOMIC INFLATION ON FAMILIES OF 
 MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES.

 The Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a report on the extent to which economic inflation has 
affected families of members of the Armed Forces.

SEC. 579K. REPORT ON THE EFFECTS OF THE SHORTAGE OF INFANT FORMULA ON 
 THE FAMILIES OF MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES.

 The Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a report on the extent to which families of members of the 
Armed Forces--
 (1) have access to infant formula; and
 (2) have been affected by any shortage of infant formula 
 available for consumer purchase from January 1, 2022, through 
 the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 579L. BRIEFING ON CHILD CARE AT CAMP BULL SIMONS.

 Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary of the Army and the Secretary of the Air Force shall 
submit to the congressional defense committees a joint briefing 
regarding the provision of child care at Camp Bull Simons, Eglin Air 
Force Base. The briefing shall include the following elements:
 (1) Risk mitigation measures that could allow the current 
 proposed site to achieve certification for child care.
 (2) Plans for alternative locations, including acquiring 
 land for a military child development center (as such term is 
 defined in section 1800 of title 10, United States Code) in 
 proximity to Camp Bull Simons.
 (3) An update on public-private partnership agreements for 
 child care that could alleviate the deficit in available child 
 care at Camp Bull Simons.
 (4) Current availability for child care, and related wait 
 times, at military child development centers on the main campus 
 of Eglin Air Force Base.

 Subtitle I--Decorations and Awards

SEC. 581. AUTHORITY TO AWARD THE MEDAL OF HONOR TO A MEMBER OF THE 
 ARMED FORCES FOR ACTS OF VALOR WHILE A PRISONER OF WAR.

 (a) Authority.--
 (1) Army.--Section 7271(1) of title 10, United States Code, 
 is amended by inserting ``, including active resistance, 
 gallantry, or defiance while serving as a prisoner of war'' 
 after ``United States''.
 (2) Navy and marine corps.--Section 8291(1) of title 10, 
 United States Code, is amended by inserting ``, including 
 active resistance, gallantry, or defiance while serving as a 
 prisoner of war'' after ``United States''.
 (3) Air force and space force.--Section 9271(1) of title 
 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``, including 
 active resistance, gallantry, or defiance while serving as a 
 prisoner of war'' after ``United States''.
 (4) Coast guard.--Section 2732(1) of title 14, United 
 States Code, is amended by inserting ``, including active 
 resistance, gallantry, or defiance while serving as a prisoner 
 of war'' after ``United States''.
 (b) Regulations.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of 
the Department in which the Coast Guard is operating shall prescribe 
regulations that set forth uniform standards for awarding the Medal of 
Honor to a member of the Armed Forces pursuant to an amendment made by 
subsection (a). Such regulations shall apply retroactively to a member 
who was a prisoner of war before the date of the prescription of such 
regulations.
 (c) Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of Representatives 
a report regarding the number of individuals who may be eligible for a 
Medal of Honor pursuant to the amendments made by this section.

SEC. 582. AUTHORIZATION FOR AWARD OF THE MEDAL OF HONOR TO DAVID R. 
 HALBRUNER FOR ACTS OF VALOR ON SEPTEMBER 11-12, 2012.

 (a) Authorization.--Notwithstanding the time limitations specified 
in section 7274 of title 10, United States Code, or any other time 
limitation with respect to the awarding of certain medals to persons 
who served in the Armed Forces, the President may award the Medal of 
Honor under section 7272 of such title to David R. Halbruner for the 
acts of valor described in the subsection (b).
 (b) Acts of Valor Described.--The acts of valor described in this 
subsection are the actions of David R. Halbruner as a master sergeant 
in the Army on September 11-12, 2012, for which he was previously 
awarded the Distinguished-Service Cross.

SEC. 583. AUTHORIZATION FOR POSTHUMOUS AWARD OF MEDAL OF HONOR TO 
 MASTER SERGEANT RODERICK W. EDMONDS FOR ACTS OF VALOR 
 DURING WORLD WAR II.

 (a) Waiver of Time Limitations.--Notwithstanding the time 
limitations specified in section 7274 of title 10, United States Code, 
or any other time limitation with respect to the awarding of certain 
medals to persons who served in the Armed Forces, the President may 
award the Medal of Honor posthumously under section 7271 of such title 
to Master Sergeant Roderick W. Edmonds for the acts of valor described 
in subsection (c).
 (b) Acts of Valor Described.--The acts of valor referred to in 
subsection (b) are the actions of Master Sergeant Roderick W. Edmonds 
on January 27, 1945, as a prisoner of war and member of the Army 
serving in Germany in support of the Battle of the Bulge, for which he 
has never been recognized by the United States Army.

SEC. 584. RESCISSION OF MEDALS OF HONOR AWARDED FOR ACTS AT WOUNDED 
 KNEE CREEK ON DECEMBER 29, 1890.

 (a) In General.--Each Medal of Honor awarded for acts at Wounded 
Knee Creek, Lakota Pine Ridge Indian Reservation, South Dakota, on 
December 29, 1890, is rescinded.
 (b) Medal of Honor Roll.--The Secretary concerned shall remove the 
name of each individual awarded a Medal of Honor for acts described in 
subsection (a) from the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Coast Guard Medal of 
Honor Roll maintained under section 1134a of title 10, United States 
Code.
 (c) Return of Medal Not Required.--No person may be required to 
return to the Federal Government a Medal of Honor rescinded under 
subsection (a).
 (d) No Denial of Benefits.--This Act shall not be construed to deny 
any individual any benefit from the Federal Government.

SEC. 585. SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING SERVICE OF GARY ANDREW CYR.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) On February 23, 1971, Corporal Gary Andrew Cyr was 19 
 years old.
 (2) Corporal Cyr was assigned to the 10th Pathfinder 
 Detachment in May of 1970 and served as a Special Operations 
 Pathfinder until January 1972.
 (3) In February 1971, Corporal Cyr's Pathfinder Unit was 
 tasked with supporting Operation Dak Soo Ri 71-1, a joint 
 operation with Korean infantry units.
 (4) On February 23, 1971, Corporal Cyr was the Pathfinder 
 air traffic controller and cargo loadmaster for four flights 
 and twelve landing pickup zones for the Operation, including 
 the primary insertion point.
 (5) This Operation involved the insertion of over 1,000 
 Korean soldiers from two divisions and 31 sling loads of cargo 
 transported by 35 helicopters over the course of the evening of 
 February 23, 1971.
 (6) Corporal Cyr was responsible for coordinating incoming 
 helicopter flights and providing accurate on-the-ground 
 information to the pilots, essentially operating as a one-man 
 air traffic control tower inside a combat zone.
 (7) Corporal Cyr's leadership and execution enabled the 
 mission to be completed in a minimum time period with no 
 damaged cargo or casualties.
 (8) Corporal Cyr's actions were hailed by helicopter pilots 
 and officers from the inserting battalions.
 (9) Corporal Cyr's actions on February 23 epitomized the 
 Pathfinder motto of ``First in, Last out,''.
 (10) William P. Murphy, Commander of the 10th Pathfinder 
 Detachment, submitted a recommendation for the award of a 
 Bronze Star to Corporal Cyr to 10th Combat Aviation Battalion 
 Commander, Captain Charles E. Markham.
 (11) Captain Markham approved the recommendation and 
 submitted it to 17th Aviation Group Commander, Lieutenant 
 Colonel Jack A. Walker.
 (12) Lieutenant Colonel Walker approved the recommendation.
 (13) The 10th Pathfinder Detachment began to stand down in 
 December 1971 and deactivated in January 1972, before Corporal 
 Cyr could be awarded the Bronze Star.
 (14) Corporal Cyr's initial award was lost as a result of 
 the deactivation.
 (b) Purpose.--That the House of Representatives--
 (1) honors the heroism of Corporal Gary Andrew Cyr to 
 successfully insert troops and ammunition on time and on 
 target; and
 (2) believes the United States Army, in light of new 
 information, should consider revisiting decorating and honoring 
 the courage and leadership of Corporal Gary Andrew Cyr.

SEC. 586. ELIGIBILITY OF VETERANS OF OPERATION END SWEEP FOR VIETNAM 
 SERVICE MEDAL.

 The Secretary of the military department concerned may, upon the 
application of an individual who is a veteran who participated in 
Operation End Sweep, award that individual the Vietnam Service Medal.

SEC. 587. AUTHORIZATION FOR AWARD OF MEDAL OF HONOR TO E. ROYCE 
 WILLIAMS FOR ACTS OF VALOR DURING THE KOREAN WAR.

 (a) Waiver of Time Limitations.--Notwithstanding the time 
limitations specified in section 8298 of title 10, United States Code, 
or any other time limitation with respect to the awarding of certain 
medals to persons who served in the Armed Forces, the President may 
award the Medal of Honor under section 8291 of such title to E. Royce 
Williams for the acts of valor described in subsection (b).
 (b) Acts of Valor Described.--The acts of valor described in this 
subsection are the actions of E. Royce Williams, as a lieutenant in the 
Navy, on November 18, 1952, for which he was previously awarded the 
Silver Star.

SEC. 588. AUTHORIZATION FOR AWARD OF MEDAL OF HONOR TO JAMES CAPERS, 
 JR. FOR ACTS OF VALOR AS A MEMBER OF THE MARINE CORPS 
 DURING THE VIETNAM WAR.

 (a) Authorization.--Notwithstanding the time limitations specified 
in sections 8298(a) and 8300 of title 10, United States Code, or any 
other time limitation with respect to the awarding of certain medals to 
persons who served in the Armed Forces, the President is authorized to 
award the Medal of Honor, under section 8291 of such title, to James 
Capers, Jr. for the acts of valor described in subsection (b).
 (b) Acts of Valor Described.--The acts of valor described in this 
subsection are the actions of James Capers, Jr., as a member of the 
Marine Corps, during the period of March 31 through April 3, 1967, 
during the Vietnam War, for which he was previously awarded the Silver 
Star.

SEC. 589. INCLUSION OF PURPLE HEART AWARDS ON MILITARY VALOR WEBSITE.

 The Secretary of Defense shall ensure that the publicly accessible 
internet website of the Department of Defense that lists individuals 
who have been awarded certain military awards includes a list of each 
individual who meets each of the following criteria:
 (1) The individual is awarded the Purple Heart for 
 qualifying actions that occur after the date of the enactment 
 of this Act.
 (2) The individual elects to be included on such list (or, 
 if the individual is deceased, the primary next of kin elects 
 the individual to be included on such list).
 (3) The public release of the individual's name does not 
 constitute a security risk, as determined by the Secretary of 
 the military department concerned.

SEC. 589A. STUDY ON FRAUDULENT MISREPRESENTATION ABOUT RECEIPT OF A 
 MILITARY MEDAL OR DECORATION.

 (a) Study.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall conduct a study to 
identify any monetary or government benefits obtained through a 
fraudulent misrepresentation about the receipt a military decoration or 
medal as described by section 704(c)(2) or 704(d) of title 18, United 
States Code.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall report 
to Congress on the findings of the study conducted under subsection (b) 
and policy recommendations to resolve issues identified in the study.

 Subtitle J--Miscellaneous Reports and Other Matters

SEC. 591. ELECTRONIC NOTARIZATION FOR MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES.

 Section 1044a of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding 
at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(e)(1) A person named in subsection (b) may exercise the powers 
described in subsection (a) through electronic means, including under 
circumstances where the individual with respect to whom such person is 
performing the notarial act is not physically present in the same 
location as such person.
 ``(2) A determination of the authenticity of a notarial act 
authorized in this section shall be made without regard to whether the 
notarial act was performed through electronic means.
 ``(3) A log or journal of a notarial act authorized in this section 
shall be considered for evidentiary purposes without regard to whether 
the log or journal is in electronic form.''.

SEC. 592. DISINTERMENTS FROM NATIONAL CEMETERIES.

 (a) Applicability of Authority to Reconsider Decisions of Secretary 
of Veterans Affairs or Secretary of the Army to Inter the Remains or 
Memorialize a Person in a National Cemetery.--
 (1) In general.--Section 2(c) of the Alicia Dawn Koehl 
 Respect for National Cemeteries Act (Public Law 113-65; 38 
 U.S.C. 2411 note) is amended by striking ``after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act'' and inserting ``after November 21, 
 1997''.
 (2) Congressional notices.--Upon becoming aware of a 
 covered interment or memorialization--
 (A) the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall issue 
 to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate 
 and House of Representatives written notice of such 
 covered interment or memorialization; and
 (B) the Secretary of the Army, in the case of a 
 covered interment or memorialization in Arlington 
 National Cemetery, shall issue to the Committees on 
 Armed Services of the Senate and House of 
 Representatives and the Committees on Veterans' Affairs 
 of the Senate and House of Representatives written 
 notice of such covered interment or memorialization.
 (3) Covered interment or memorialization defined.--In this 
 subsection, the term ``covered interment or memorialization'' 
 means an interment or memorialization--
 (A) in a national cemetery;
 (B) between January 1, 1990 and November 21, 1997; 
 and
 (C) that would have been subject to section 2411 of 
 title 38, United States Code, as amended by the Alicia 
 Dawn Koehl Respect for National Cemeteries Act if 
 subsection 2(c) of such Act were amended by striking 
 ``after the date of the enactment of this Act'' and 
 inserting ``on or after January 1, 1990''.
 (b) Disinterment of Remains of Andrew Chabrol From Arlington 
National Cemetery.--
 (1) Disinterment.--Not later than September 30, 2023, the 
 Secretary of the Army shall disinter the remains of Andrew 
 Chabrol from Arlington National Cemetery.
 (2) Notification.--The Secretary of the Army may not carry 
 out paragraph (1) until after notifying the next of kin of 
 Andrew Chabrol.
 (3) Disposition.--After carrying out paragraph (1), the 
 Secretary of the Army shall--
 (A) relinquish the remains to the next of kin 
 described in paragraph (2); or
 (B) if no such next of kin responds to notification 
 under paragraph (2), arrange for disposition of the 
 remains the Secretary of the Army determines 
 appropriate.

SEC. 593. CLARIFICATION OF AUTHORITY OF NCMAF TO UPDATE CHAPLAINS HILL 
 AT ARLINGTON NATIONAL CEMETERY.

 Section 584(a) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 38 U.S.C. 2409 note) is amended by adding 
at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Authority of secretary of the army.--The Secretary of 
 the Army may permit NCMAF to carry out any action authorized by 
 this subsection without regard to the time limitation under 
 section 2409(b)(2)(C) of title 38, United States Code.''.

SEC. 594. NOTIFICATIONS ON MANNING OF AFLOAT NAVAL FORCES.

 Section 597(d)(3) of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2020 (Public Law 116-92; 10 U.S.C. 8013 note) is amended by 
inserting ``or a commissioned ship undergoing nuclear refueling or 
defueling and any concurrent complex overhaul'' after ``Register''.

SEC. 595. PILOT PROGRAM ON CAR SHARING ON MILITARY INSTALLATIONS IN 
 ALASKA.

 (a) Establishment.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall seek to carry out 
a pilot program to allow car sharing on military installations in 
Alaska.
 (b) Program Elements.--To carry out a pilot program under this 
section, the Secretary shall take steps including the following:
 (1) Seek to enter into an agreement with an entity that--
 (A) provides car sharing services; and
 (B) is capable of serving all military 
 installations in Alaska.
 (2) Provide to members assigned to military installations 
 in Alaska the resources the Secretary determines necessary to 
 participate in such pilot program.
 (3) Promote such pilot program to such members.
 (c) Implementation Plan.--Not later than 90 days after the date the 
Secretary enters into an agreement under subsection (b)(1), the 
Secretary shall submit to the congressional defense committees a plan 
to carry out the pilot program.
 (d) Duration.--A pilot program under this section shall terminate 
two years after the Secretary commences such pilot program.
 (e) Report.--Upon the termination of a pilot program under this 
section, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional 
defense committees a report containing the following information:
 (1) The number of individuals who used car sharing services 
 offered pursuant to the pilot program.
 (2) The cost to the United States of the pilot program.
 (3) An analysis of the effect of the pilot program on 
 mental health and community connectedness of members described 
 in subsection (b)(2).
 (4) Other information the Secretary determines appropriate.
 (f) Military Installation Defined.--In this section, the term 
``military installation'' has the meaning given such term in section 
2801 of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 596. SUPPORT FOR MEMBERS WHO PERFORM DUTIES REGARDING REMOTELY 
 PILOTED AIRCRAFT: STUDY; REPORT.

 (a) Study.--The Secretary of Defense (in consultation with the 
Secretary of Transportation and Administrator of the Federal Aviation 
Administration) shall conduct a study to identify opportunities to 
provide more support services to, and greater recognition of combat 
accomplishments of, RPA crew. Such study shall identify the following 
with respect to each covered Armed Force:
 (1) Safety policies applicable to crew of traditional 
 aircraft that apply to RPA crew.
 (2) Personnel policies, including crew staffing and 
 training practices, applicable to crew of traditional aircraft 
 that apply to RPA crew.
 (3) Metrics the Secretaries of the military departments use 
 to evaluate the health of RPA crew.
 (4) Incentive pay, retention bonuses, promotion rates, and 
 career advancement opportunities for RPA crew.
 (5) Combat zone compensation available to RPA crew.
 (6) Decorations and awards for combat available to RPA 
 crew.
 (7) Mental health care available to crew of traditional 
 aircraft and RPA crew who conduct combat operations.
 (8) Whether RPA crew receive post-separation health 
 (including mental health) care equivalent to crew of 
 traditional aircraft.
 (9) An explanation of any difference under paragraph (8).
 (b) Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
appropriate congressional committees a report containing the results of 
the study conducted under this section, including any policy 
recommendations of the Secretary regarding such results.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) In this section, the term ``appropriate congressional 
 committees'' means the following:
 (A) The Committees on Armed Services of the Senate 
 and House of Representatives.
 (B) The Committees on Appropriations of the Senate 
 and House of Representatives.
 (C) The Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate.
 (D) The Committee on Transportation and 
 Infrastructure of the House of Representatives.
 (2) The term ``covered Armed Force'' means an Armed Force 
 under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of a military 
 department.
 (3) The term ``RPA crew'' means members of covered Armed 
 Forces who perform duties relating to remotely piloted 
 aircraft.
 (4) The term ``traditional aircraft'' means fixed or rotary 
 wing aircraft operated by an onboard pilot.

SEC. 597. REVIEW OF MARKETING AND RECRUITING OF THE DEPARTMENT OF 
 DEFENSE.

 (a) In General.--Not later that September 30, 2023, the Secretary 
of Defense, in consultation with the Comptroller General of the United 
States and experts determined by the Secretary, shall evaluate the 
marketing and recruiting efforts of the Department of Defense to 
determine how to use social media and other technology platforms to 
convey to young people the opportunities and benefits of service in the 
covered Armed Forces.
 (b) Covered Armed Force Defined.--In this section, the term 
``covered Armed Force'' means the following:
 (1) The Army.
 (2) The Navy.
 (3) The Marine Corps.
 (4) The Air Force.
 (5) The Space Force.

SEC. 598. REPORT ON RECRUITING EFFORTS OF THE ARMY.

 (a) Report Required.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the 
enactment of this act, the Secretary of the Army shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report on recruiting efforts of the 
Army. Such report shall contain the following elements:
 (1) A comparison of the number of active Army enlistments 
 from each region annually during fiscal years 2018 through 
 2022, the number of recruiters stationed in each region, and 
 advertising dollars spent in each region, including annual 
 numbers and averages.
 (2) A comparison of the number of active Army enlistments 
 produced by each Army Recruiting Battalion during fiscal years 
 2018 through 2022, the number of recruiters stationed in each 
 battalion, and advertising dollars spent in support of each 
 battalion, including annual numbers and averages.
 (3) An analysis of the geographic dispersion of enlistments 
 by military occupational specialty during fiscal years 2018 
 through 2022.
 (4) An analysis of the amount of Federal funds spent on 
 advertising per active duty enlistment by Army Recruiting 
 Battalion and region during fiscal years 2018 through 2022, and 
 a ranked list of those battalions from most efficient to least 
 efficient.
 (5) A comparison of the race, religion, gender, education 
 levels, military occupational specialties, and waivers for 
 enlistment granted to enlistees by region and Army Recruiting 
 Battalion area of responsibility during fiscal years 2018 
 through 2022.
 (b) Format.--The report under this section shall display data 
through infographics wherever possible.
 (c) Publication.--Not later than 30 days after submitting the 
report under subsection (a), the Secretary of the Army shall publish, 
on a publicly accessible website of the Army, the report and the data 
sets (scrubbed of all personally identifiable information) used to 
generate the report.
 (d) Region Defined.--In this section, the term ``region'' means a 
region used for the 2020 decennial census.

SEC. 599. SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING WOMEN INVOLUNTARILY SEPARATED 
 FROM THE ARMED FORCES DUE TO PREGNANCY OR PARENTHOOD.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) In June 1948, Congress enacted the Women's Armed 
 Services Integration Act of 1948, which formally authorized the 
 appointment and enlistment of women in the regular components 
 of the Armed Forces.
 (2) With the expansion of the Armed Forces to include 
 women, the possibility arose for the first time that members of 
 the regular components of the Armed Forces could become 
 pregnant.
 (3) The response to such possibilities and actualities was 
 Executive Order 10240, signed by President Harry S. Truman in 
 1951, which granted the Armed Forces the authority to 
 involuntarily separate or discharge a woman if she became 
 pregnant, gave birth to a child, or became a parent by adoption 
 or a stepparent.
 (4) The Armed Forces responded to the Executive order by 
 systematically discharging any woman in the Armed Forces who 
 became pregnant, regardless of whether the pregnancy was 
 planned, unplanned, or the result of sexual abuse.
 (5) Although the Armed Forces were required to offer women 
 who were involuntarily separated or discharged due to pregnancy 
 the opportunity to request retention in the military, many such 
 women were not offered such opportunity.
 (6) The Armed Forces did not provide required separation 
 benefits, counseling, or assistance to the members of the Armed 
 Forces who were separated or discharged due to pregnancy.
 (7) Thousands of members of the Armed Forces were 
 involuntarily separated or discharged from the Armed Forces as 
 a result of pregnancy.
 (8) There are reports that the practice of the Armed Forces 
 to systematically separate or discharge pregnant members caused 
 some such members to seek an unsafe or inaccessible abortion, 
 which was not legal at the time, or to put their children up 
 for adoption, and that, in some cases, some women died by 
 suicide following their involuntary separation or discharge 
 from the Armed Forces.
 (9) Such involuntary separation or discharge from the Armed 
 Forces on the basis of pregnancy was challenged in Federal 
 district court by Stephanie Crawford in 1975, whose legal 
 argument stated that this practice violated her constitutional 
 right to due process of law.
 (10) The Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit ruled in 
 Stephanie Crawford's favor in 1976 and found that Executive 
 Order 10240 and any regulations relating to the Armed Forces 
 that made separation or discharge mandatory due to pregnancy 
 were unconstitutional.
 (11) By 1976, all regulations that permitted involuntary 
 separation or discharge of a member of the Armed Forces because 
 of pregnancy or any form of parenthood were rescinded.
 (12) Today, women comprise 17 percent of the Armed Forces, 
 and many are parents, including 12 percent of whom are single 
 parents.
 (13) While military parents face many hardships, today's 
 Armed Forces provides various lengths of paid family leave for 
 mothers and fathers, for both birth and adoption of children.
 (b) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that women who 
served in the Armed Forces before February 23, 1976, should not have 
been involuntarily separated or discharged due to pregnancy or 
parenthood.
 (c) Expression of Remorse.--Congress hereby expresses deep remorse 
for the women who patriotically served in the Armed Forces, but were 
forced, by official United States policy, to endure unnecessary and 
discriminatory actions, including the violation of their constitutional 
right to due process of law, simply because they became pregnant or 
became a parent while a member of the Armed Forces.

SEC. 599A. ARMED FORCES WORKPLACE AND GENDER RELATIONS SURVEYS.

 Subsection (c) of section 481 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (3), (4), and (5) as 
 paragraphs (4), (5), and (6), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(3) Indicators of the assault (including unwanted sexual 
 contact) that give reason to believe that the victim was 
 targeted, or discriminated against, or both, for a real or 
 perceived status in a minority group based on race, color, 
 national origin, religion, sex (including gender identity, 
 sexual orientation, or sex characteristics), and any other 
 factor considered appropriate by the Secretary.''.

SEC. 599B. TASK FORCE ON HISTORICAL AND CURRENT BARRIERS TO AFRICAN 
 AMERICAN PARTICIPATION AND EQUAL TREATMENT IN THE ARMED 
 SERVICES.

 (a) Establishment.--The Secretary of Defense shall establish within 
the Department of Defense a task force to be known as the ``Task Force 
on Historical and Current Barriers to African American Participation 
and Equal Treatment in the Armed Services'' (hereafter referred to as 
the ``Task Force'').
 (b) Duties.--The Task Force shall advise, consult with, report to, 
and make recommendations to the Secretary, as appropriate, on the 
development, refinement, and implementation of policies, programs, 
planning, and training which will provide redress for historical 
barriers to African American participation and equal treatment in the 
Armed Services.
 (c) Studies and Investigations.--
 (1) Investigation of historical record of slavery.--As part 
 of its duties, the Task Force shall identify, compile, examine, 
 and synthesize the relevant corpus of evidentiary documentation 
 regarding the military or Armed Service's involvement in the 
 institution of slavery. The Task Force's documentation and 
 examination shall include facts related to--
 (A) the capture and procurement of Africans;
 (B) the transport of Africans to the United States 
 and the colonies that became the United States for the 
 purpose of enslavement, including their treatment 
 during transport;
 (C) the sale and acquisition of Africans and their 
 descendants as chattel property in interstate and 
 intrastate commerce;
 (D) the treatment of African slaves and their 
 descendants in the colonies and the United States, 
 including the deprivation of their freedom, 
 exploitation of their labor, and destruction of their 
 culture, language, religion, and families; and
 (E) the extensive denial of humanity, sexual abuse, 
 and the chatellization of persons.
 (2) Study of effects of discriminatory policies in the 
 armed services.--As part of its duties, the Task Force shall 
 study and analyze the official policies or routine practices of 
 the Armed Services with discriminatory intent or discriminatory 
 effect on the formerly enslaved Africans and their descendants 
 in the Armed Services following the overdue recognition of such 
 persons as United States citizens beginning in 1868.
 (3) Study of other forms of discrimination.--As part of its 
 duties, the Task Force shall study and analyze the other forms 
 of discrimination in the Armed Services against freed African 
 slaves and their descendants who were belatedly accorded their 
 rightful status as United States citizens from 1868 to the 
 present.
 (4) Study of lingering effects of discrimination.--As part 
 of its duties, the Task Force shall study and analyze the 
 lingering negative effects of the institution of slavery and 
 the matters described in the preceding paragraphs on living 
 African Americans and their participation in the Armed 
 Services.
 (d) Recommendations for Remedies.--
 (1) Recommendations.--Based on the results of the 
 investigations and studies carried out under subsection (c), 
 the Task Force shall recommend appropriate remedies to the 
 Secretary.
 (2) Issues addressed.--In recommending remedies under this 
 subsection, the Task Force shall address the following:
 (A) How Federal laws and policies that continue to 
 disproportionately and negatively affect African 
 Americans as a group in the Armed Services, and those 
 that perpetuate the lingering effects, materially and 
 psycho-socially, can be eliminated.
 (B) How the injuries resulting from the matters 
 described in subsection (c) can be reversed through 
 appropriate policies, programs, and projects.
 (C) How, in consideration of the Task Force's 
 findings, to calculate any form of repair for 
 inequities to the descendants of enslaved Africans.
 (D) The form of that repair which should be 
 awarded, the instrumentalities through which the repair 
 should be provided, and who should be eligible for the 
 repair of such inequities.
 (e) Annual Report.--
 (1) Submission.--Not later than 90 days after the end of 
 each year, the Task Force shall submit a report to the 
 Secretary on its activities, findings, and recommendations 
 during the preceding year.
 (2) Publication.--Not later than 180 days after the date on 
 which the Secretary receives an annual report for a year under 
 paragraph (1), the Secretary shall publish a public version of 
 the report, and shall include such related matters as the 
 Secretary finds would be informative to the public during that 
 year.
 (f) Composition; Governance.--
 (1) Composition.--The Task Force shall be composed of such 
 number of members as the Secretary may appoint from among 
 individuals whom the Secretary finds are qualified to serve by 
 virtue of their military service, education, training, activism 
 or experience, particularly in the field of history, sociology, 
 and African American studies.
 (2) Publication of list of members.--The Secretary shall 
 post and regularly update on a public website of the Department 
 of Defense the list of the members of the Task Force.
 (3) Meetings.--The Task Force shall meet not less 
 frequently than quarterly, and may convene additional meetings 
 during a year as necessary. At least one of the meetings during 
 each year shall be open to the public.
 (4) Governance.--The Secretary shall establish rules for 
 the structure and governance of the Task Force.
 (5) Deadline.--The Secretary shall complete the appointment 
 of the members of the Task Force not later than 180 days after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 599C. PLAN TO COMBAT RACIAL BIAS, DISCRIMINATION, AND HARASSMENT 
 AGAINST ASIAN AMERICAN SERVICE MEMBERS, CIVILIANS, AND 
 CONTRACTOR PERSONNEL.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that:
 (1) Asian American service members, civilians, and 
 contractors serve with honor and distinction in the Department 
 of Defense.
 (2) Asian Americans continue to be underrepresented in the 
 Department of Defense and other national security agencies, 
 especially at senior leadership and general and flag officer 
 levels.
 (3) Greater recruitment, retention, and inclusion of Asian 
 American personnel, particularly those with language skills and 
 cultural competencies, is critical to implementation of the 
 Administration's Interim National Security Strategic Guidance 
 and National Defense Strategy, both of which place greater 
 emphasis on strategic competition in the Indo-Pacific region.
 (4) The Department of Defense has a responsibility to take 
 meaningful action in addressing the higher rates of racially or 
 ethnically rooted bias, discrimination, and harassment 
 experienced and reported by service members, civilians, and 
 contractor personnel of Asian American descent, especially 
 women.
 (5) Protecting and upholding our values in diversity, 
 equity, and inclusion at home are essential to our efforts in 
 promoting democracy and inclusion abroad.
 (b) Plan Required.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall--
 (1) submit to the congressional defense committees a report 
 that includes--
 (A) an assessment of the extent to which Department 
 of Defense service members, civilians, and contractor 
 personnel experience anti-Asian bias, discrimination, 
 or harassment, including contributing factors such as 
 the security clearance review process;
 (B) a review of Department of Defense programs, 
 policies, and practices that impact diversity, equity, 
 and inclusion goals, especially with respect to such 
 service members, civilians, and contractor personnel 
 who are Asian Americans; and
 (C) recommendations, developed in consultation with 
 Asian American organizations, to address unconscious 
 bias, discrimination, and harassment targeted at Asian 
 Americans and to improve recruitment and retention of 
 Asian American service members, civilians, and 
 contractor personnel, including accountability measures 
 and improvements to services to inform and support 
 personnel with resolving discrimination complaints 
 through administrative or judicial processes; and
 (2) make the report required under paragraph (1) publicly 
 available on the website of the Department of Defense.
 (c) Implementation and Update.--Not later than 2 years after the 
date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall--
 (1) implement the recommendations described in subsection 
 (b)(1)(C); and
 (2) provide to the congressional defense committees an 
 update on the implementation of such recommendations.

SEC. 599D. RECURRING REPORT REGARDING COVID-19 MANDATE.

 Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act 
and every 60 days thereafter until the Secretary of Defense lifts the 
requirement that a member of the Armed Forces shall receive a 
vaccination against COVID-19, the Secretary shall submit to the 
Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of Representatives 
a report, without any personally identifiable information, containing 
the following:
 (1) With regard to religious exemptions to such 
 requirement--
 (A) the number of such exemptions for which members 
 applied;
 (B) the number of such religious exemptions denied;
 (C) the reasons for such denials;
 (D) the number of members denied such a religious 
 exemption who complied with the requirement; and
 (E) the number of members denied such a religious 
 exemption who did not comply with the requirement who 
 were separated, and with what characterization.
 (2) With regard to medical exemptions to such requirement--
 (A) the number of such medical exemptions for which 
 members applied;
 (B) the number of such medical exemptions denied;
 (C) the reasons for such denials;
 (D) the number of members denied such a medical 
 exemption who complied with the requirement; and
 (E) the number of members denied such a medical 
 exemption who did not comply with the requirement who 
 were separated, and with what characterization.

SEC. 599E. PILOT PROGRAM ON SAFE STORAGE OF PERSONALLY OWNED FIREARMS.

 (a) Establishment.--The Secretary of Defense shall establish a 
voluntary pilot program to promote the safe storage of personally owned 
firearms.
 (b) Elements.--Under the pilot program under subsection (a), the 
Secretary of Defense shall furnish to members of the Armed Forces 
described in subsection (c) secure gun storage or safety devices for 
the purpose of securing personally owned firearms when not in use 
(including by directly providing, subsidizing, or otherwise making 
available such devices).
 (c) Voluntary Participants.--A member of the Armed Forces described 
in this subsection is a member of the Armed Forces who elects to 
participate in the pilot program under subsection (a) and is stationed 
at a military installation selected under subsection (e).
 (d) Plan.--Not later than one year after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional 
defense committees a plan for the implementation of the pilot program 
under subsection (a).
 (e) Selection of Installations.--Not later than two years after the 
date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall 
select not fewer than five military installations at which to carry out 
the pilot program under subsection (a).
 (f) Duration.--The duration of the pilot program under subsection 
(a) shall be for a period of six years.
 (g) Report.--Upon the termination of the pilot program under 
subsection (a), the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report containing the following 
information:
 (1) The number and type of secure gun storage or safety 
 devices furnished to members of the Armed Forces under such 
 pilot program.
 (2) The cost of such pilot program.
 (3) An analysis of the effect of such pilot program on 
 suicide prevention.
 (4) Such other information as the Secretary may determine 
 appropriate, except that such information may not include the 
 personally identifiable information of a participant in such 
 pilot program.
 (h) Secure Gun Storage or Safety Device Defined.--In this 
subsection, the term ``secure gun storage or safety device'' means--
 (1) a device that, when installed on a firearm, is designed 
 to prevent the firearm from being operated without first 
 deactivating the device;
 (2) a device incorporated into the design of the firearm 
 that is designed to prevent the operation of the firearm by any 
 individual without access to the device; or
 (3) a safe, gun safe, gun case, lock box, or other device 
 that may be used to store a firearm and is designed to be 
 unlocked only by a key, combination, or other similar means.

SEC. 599F. REPORT ON NON-CITIZEN MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES.

 Section 147(b) of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (8), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) by redesignating paragraph (9) as paragraph (10); and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (8) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(9) shall submit to the congressional defense committees 
 an annual report on--
 ``(A) the number of members of the Armed Forces who 
 are not citizens of the United States during the year 
 covered by such report;
 ``(B) the immigration status of such members; and
 ``(C) the number of such members naturalized; 
 and''.

SEC. 599G. REPORT ON INSTANCES OF ANTISEMITISM.

 The Secretaries concerned shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a report that identifies, with respect to the equal 
opportunity programs under the jurisdiction of each Secretary 
concerned--
 (1) all administrative investigations into allegations of 
 antisemitism; and
 (2) all substantiated instances of antisemitism.

SEC. 599H. ANNUAL REPORT REGARDING COST OF LIVING FOR MEMBERS AND 
 EMPLOYEES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE.

 Section 136 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding 
at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(e) The Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness 
shall submit annually to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate 
and House of Representatives a report containing an analysis of the 
costs of living, nationwide, for
 ``(1) members of the Armed Forces on active duty; and
 ``(2) employees of the Department of Defense.''.

SEC. 599I. REVIEW OF RECRUITING EFFORTS FOR WOMEN.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall evaluate the 
effectiveness and scale of existing outreach programs, with the 
objective of creating new programs or adjusting the existing programs 
to increase the recruitment of women, including young women, for 
service in the Armed Forces.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 365 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Department shall submit to the Committees on 
Armed Services of the House of Representatives and the Senate a report 
that includes--
 (1) evaluations of existing marketing and recruitment 
 efforts to increase recruitment of women in the Armed Forces; 
 and
 (2) recommendations on new initiatives, programs, or 
 practices to increase the recruitment of women in the Armed 
 Forces.

SEC. 599J. REPORT ON SUPPORT FOR PREGNANT MEMBERS.

 The Secretary of Defense shall report to the Committees on Armed 
Services of the Senate and House of Representatives a summary of past, 
current, and future efforts to support pregnant members of the Armed 
Forces, including--
 (1) the number of pregnant members who served at least one 
 day of active duty in a calendar year;
 (2) recommendations to improve efforts to support pregnant 
 members.

SEC. 599K. CLARIFICATION OF AUTHORITY TO SOLICIT GIFTS IN SUPPORT OF 
 THE MISSION OF THE DEFENSE POW/MIA ACCOUNTING AGENCY TO 
 ACCOUNT FOR MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES AND DEPARTMENT OF 
 DEFENSE CIVILIAN EMPLOYEES LISTED AS MISSING.

 Section 1501a of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (e)(1), by inserting ``solicit,'' after 
 ``the Secretary may''; and
 (2) in subsection (f)(2)--
 (A) by inserting ``solicitation or'' after 
 ``provide that''; and
 (B) by striking ``acceptance or use'' and inserting 
 ``solicitation, acceptance, or use''.

SEC. 599L. REPORT ON EFFORTS TO PREVENT AND RESPOND TO DEATHS BY 
 SUICIDE IN THE NAVY.

 (a) Review Required.--The Inspector General of the Department of 
Defense shall conduct a review of the efforts by the Secretary of the 
Navy to--
 (1) prevent incidents of deaths by suicide, suicide 
 attempts, and suicidal ideation among covered members; and
 (2) respond to such incidents.
 (b) Elements of Review.--The study conducted under subsection (a) 
shall include an assessment of each of the following:
 (1) The extent of data collected regarding incidents of 
 deaths by suicide, suicide attempts, and suicidal ideation 
 among covered members, including data regarding whether such 
 covered members are assigned to sea duty or shore duty at the 
 time of such incidents.
 (2) The means used by commanders to prevent and respond to 
 incidents of deaths by suicide, suicide attempts, and suicidal 
 ideation among covered members.
 (3) Challenges related to--
 (A) the prevention of incidents of deaths by 
 suicide, suicide attempts, and suicidal ideation among 
 members of the Navy assigned to sea duty; and
 (B) the development of a response to such 
 incidents.
 (4) The capacity of teams providing mental health services 
 to covered members to respond to incidents of suicidal ideation 
 or suicide attempts among covered members in the respective 
 unit each such team serves.
 (5) The means used by such teams to respond to such 
 incidents, including the extent to which post-incident programs 
 are available to covered members.
 (6) Such other matters as the Inspector General considers 
 appropriate in connection with the prevention of deaths by 
 suicide, suicide attempts, and suicidal ideation among covered 
 members.
 (c) Report Required.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Inspector General of the Department of 
Defense shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report 
that includes a summary of the results of the review conducted under 
subsection (a).
 (d) Covered Member Defined.--In this section the term ``covered 
member'' means a member of the Navy assigned to sea duty or shore duty.

SEC. 599M. REPORT ON PROGRAMS THROUGH WHICH MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES 
 MAY FILE ANONYMOUS CONCERNS.

 (a) Review Required.--The Inspector General of the Department of 
Defense shall conduct a review that shall include an assessment of the 
extent to which the Secretary of Defense and each Secretary of a 
military department have--
 (1) issued policy and guidance concerning the 
 establishment, promotion, and management of an anonymous 
 concerns program;
 (2) established safeguards in such policy and guidance to 
 ensure the anonymity of concerns or complaints filed through an 
 anonymous concerns program; and
 (3) used an anonymous concerns program--
 (A) for purposes that include services on a 
 military installation; and
 (B) in settings that include--
 (i) naval vessels;
 (ii) military installations outside the 
 continental United States; and
 (iii) remote locations.
 (b) Report Required.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Inspector General of the Department of 
Defense shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report 
that includes the findings of the review conducted under subsection 
(a).
 (c) Anonymous Concerns Program Defined.--In this section, the term 
``anonymous concerns program''--
 (1) means a program that enables a member of the Armed 
 Force to anonymously submit a complaint or concern related to 
 topics that include--
 (A) morale;
 (B) quality of life;
 (C) safety; or
 (D) the availability of Department of Defense 
 programs or services to support members of the Armed 
 Forces; and
 (2) does not include an anonymous reporting mechanism 
 related to sexual harassment, sexual assault, anti-harassment 
 complaints, or military equal opportunity complaints.

SEC. 599N. SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING ULYSSES S. GRANT.

 It is the Sense of Congress that--
 (1) the efforts and leadership of Ulysses S. Grant in 
 defending the United States deserve honor;
 (2) the military victories achieved under the command of 
 Ulysses S. Grant were integral to the preservation of the 
 United States; and
 (3) Ulysses S. Grant is among the most influential military 
 commanders in the history of the United States.

 TITLE VI--COMPENSATION AND OTHER PERSONNEL BENEFITS

 Subtitle A--Basic Pay and Allowances

SEC. 601. EXCLUSION OF BAH FROM GROSS HOUSEHOLD INCOME FOR PURPOSES OF 
 BASIC NEEDS ALLOWANCE.

 Section 402b(k)(1) of title 37, United States Code, is amended by 
striking subparagraph (B) and inserting the following:
 ``(B) the basic allowance for housing under section 
 403 of this title paid to such member.''.

SEC. 602. BASIC ALLOWANCE FOR HOUSING FOR A MEMBER WITHOUT DEPENDENTS 
 WHOSE RELOCATION WOULD FINANCIALLY DISADVANTAGE SUCH 
 MEMBER.

 Section 403(o) of title 37, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(1)'' before ``In the case of a member 
 who is assigned''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(2) In the case of a member without dependents who is assigned to 
a unit that undergoes a change of home port or a change of permanent 
duty station, the Secretary concerned may, if the Secretary concerned 
determines that it would be inequitable to base the member's 
entitlement to, and amount of, a basic allowance for housing on the new 
home port or permanent duty station, treat such member, for the 
purposes of this section, as if the unit to which the member is 
assigned did not undergo such a change.''.

SEC. 603. TEMPORARY CONTINUATION OF RATE OF BASIC ALLOWANCE FOR HOUSING 
 FOR MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES WHOSE SOLE DEPENDENT DIES 
 WHILE RESIDING WITH THE MEMBER.

 (a) Authority.--Section 403 of title 37, United States Code, as 
amended by section 602, is further amended by--
 (1) redesignating subsections (m) through (p) as 
 subsections (n) through (q);
 (2) by inserting after subsection (l) the following new 
 subsection (m):
 ``(m) Temporary Continuation of Rate of Basic Allowance for Members 
of the Armed Forces Whose Sole Dependent Dies While Residing With the 
Member.--(1) Notwithstanding subsection (a)(2) or any other section of 
law, the Secretary of Defense and or the Secretary of the Department in 
which the Coast Guard is operating, may, after the death of the sole 
dependent of a member of the armed forces, continue to pay a basic 
allowance for housing to such member at the rate paid to such member at 
the time of the death of such sole dependent if--
 ``(A) such sole dependent dies--
 ``(i) while the member is on active duty; and
 ``(ii) while residing with the member, unless 
 separated by the necessity of military service or to 
 receive institutional care as a result of disability or 
 incapacitation or under such other circumstances as the 
 Secretary concerned may by regulation prescribe; and
 ``(B) the member--
 ``(i) is not occupying a housing facility under the 
 jurisdiction of the Secretary concerned on the date of 
 the death of the sole dependent; or
 ``(ii) is occupying such housing on a rental basis 
 on such date.
 ``(2) The continuation of the rate of an allowance under this 
subsection shall terminate 365 days after the date of the death of the 
sole dependent.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 2881a(c) of title 10, United 
States Code, is amended by striking ``section 403(n)'' and inserting 
``section 403(o)''.

SEC. 604. ALLOWANCE FOR GYM MEMBERSHIP FOR CERTAIN MEMBERS OF THE ARMED 
 FORCES WHO RESIDE MORE THAN 10 MILES FROM A MILITARY 
 INSTALLATION.

 (a) Establishment.--Chapter 7 of title 37, United States Code, is 
amended by inserting after section 425 the following new section:
``Sec. 426. Allowance for gym membership for certain members of the 
 armed forces who reside more than 10 miles from a 
 military installation
 ``(a) Allowance Authorized.--The Secretary of the military 
department concerned may pay, to a covered member, a monthly allowance 
for a gym membership.
 ``(b) Amount.--A monthly allowance to a covered member under this 
section shall be in an amount determined by the Secretary of Defense 
based on the average cost of a gym membership in the military housing 
area in which the covered member resides.
 ``(c) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `covered armed force' means the following:
 ``(A) The Army.
 ``(B) The Navy.
 ``(C) The Marine Corps.
 ``(D) The Air Force.
 ``(E) The Space Force.
 ``(2) The term `covered member' means a member of a covered 
 armed force--
 ``(A) who resides more than 10 miles from a 
 military installation; and
 ``(B) who furnishes to the Secretary of the 
 military department concerned receipts or other 
 evidence such member has a gym membership.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 
425 the following:

``426. Allowance for gym membership for certain members of the armed 
 forces who reside more than 10 miles from a 
 military installation.''.

SEC. 605. REVIVAL AND REDESIGNATION OF PROVISION ESTABLISHING BENEFITS 
 FOR CERTAIN MEMBERS ASSIGNED TO THE DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE 
 AGENCY.

 (a) Revivial.--Section 491 of title 37, United States Code--
 (1) is revived to read as it did immediately before its 
 repeal under section 604 of the National Defense Authorization 
 Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81); and
 (2) is redesignated as section 431 of such title.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
chapter 7 of such title is amended by inserting, after the item 
relating to section 427, the following new item:

``431. Benefits for certain members assigned to the Defense 
 Intelligence Agency.''.

SEC. 606. REIMBURSEMENT OF CERTAIN CHILD CARE COSTS INCIDENT TO A 
 PERMANENT CHANGE OF STATION OR ASSIGNMENT.

 (a) Designated Child Care Provider: Definition; Inclusion as 
Authorized Traveler.--Section 451(a) of title 37, United States Code, 
is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2)(C), by inserting ``, or as a 
 designated child care provider if child care is not available 
 to a member of the armed forces at a military child development 
 center (as that term is defined in section 1800 of title 10) at 
 the permanent duty location of such member not later than 30 
 days after the member arrives at such location'' before the 
 period; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) The term `designated child care provider' means an 
 adult selected by a member of the armed forces to provide child 
 care to a dependent child of such member.''.
 (b) Authorization of Reimbursement.--Section 453 of title 37, 
United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection:
 ``(h) Reimbursement of Certain Child Care Costs Incident to a 
Member's Permanent Change of Station or Assignment.--(1) From amounts 
otherwise made available for a fiscal year to provide travel and 
transportation allowances under this chapter, the Secretary concerned 
may reimburse a member of the armed forces for travel expenses for a 
designated child care provider when--
 ``(A) the member is reassigned, either as a permanent 
 change of station or permanent change of assignment, to a new 
 duty station;
 ``(B) the movement of the member's dependents is authorized 
 at the expense of the United States under this section as part 
 of the reassignment;
 ``(C) child care is not available at a military child 
 development center (as that term is defined in section 1800 of 
 title 10) at such duty station not later than 30 days after the 
 member arrives at such duty station; and
 ``(D) the dependent child is on the wait list for child 
 care at such military child development center.
 ``(2) Reimbursement provided to a member under this subsection may 
not exceed--
 ``(A) $500 for a reassignment between duty stations within 
 the continental United States; and
 ``(B) $1,500 for a reassignment involving a duty station 
 outside of the continental United States.
 ``(3) A member may not apply for reimbursement under this 
subsection later than one year after a reassignment described in 
paragraph (1).
 ``(4) In the event a household contains two or more members 
eligible for reimbursement under this subsection, reimbursement may be 
paid to one member among such members as such members shall jointly 
elect.''.

SEC. 607. ALLOWABLE TRAVEL AND TRANSPORTATION ALLOWANCES: COMPLEX 
 OVERHAUL.

 Section 452(b) of title 37, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by redesignating the second paragraph (18) as paragraph 
 (21); and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
 ``(22) Permanent change of assignment to or from a naval 
 vessel undergoing nuclear refueling or defueling and any 
 concurrent complex overhaul, even if such assignment is within 
 the same area as the current assignment of the member.
 ``(23) Current assignment to a naval vessel entering or 
 exiting nuclear refueling or defueling and any concurrent 
 complex overhaul.''.

SEC. 608. EXPANSION OF AUTHORITY TO REIMBURSE A MEMBER OF THE UNIFORMED 
 SERVICES FOR SPOUSAL BUSINESS COSTS ARISING FROM A 
 PERMANENT CHANGE OF STATION.

 Subsection (g) of section 453 of title 37, United States Code, as 
amended by section 606, is further amended--
 (1) in the heading, by inserting ``or Business Costs'' 
 after ``Relicensing Costs'';
 (2) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``or qualified business 
 costs'' after ``qualified relicensing costs'';
 (3) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by inserting ``(A)'' before ``Reimbursement'';
 (B) by inserting ``for qualified relicensing 
 costs'' after ``subsection'';
 (C) by striking ``$1000'' and inserting ``$1,000''; 
 and
 (D) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(B) Reimbursement provided to a member under this subsection for 
qualified business costs may not exceed $2,000 in connection with each 
reassignment described in paragraph (1).'';
 (4) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``or qualified business 
 costs'' after ``qualified relicensing costs'';
 (5) in paragraph (4)--
 (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by 
 inserting ``business license, permit,'' after 
 ``courses,'';
 (B) in subparagraph (A)--
 (i) by inserting ``, or owned a business,'' 
 before ``during'';
 (ii) by inserting ``professional'' before 
 ``license''; and
 (iii) by inserting ``, or business license 
 or permit,'' after ``certification''; and
 (C) in subparagraph (B)--
 (i) by inserting ``professional'' before 
 ``license''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``, or business license 
 or permit,'' after ``certification''; and
 (6) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(5) In this subsection, the term `qualified business costs' means 
costs, including moving services for equipment, equipment removal, new 
equipment purchases, information technology expenses, and inspection 
fees, incurred by the spouse of a member if--
 ``(A) the spouse owned a business during the member's 
 previous duty assignment and the costs result from a movement 
 described in paragraph (1)(B) in connection with the member's 
 change in duty location pursuant to reassignment described in 
 paragraph (1)(A); and
 ``(B) the costs were incurred or paid to move such business 
 to a new location in connection with such reassignment.''.

SEC. 609. PERMANENT AUTHORITY TO REIMBURSE MEMBERS FOR SPOUSE 
 RELICENSING COSTS PURSUANT TO A PERMANENT CHANGE OF 
 STATION.

 Subsection (g) of section 453 of title 37, United States Code, as 
amended by sections 606 and 608, is further amended by striking 
paragraph (3) and redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (3).

SEC. 609A. TRAVEL AND TRANSPORTATION ALLOWANCES FOR CERTAIN MEMBERS OF 
 THE ARMED FORCES WHO ATTEND A PROFESSIONAL MILITARY 
 EDUCATION INSTITUTION OR TRAINING CLASSES.

 Section 453 of title 37, United States Code, as amended by sections 
606, 608, and 609, is further amended by adding at the end the 
following new subsection:
 ``(i) Attendance at Professional Military Education Institution or 
Training Classes.--
 ``(1) The Secretary of the military department concerned 
 may authorize temporary duty status, and travel and 
 transportation allowances payable to a member in such status, 
 for a member under the jurisdiction of such Secretary who is 
 reassigned--
 ``(A) between duty stations located within the 
 United States;
 ``(B) for a period of not more than one year;
 ``(C) for the purpose of participating in 
 professional military education or training classes,
 ``(D) with orders to return to the duty station 
 where the member maintains primary residence and the 
 dependents of such member reside.
 ``(2) If the Secretary of the military department concerned 
 assigns permanent duty status to a member described in 
 paragraph (1), such member shall be eligible for travel and 
 transportation allowances including the following:
 ``(A) Transportation, including mileage at the same 
 rate paid for a permanent change of station.
 ``(B) Per diem while traveling between the 
 permanent duty station and professional military 
 education institution or training site.
 ``(C) Per diem paid in the same manner and amount 
 as temporary lodging expenses.
 ``(D) Per diem equal to the amount of the basic 
 allowance for housing under section 403 of this title 
 paid to a member--
 ``(i) in the grade of such member;
 ``(ii) without dependents;
 ``(iii) who resides in the military housing 
 area in which the professional military 
 education institution or training site is 
 located.
 ``(E) Movement of household goods in an amount 
 determined under applicable regulations.''.

SEC. 609B. ESTABLISHMENT OF ALLOWANCE FOR CERTAIN RELOCATIONS OF PETS 
 OF MEMBERS OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES.

 (a) Establishment.--Section 453 of title 37, United States Code, as 
amended by sections 606, 608, 609, and 609A, is further amended by 
adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(j) Pet Relocation Arising From a Permanent Change of Duty 
Station to or From a Location Outside the Continental United States.--
(1) The Secretary concerned shall reimburse a member for costs--
 ``(A) to move a pet of the member; and
 ``(B) arising from a permanent change of duty station of 
 such member to or from a location outside the continental 
 United States.
 ``(2) Reimbursement provided to a member under this subsection may 
not exceed $2,000 in connection with each permanent change of duty 
station described in paragraph (1).
 ``(3) In this subsection, the term `pet' has the meaning given such 
term in section 2266 of title 18.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section takes 
effect on the day that is 180 days after the date of the enactment of 
this Act and applies to the relocation of a member of the uniformed 
services on or after such day.

SEC. 609C. EXTENSION OF ONE-TIME UNIFORM ALLOWANCE FOR OFFICERS WHO 
 TRANSFER TO THE SPACE FORCE.

 Subsection (d)(1) of section 606 of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry 
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 
116-283; 134 Stat. 3672; 37 U.S.C. 416 note) is amended by striking 
``September 30, 2022'' and inserting ``September 30, 2023''.

SEC. 609D. OCONUS COST OF LIVING ALLOWANCE: ADJUSTMENTS; NOTICE TO 
 CERTAIN CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEES.

 (a) Adjustments.--
 (1) Reductions: limitation.--The Secretary of Defense and 
 the Secretary of the Department in which the Coast Guard is 
 operating may not reduce the cost-of-living allowance for a 
 member of the Armed Forces assigned to a duty station located 
 outside the United States except in connection with a permanent 
 change of station for such member.
 (2) Increases.--The Secretary of Defense and the Secretary 
 of the Department in which the Coast Guard is operating may 
 increase the allowance described in paragraph (1) for a member 
 of the Armed Forces at any time.
 (b) Notice to Certain Congressional Committees.--The Secretary of 
Defense shall notify the appropriate congressional committees not less 
than 180 days before modifying a table used to calculate the living 
allowance described in subsection (a).
 (c) Briefing.--Not later than March 1, 2023, the Secretary of 
Defense shall brief the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and 
House of Representatives regarding effects of this section on the 
allowance described in subsection (a).
 (d) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the following:
 (1) The Committee on Armed Services of the Senate.
 (2) The Committees on Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (3) The Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation 
 of the Senate.
 (4) The Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of 
 the House of Representatives.

SEC. 609E. PAY FOR DOD AND COAST GUARD CHILD CARE PROVIDERS: STUDIES; 
 ADJUSTMENT.

 (a) DOD Child Care Employee Compensation Review.--
 (1) Review required.--The Secretary of Defense shall, for 
 each geographic area in which the Secretary of a military 
 department operates a military child development center, 
 conduct a study--
 (A) comparing the total compensation, including all 
 pay and benefits, of child care employees of each 
 military child development center in the geographic 
 area to the total compensation of similarly 
 credentialed employees of public elementary schools in 
 such geographic area; and
 (B) estimating the difference in average pay and 
 the difference in average benefits between such child 
 care employees and such employees of public elementary 
 schools.
 (2) Schedule.--The Secretary of Defense shall complete the 
 studies required under paragraph (1)--
 (A) for the geographic areas containing the 
 military installations with the 25 longest wait lists 
 for child care services at military child development 
 centers, not later than one year after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act; and
 (B) for geographic areas other than geographic 
 areas described in subparagraph (A), not later than two 
 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (3) Reports.--
 (A) Interim report.--Not later than one year after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of 
 Defense shall submit to the congressional defense 
 committees and the Coast Guard committees a report 
 summarizing the results of the studies required under 
 paragraph (1) that have been completed as of the date 
 of the submission of such report.
 (B) Final report.--Not later than 120 days after 
 the completion of all the studies required under 
 paragraph (1), the Secretary shall submit to the 
 congressional defense committees and the Coast Guard 
 committees a report summarizing the results of such 
 studies.
 (b) Coast Guard Child Development Center Employee Compensation 
Review.--
 (1) Review required.--The Secretary of Homeland Security 
 shall, for each geographic area in which the Secretary operates 
 a Coast Guard child development center, conduct a study--
 (A) comparing the total compensation (including all 
 pay and benefits) of child development center employees 
 of each Coast Guard child development center in such 
 geographic area, to the total compensation of similarly 
 credentialed employees of public elementary schools in 
 such geographic area; and
 (B) estimating the difference in average pay and 
 the difference in average benefits between such child 
 development center employees and such employees of 
 public elementary schools.
 (2) Schedule.--The Secretary of Homeland Security shall 
 complete the studies required under paragraph (1)--
 (A) for the geographic areas containing the Coast 
 Guard installations with the 10 longest wait lists for 
 child development services at Coast Guard child 
 development centers, not later than one year after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act; and
 (B) for geographic areas other than geographic 
 areas described in subparagraph (A), not later than two 
 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (3) Reports.--
 (A) Interim report.--Not later than one year after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of 
 Homeland Security shall submit to the Coast Guard 
 committees and the congressional defense committees a 
 report summarizing the results of the respective 
 studies required under paragraph (1) that the Secretary 
 has completed as of the date of the submission of such 
 report.
 (B) Final report.--Not later than 120 days after 
 the completion of all respective studies required under 
 paragraph (1), the Secretary of Homeland Security shall 
 submit to the Coast Guard committees and the 
 congressional defense committees a report summarizing 
 the results of such studies.
 (c) Compensation Adjustment.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) Department of defense.--Not later than 90 days 
 after the date on which the Secretary of Defense 
 completes the study for a geographic area under 
 subsection (a), the Secretary of each military 
 department that operates a military child development 
 center in such geographic area shall ensure that the 
 dollar value of the total compensation, including the 
 pay and benefits, of child care employees is not less 
 than the average dollar value of the total compensation 
 of similarly credentialed employees of public 
 elementary schools in such geographic area.
 (B) Coast guard.--Not later than 90 days after the 
 date on which the Secretary of Homeland Security 
 completes the study for a geographic area under 
 subsection (b), the Commandant of the Coast Guard shall 
 ensure that the dollar value of the total compensation, 
 including the pay and benefits, of child development 
 center employees in such geographic area is not less 
 than the average dollar value of the total compensation 
 of similarly credentialed employees of public 
 elementary schools in such geographic area.
 (2) Adjustment limit.--No child care employee or child 
 development center employee may have his or her pay or benefits 
 decreased pursuant to paragraph (1).
 (3) Reports.--
 (A) Department of defense.--Not later than one year 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act, and 
 annually thereafter for five years, each Secretary of a 
 military department shall submit to the congressional 
 defense committees and the Coast Guard committees a 
 report detailing the effects of changes in the total 
 compensation under this subsection, including the 
 effects on the hiring and retention of child care 
 employees and on the number of children for which 
 military child development centers provide child care 
 services.
 (B) Coast guard.--Not later than one year after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, and annually 
 thereafter for five years, the Commandant of the Coast 
 Guard shall submit to the Coast Guard committees and 
 the congressional defense committees a report detailing 
 the effects of changes in the total compensation under 
 this subsection, including the effects on the hiring 
 and retention of child development center employees and 
 on the number of children for which Coast Guard child 
 development centers provide child development services.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``benefits'' includes--
 (A) retirement benefits;
 (B) any insurance premiums paid by an employer;
 (C) education benefits, including tuition 
 reimbursement and student loan repayment; and
 (D) any other compensation an employer provides to 
 an employee for service performed as an employee (other 
 than pay), as determined appropriate by the Secretary 
 of Defense or Secretary of Homeland Security, as 
 applicable.
 (2) The terms ``child care employee'' and ``military child 
 development center'' have the meanings given such terms in 
 section 1800 of title 10, United States Code.
 (3) The terms ``child development center employee'' and 
 ``Coast Guard child development center'' have the meanings 
 given such terms in section 2921 of title 14, United States 
 Code.
 (4) The term ``Coast Guard committees'' means--
 (A) the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate;
 (B) the Committee on Transportation and 
 Infrastructure of the House of Representatives; and
 (C) the Committees on Appropriations of the Senate 
 and the House of Representatives.
 (5) The term ``congressional defense committees'' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 101 of title 10, United 
 States Code.
 (6) The term ``elementary school'' means a day or 
 residential school which provides elementary education, as 
 determined under State law.
 (7) The term ``pay'' includes the basic rate of pay of an 
 employee and any additional payments an employer pays to an 
 employee for service performed as an employee.

 Subtitle B--Bonus and Incentive Pays

SEC. 611. ONE-YEAR EXTENSION OF CERTAIN EXPIRING BONUS AND SPECIAL PAY 
 AUTHORITIES.

 (a) Authorities Relating to Reserve Forces.--Section 910(g) of 
title 37, United States Code, relating to income replacement payments 
for reserve component members experiencing extended and frequent 
mobilization for active duty service, is amended by striking ``December 
31, 2022'' and inserting ``December 31, 2023''.
 (b) Title 10 Authorities Relating to Health Care Professionals.--
The following sections of title 10, United States Code, are amended by 
striking ``December 31, 2022'' and inserting ``December 31, 2023'':
 (1) Section 2130a(a)(1), relating to nurse officer 
 candidate accession program.
 (2) Section 16302(d), relating to repayment of education 
 loans for certain health professionals who serve in the 
 Selected Reserve.
 (c) Authorities Relating to Nuclear Officers.--Section 333(i) of 
title 37, United States Code, is amended by striking ``December 31, 
2022'' and inserting ``December 31, 2023''.
 (d) Authorities Relating to Title 37 Consolidated Special Pay, 
Incentive Pay, and Bonus Authorities.--The following sections of title 
37, United States Code, are amended by striking ``December 31, 2022'' 
and inserting ``December 31, 2023'':
 (1) Section 331(h), relating to general bonus authority for 
 enlisted members.
 (2) Section 332(g), relating to general bonus authority for 
 officers.
 (3) Section 334(i), relating to special aviation incentive 
 pay and bonus authorities for officers.
 (4) Section 335(k), relating to special bonus and incentive 
 pay authorities for officers in health professions.
 (5) Section 336(g), relating to contracting bonus for 
 cadets and midshipmen enrolled in the Senior Reserve Officers' 
 Training Corps.
 (6) Section 351(h), relating to hazardous duty pay.
 (7) Section 352(g), relating to assignment pay or special 
 duty pay.
 (8) Section 353(i), relating to skill incentive pay or 
 proficiency bonus.
 (9) Section 355(h), relating to retention incentives for 
 members qualified in critical military skills or assigned to 
 high priority units.
 (e) Authority to Provide Temporary Increase in Rates of Basic 
Allowance for Housing.--Section 403(b) of title 37, United States Code, 
is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (7)(E), by striking ``December 31, 2022'' 
 and inserting ``December 31, 2023''; and
 (2) in paragraph (8)(C), by striking ``September 30, 2022'' 
 and inserting ``December 31, 2023''.

SEC. 612. INCREASE TO MAXIMUM AMOUNTS OF CERTAIN BONUS AND SPECIAL PAY 
 AUTHORITIES.

 (a) General Bonus Authority for Enlisted Members.--Section 
331(c)(1) of title 37, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``$50,000'' and 
 inserting ``$75,000''; and
 (2) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``$30,000'' and 
 inserting ``$50,000''.
 (b) Special Bonus and Incentive Pay Authorities for Nuclear 
Officers.--Section 333(d)(1)(A) of title 37, United States Code, is 
amended by striking ``$50,000'' and inserting ``$75,000''.
 (c) Special Aviation Incentive Pay and Bonus Authorities for 
Officers.--Section 334(c)(1) of title 37, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``$1,000'' and 
 inserting ``$1,500''; and
 (2) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``$35,000'' and 
 inserting ``$75,000''.
 (d) Skill Incentive Pay or Proficiency Bonus.--Section 353(c)(1)(A) 
of title 37, United States Code, is amended by striking ``$1,000'' and 
inserting ``$1,750''.

SEC. 613. SPECIAL PAY AND ALLOWANCES FOR MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES 
 ASSIGNED TO COLD WEATHER OPERATIONS.

 (a) Special Pay.--
 (1) Establishment.--Subchapter II of chapter 5 of title 37, 
 United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 336 
 the following new section:
``Sec. 337. Special pay: members of the armed forces assigned to cold 
 weather operations
 ``(a) Special Pay Authorized.--The Secretary concerned shall pay 
monthly special pay (to be known as `arctic pay') to a member of the 
armed forces--
 ``(1) assigned to perform cold weather operations; or
 ``(2) required to maintain proficiency through frequent 
 operations in cold weather.
 ``(b) Amount of Pay.--Special pay under this section shall equal 
$300 per month.
 ``(c) Relationship to Other Pay or Allowances.--Special pay under 
this section is in addition to any other pay or allowance to which a 
member is entitled.
 ``(d) Sunset.--No special pay may be paid under this section after 
December 31, 2023.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the 
 beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the 
 item relating to section 336 the following:

``337. Special pay: members of the armed forces assigned to permanent 
 duty stations in Alaska.''.
 (3) Regulations.--The Secretary of Defense shall prescribe 
 regulations for the payment of arctic pay under section 337 of 
 such title, as added by subsection (a).
 (b) Pilot Allowance for Broadband.--
 (1) Establishment.--Chapter 7 of title 37, United States 
 Code, is amended by inserting after section 425 the following 
 new section:
``Sec. 426. Allowance for broadband for members of the armed forces 
 assigned to permanent duty stations in Alaska
 ``(a) Allowance Authorized.--The Secretary concerned shall pay, to 
a member of the armed forces assigned to a permanent duty station in 
Alaska, a monthly allowance for broadband.
 ``(b) Amount.--The monthly allowance to a member under this section 
shall be--
 ``(1) $125 during calendar year 2023; and
 ``(2) in subsequent calendar years, an amount determined by 
 the Secretary of Defense based on the difference between the 
 average costs of unlimited broadband plans in Alaska and in the 
 continental United States.
 ``(c) Sunset.--No allowance may be paid under this section after 
December 31, 2028.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the 
 beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the 
 item relating to section 425 the following:

``426. Allowance for broadband for members of the armed forces assigned 
 to permanent duty stations in Alaska.''.
 (3) Effective date.--Section 426 of such title, as added by 
 this subsection, shall take effect on the day the Secretary of 
 Defense prescribes regulations under paragraph (4).
 (4) Regulations.--Not later than six months after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall 
 prescribe regulations to carry out section 426 of such title, 
 as added by this subsection.
 (5) Report.--Not later than December 31, 2027, the 
 Secretary of Defense shall submit to the Committees on Armed 
 Services of the Senate and House of Representatives a report 
 containing--
 (A) the evaluation of the Secretary of the 
 allowance under section 426 of such title, as added by 
 this subsection; and
 (B) any recommendation of the Secretary regarding 
 whether such allowance should be amended, extended, or 
 made permanent.
 (c) Travel and Transportation Allowance.--
 (1) Entitlement.--Not later than 90 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall 
 prescribe regulations and guidance that entitle a member of the 
 Armed Forces, assigned to a permanent duty station in Alaska, 
 to a one-time allowance for air travel for the member and 
 dependents of such member.
 (2) Amounts.--If the air travel is to the permanent 
 residence of the member, the amount of the allowance shall 
 equal the total costs of such air travel. If such air travel is 
 to another destination within the United States, amount of the 
 allowance shall be equal to the lesser of the following:
 (A) The rate for such air travel under the City 
 Pair Program of the General Services Administration (or 
 successor program) in effect at the time of such air 
 travel.
 (B) The actual costs of such air travel.
 (3) Timing.--Air travel reimbursed under such regulation 
 may not commence later than 30 months after the member is 
 assigned to a permanent duty station in Alaska.
 (4) Additional authorization.--The Secretary concerned may 
 authorize an additional allowance for a member who has used the 
 allowance to which such member is entitled under this 
 subsection.

SEC. 614. AUTHORIZATION OF INCENTIVE PAY TO A MEMBER OF THE ARMED 
 FORCES WHOSE DISCLOSURE OF FRAUD, WASTE, OR MISMANAGEMENT 
 RESULTS IN COST SAVINGS TO THE MILITARY DEPARTMENT 
 CONCERNED.

 (a) Authority.--Subchapter II of chapter 5 of title 37, United 
States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section:
``Sec. 358. Incentive pay for cost savings disclosures
 ``(a) Authority.--The Secretary concerned may pay an incentive pay 
to a member of the Armed Forces whose disclosure of fraud, waste, or 
mismanagement to a covered official, results in cost savings for the 
military department concerned. The amount of an award under this 
section may not exceed the lesser of--
 ``(1) $10,000; or
 ``(2) an amount equal to 1 percent of the cost savings that 
 the covered official determines to be the total savings 
 attributable to such disclosure.
 ``(b) Calculation.--For purposes of subsection (a)(2), the covered 
official may take into account cost savings projected for subsequent 
fiscal years that will be attributable to such disclosure.
 ``(c) Covered Official Defined.--In this section, the term `covered 
official' includes the following:
 ``(1) The Secretary concerned.
 ``(2) The Inspector General concerned.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 
357 the following:

``358. Incentive pay for cost savings disclosures.''.

SEC. 615. INFLATION BONUS PAY.

 (a) Bonus Pay.--Beginning on January 1, 2023, the Secretary 
concerned shall pay a bonus to each eligible member under the 
jurisdiction of such Secretary concerned.
 (b) Payment.--Bonus pay under this section shall be paid to an 
eligible member on a monthly basis.
 (c) Amount of Pay.--Each bonus payment under this section shall be 
in an amount determined by the Secretary concerned, based on prevailing 
economic conditions that adversely affect members, but in no case shall 
be less than 2.4 percent of the rate--
 (1) in effect on January 1, 2023; and
 (2) of, for an eligible member--
 (A) pay under section 204 of title 37, United 
 States Code; or
 (B) compensation under section 206 of title 37, 
 United States Code.
 (d) Relationship to Other Pay and Allowances.--Bonus pay paid to an 
eligible member under this section is in addition to any other pay and 
allowances to which the eligible member is entitled.
 (e) Termination.--No bonus may be paid under this section after 
December 31, 2023.
 (f) Eligible Member Defined.--In this section, the term ``eligible 
member'' means a member of the uniformed services--
 (1) who is entitled to pay or compensation described in 
 subsection (c)(2); and
 (2) whose basic pay for 2023 is less than $45,000.

SEC. 616. ESTABLISHING COMPLEX OVERHAUL PAY.

 (a) Establishment.--Not later than six months after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall prescribe 
regulations under section 352 of title 37, United States Code, for the 
payment of special monthly pay (to be known as ``complex overhaul 
pay'') to a member of the Armed Forces assigned to a naval vessel 
undergoing nuclear refueling or defueling and any concurrent complex 
overhaul.
 (b) Amount of Pay.--Complex overhaul pay shall equal $200 per 
month.
 (c) Relationship to Other Pay or Allowances.--Complex overhaul pay 
is in addition to any other pay or allowance to which a member is 
entitled.

SEC. 617. AIR FORCE RATED OFFICER RETENTION DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.

 (a) Program Requirement.--The Secretary shall establish and carry 
out within the Department of the Air Force a demonstration program to 
assess and improve retention on active duty in the Air Force of rated 
officers described in subsection (b).
 (b) Rated Officers Described.--Rated officers described in this 
subsection are rated officers serving on active duty in the Air Force, 
excluding rated officers with a reserve appointment in the Air National 
Guard or Air Force Reserve--
 (1) whose continued service on active duty would be in the 
 best interest of the Department of the Air Force, as determined 
 by the Secretary; and
 (2) who have not more than three years and not less than 
 one year remaining on an active duty service obligation under 
 section 653 of title 10, United States Code.
 (c) Written Agreement.--
 (1) In general.--Under the demonstration program required 
 under subsection (a), the Secretary shall offer retention 
 incentives under subsection (d) to a rated officer described in 
 subsection (b) who executes a written agreement to remain on 
 active duty in a regular component of the Air Force for not 
 less than four years after the completion of the active duty 
 service obligation of the officer under section 653 of title 
 10, United States Code.
 (2) Exception.--If the Secretary of the Air Force 
 determines that an assignment previously guaranteed under 
 subsection (d)(1) to a rated officer described in subsection 
 (b) cannot be fulfilled, the agreement of the officer under 
 paragraph (1) to remain on active duty shall expire not later 
 than one year after that determination.
 (d) Retention Incentives.--
 (1) Guarantee of future assignment location.--Under the 
 demonstration program required under subsection (a), the 
 Secretary may offer to a rated officer described in subsection 
 (b) a guarantee of future assignment locations based on the 
 preference of the officer.
 (2) Aviation bonus.--Under the demonstration program 
 required under subsection (a), notwithstanding section 334(c) 
 of title 37, United States Code, the Secretary may pay to a 
 rated officer described in subsection (b) an aviation bonus not 
 to exceed an average annual amount of $50,000 (subject to 
 paragraph (3)(B)).
 (3) Combination of incentives.--The Secretary may offer to 
 a rated officer described in subsection (b) a combination of 
 incentives under paragraphs (1) and (2).
 (4) Variations; limitations.--The Secretary may vary or 
 limit the total number of available contracts and the 
 combination of incentives within such contracts to target 
 certain Air Force specialty codes, ensure required assignments 
 locations are filled, and readiness is not negatively affected. 
 The Secretary shall determine the criteria for such variations 
 or limitations and include such criteria in the annual briefing 
 under subsection (e).
 (e) Annual Briefing.--Not later than December 31, 2023, and 
annually thereafter until the termination of the demonstration program 
required under subsection (a), the Secretary shall provide to the 
Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and the House of 
Representatives a briefing describing the use of such demonstration 
program and its effects on the retention on active duty in the Air 
Force of rated officers described in subsection (b).
 (f) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Rated officer.--The term ``rated officer'' means an 
 officer specified in section 9253 of title 10, United States 
 Code.
 (2) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of the Air Force.
 (g) Termination.--This section shall terminate on December 31, 
2028.

 Subtitle C--Family and Survivor Benefits

SEC. 621. EXPANDED ELIGIBILITY FOR BEREAVEMENT LEAVE FOR MEMBERS OF THE 
 ARMED FORCES.

 (a) Expansion.--Section 701(m) of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended in paragraph (3) by striking subparagraphs (A) and (B) and 
inserting the following:
 ``(A) a spouse;
 ``(B) a son or daughter; or
 ``(C) a parent.
 ``(4) In this section, the term `son or daughter' means--
 ``(A) a biological, adopted, step, or foster son or 
 daughter of the individual;
 ``(B) a person who is a legal ward of the member, or was a 
 legal ward of the individual when the person was a minor or 
 otherwise required a legal guardian; or
 ``(C) a person for whom the member stands in loco parentis 
 or stood in loco parentis when the person was a minor or 
 otherwise required the individual to stand in loco parentis.
 ``(5) In this section, the term `parent' means--
 ``(A) a biological, adoptive, step, or foster parent of the 
 individual, or a person who was a foster parent of the 
 individual when the individual was a minor;
 ``(B) a legal guardian of the individual, or person who was 
 a legal guardian of the individual when the individual was a 
 minor or otherwise required a legal guardian; or
 ``(C) a person who stands in loco parentis to the member or 
 stood in loco parentis when the individual was a minor or 
 otherwise required a person to stand in loco parentis.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
take effect on the latter of July 3, 2022, and the date of the 
enactment of this Act.

SEC. 622. CLAIMS RELATING TO THE RETURN OF PERSONAL EFFECTS OF A 
 DECEASED MEMBER OF THE ARMED FORCES.

 Section 1482(a) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(11)(A) Delivery of personal effects of a decedent to the 
 next of kin or other appropriate person.
 ``(B) If the Secretary concerned enters into an agreement 
 with an entity to carry out subparagraph (A), the Secretary 
 concerned shall pursue a claim against such entity that arises 
 from the failure of such entity to substantially perform such 
 subparagraph.
 ``(C) If an entity described in subparagraph (B) fails to 
 substantially perform subparagraph (A) by damaging, losing, or 
 destroying the personal effects of a decedent, the Secretary 
 concerned shall reimburse the person designated under 
 subsection (c) the greater of $1,000 or the fair market value 
 of such damage, loss, or destruction. The Secretary concerned 
 may request from, the person designated under subsection (c), 
 proof of fair market value and ownership of the personal 
 effects.''.

SEC. 623. EXPANSION OF AUTHORIZED ASSISTANCE FOR PROVIDERS OF CHILD 
 CARE SERVICES TO MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES.

 (a) Expansion.--Section 1798 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``financial assistance'' each place it 
 appears and inserting ``covered assistance''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(d) Covered Assistance Defined.--In this section, the term 
`covered assistance' includes--
 ``(1) financial assistance; and
 ``(2) free or reduced-cost child care services furnished by 
 the Secretary.''.
 (b) Techncial and Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section heading.--The heading of such section is 
 amended by striking ``financial''.
 (2) Table of sections.--The table of sections at the 
 beginning of subchapter II of chapter 88 of such title is 
 amended by striking the item relating to section 1798 and 
 inserting the following:

``1798. Child care services and youth program services for dependents: 
 assistance for providers.''.

SEC. 624. SURVIVOR BENEFIT PLAN OPEN ENROLLMENT PERIOD.

 (a) Persons Not Currently Participating in Survivor Benefit Plan.--
 (1) Election of sbp coverage.--An eligible retired or 
 former member may elect to participate in the Survivor Benefit 
 Plan during the open enrollment period specified in subsection 
 (d).
 (2) Eligible retired or former member.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), an eligible retired or former member is a 
 member or former member of the uniformed services who, on the 
 day before the first day of the open enrollment period, 
 discontinued participation in the Survivor Benefit Plan under 
 section 1452(g) of title 10, United States Code, and--
 (A) is entitled to retired pay; or
 (B) would be entitled to retired pay under chapter 
 of title 10, United States Code (or chapter 67 of such 
 title as in effect before October 5, 1994), but for the 
 fact that such member or former member is under 60 
 years of age.
 (3) Status under sbp of persons making elections.--
 (A) Standard annuity.--A person making an election 
 under subparagraph (A) by reason of eligibility under 
 subparagraph (B)(i) shall be treated for all purposes 
 as providing a standard annuity under the Survivor 
 Benefit Plan.
 (B) Reserve-component annuity.--A person making an 
 election under subparagraph (A) by reason of 
 eligibility under subparagraph (B)(ii) shall be treated 
 for all purposes as providing a reserve-component 
 annuity under the Survivor Benefit Plan.
 (b) Manner of Making Elections.--
 (1) In general.--An election under this subsection must be 
 made in writing, signed by the person making the election, and 
 received by the Secretary concerned before the end of the open 
 enrollment period. Except as provided in subparagraph (B), any 
 such election shall be made subject to the same conditions, and 
 with the same opportunities for designation of beneficiaries 
 and specification of base amount, that apply under the Survivor 
 Benefit Plan. A person making an election under paragraph (1) 
 to provide a reserve-component annuity shall make a designation 
 described in section 1448(e) of title 10, United States Code.
 (2) Election must be voluntary.--An election under this 
 subsection is not effective unless the person making the 
 election declares the election to be voluntary. An election to 
 participate in the Survivor Benefit Plan under this subsection 
 may not be required by any court. An election to participate or 
 not to participate in the Survivor Benefit Plan is not subject 
 to the concurrence of a spouse or former spouse of the person.
 (c) Effective Date for Elections.--Any such election shall be 
effective as of the first day of the first calendar month following the 
month in which the election is received by the Secretary concerned.
 (d) Open Enrollment Period Defined.--The open enrollment period is 
the period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act and 
ending on January 1, 2024.
 (e) Applicability of Certain Provisions of Law.--The provisions of 
sections 1449, 1453, and 1454 of title 10, United States Code, are 
applicable to a person making an election, and to an election, under 
this subsection in the same manner as if the election were made under 
the Survivor Benefit Plan.
 (f) Premiums for Open Enrollment Election.--
 (1) Premiums to be charged.--The Secretary of Defense shall 
 prescribe in regulations premiums which a person electing under 
 this subsection shall be required to pay for participating in 
 the Survivor Benefit Plan pursuant to the election. The total 
 amount of the premiums to be paid by a person under the 
 regulations shall be equal to the sum of--
 (A) the total amount by which the retired pay of 
 the person would have been reduced before the effective 
 date of the election if the person had elected to 
 participate in the Survivor Benefit Plan (for the same 
 base amount specified in the election) at the first 
 opportunity that was afforded the member to participate 
 under chapter 73 of title 10, United States Code;
 (B) interest on the amounts by which the retired 
 pay of the person would have been so reduced, computed 
 from the dates on which the retired pay would have been 
 so reduced at such rate or rates and according to such 
 methodology as the Secretary of Defense determines 
 reasonable; and
 (C) any additional amount that the Secretary 
 determines necessary to protect the actuarial soundness 
 of the Department of Defense Military Retirement Fund 
 against any increased risk for the fund that is 
 associated with the election.
 (2) Premiums to be credited to retirement fund.--Premiums 
 paid under the regulations shall be credited to the Department 
 of Defense Military Retirement Fund.
 (g) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (1) The term ``Survivor Benefit Plan'' means the program 
 established under subchapter II of chapter 73 of title 10, 
 United States Code.
 (2) The term ``retired pay'' includes retainer pay paid 
 under section 8330 of title 10, United States Code.
 (3) The terms ``uniformed services'' and ``Secretary 
 concerned'' have the meanings given those terms in section 101 
 of title 37, United States Code.
 (4) The term ``Department of Defense Military Retirement 
 Fund'' means the Department of Defense Military Retirement Fund 
 established under section 1461(a) of title 10, United States 
 Code.

SEC. 625. STUDY AND REPORT ON MILITARY INSTALLATIONS WITH LIMITED CHILD 
 CARE.

 (a) Study.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense shall conduct a 
 study regarding child care at military installations of the 
 covered Armed Forces--
 (A) that are not served by a military child 
 development center; or
 (B) where the military child development center has 
 few available spots.
 (2) Elements.--The study shall identify the following with 
 regards to each military installation described in paragraph 
 (1):
 (A) The current and maximum possible enrollment at 
 the military child development center (if one exists).
 (B) Plans of the Secretary to expand an existing, 
 or construct a new, military child development center.
 (C) The resulting capacity of each military child 
 development center described in subparagraph (B).
 (D) The median cost of services at accredited child 
 care facilities located near such military installation 
 compared to the amount of assistance provided by the 
 Secretary of the military department concerned to 
 members for child care services.
 (E) The unique needs or challenges facing the 
 population of such military installation that may 
 require additional tailored resources, including--
 (i) the needs of non-English speaking 
 members of that population; and
 (ii) the needs of English as a second 
 language members of that population.
 (b) Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the congressional 
defense committees a report containing the results of the study 
conducted under this section, including any policy recommendations of 
the Secretary to address the rising cost of child care near military 
installations and the rates of child care fee assistance provided to 
members of the covered Armed Forces.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered Armed Force'' means the following:
 (A) The Army.
 (B) The Navy.
 (C) The Marine Corps.
 (D) The Air Force.
 (E) The Space Force.
 (2) The term ``military child development center'' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 1800 of title 10, United 
 States Code.

SEC. 626. HUNGER AMONG MILITARY FAMILIES: DATA COLLECTION; TRAINING; 
 REPORT.

 (a) Data Collection.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and 
Readiness, acting through the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Military 
Community and Family Policy, in coordination with the Under Secretary 
for Food, Nutrition, and Consumer Services of the Department of 
Agriculture, shall--
 (1) develop a survey, in collaboration with the Department 
 of Agriculture, to determine how many members of the Armed 
 Forces serving on active duty, and dependents of such members, 
 are food insecure;
 (2) issue the survey to such members and dependents;
 (3) collect data from the survey on the use, by such 
 members and dependents, of Federal nutrition assistance 
 programs, including the supplemental nutrition assistance 
 program under the Food and Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2011 
 et seq.), the special supplemental nutrition program for women, 
 infants, and children under section 17 of the Child Nutrition 
 Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786), the school lunch program under 
 the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 
 1751 et seq.), and the school breakfast program under section 4 
 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1773); and
 (4) collect data related to the number of such members and 
 dependents who--
 (A) are eligible for the basic needs allowance 
 under section 402b of title 37, United States Code; and
 (B) receive such basic needs allowance;
 (5) develop and carry out a plan to train and designate an 
 individual who will assist members at military installations on 
 how and where to refer such members and their dependents for 
 participation in Federal nutrition assistance programs 
 described in paragraph (3); and
 (6) coordinate Department of Defense efforts to address 
 food insecurity and nutrition.
 (b) Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Under Secretary of 
Defense for Personnel & Readiness shall submit to the congressional 
defense committees, the Committees on Agriculture and Education and 
Labor of the House of Representatives, and the Committee on 
Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate a report including 
the following:
 (1) The number of members of the Armed Forces serving on 
 active duty and their dependents who are food insecure.
 (2) The number of such members and their dependents who use 
 the Federal nutrition assistance programs described in 
 subsection (a)(3).
 (3) The number of such members and their dependents 
 described in subsection (a)(3).
 (4) The status of implementation of the plan under 
 subsection (a)(5).

 Subtitle D--Defense Resale Matters

SEC. 631. PROHIBITION ON SALE OF CHINESE GOODS IN COMMISSARY STORES AND 
 MILITARY EXCHANGES.

 The Secretary of Defense shall prohibit the sale, at a commissary 
store or military exchange, of goods--
 (1) manufactured in China;
 (2) assembled in China;
 (3) imported into the United States from China; or
 (4) containing materials from the Xinjiang Uyghur 
 Autonomous Region of the People's Republic of China.

 Subtitle E--Miscellaneous Rights, Benefits, and Reports

SEC. 641. TRANSITIONAL COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS FOR THE FORMER SPOUSE 
 OF A MEMBER OF THE ARMED FORCES WHO ALLEGEDLY COMMITTED A 
 DEPENDENT-ABUSE OFFENSE DURING MARRIAGE.

 (a) In General.--Section 1059 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) in the heading--
 (A) by striking ``separated for'' and inserting 
 ``who commit''; and
 (B) by inserting ``; health care'' after ``exchange 
 benefits'';
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in the heading, by striking ``Punitive and 
 Other Adverse Actions Covered'' and inserting ``Covered 
 Members'';
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``offense.'' and 
 inserting ``offense; or''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(3) who is not described in paragraph (1) or (2) and 
 whose former spouse alleges that the member committed a 
 dependent-abuse offense--
 ``(A) during the marriage to the former spouse;
 ``(B) for which the applicable statute of 
 limitations has not lapsed; and
 ``(C) that an incident determination committee 
 determines meets the criteria for abuse.'';
 (3) in subsection (e)(1)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A)(ii), by striking ``; and'' 
 and inserting a semicolon;
 (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(C) in the case of a member described in subsection 
 (b)(3), shall commence upon the date of the final decree of 
 divorce, dissolution, or annulment of that member from the 
 former spouse described in such subsection.''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(n) Health Care for Certain Former Spouses.--The Secretary 
concerned shall treat a former spouse described in subsection (b)(3) as 
an abused dependent described in section 1076(e) of this title.''.
 (b) Technical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
chapter 53 of such title is amended by striking the item relating to 
section 1059 and inserting the following:

``1059. Dependents of members who commit dependent abuse: transitional 
 compensation; commissary and exchange 
 benefits; health care.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this Act shall apply to 
a former spouse described in subsection (b)(3) of such section 1059, as 
added by subsection (a)(2) of this section, whose final decree of 
divorce, dissolution, or annulment described in subsection (e)(1)(C) of 
such section 1059, as added by subsection (a)(3) of this section, is 
issued on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 642. AUTHORIZATION OF PERMISSIVE TEMPORARY DUTY FOR WELLNESS.

 In order to reduce the rate of suicides in the Armed Forces, the 
Secretary of each military department may prescribe regulations that 
authorize a member of an Armed Force under the jurisdiction of such 
Secretary to take not more than two weeks of permissive temporary duty 
each year to attend a seminar, retreat, workshop, or outdoor 
recreational therapy event--
 (1) hosted by a non-profit organization; and
 (2) that focuses on psychological, physical, spiritual, or 
 social wellness.

SEC. 643. STUDY ON BASIC PAY.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense shall seek to enter into 
an agreement with a nonprofit entity or a federally funded research and 
development center to conduct research and analysis on the value of 
basic pay for members of the Armed Forces. The Secretary may include 
such research and analysis in the next quadrennial review of military 
compensation.
 (b) Elements.--The research and analysis conducted under subsection 
(a) shall include the following:
 (1) An assessment of the model used to determine the basic 
 pay in the current basic pay tables, including--
 (A) an analysis of whether to update the current 
 model to meet the needs of the 2023 employment market;
 (B) a historical understanding of when the current 
 model was established and how frequently it has been 
 during the last 10 years;
 (C) an understanding of the assumptions on which 
 the model is based and how such assumptions are 
 validated;
 (D) an analysis of time-in-grade requirements and 
 how they may affect retention and promotion; and
 (E) an assessment of how recruiting and retention 
 information is used to adjust the model.
 (2) An assessment of whether to modify current basic pay 
 tables to consider higher rates of pay for specialties the 
 Secretary determines are in critical need of personnel.
 (3) An analysis of--
 (A) how basic pay has compared with civilian pay 
 since the 70th percentile benchmark for basic pay was 
 established; and
 (B) whether to change the 70th percentile 
 benchmark.
 (4) An assessment of whether--
 (A) to adjust the annual increase in basic pay, 
 currently guided by changes in the Employment Cost 
 Index as a measure of the growth in private-sector 
 employment costs; or
 (B) to use a different index, such as the Defense 
 Employment Cost Index.
 (5) Legislative and policy recommendations regarding basic 
 pay table based on analyses and assessments under paragraphs 
 (1) through (4).
 (c) Briefings and Progress Report.--
 (1) Interim briefing.--Not later than April 1, 2023, the 
 Secretary shall provide to the appropriate congressional 
 committees an interim briefing on the elements described in 
 subsection (b).
 (2) Progress report.--Not later than one year after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit 
 to the appropriate congressional committees a progress report 
 on the study under this section.
 (3) Final briefing.--Not later than two years after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit 
 to the appropriate congressional committees a final briefing on 
 the study under this section.
 (d) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the following:
 (1) The Committee on Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (2) The Committee on Armed Services of the Senate.
 (3) The Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of 
 the House of Representatives.
 (4) The Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation 
 of the Senate.

SEC. 644. REPORT ON ACCURACY OF BASIC ALLOWANCE FOR HOUSING.

 (a) Report; Elements.--Not later than one year after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in consultation 
with the Secretary of the department in which the Coast Guard is 
operating, shall prepare and submit to the appropriate congressional 
committees a report on BAH. Such report shall contain the following 
elements:
 (1) The evaluation of the Secretary--
 (A) of the efficiency and accuracy of the current 
 system used to calculate BAH;
 (B) the appropriateness of using mean and median 
 housing costs in such calculation;
 (C) of existing MHAs, in relation to choices in, 
 and availability of, housing to servicemembers;
 (D) of the suitability of the six standard housing 
 profiles in relation to the average family sizes of 
 servicemembers, disaggregated by uniformed service, 
 rank, and MHA;
 (E) of the flexibility of BAH to respond to changes 
 in real estate markets; and
 (F) of residential real estate processes to 
 determine rental rates.
 (2) The recommendation of the Secretary--
 (A) regarding the feasibility of including 
 information, furnished by Federal entities, regarding 
 school districts, in calculating BAH;
 (B) whether to calculate BAH more frequently, 
 including in response to a sudden change in the housing 
 market;
 (C) whether to enter into an agreement with a 
 covered entity, to compile data and develop an 
 enterprise grade, objective, data-driven algorithm to 
 calculate BAH;
 (D) whether to publish the methods used by the 
 Secretary to calculate BAH on a publicly accessible 
 website of the Department of Defense; and
 (E) whether BAH calculations appropriately account 
 for increased housing costs associated with Coast Guard 
 facilities.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means 
 the following:
 (A) The Committee on Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (B) The Committee on Armed Services of the Senate.
 (C) The Committee on Transportation and 
 Infrastructure of the House of Representatives.
 (D) The Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate.
 (2) The term ``BAH'' means the basic allowance for housing 
 for members of the uniformed services under section 403 of 
 title 37, United States Code.
 (3) The term ``covered entity'' means a nationally 
 recognized entity in the field of commercial real estate that 
 has data on local rental rates in real estate markets across 
 the United States.
 (4) The term ``MHA'' means military housing area.
 (5) The term ``servicemember'' has the meaning given such 
 term in section 101 of the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act (50 
 U.S.C. 3911).

SEC. 645. STUDY AND REPORT ON BARRIERS TO HOME OWNERSHIP FOR MEMBERS OF 
 THE ARMED FORCES.

 (a) In General.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall seek to enter 
into an agreement with a federally funded research and development 
center or non-profit entity to conduct a study on the barriers to home 
ownership for members of the Armed Forces. At the conclusion of such 
study, the Secretary shall submit, to the appropriate congressional 
committees, a report containing the following elements:
 (1) Potential barriers to such home ownership, including 
 down payments, concerns about home maintenance, and challenges 
 in selling a home.
 (2) The percentage of members who use the basic allowance 
 for housing to pay for a mortgage, disaggregated by Armed 
 Force, rank, and military housing area.
 (3) Any identified differences in home ownership rates 
 among members correlated with race or gender.
 (4) What percentage of members own a home before separating 
 from the Armed Forces.
 (b) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the following:
 (1) The Committee on Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (2) The Committee on Armed Services of the Senate.
 (3) The Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of 
 the House of Representatives.
 (4) The Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation 
 of the Senate.

SEC. 646. PLAN FOR REIMBURSEMENT OF CERTAIN EXPENSES OF CERTAIN MEMBERS 
 AND VETERANS RELATED TO AFGHANISTAN EVACUATION.

 (a) Plan.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the appropriate 
congressional committees a plan (in this section referred to as the 
``Plan'') to reimburse members of the Armed Forces serving on active 
duty and veterans who expended personal funds in support of efforts to 
evacuate, from Afghanistan, Afghan nationals who previously supported 
military or reconstruction missions of the United States in 
Afghanistan.
 (b) Consultation.--In developing the plan, the Secretary shall 
consult with the following:
 (1) The Secretary of State.
 (2) The Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
 (3) Non-governmental organizations and veterans service 
 organizations with expertise in supporting the evacuation of 
 Afghan nationals from Afghanistan.
 (c) Elements.--The Plan shall include the following elements:
 (1) Eligibility requirements for members of the Armed 
 Forces serving on active duty and veterans to file a 
 reimbursement claim under the Plan.
 (2) The criteria for reimbursement, including the types of 
 reimbursable claims and maximum reimbursement limit.
 (3) The process for filing a reimbursement claim.
 (4) The supporting documentation required to file a 
 reimbursement claim.
 (5) An estimate of the costs that would be associated with 
 implementing the Plan.
 (d) Public Availability.--Not later than one year after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall of Defense post the plan 
on a publicly available website of the Department of Defense.
 (e) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means:
 (1) With respect to the House of Representatives:
 (A) The Committee on Oversight and Reform.
 (B) The Committee on Armed Services.
 (2) With respect to the Senate:
 (A) The Committee on Homeland Security and 
 Government Affairs.
 (B) The Committee on Armed Services.

SEC. 647. EXPANSION OF THE SPACE-AVAILABLE TRAVEL PROGRAM TO ALLOW 
 CERTAIN DISABLED VETERANS TO TRAVEL WITH A CAREGIVER OR 
 DEPENDENT ON CERTAIN AIRCRAFT.

 (a) Exception to Limitation on Use of Travel Program Funds.--
Section 2641b(b) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding 
at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(3) The limitation in paragraph (2) shall not apply to the use of 
funds to purchase or design new equipment to carry out paragraphs (4) 
and (5) of subsection (c).''.
 (b) Certain Caregiver or Dependent Eligibility for Travel 
Program.--Section 2641b(c) of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (5) and (6) as paragraphs 
 (6) and (7), respectively;
 (2) in paragraph (6) (as redesignated by paragraph (1)), by 
 striking ``paragraphs (1) through (3)'' and inserting 
 ``paragraphs (1) through (4)''; and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (4) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(5) Subject to subsection (f) and under conditions and 
 circumstances as the Secretary shall specify in regulations 
 under subsection (a), a caregiver or family caregiver (as such 
 terms are defined in section 1720G of title 38) of a veteran 
 with a permanent service-connected disability rated as 
 total.''.
 (c) Limitation on Priority in Travel Program.--Section 2641b(f) of 
title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``a veteran eligible for 
 travel pursuant to subsection (c)(4)'' and inserting ``an 
 individual eligible for travel pursuant to paragraph (4) or (5) 
 of subsection (c)''; and
 (2) in paragraphs (2) and (3), by striking ``The authority 
 in subsection (c)(4)'' each place it appears and inserting 
 ``The authority in paragraph (4) or (5) of subsection (c)''.

 Subtitle F--Disability and Retired Pay

SEC. 651. ELIMINATION OF CAP ON ADDITIONAL RETIRED PAY FOR 
 EXTRAORDINARY HEROISM FOR MEMBERS OF THE ARMY AND AIR 
 FORCE WHO SERVED DURING THE VIETNAM ERA.

 Title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in section 1402(f)(2), by striking ``The amount'' and 
 inserting ``Except in the case of a member who served during 
 the Vietnam Era (as that term is defined in section 12731 of 
 this title), the amount'';
 (2) in section 7361(a)(2), by inserting ``(except in the 
 case of a member who served during the Vietnam Era, as that 
 term is defined in section 12731 of this title)'' after 
 ``based''; and
 (3) in section 9361(a)(2), by inserting ``(except in the 
 case of a member who served during the Vietnam Era, as that 
 term is defined in section 12731 of this title)'' after 
 ``based''.

 TITLE VII--HEALTH CARE PROVISIONS

 Subtitle A--TRICARE and Other Health Care Benefits

SEC. 701. CLARIFICATION OF COVERAGE OF ARTIFICIAL REPRODUCTIVE SERVICES 
 FOR CERTAIN TRICARE BENEFICIARIES.

 Section 1074(c)(4) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
adding at the end the following new subparagraphs:
 ``(C) In providing for the coverage under this subsection of 
artificial reproductive services to any member of a covered armed force 
who incurs a serious injury or illness on active duty as specified in 
subparagraph (A), the Secretary of Defense shall ensure that the 
coverage of such services, including gamete donation and surrogacy 
services, is provided without regard to whether the member is married 
to a spouse of the same gender, married to a spouse of the opposite 
gender, or unmarried.
 ``(D) In this paragraph, the term `covered armed force' means the 
following:
 ``(i) The Army.
 ``(ii) The Navy.
 ``(iii) The Marine Corps.
 ``(iv) The Air Force.
 ``(v) The Space Force.''.

SEC. 702. CLARIFICATION OF COVERAGE OF CERTAIN AREOLAR NIPPLE TATTOOING 
 PROCEDURES UNDER TRICARE PROGRAM.

 (a) Coverage Under TRICARE Program.--Section 1079(a)(11)(A) of 
title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``(including two-
dimensional and three-dimensional areolar nipple tattooing)'' after 
``breast reconstructive surgery''.
 (b) Applicability.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
apply with respect to breast reconstructive surgeries provided on or 
after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 703. TRICARE DENTAL FOR SELECTED RESERVE.

 Section 1076a of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in the header, by striking ``selected 
 reserve and''; and
 (ii) by striking ``for members of the 
 Selected Reserve of the Ready Reserve and'';
 (B) in paragraph (2), in the header, by inserting 
 ``individual ready'' after ``other''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(5) Plan for selected reserve.--A dental benefits plan 
 for members of the Selected Reserve of the Ready Reserve.'';
 (2) in subsection (d)--
 (A) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph 
 (4); and
 (B) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(3) No premium plans.--(A) The dental insurance plan 
 established under subsection (a)(5) is a no premium plan.
 ``(B) Members enrolled in a no premium plan may not be 
 charged a premium for benefits provided under the plan.'';
 (3) in subsection (e)(2)(A), by striking ``a member of the 
 Selected Reserve of the Ready Reserve or'';
 (4) by redesignating subsections (f) through (k) as 
 subsections (g) through (l), respectively;
 (5) by inserting after subsection (e) the following new 
 subsection (f):
 ``(f) Copayments Under No Premium Plans.--A member who receives 
dental care under a no premium plan referred to in subsection (d)(3) 
shall pay no charge for any care described in subsection (c).''; and
 (6) in subsection (i), as redesignated by paragraph (4), by 
 striking ``subsection (k)(2)'' and inserting ``subsection 
 (l)(2)''.

SEC. 704. REPORT REQUIREMENT FOR CERTAIN CONTRACTS UNDER TRICARE 
 PROGRAM.

 (a) GAO Report Upon Award of Certain Contracts.--Chapter 55 of 
title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 
1097d the following new section (and conforming the table of sections 
at the beginning of such chapter accordingly):
``Sec. 1097e. TRICARE program: report requirement for certain contracts
 ``(a) GAO Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date on which 
the Secretary of Defense enters into a major military health care 
contract, the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to 
the congressional defense committees a report on the contract.
 ``(b) Matters.--Each report under subsection (a) shall include, 
with respect to the contract for which the report is submitted, a 
review of the process used in awarding the contract.
 ``(c) Major Military Health Care Contract Defined.--In this 
section, the term `major military health care contract' means a 
contract the Secretary determines is a managed care support contract 
for the administration of the TRICARE program (including the 
administration of medical and dental care services under such program) 
and is estimated by the Secretary to require an eventual total 
expenditure of more than $1,000,000,000.''.
 (b) Submission of Criteria to Congress.--Not later than 180 days 
after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense 
shall develop specific criteria for the determination of a contract as 
a ``major military health care contract'' pursuant to section 1097e(c) 
of title 10, United States Code, as added by subsection (a), and submit 
to the congressional defense committees a detailed list of such 
criteria.

SEC. 705. TEMPORARY REQUIREMENT FOR CONTRACEPTION COVERAGE PARITY UNDER 
 THE TRICARE PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense shall ensure that, during 
the one-year period beginning on the date that is 30 days after the 
date of the enactment of the Act, the imposition or collection of cost-
sharing for certain services is prohibited as follows:
 (1) Pharmacy benefits program.--Notwithstanding 
 subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C), of section 1074g(a)(6) of 
 title 10, United States Code, cost-sharing may not be imposed 
 or collected with respect to any eligible covered beneficiary 
 for any prescription contraceptive on the uniform formulary 
 provided through a retail pharmacy described in section 
 1074(a)(2)(E)(ii) of such title or through the national mail-
 order pharmacy program of the TRICARE Program.
 (2) TRICARE select.--Notwithstanding any provision under 
 section 1075 of title 10, United States Code, cost-sharing may 
 not be imposed or collected with respect to any beneficiary 
 under such section for a covered service that is provided by a 
 network provider under the TRICARE program.
 (3) TRICARE prime.--Notwithstanding subsections (a), (b), 
 and (c) of section 1075a of title 10, United States Code, cost-
 sharing may not be imposed or collected with respect to any 
 beneficiary under such section for a covered service that is 
 provided under TRICARE Prime.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered service'' means any method of 
 contraception approved by the Food and Drug Administration, any 
 contraceptive care (including with respect to insertion, 
 removal, and follow up), any sterilization procedure, or any 
 patient education or counseling service provided in connection 
 with any such method, care, or procedure.
 (2) The term ``eligible covered beneficiary'' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 1074g of title 10, United 
 States Code.
 (3) The terms ``TRICARE Program'' and ``TRICARE Prime'' 
 have the meaning given such terms in section 1072 of title 10, 
 United States Code.

SEC. 706. RATES OF REIMBURSEMENT FOR PROVIDERS OF APPLIED BEHAVIOR 
 ANALYSIS.

 (a) In General.--In furnishing applied behavior analysis under the 
TRICARE program to individuals described in subsection (b) during the 
period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act and ending on 
December 31, 2023, the Secretary of Defense shall ensure that the 
reimbursement rates for providers of applied behavior analysis are not 
less than the rates that were in effect on April 30, 2022.
 (b) Individuals Described.--Individuals described in this 
subsection are individuals who are covered beneficiaries by reason of 
being a member or former member of the Army, Navy, Air Force, Space 
Force, or Marine Corps, including the reserve components thereof, or a 
dependent of such a member or former member.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section, the terms ``covered 
beneficiary'' and ``TRICARE program'' have the meaning given those 
terms in section 1072 of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 707. MEDICAL TESTING AND RELATED SERVICES FOR FIREFIGHTERS OF 
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE.

 (a) Provision of Services.--During the annual periodic health 
assessment of each firefighter of the Department of Defense, or at such 
other intervals as may be indicated in this subsection, the Secretary 
shall provide to the firefighter (at no cost to the firefighter) 
appropriate medical testing and related services to detect, document 
the presence or absence of, and prevent, certain cancers. Such services 
shall meet, at a minimum, the following criteria:
 (1) Breast cancer.--With respect to the breast cancer 
 screening, if the firefighter is a female firefighter--
 (A) such services shall include the provision of a 
 mammogram to the firefighter--
 (i) on at least a biannual basis if the 
 firefighter is 40 years old to 49 years old 
 (inclusive);
 (ii) on at least an annual basis if the 
 firefighter is at least 50 years old; and
 (iii) as clinically indicated (without 
 regard to age); and
 (B) in connection with such provision, a licensed 
 radiologist shall review the most recent mammogram 
 provided to the firefighter, as compared to prior 
 mammograms so provided, and provide to the firefighter 
 the results of such review.
 (2) Colon cancer.--With respect to colon cancer screening--
 (A) if the firefighter is at least 40 years old, 
 and as otherwise clinically indicated, such services 
 shall include the communication to the firefighter of 
 the risks and benefits of stool-based blood testing;
 (B) if the firefighter is at least 45 years old, 
 and as clinically indicated (without regard to age), 
 such services shall include the provision, at regular 
 intervals, of visual examinations (such as a 
 colonoscopy, CT colonoscopy, or flexible sigmoidoscopy) 
 or stool-based blood testing; and
 (C) in connection with such provision, a licensed 
 physician shall review and provide to the firefighter 
 the results of such examination or testing, as the case 
 may be.
 (3) Prostate cancer.--With respect to prostate cancer 
 screening, if the firefighter is a male firefighter, the 
 communication to the firefighter of the risks and benefits of 
 prostate cancer screenings and the provision to the firefighter 
 of a prostate-specific antigen test--
 (A) on an annual basis, if the firefighter is at 
 least 50 years old;
 (B) on an annual basis, if the firefighter is at 
 least 40 years old and is a high-risk individual; and
 (C) as clinically indicated (without regard to 
 age).
 (4) Other cancers.--Such services shall include routine 
 screenings for any other cancer the risk or occurrence of which 
 the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
 has identified as higher among firefighters than among the 
 general public, the provision of which shall be carried out 
 during the annual periodic health assessment of the 
 firefighter.
 (b) Optional Nature.--A firefighter of the Department of Defense 
may opt out of the receipt of a medical testing or related service 
provided under subsection (a).
 (c) Use of Consensus Technical Standards.--In providing medical 
testing and related services under subsection (a), the Secretary shall 
use consensus technical standards in accordance with section 12(d) of 
the National Technology Transfer and Advancement Act of 1995 (15 U.S.C. 
272 note).
 (d) Documentation.--
 (1) In general.--In providing medical testing and related 
 services under subsection (a), the Secretary--
 (A) shall document the acceptance rates of such 
 tests offered and the rates of such tests performed;
 (B) shall document tests results, to identify 
 trends in the rates of cancer occurrences among 
 firefighters; and
 (C) may collect and maintain additional information 
 from the recipients of such tests and other services, 
 to allow for appropriate scientific analysis.
 (2) Privacy.--In analyzing any information of an individual 
 documented, collected, or maintained under paragraph (1), in 
 addition to complying with other applicable privacy laws, the 
 Secretary shall ensure the name, and any other personally 
 identifiable information, of the individual is removed from 
 such information prior to the analysis.
 (3) Sharing with centers for disease control and 
 prevention.--The Secretary may share data from any tests 
 performed under subsection (a) with the Director of the Centers 
 for Disease Control and Prevention, as appropriate, to increase 
 the knowledge and understanding of cancer occurrences among 
 firefighters.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``firefighter'' has the meaning given that 
 term in section 707 of the National Defense Authorization Act 
 for Fiscal Year 2020 (Public Law 116-92; 133 Stat. 1441; 10 
 U.S.C. 1074m note).
 (2) The term ``high-risk individual'' means an individual 
 who--
 (A) is African American;
 (B) has at least one first-degree relative who has 
 been diagnosed with prostate cancer at an early age; or
 (C) is otherwise determined by the Secretary to be 
 high-risk with respect to prostate cancer.

SEC. 708. AUDIT OF BEHAVIORAL HEALTH CARE NETWORK PROVIDERS LISTED IN 
 TRICARE DIRECTORY.

 (a) Audit Required.--The Secretary of Defense shall conduct an 
audit of the behavioral health care providers listed in the TRICARE 
directory.
 (b) Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the congressional 
defense committees a report on the findings of the audit under 
subsection (a). Such report shall include the following:
 (1) An identification of the following, disaggregated by 
 provider specialty and TRICARE region:
 (A) The number of such behavioral health care 
 providers with respect to which there are duplicate 
 listings in the TRICARE directory.
 (B) The number of such behavioral health care 
 providers that, as of the commencement of the audit, 
 were listed in the TRICARE directory as available and 
 accepting new TRICARE patients.
 (C) The number of such behavioral health care 
 providers that, as a result of the audit, the Secretary 
 determines are no longer available or accepting new 
 TRICARE patients.
 (D) The number of such behavioral health care 
 providers that were not previously listed in the 
 TRICARE directory as available and accepting new 
 TRICARE patients but that, as a result of the audit, 
 the Secretary determines are so available and 
 accepting.
 (E) The number of behavioral health care providers 
 listed in the TRICARE directory that are no longer 
 practicing.
 (F) The number of behavioral health care providers 
 that, in conducting the audit, the Secretary of Defense 
 could not reach for purposes of verifying information 
 relating to availability or status.
 (2) An identification of the number of TRICARE 
 beneficiaries in each TRICARE region, disaggregated by 
 beneficiary category.
 (3) A description of the methods by which the Secretary 
 measures the following:
 (A) The accessibility and accuracy of the TRICARE 
 directory, with respect to behavioral health care 
 providers listed therein.
 (B) The adequacy of behavioral health care 
 providers under the TRICARE program.
 (4) A description of the efforts of the Secretary to 
 recruit and retain behavioral health care providers.
 (5) Recommendations by the Secretary, based on the findings 
 of the audit, on how to improve the availability of behavioral 
 health care providers that are network providers under the 
 TRICARE program, including through the inclusion of specific 
 requirements in the next generation of TRICARE contracts.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``TRICARE directory'' means the directory of 
 network providers under the TRICARE program.
 (2) The term ``TRICARE program'' has the meaning given such 
 term in section 1072 of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 709. INDEPENDENT ANALYSIS OF QUALITY AND PATIENT SAFETY REVIEW 
 PROCESS UNDER DIRECT CARE COMPONENT OF TRICARE PROGRAM.

 (a) Agreement.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense shall seek to 
 enter into an agreement with the National Academies of 
 Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (in this section referred 
 to as the ``National Academies'') for the National Academies to 
 carry out the activities described in subsections (b) and (c).
 (2) Timing.--The Secretary shall seek to enter into the 
 agreement described in paragraph (1) not later than 60 days 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Analysis by the National Academies.--
 (1) Analysis.--Under an agreement between the Secretary and 
 the National Academies entered into pursuant to subsection (a), 
 the National Academies shall conduct an analysis of the quality 
 and patient safety review process for health care provided 
 under the direct care component of the TRICARE program and 
 develop recommendations for the Secretary based on such 
 analysis.
 (2) Elements.--The analysis conducted and recommendations 
 developed under paragraph (1) shall include, with respect to 
 the direct care component, the following:
 (A) An assessment of the procedures under such 
 component regarding credentialing and privileging for 
 health care providers (and an assessment of compliance 
 with such procedures).
 (B) An assessment of the processes under such 
 component for quality assurance, standard of care, and 
 incident review (and an assessment of compliance with 
 such processes).
 (C) An assessment of the accountability processes 
 under such component for health care providers who are 
 found to have not met a required standard of care.
 (3) Information access and privacy.--
 (A) Access to records.--Notwithstanding section 
 1102 of title 10, United States Code, the Secretary 
 shall provide the National Academies with access to 
 such records of the Department of Defense as the 
 Secretary may determine necessary for purposes of the 
 National Academies conducting the analysis and 
 developing the recommendations under paragraph (1).
 (B) Privacy of information.--In conducting the 
 analysis and developing the recommendations under 
 paragraph (1), the National Academies--
 (i) shall maintain any personally 
 identifiable information in records accessed by 
 the National Academies pursuant to subparagraph 
 (A) in accordance with applicable laws, 
 protections, and best practices regarding the 
 privacy of information; and
 (ii) may not permit access to such 
 information by any individual or entity not 
 engaged in conducting such analysis or 
 developing such recommendations.
 (c) Report.--Under an agreement entered into between the Secretary 
and the National Academies under subsection (a), the National 
Academies, not later than one year after the date of the execution of 
the agreement, shall--
 (1) submit to the congressional defense committees and 
 (with respect to any findings concerning the Coast Guard when 
 it is not operating as a service in the Department of the Navy) 
 the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House 
 of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate a report on the findings of the 
 National Academies with respect to the analysis conducted and 
 recommendations developed under subsection (b); and
 (2) make such report available on a public website in 
 unclassified form.
 (d) TRICARE Program Defined.--In this section, the term ``TRICARE 
program'' has the meaning given such term in section 1072 of title 10, 
United States Code.

 Subtitle B--Health Care Administration

SEC. 721. CONGRESSIONAL NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENT TO MODIFY SCOPE OF 
 SERVICES PROVIDED AT MILITARY MEDICAL TREATMENT 
 FACILITIES.

 Section 1073c(a) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(7)(A) The Secretary of Defense may not modify the scope of 
medical care provided at a military medical treatment facility pursuant 
to paragraph (2)(C) (including by modifying the staff, types of 
services available, or beneficiary population served, at the facility), 
unless--
 ``(i) the Secretary submits to the Committees on Armed 
 Services of the House of Representatives and the Senate a 
 notification of the proposed modification in scope;
 ``(ii) a period of 180 days has elapsed following the date 
 on which the Secretary submits such notification; and
 ``(iii) if the proposed modification in scope involves the 
 termination or reduction of inpatient capabilities at a 
 military medical treatment facility located outside the United 
 States, the Secretary has provided to each member of the armed 
 forces or covered beneficiary receiving services at such 
 facility a transition plan for the continuity of health care 
 for such member or covered beneficiary and an opportunity to 
 participate in at least two public forums convened by the 
 Secretary, to discuss the transition plan and any related 
 concerns.
 ``(B) Each notification under subparagraph (A) shall contain 
information demonstrating, with respect to the military medical 
treatment facility for which the modification in scope has been 
proposed, the extent to which the commander of the military 
installation at which the facility is located has been consulted 
regarding such modification, to ensure that the proposed modification 
in scope would have no impact on the operational plan for such 
installation.''.

SEC. 722. MODIFICATION OF CERTAIN DEADLINE AND REQUIREMENT TO TRANSFER 
 RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FUNCTIONS TO DEFENSE HEALTH 
 AGENCY.

 Section 1073c of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (e)--
 (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by 
 striking ``September 30, 2022'' and inserting 
 ``September 30, 2023''; and
 (B) in paragraph (1)(B), by striking ``the Army 
 Medical Research and Materiel Command'' and inserting 
 ``such elements and functions of the Army Medical 
 Research and Materiel Command as the Secretary 
 determines appropriate'';
 (2) by redesignating subsections (g) and (h) as subsections 
 (h) and (i); and
 (3) by inserting after subsection (f) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(g) Report Requirement.--The Secretary of Defense may not take 
any action to exclude an element or function of the Army Medical 
Research and Materiel Command from organization under or transfer to 
the Defense Health Agency Research and Development pursuant to a 
determination referred to in subsection (e)(1)(B) unless--
 ``(1) the Secretary submits to the Committees on Armed 
 Services of the House of Representatives and the Senate a 
 report containing an explanation of the determination and a 
 plan for the proposed exclusion; and
 ``(2) a period of 90 days has elapsed following the date on 
 which the Secretary submits such report.''.

SEC. 723. MODIFICATION OF REQUIREMENT TO TRANSFER PUBLIC HEALTH 
 FUNCTIONS TO DEFENSE HEALTH AGENCY.

 Section 1073c(e)(2) of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by striking 
 ``A subordinate'' and inserting ``(A) A subordinate'';
 (2) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) and (B) as clauses 
 (i) and (ii);
 (3) in clause (ii), as so redesignated--
 (A) by striking ``comprised of'' and inserting 
 ``except as provided in subparagraph (B), comprised 
 of''; and
 (B) by striking ``Command'' each place it appears 
 and inserting ``Center''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(B) At the discretion of the Secretary of Defense, the 
 Secretary of a military department may retain an element or 
 function that would otherwise be organized under or transferred 
 to the Defense Health Agency Public Health pursuant to 
 subparagraph (A)(ii) if the Secretary of Defense determines 
 such element or function--
 ``(i) addresses a need that is unique to that 
 military department; and
 ``(ii) is in direct support of operating forces and 
 necessary to implement national security or defense 
 strategies.
 ``(C) The Secretary of a military department may not take 
 any action to retain an element or function pursuant to a 
 determination by the Secretary of Defense referred to in 
 subparagraph (B) unless--
 ``(i) the Secretary of Defense submits to the 
 Committees on Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives and the Senate a report containing an 
 explanation of such determination and a plan for the 
 proposed retention; and
 ``(ii) a period of 90 days has elapsed following 
 the date on which the Secretary submits such report.''.

SEC. 724. OTHER TRANSACTION AUTHORITY FOR STUDIES AND DEMONSTRATION 
 PROJECTS RELATING TO DELIVERY OF HEALTH AND MEDICAL CARE.

 Section 1092(b) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
inserting ``or transactions (other than contracts, cooperative 
agreements, and grants)'' after ``contracts''.

SEC. 725. LICENSURE REQUIREMENT FOR CERTAIN HEALTH-CARE PROFESSIONALS 
 PROVIDING SERVICES AS PART OF MISSION RELATING TO 
 EMERGENCY, HUMANITARIAN, OR REFUGEE ASSISTANCE.

 Section 1094(d)(2) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
inserting `` contractor not covered under section 1091 of this title 
who is providing medical treatment as part of a mission relating to 
emergency, humanitarian, or refugee assistance,'' after ``section 1091 
of this title,''.

SEC. 726. IMPROVEMENTS RELATING TO MEDICAL OFFICER OF THE MARINE CORPS 
 POSITION.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 806 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new section (and conforming 
the table of sections at the beginning of such chapter accordingly):
``Sec. 8048. Medical Officer of the Marine Corps
 ``(a) There is a Medical Officer of the Marine Corps who shall be 
appointed from among flag officers of the Navy.
 ``(b) The Medical Officer of the Marine Corps, while so serving, 
shall hold the grade of rear admiral (lower half).''.
 (b) Exclusion From Certain Distribution Limitations.--Section 525 
of such title is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (g) as subsection (h); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (f) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(g) A naval officer while serving as the Medical Officer of the 
Marine Corps is in addition to the number that would otherwise be 
permitted for the Navy for officers serving on active duty in the grade 
of rear admiral (lower half) under subsection (a).''.
 (c) Exclusion From Active Duty Strength Limitations Prior to 
December 31, 2022.--Section 526 of such title is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (k) as subsection (l); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (j) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(k) Exclusion of Medical Officer of Marine Corps.--The 
limitations of this section do not apply to the flag officer who is 
serving as the Medical Officer of the Marine Corps.''.
 (d) Exclusion From Active Duty Strength Limitations After December 
31, 2022.--Section 526a of such title is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsections (h) through (k) as 
 subsections (i) through (l), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (g) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(h) Exclusion of Medical Officer of Marine Corps.--The 
limitations of this section do not apply to the flag officer who is 
serving as the Medical Officer of the Marine Corps.''.

SEC. 727. AUTHORITY FOR DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE PROGRAM TO PROMOTE EARLY 
 LITERACY AMONG CERTAIN YOUNG CHILDREN AS PART OF 
 PEDIATRIC PRIMARY CARE.

 (a) Program.--Chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended by inserting after section 1109 the following new section (and 
conforming the table of sections at the beginning of such chapter 
accordingly):
``Sec. 1109A. Authority for program to promote early literacy among 
 certain young children as part of pediatric primary care
 ``(a) Authority.--The Secretary of Defense may carry out a program 
to promote early literacy among young children the caregivers of whom 
are members of the armed forces as part of the pediatric primary care 
of such children.
 ``(b) Activities.--Activities under the program under subsection 
(a) shall be evidence-informed and include the following:
 ``(1) The provision to pediatric primary care providers and 
 other appropriate personnel of the Department of training on 
 early literacy promotion.
 ``(2) The purchase and distribution of age-appropriate 
 books to covered caregivers.
 ``(3) The modification of waiting rooms in military medical 
 treatment facilities, including in specific clinics within such 
 facilities, to ensure such waiting rooms include materials that 
 reinforce language-rich interactions between young children and 
 their covered caregivers, including a full selection of 
 literature for young children.
 ``(4) The dissemination to covered caregivers of education 
 materials on pediatric early literacy.
 ``(5) Such other activities as the Secretary determines 
 appropriate.
 ``(c) Locations.--In carrying out the program under subsection (a), 
the Secretary may conduct the activities under subsection (b) at any 
military medical treatment facility.
 ``(d) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `covered caregiver' means a member of the 
 armed forces who is a caregiver of a young child.
 ``(2) The term `young child' means any child from birth to 
 the age of five years old, inclusive.''.
 (b) Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
Committees on Armed Services of the House of Representatives and the 
Senate a report on the extent to which the authority under section 
1109A(a) of title 10, United States Code, (as added by subsection (a)) 
is used, including a description of any activities carried out under 
the program so authorized.
 (c) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section, or the 
amendments made by this section, shall be construed as requiring that a 
child have more than one caregiver as a condition of receiving services 
under, or otherwise participating in, the program authorized under such 
section 1109A.

SEC. 728. ACCOUNTABILITY FOR WOUNDED WARRIORS UNDERGOING DISABILITY 
 EVALUATION.

 (a) In General.--Not later than April 1, 2023, the Secretary of 
Defense, in consultation with the Secretaries concerned, shall 
establish a policy to ensure accountability for actions taken under the 
authorities of the Defense Health Agency and the Armed Forces, 
respectively, concerning wounded, ill, and injured members of the Armed 
Forces during the integrated disability evaluation system process. Such 
policy shall include the following:
 (1) A requirement that a determination of fitness for duty 
 under chapter 61 of title 10, United States Code, of a member 
 of the Armed Forces falls under the jurisdiction of the 
 Secretary concerned.
 (2) A description of the role of the Director of the 
 Defense Health Organization in supporting the Secretaries 
 concerned in carrying out determinations of fitness for duty as 
 specified in paragraph (1).
 (3) A requirement that a medical evaluation provided under 
 the authority of the Defense Health Agency under section 1073c 
 of title 10, United States Code, shall comply with applicable 
 law and Department of Defense regulations and shall be 
 considered by the Secretary concerned in determining fitness 
 for duty under such chapter.
 (4) A description of how the Director of the Defense Health 
 Agency adheres to the medical evaluation processes of the Armed 
 Forces, including an identification of each applicable 
 regulation or policy the Director is required to adhere to.
 (5) A requirement that wounded, ill, and injured members of 
 the Armed Forces shall not be denied the protections, 
 privileges, or right to due process afforded under applicable 
 law and regulations of the Department of Defense and the Armed 
 Forces.
 (6) A description of the types of due process protections, 
 privileges, and rights afforded to members of the Armed Forces 
 pursuant to paragraph (5), including an identification of each 
 such due process protection.
 (b) Clarification of Responsibilities Regarding Medical Evaluation 
Boards.--Section 1073c of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
redesignating subsection (h) as subsection (i); and by inserting after 
subsection (g) the following new subsection (h):
 ``(h) Authorities Reserved to the Secretaries Concerned Regarding 
the Disability Evaluation System.--Notwithstanding the responsibilities 
and authorities of the Defense Health Agency with respect to the 
administration of military medical treatment facilities as set forth in 
this section, including medical evaluations of members of the armed 
forces, the Secretary concerned shall maintain personnel authority over 
and responsibility for any member of the armed forces while the member 
is being considered by a medical evaluation board. Such responsibility 
shall include the following:
 ``(1) Responsibility for administering the morale and 
 welfare of the member.
 ``(2) Responsibility for determinations of fitness for duty 
 of the member under chapter 61 of this title.''.
 (c) Briefing.--Not later than February 1, 2023, the Secretary of 
Defense shall provide to the appropriate congressional committees a 
briefing on the status of the implementation of subsections (a) and 
(b).
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the Committee on Armed Services and the 
 Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the 
 House of Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Armed Services and the 
 Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of 
 the Senate.
 (2) The term ``Secretary concerned'' has the meaning given 
 that term in section 101 of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 729. INCENTIVE PAYMENTS FOR RETENTION OF CERTAIN BEHAVIORAL HEALTH 
 PROVIDERS.

 (a) Incentive Payments for Certain Behavioral Health Providers.--
 (1) Incentive payments.--The Secretary of Defense, using 
 authorities available to the Secretary, shall increase the use 
 of incentive payments paid to individuals described in 
 paragraph (2) for the purpose of retaining such employees.
 (2) Eligible recipients.--Individuals described in this 
 paragraph are covered civilian behavioral health providers in 
 the following professions:
 (A) Clinical psychologists.
 (B) Social workers.
 (C) Counselors.
 (3) Prioritization.--In increasing the use of incentive 
 payments under paragraph (1), the Secretary of Defense shall 
 give priority for such an incentive payment to an individual 
 described in paragraph (2) who is stationed at a remote 
 installation or an installation with a higher-than-average 
 turnover of covered civilian behavioral health providers, as 
 determined by the Secretary.
 (4) Reports.--Not later than February 1 of each of calendar 
 years 2023, 2024, 2025, and 2026, the Secretary of Defense 
 shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report 
 that includes the following:
 (A) The number of covered civilian behavioral 
 health providers as of the end of the fiscal year 
 preceding the year in which the report is submitted, 
 disaggregated by the professions specified in paragraph 
 (2) and by whether the covered civilian behavioral 
 health provider is stationed at a remote installation.
 (B) Of such covered civilian behavioral health 
 providers, the number who, during such preceding fiscal 
 year, received an incentive payment referred to in 
 paragraph (1), disaggregated by the professions 
 specified in paragraph (2) and by whether the covered 
 civilian behavioral health provider is stationed at a 
 remote installation.
 (C) With respect to such covered civilian 
 behavioral health providers who so received an 
 incentive payment, the median and mean incentive 
 payment amount so received, disaggregated by the 
 professions specified in paragraph (2) and by whether 
 the covered civilian behavioral health provider is 
 stationed at a remote installations.
 (D) For the five fiscal years preceding the year in 
 which the report is submitted, the aggregate amount of 
 incentive payments referred to in paragraph (1) paid to 
 covered civilian behavioral health providers.
 (E) A summary of the actions taken by the Secretary 
 to implement the requirements of this section.
 (F) An assessment of the effectiveness of 
 increasing the use of incentive payments under 
 paragraph (1) for improved retention of covered 
 civilian behavioral health providers.
 (G) Any recommendations by the Secretary for 
 additional authorities, or modifications to authorities 
 already available to the Secretary, to further improve 
 the retention of covered civilian behavioral health 
 providers.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``behavioral health'' includes clinical 
 psychology, social work, counseling, and related fields.
 (2) The term ``civilian behavioral health provider'' means 
 a behavioral health provider who is a civilian employee of the 
 Department of Defense.
 (3) The term ``counselor'' means an individual who holds--
 (A) a master's or doctoral degree from an 
 accredited graduate program in--
 (i) marriage and family therapy; or
 (ii) clinical mental health counseling; and
 (B) a current license or certification from a State 
 that grants the individual the authority to provide 
 counseling services as an independent practitioner in 
 the respective field of the individual.
 (4) The term ``covered civilian behavioral health 
 provider'' means a civilian behavioral health provider whose 
 employment by the Secretary of Defense involves the provision 
 of behavioral health services at a military medical treatment 
 facility.
 (5) The term ``military installation'' has the meaning 
 given that term in section 2801 of title 10, United States 
 Code.
 (6) The term ``remote installation'' means a military 
 installation that the Secretary determines to be in a remote 
 location.

SEC. 730. CLARIFICATION OF LICENSE PORTABILITY FOR HEALTH CARE 
 PROVIDERS PROVIDING SERVICES UNDER RESERVE HEALTH 
 READINESS PROGRAM.

 For purposes of license portability under paragraph (1) of section 
1094(d) of title 10, United States Code, a health care provider who 
provides medical or dental services under the Reserve Health Readiness 
program of the Department of Defense (or any successor program) and 
meets the requirements specified in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of 
paragraph (2) of such section shall be considered a health-care 
professional described in such paragraph.

SEC. 731. POLICY OF DEFENSE HEALTH AGENCY ON EXPANDED RECOGNITION OF 
 BOARD CERTIFICATIONS FOR PHYSICIANS.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Director of the Defense Health Agency shall revise the policy 
of the Defense Health Agency relating to credentialing and privileging 
under the military health system, to expand the recognition of board 
certifications for physicians under such policy to a wide range of 
additional board certifications.

SEC. 732. SLEEP APNEA SCREENING.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health 
Affairs shall provide a plan to the congressional defense committees 
for a pilot program to screen for obstructive sleep apnea among persons 
going through the officer accession program.
 (b) Plan Contents.--This plan required under subsection (a) shall 
include--
 (1) how many individuals will be tested under the pilot 
 program; and
 (2) how much the pilot program would cost.

SEC. 733. DEMONSTRATION PROJECT ON INFANT AND EARLY CHILDHOOD MENTAL 
 HEALTH SERVICES FOR CHILDREN OF MEMBERS OF THE ARMED 
 FORCES.

 (a) Assessment of Availability of Services.--The Secretary of 
Defense shall conduct an assessment of the availability at military 
installations (and in the surrounding communities) of covered services 
at the Federal, State, and local level for covered children, for the 
purpose of ensuring access to such services for covered children with 
infant and early childhood mental health needs. Such assessment shall 
address, at a minimum, the following:
 (1) The availability of covered services that advance 
 social and emotional development for covered children, 
 including any relevant certification or endorsement programs 
 for professionals serving as infant and early childhood mental 
 health consultants for military child development centers.
 (2) The availability of adequate diagnostic and non-medical 
 intervention covered services for covered children.
 (3) The availability of supplemental covered services for 
 covered children, such as consultation services provided by 
 licensed professionals who are appropriately certified or 
 endorsed in infant and early childhood mental health, as 
 determined by the Secretary.
 (4) The ease of access to adequate covered educational or 
 treatment services for covered children, as appropriate, such 
 as the average duration of time spent on waiting lists prior to 
 receiving such services.
 (b) Review of Best Practices.--In developing the assessment under 
subsection (a), the Secretary of Defense shall conduct a review of best 
practices across the United States for the provision of covered 
services to covered children. Such review shall include an assessment 
of any covered services of the Federal or State government available in 
each State, with an emphasis on the availability in locations where 
members of the Armed Forces with children reside.
 (c) Demonstration Projects.--
 (1) Projects authorized.--The Secretary of Defense may 
 conduct one or more demonstration projects under this 
 subsection to test and evaluate various approaches to the 
 provision of covered services to covered children, for the 
 purposes of determining the efficacy of such approaches, 
 reducing incidents of behavioral issues among those with infant 
 and early childhood mental health needs, ensuring the early 
 identification of such needs that may require non-medical 
 intervention, and such other related purposes as may be 
 determined appropriate by the Secretary.
 (2) Participants.--The Secretary may select for 
 participation in the study--
 (A) members of the Armed Forces with covered 
 children who elect to so participate; and
 (B) military child development centers that are 
 located on or near military installations or that 
 otherwise provide services to covered children.
 (3) Personnel.--In carrying out a demonstration project 
 under this subsection, the Secretary of Defense may assign 
 personnel who hold a covered degree that the Secretary 
 determines appropriate for the provision of covered services to 
 act as consultants for the provision of such services to 
 covered children who are participants in the demonstration 
 project. Under such demonstration project, such assigned 
 personnel may--
 (A) develop and monitor promotion and prevention, 
 and non-medical intervention, plans for such 
 participants;
 (B) provide appropriate training in the provision 
 of covered services to such participants;
 (C) provide non-medical counseling services to such 
 participants, and any members of the Armed Forces who 
 are the caregivers of such participants, as 
 appropriate;
 (D) coordinate and collaborate with other relevant 
 service providers on the military installation or in 
 the surrounding community regarding covered services; 
 and
 (E) become endorsed, or work towards becoming 
 endorsed, by an organization that provides licensing or 
 professional certifications recognized by the Federal 
 or State government for infant and early childhood 
 mental health professionals.
 (4) Infant and early childhood mental health 
 consultations.--
 (A) Curriculum.--As an activity under the 
 demonstration project, the Secretary of Defense may 
 authorize the development of a comprehensive 
 professional development curriculum for use in training 
 non-medical counselors in infant and early childhood 
 mental health consultation services, so that such 
 counselors may serve as infant early childhood mental 
 health consultants for covered children who are 
 participants in the demonstration project.
 (B) Competency guidelines.--The curriculum under 
 subparagraph (A) shall be based on a set of competency 
 guidelines that are--
 (i) designed to enhance culturally 
 sensitive, relationship-focused practice within 
 the framework of infant and early childhood 
 mental health; and
 (ii) recognized by an organization 
 specified in paragraph (3)(E) for the purposes 
 of certification or endorsement as a infant and 
 early childhood mental health practitioner.
 (5) Contract authority.--
 (A) Authority.--The Secretary of Defense may enter 
 into a contract, or multiple contracts, for the conduct 
 of any demonstration project under this subsection.
 (B) Requirement for supervisory-level providers.--
 As a term of any contract that is entered into pursuant 
 to subparagraph (A) for the implementation of special 
 educational and behavioral intervention plans for 
 covered children who are participants in the 
 demonstration project, the Secretary shall require that 
 any such plan be developed, reviewed, and maintained by 
 supervisory-level providers approved by the Secretary.
 (C) Contractor requirements.--The Secretary shall 
 establish, and ensure the implementation of, the 
 following:
 (i) Minimum required criteria for the 
 education, training, and experience of any 
 contractor furnishing covered services pursuant 
 to a contract under subparagraph (A).
 (ii) Requirements for the supervision and 
 oversight of contractors who are infant and 
 early childhood mental health consultants, 
 including requirements for relevant credentials 
 for such consultants and the frequency and 
 intensity of such supervision.
 (iii) Such other requirements as the 
 Secretary considers appropriate to ensure the 
 safety and protection of covered children who 
 are participants in the demonstration project.
 (6) Deadline to commence; minimum period.--For each 
 demonstration project conducted under this subsection--
 (A) the Secretary shall commence the demonstration 
 project not later than 180 days after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act; and
 (B) the demonstration project shall be conducted 
 for a period of not less than two years.
 (7) Evaluation.--
 (A) Requirement.--The Secretary of Defense shall 
 conduct an evaluation of the outcomes of each 
 demonstration project conducted under this subsection, 
 to determine the efficacy of covered services provided 
 under the demonstration project.
 (B) Matters.-- Each evaluation under subparagraph 
 (A) shall include, with respect to the relevant 
 demonstration project, an assessment of the extent to 
 which activities under the demonstration project 
 contributed to the following:
 (i) Positive outcomes for covered children.
 (ii) Improvements to the services and 
 continuity of care for covered children.
 (iii) Improvements to military family 
 readiness and enhanced military retention.
 (d) Reports on Demonstration Projects.--Not later than two years 
and 180 days after the date of the commencement of a demonstration 
project under subsection (c), the Secretary of Defense shall submit to 
the Committees on Armed Services of the House of Representatives and 
the Senate a report on the demonstration project. Such report shall 
include the following:
 (1) A description of the demonstration project.
 (2) The results of the evaluation under subsection (c)(7) 
 with respect to the demonstration project.
 (3) A description of plans for the future provision of 
 covered services, in accordance with the model or approach 
 evaluated pursuant to the demonstration project.
 (e) Relationship to Other Benefits.--Nothing in this section shall 
be construed as precluding a member of the Armed Forces, or a dependent 
of such a member, from eligibility for benefits under chapter 55 of 
title 10, United States Code, to which such member or dependent would 
otherwise be eligible.
 (f) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``child'' has the meaning given that term in 
 section 1072 of title 10, United States Code.
 (2) The term ``covered child'' means the infant, toddler, 
 or young child (from birth to age five, inclusive) of a member 
 of the Armed Forces.
 (3) The term ``covered degree'' means a postsecondary 
 degree that--
 (A) is awarded by an institution of higher of 
 education eligible to participate in programs under 
 title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 1070 et seq.); and
 (B) is in the field of mental health, human 
 development, social work, or a related field, as 
 determined by the Secretary of Defense.
 (4) The term ``covered educational or treatment service''--
 (A) means a service, including a supportive 
 service, that provides quality early childhood 
 education by promoting healthy social and emotional 
 development and providing support for children 
 experiencing mental health challenges; and
 (B) includes the conduct of assessments, coaching 
 for educators and parents, and referrals to health care 
 professionals with specialties in infant and early 
 childhood mental health for diagnosis, therapeutic 
 treatment, and early intervention.
 (5) The term ``covered service'' means a covered 
 educational and treatment service or any other medical or non-
 medical service, including consultation services, relating to 
 the improvement of infant and early childhood mental health in 
 the context of family, community, and culture.
 (6) The term ``infant and early childhood mental health'' 
 means the developing capacity of an infant, toddler, or young 
 child (from birth to age five, inclusive), to--
 (A) form close and secure adult and peer 
 relationships;
 (B) experience, manage, and express a full range of 
 emotions; and
 (C) explore the environment and learn.

SEC. 734. IMPROVEMENTS TO PROCESSES TO REDUCE FINANCIAL HARM CAUSED TO 
 CIVILIANS FOR CARE PROVIDED AT MILITARY MEDICAL TREATMENT 
 FACILITIES.

 (a) Clarification of Fee Waiver Process.--Section 1079b of title 
10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
 ``(b) Waiver of Fees.--Each commander (or director, as applicable) 
of a military medical treatment facility shall issue a waiver for a fee 
that would otherwise be charged under the procedures implemented under 
subsection (a) to a civilian provided medical care at the facility who 
is not a covered beneficiary if the provision of such care enhances the 
knowledge, skills, and abilities of health care providers, as 
determined by the respective commander or director.''; and
 (2) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d).
 (b) Modified Payment Plan for Certain Civilians.--
 (1) In general.--Such section is further amended--
 (A) by inserting after subsection (b), as amended 
 by subsection (a), the following:
 ``(c) Modified Payment Plan for Certain Civilians.--(1)(A) If a 
civilian specified in subsection (a) is covered by a covered payer at 
the time care under this section is provided, the civilian shall only 
be responsible to pay, for any services not covered by such covered 
payer, copays, coinsurance, deductibles, or nominal fees.
 ``(B)(i) The Secretary of Defense may bill only the covered payer 
for care provided to a civilian described in subparagraph (A).
 ``(ii) Payment received by the Secretary from the covered payer of 
a civilian for care provided under this section that is provided to the 
civilian shall be considered payment in full for such care.
 ``(2) If a civilian specified in subsection (a) does not meet the 
criteria under paragraph (1), is underinsured, or has a remaining 
balance and is at risk of financial harm, the Secretary of Defense 
shall reduce each fee that would otherwise be charged to the civilian 
under this section according to a sliding fee discount program.
 ``(3) If a civilian specified in subsection (a) does not meet the 
criteria under paragraph (1) or (2), the Secretary of Defense shall 
implement an additional catastrophic waiver to prevent financial harm.
 ``(4) The modified payment plan under this subsection may not be 
administered by a Federal agency other than the Department of 
Defense.''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(e) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `covered payer' means a third-party payer or 
 other insurance, medical service, or health plan.
 ``(2) The terms `third-party payer' and `insurance, medical 
 service, or health plan' have the meaning given those terms in 
 section 1095(h) of this title.''.
 (c) Applicability.--The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) 
shall apply with respect to care provided on or after the date that is 
180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 735. IMPROVEMENTS TO MILITARY MEDICAL TREATMENT FACILITIES AND 
 OTHER FACILITIES UNDER MILITARY HEALTH SYSTEM.

 (a) Study.--The Secretary of Defense shall conduct a study on any 
deficiencies of, and necessary improvements to, military medical 
treatment facilities and other covered facilities, to ensure the 
design, construction, and maintenance of such facilities are in 
compliance with each covered code, specification, and standard. Such 
study shall include an identification of any necessary updates to the 
Unified Facilities Criteria relating to military construction planning 
and design with respect to such facilities, to ensure such compliance.
 (b) Reports.--
 (1) First report.--Not later than one year after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall 
 submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the 
 findings of the study under subsection (a). Such report shall 
 include--
 (A) for each covered facility, a description of any 
 deficiencies identified pursuant to such study; and
 (B) the plans of the Secretary, including costs and 
 timelines, to address such deficiencies through the 
 rehabilitation, repair, or retrofit of the facility, as 
 applicable.
 (2) Annual reports.--Not later than one year after the date 
 on which the report under paragraph (1) is submitted, and on an 
 annual basis thereafter until the date on which the Secretary 
 determines all covered facilities are in compliance with each 
 covered code, specification, and standard, the Secretary shall 
 submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the 
 progress made toward addressing any deficiency of a covered 
 facility and maintaining covered facilities, to ensure such 
 compliance.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered code, specification, and 
 standard''--
 (A) means the latest published edition of any code, 
 specification, or standard that incorporates the latest 
 hazard-resistant and energy-efficient designs, 
 establishes minimum acceptable criteria for design, 
 construction, or maintenance, and is at least as 
 stringent as the previously published edition; and
 (B) includes the following (or the latest published 
 edition thereof that is at least as stringent as the 
 previously published edition):
 (i) The 2021 International Energy 
 Conservation Code.
 (ii) The ASHRAE Standard 90.1.
 (iii) The ASHRAE Standard 170.
 (iv) The ASHRAE Standard 189.3.
 (v) The American Society of Civil Engineers 
 Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other 
 Structures (ASCE Standard ASCE 7).
 (vi) The International Wildland-Urban 
 Interface Code.
 (vii) Executive Order 13690 of January 30, 
 2015 (80 Fed. Reg. 6425) (relating to a Federal 
 Flood Risk Management Standard for critical 
 facilities).
 (2) The term ``covered facility'' means any Department of 
 Defense-owned facility used for activities under the military 
 health system, including military medical treatment facilities, 
 military ambulatory care and occupational health facilities, 
 and defense health research facilities.

SEC. 736. ACCESS TO CERTAIN DEPENDENT MEDICAL RECORDS BY REMARRIED 
 FORMER SPOUSES.

 (a) Access.--The Secretary of Defense may authorize a remarried 
former spouse who is a custodial parent of a dependent child to retain 
electronic access to the privileged medical records of such dependent 
child, notwithstanding that the former spouse is no longer a dependent 
under section 1072(2) of title 10, United States Code.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``dependent'' has the meaning given that term 
 in section 1072 of title 10, United States Code.
 (2) The term ``dependent child'' means a dependent child of 
 a remarried former spouse and a member or former member of a 
 uniformed service.
 (3) The term ``remarried former spouse'' means a remarried 
 former spouse of a member or former member of a uniformed 
 service.

SEC. 737. AFFILIATES SHARING PILOT PROGRAM.

 Section 5318(g)(8)(B)(iii) of title 31, United States Code, is 
amended by striking ``3 years after the date of enactment of this 
paragraph'' and inserting ``3 years after the date that the Secretary 
of the Treasury issues rules pursuant to subparagraph (A)''.

SEC. 738. HOUSING FIRST REPORT.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development 
shall, not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
section, submit to the Financial Services Committee of the House of 
Representatives and the Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee of 
the Senate, a report about the effectiveness and success of housing 
first policies in addressing homelessness by connecting homeless 
individuals with housing and voluntary services.
 (b) Contents.--The report required under subsection (a) shall 
include findings made by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development 
with respect to the barriers that people experiencing homelessness face 
when attempting to secure permanent housing.
 (c) Housing First Policy Defined.--In this section, the term 
``housing first policy'' means a policy that prohibits conditioning the 
provision of housing assistance for an individual or family on--
 (1) individual or family participation in supportive 
 services, such as counseling, job training, or addiction 
 treatment, for such individual or family; or
 (2) such individuals or family meeting certain 
 prerequisites, including employment, sobriety, or lack of drug 
 use.

 Subtitle C--Studies and Reports

SEC. 741. GAO STUDY ON COVERAGE OF MENTAL HEALTH DISORDERS UNDER 
 TRICARE PROGRAM AND RELATIONSHIP TO CERTAIN MENTAL HEALTH 
 PARITY LAWS.

 (a) Study and Report Required.--Not later than 180 days after the 
date of the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the 
United States shall--
 (1) conduct a study to identify and assess the similarities 
 and differences with respect to coverage of mental health 
 disorders under the TRICARE program and coverage requirements 
 under mental health parity laws; and
 (2) submit to the Secretary of Defense, the congressional 
 defense committees, and (with respect to any findings 
 concerning the Coast Guard when it is not operating as a 
 service in the Department of the Navy), the Secretary of 
 Homeland Security, the Committee on Transportation and 
 Infrastructure of the House of Representatives, and the 
 Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the 
 Senate a report containing the findings of such study.
 (b) Matters.--The report under subsection (a) shall include the 
following:
 (1) A description of any overlaps or gaps between coverage 
 requirements under the TRICARE program and under the mental 
 health parity laws, with respect to treatment for the continuum 
 of mental health disorders (including substance use disorder).
 (2) An identification of any existing or anticipated 
 effects of any such overlaps or gaps on access to care by 
 TRICARE beneficiaries.
 (3) An identification of denial rates under the TRICARE 
 program for requests by TRICARE beneficiaries for coverage of 
 mental or behavioral health care services, and the overturn 
 rates of appeals for such requests, disaggregated by type of 
 health care service.
 (4) A list of each mental or behavioral health care 
 provider type that is not an authorized provider type under the 
 TRICARE program.
 (5) An identification of any anticipated effects of 
 modifying coverage requirements under the TRICARE program to 
 bring such requirements into conformity with mental health 
 parity laws, including an assessment of the following:
 (A) Potential costs to the Department of Defense, 
 the Department of Homeland Security (with respect to 
 matters concerning the Coast Guard when it is not 
 operating as a service in the Department of the Navy), 
 and TRICARE beneficiaries as a result of such 
 modification.
 (B) The adequacy of the TRICARE program network to 
 support such modification.
 (C) Potential effects of such modification on 
 access to care by TRICARE beneficiaries.
 (D) Such other matters as may be determined 
 appropriate by the Comptroller General.
 (c) Briefing.--Not later than 90 days after the date on which the 
Secretaries receives the report submitted under subsection (a), the 
Secretaries shall provide to the congressional defense committees a 
briefing on any statutory changes the Secretaries determine necessary 
to close gaps in the coverage of mental health disorders under the 
TRICARE program, including any such gaps identified in the report, to 
bring such coverage into conformity with requirements under mental 
health parity laws.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``mental health parity laws'' means--
 (A) section 2726 of the Public Health Service Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 300gg-26);
 (B) section 712 of the Employee Retirement Income 
 Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1185a);
 (C) section 9812 of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986 (26 U.S.C. 9812); or
 (D) any other Federal law that applies the 
 requirements under any of the sections described in 
 subparagraph (A), (B), or (C), or requirements that are 
 substantially similar to those provided under any such 
 section, as determined by the Comptroller General.
 (2) The term ``TRICARE program'' has the meaning given such 
 term in section 1072 of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 742. FEASIBILITY STUDY ON ESTABLISHMENT OF NEW COMMAND ON DEFENSE 
 HEALTH.

 (a) Study.--The Secretary of Defense shall conduct a feasibility 
study regarding the establishment of a new defense health command under 
which the Defense Health Agency would be a joint component. In 
conducting such study, the Secretary shall consider for the new command 
each of the following potential structures:
 (1) A unified combatant command.
 (2) A specified combatant command.
 (3) Any other defense health command structure the 
 Secretary determines appropriate.
 (b) Matters.--The study under subsection (a) shall include, with 
respect to the new command specified in such subsection, the following:
 (1) An assessment of the organizational structure required 
 to establish the new command with the following 
 responsibilities and duties:
 (A) The conduct of health operations among 
 operational units of the Armed Forces.
 (B) The administration of military medical 
 treatment facilities.
 (C) The administration of the TRICARE program.
 (D) Serving as the element of the Armed Forces with 
 the primary responsibility for the following:
 (i) Medical treatment, advanced trauma 
 management, emergency surgery, and 
 resuscitative care.
 (ii) Emergency and specialty surgery, 
 intensive care, medical specialty care, and 
 related services.
 (iii) Preventive, acute, restorative, 
 curative, rehabilitative, and convalescent 
 care.
 (E) Collaboration with medical facilities 
 participating in the National Disaster Medical System 
 established pursuant to section 2812 of the Public 
 Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300hh-11), the Veterans 
 Health Administration, and such other Federal 
 departments and agencies and nongovermental 
 organizations as may be determined appropriate, 
 including with respect to the care services specified 
 in subparagraph (D)(iii).
 (F) The conduct of existing research and education 
 activities of the Department of Defense in the filed of 
 health sciences.
 (G) The conduct of public health and global health 
 activities not otherwise assigned to the Armed Forces.
 (H) The administration of the Defense Health 
 Program Account under section 1100 of title 10, United 
 States Code.
 (2) A description of the potential reporting relationship 
 between the commander of the new command, the Assistant 
 Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs, and the Under 
 Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness.
 (3) A description of the roles of the Surgeons General of 
 the Army, Navy and Air Force, with respect to the commander of 
 the new command.
 (4) A description of the additional legislative 
 authorities, if any, necessary to establish the new command.
 (c) Briefing; Report.--Not later than September 30, 2023, the 
Secretary of Defense shall--
 (1) provide to the Committees of Armed Services of the 
 House of Representatives and the Senate briefing on the results 
 of the study under subsection (a); and
 (2) submit to the Committees of Armed Services of the House 
 of Representatives and the Senate briefing and report on the 
 results of such study.

SEC. 743. STUDY AND AWARENESS INITIATIVE REGARDING USE OF QUALIFIED 
 ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES TO TREAT CERTAIN MEMBERS OF THE 
 ARMED FORCES ON TERMINAL LEAVE.

 (a) Study.--The Secretary of Defense shall conduct a study on the 
use of qualified alternative therapies as alternative therapies to 
prescription opioids in the treatment of members of the Armed Forces on 
terminal leave preceding separation, retirement, or release from active 
duty.
 (b) Participants.--The Secretary shall select participants in the 
study under subsection (a) from among members of the Armed Forces on 
terminal leave--
 (1) who have been diagnosed with post traumatic stress 
 disorder, a traumatic brain injury, or any other condition 
 involving severe pain, as determined by the Secretary for 
 purposes of this section;
 (2) who but for such participation, would be prescribed 
 opioid medications in connection with the treatment of such 
 condition; and
 (3) who elect to participate in the study (including in the 
 post-study monitoring under subsection (c)).
 (c) Post-study Monitoring.--Following the conclusion of the study 
under subsection (a), the Secretary shall monitor the effects of such 
study on the health of former participants by conducting assessments of 
such former participants, and shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees reports on the results of such monitoring, at the following 
intervals:
 (1) One year after the date of such conclusion.
 (2) Three years after the date of such conclusion.
 (d) Effect on Other Benefits.--The eligibility or entitlement of a 
member of the Armed Forces to any other benefit under the laws 
administered by the Secretary shall not be affected by the 
participation of the member in the study under this section (including 
by participation in the post-study monitoring under subsection (c)).
 (e) Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
appropriate congressional committees a report on the findings of the 
study under subsection (a). Such report shall include--
 (1) a description of any such findings relating to the 
 benefits or other effects of using a qualified alternative 
 therapy as an alternative to prescription opioids under the 
 study; and
 (2) any recommendations of the Secretary based on such 
 findings.
 (f) Education Initiative.--The Secretary shall carry out an 
education initiative regarding the use of a qualified alternative 
therapy for the treatment of the conditions referred to in subsection 
(b)(1). In carrying out such initiative, the Secretary shall take into 
consideration--
 (1) to the extent practicable, the findings of the study 
 under subsection (a);
 (2) the specific vulnerability to opioid abuse and 
 substance abuse disorder of individuals transitioning from 
 serving on active duty in the Armed Forces; and
 (3) best practices for reducing the stigmatization of 
 qualified alternative therapies.
 (g) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The terms ``active duty'' and ``Armed Forces'' have the 
 meaning given those terms in section 101 of title 10, United 
 States Code.
 (2) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the congressional defense committees;
 (B) the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the 
 House of Representatives; and
 (C) the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate.
 (3) The term ``qualified alternative therapy'' means--
 (A) medicinal cannabis;
 (B) methylenedioxymethamphetamine (commonly 
 referred to as MDMA); and
 (C) psilocybin.

SEC. 744. REPORT ON COMPOSITION OF MEDICAL PERSONNEL OF EACH MILITARY 
 DEPARTMENT AND RELATED MATTERS.

 (a) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter for five years, the 
Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the Secretaries of the 
military departments, shall submit to the Committees on Armed Services 
of the House of Representatives and the Senate a report on the 
composition of the medical personnel of each military department and 
related matters.
 (b) Matters.--The report under subsection (a) shall include the 
following:
 (1) With respect to each military department, the 
 following:
 (A) An identification of the total number of 
 medical personnel of the military department.
 (B) An identification of the number of such medical 
 personnel who are officers in a grade above O-6.
 (C) An identification of the number of such medical 
 personnel who are officers in a grade below O-7.
 (D) An identification of the number of such medical 
 personnel who are enlisted members.
 (E) An assessment of potential issues relating to 
 the composition of such medical personnel.
 (F) A description of any plans of the Secretary 
 to--
 (i) reduce the total number of such medical 
 personnel; or
 (ii) eliminate any covered position for 
 such medical personnel.
 (G) A recommendation by the Secretary for the 
 number of covered positions for such medical personnel 
 that should be required for purposes of maximizing 
 medical readiness (without regard to current statutory 
 limitations, or potential future statutory limitations, 
 on such number), presented as a total number for each 
 military department and disaggregated by grade.
 (2) An assessment of the advisability of establishing 
 within the Department of the Air Force, by not later than five 
 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, a position 
 of the Medical Officer of the Space Force with the 
 responsibilities of advising the Chief of Space Operations on 
 all matters relating to health care for members of the Space 
 Force and serving as the expert on such matters in working with 
 the heads of other Federal departments and agencies on related 
 issues.
 (3) An assessment of the necessity of maintaining the 
 position of the Medical Officer of the Marine Corps, 
 including--
 (A) a comparison of the effects of filling such 
 position with an officer in the grade of O-6 versus an 
 officer in the grade of O-7;
 (B) an assessment of potential issues associated 
 with the elimination of such position; and
 (C) a description of any potential effects of such 
 elimination with respect to medical readiness.
 (c) Disaggregation of Certain Data.--The data specified in 
subparagraphs (A) through (D) of subsection (b)(1) shall be presented 
as a total number and disaggregated by each medical component of the 
respective military department.
 (d) Inclusion of Certain Demographic Data.--The data specified in 
subparagraphs (A) through (D) of subsection (b)(1) shall include a 
description and analysis of the demographic information of the medical 
personnel covered by each such subparagraph, including with respect to 
the following:
 (1) Race (presented in the aggregate and disaggregated by 
 the same major race categories as are used in the decennial 
 census of population and housing conducted by the Director of 
 the Census Bureau).
 (2) Ethnicity.
 (3) Gender identity.
 (e) Considerations in Assessing Certain Space Force Matter.--In 
conducting the assessment pursuant to subsection (b)(2), the Secretary 
of Defense shall take into consideration the tasks, operations, and 
specific health care considerations that accompany the space 
warfighting mission of the Space Force.
 (f) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered position'' means a position for an 
 officer in a grade above O-6.
 (2) The terms ``enlisted member'' and ``officer'' have the 
 meanings given those terms in section 101(b) of title 10, 
 United States Code.
 (3) The term ``medical component'' means--
 (A) in the case of the Army, the Medical Corps, 
 Dental Corps, Nurse Corps, Medical Service Corps, 
 Veterinary Corps, and Army Medical Specialist Corps;
 (B) in the case of the Air Force, members 
 designated as medical officers, dental officers, Air 
 Force nurses, medical service officers, and biomedical 
 science officers; and
 (C) in the case of the Navy, the Medical Corps, 
 Dental Corps, Nurse Corps, and Medical Service Corps.
 (4) The term ``medical personnel'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 115a(e) of title 10, United States Code.
 (5) The term ``military department'' has the meaning given 
 that term in section 101(a) of such title.

SEC. 745. BRIEFING AND REPORT ON REDUCTION OR REALIGNMENT OF MILITARY 
 MEDICAL MANNING AND MEDICAL BILLETS.

 Section 731(a)(2)(A) of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(A) Briefing; report.--The Comptroller General 
 shall submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the 
 House of Representatives and the Senate--
 ``(i) a briefing on preliminary 
 observations regarding the analyses used to 
 support any reduction or realignment of 
 military medical manning, including any 
 reduction or realignment of medical billets of 
 the military departments, not later than 
 December 27, 2022; and
 ``(ii) a report on such analyses not later 
 than May 31, 2023.''.

SEC. 746. REPORT ON FEASABILITY OF CERTAIN LICENSING MODELS FOR 
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE-OWNED VACCINES AND OTHER MEDICAL 
 INTERVENTIONS RELATING TO COVID-19.

 (a) Report.--The Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report on the feasibility of a 
licensing model under which, with respect to Department of Defense-
owned vaccines or other medical interventions relating to COVID-19 that 
are approved, licensed, or otherwise authorized for use in accordance 
with applicable law, the Secretary would grant to Government-owned 
contractor-operated manufacturers nonexclusive licenses to manufacture 
such vaccines or other interventions.
 (b) Matters.--The report under subsection (a) shall include an 
evaluation of the estimated differences in the pricing of, and 
equitable access to, the vaccines and other interventions specified in 
such subsection, that may arise as a result of--
 (1) the Secretary granting exclusive licenses to 
 manufacture such vaccines and other interventions, as compared 
 with nonexclusive licenses; and
 (2) the Secretary granting either such license to 
 Government-owned contractor-operated manufacturers, as compared 
 with other manufacturers.

SEC. 747. STUDY ON THE IMPACT OF MILITARY TRAUMA AND INTIMATE PARTNER 
 VIOLENCE ON MATERNAL HEALTH OUTCOMES.

 (a) Study.--The Secretary of Defense shall carry out a study on the 
impact of military trauma and intimate partner violence on maternal 
health outcomes, with a focus on racial and ethnic backgrounds.
 (b) Report.--The Secretary of Defense shall issue a report to the 
Congress containing all findings and determinations made in carrying 
out the study required under subsection (a).

SEC. 748. REPORT ON COVERAGE OF BEHAVIORAL AND MENTAL HEALTH CRISIS 
 SERVICES UNDER TRICARE PROGRAM.

 (a) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report on the scope of coverage 
under the TRICARE program of inpatient and outpatient behavioral and 
mental health crisis services.
 (b) Matters.--The report under subsection (a) shall include, with 
respect to the period beginning on January 1, 2019, and ending on 
December 31, 2021, an identification of the following:
 (1) The total amount of funds expended under the TRICARE 
 program on behavioral and mental health crisis services, 
 disaggregated by the site at which the service was furnished.
 (2) The total amount of funds expended under such program 
 for other services furnished to individuals in behavioral or 
 mental health crisis.
 (3) The provider types that billed for the services 
 specified in paragraphs (1) and (2).
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``crisis services'' means the services 
 identified as such in the document of the Substance Abuse and 
 Mental Health Service Administration published in 2020, titled 
 ``National Guidelines for Behavioral Health Crisis Care: Best 
 Practice Toolkit''.
 (2) The term ``TRICARE program'' has the meaning given that 
 term in section 1072 of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 749. REPORT ON MENTAL HEALTH PROVIDER READINESS DESIGNATIONS.

 Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary of Defense shall update the registry and provider lists 
under subsection (b) of section 717 of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 (Public Law 114-92; 129 Stat. 
868; 10 U.S.C. 1073 note) and submit to the congressional defense 
committees a report containing--
 (1) the number of providers that have received a mental 
 health provider readiness designation under such section 717, 
 disaggregated by geographic region and provider specialty; and
 (2) recommendations to incentivize, or otherwise increase 
 the number of, providers with such designation.

SEC. 750. STUDY ON PROVIDER TRAINING GAPS WITH RESPECT TO SCREENING AND 
 TREATMENT OF MATERNAL MENTAL HEALTH CONDITIONS.

 (a) Study.--The Secretary of Defense, acting through the Assistant 
Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs, shall conduct a study to 
identify gaps in the training of covered providers with respect to the 
screening and treatment of maternal mental health conditions. Such 
study shall include--
 (1) an assessment of the level of experience of covered 
 providers with, and the attitudes of such providers regarding, 
 the treatment of pregnant and postpartum women with mental or 
 substance use disorders; and
 (2) recommendations for the training of covered providers, 
 taking into account any training gaps identified pursuant to 
 the study.
 (b) Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
Committees on Armed Services of the House of Representatives and the 
Senate a report containing the findings of the study under section (a).
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered provider'' means a maternal health 
 care provider or behavioral health provider furnishing services 
 under the military health system (including under the TRICARE 
 program).
 (2) The term ``TRICARE program'' has the meaning given that 
 term in section 1072 of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 751. REPORT ON MENTAL HEALTH CONDITIONS AND METABOLIC DISEASE 
 AMONG CERTAIN MEMBERS OF ARMED FORCES.

 Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Defense shall conduct a study, and submit to 
Congress a report, on the rate of incidence of the simultaneous 
presence among members of the Armed Forces serving on active duty of a 
metabolic disease and a mental health condition (including post 
traumatic stress disorder, depression, and anxiety) or substance use 
disorder.

SEC. 752. STUDY ON ACCESSABILITY OF MENTAL HEALTH PROVIDERS AND 
 SERVICES FOR ACTIVE DUTY MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES.

 (a) Study.--The Secretary of Defense shall conduct a study on the 
accessibility of mental health care providers and services for members 
of the Armed Forces serving on active duty, including an assessment 
of--
 (1) the accessibility of mental health care providers on 
 military installations;
 (2) the accessibility of inpatient services for mental 
 health care for such members; and
 (3) steps that may be taken to improve such accessibility.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
Committees on Armed Services of the House of Representatives and the 
Senate a report containing the findings of the study under subsection 
(a).

SEC. 753. HEALTH-RELATED BEHAVIORS SURVEY AND REPORT.

 (a) Survey.--The Director of the Defense Health Agency shall 
conduct a health-related behaviors survey among the members of the 
Armed Forces.
 (b) Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Director of the Defense Health Agency shall 
submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the House of 
Representatives and the Senate a report containing the results of the 
survey under subsection (a).

SEC. 754. REPORT ON COORDINATION, DATA SHARING, AND EVALUATION EFFORTS 
 FOR SUICIDE PREVENTION.

 Not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, shall 
submit to each congressional committee with jurisdiction over the 
Department of Defense, the Department of Veterans Affairs, and the 
Department of Health and Human Services, a report on the coordination, 
data sharing, and evaluation efforts on suicide prevention across these 
departments. The report shall include:
 (1) An overview of the functioning and core findings of the 
 Interagency Task Force on Military and Veterans Mental Health 
 since its creation in 2012.
 (2) An accounting of the funding each Department has 
 obligated towards suicide prevention related research.
 (3) An outline of methods of comparing programs and sharing 
 best practices for suicide prevention by each Department.
 (4) An outline of the work to actively develop and improve 
 joint suicide prevention practices based on information 
 compiled and shared by each Department.
 (5) An outline of the plan each Department has to achieve 
 greater government efficiency and cross-agency coordination, 
 data sharing, and evaluation in Federal suicide prevention 
 efforts, in line with Priority Goal 5 of the plan entitled, 
 ``Reducing Military and Veteran Suicide'', published by the 
 White House in November 2021.
 (6) Any other information the Secretary of Defense, 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, or the Secretary of 
 Veterans Affairs determines to be appropriate.

SEC. 755. GAO STUDY ON DOD AND VA MAMMOGRAM AND BREAST CANCER SCREENING 
 POLICIES.

 (a) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall 
conduct a review, beginning not later than 90 days after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, to examine and determine whether current 
Department of Defense and Department of Veterans Affairs policies allow 
individuals with dense breast, regardless of age, with no-cost or low-
cost access through their health programs to all the screening and 
diagnostic tools needed to confirm breast cancer, including when 
standard mammograms are inconclusive or ineffective in doing so.
 (b) Contents.--The study conducted pursuant to subsection (a) 
shall--
 (1) examine the utilization of existing screening and 
 diagnosis tools by participants in health programs administered 
 by the Department of Defense and Department of Veterans 
 Affairs, disaggregated by demographic characteristics;
 (2) identify and examine barriers to greater access to such 
 tools in each such agency, including whether cost prevents 
 individuals from receiving additional breast cancer diagnostic 
 or screening exams that may confirm the presence of breast 
 cancer;
 (3) make recommendations on how each such agency can 
 improve policies to best address the unique challenges 
 identifying breast cancer in those with dense breasts;
 (4) analyze how well such agencies' policies regarding 
 breast cancer screening and diagnoses for those with dense 
 breast align with coverage under other Federal health care 
 programs such as Medicaid, Medicare, coverage on the Affordable 
 Care Act health care marketplace, and the recommendations of 
 the United States Preventive Services Task Force;
 (5) identify the most recent time that relevant policies 
 were updated by each such agency and how often they are 
 currently reviewed or updated;
 (6) analyze how well existing policies reflect or include 
 the best available science on helping women with dense breast 
 receive accurate diagnosis regarding the presence or absence of 
 cancer; and
 (7) identify any efforts by each such agency to educate 
 health care providers who provide cancer screening, treatment, 
 or diagnosis services and patients receiving such services on 
 the limitations of mammograms in confirming breast cancer for 
 those with dense breasts.
 (c) Consultation.--In conducting the study pursuant to subsection 
(a), the Comptroller General may consult with breast cancer patients or 
their advocates receiving care through the health care systems of the 
Department of Defense and Department of Veterans Affairs, health care 
providers supporting breast cancer care or organizations representing 
such providers, other Federal agencies, and other stakeholders, as 
appropriate.
 (d) Study.--Not later than September 30, 2024, the Comptroller 
General shall submit to the Congress a report on the study conducted 
pursuant to subsection (a) containing a description of the study and 
any findings and conclusions of the study.

SEC. 756. STUDY AND REPORT ON RATE OF CANCER-RELATED MORBIDITY AND 
 MORTALITY.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense shall conduct, or enter 
into a contract with an appropriate federally funded research and 
development center to conduct, a study to assess whether individuals 
(including individuals on active duty or in a reserve component or the 
National Guard) assigned to the Pease Air Force Base and Pease Air 
National Guard Base for a significant period of time during the period 
of 1970 through 2020 experience a higher-than-expected rate of cancer-
related morbidity and mortality as a result of time on base or 
exposures associated with time on base compared to the rate of cancer-
related morbidity and mortality of the general population of the United 
States, accounting for differences in sex, age, and race.
 (b) Completion; Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall provide for--
 (1) the completion of the study under subsection (a); and
 (2) the submission of a report on the results of the study 
 to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of 
 Representatives.
 (c) Definition.--In this section, the term ``significant period of 
time'' shall be defined by the Secretary of Defense or by the entity 
conducting the study under subsection (a), as the Secretary determines 
appropriate.

SEC. 757. GAO STUDY ON ACCESS TO EXCEPTIONAL FAMILY MEMBER PROGRAM AND 
 EXTENDED CARE HEALTH OPTION PROGRAM BY MEMBERS OF RESERVE 
 COMPONENTS.

 (a) Study and Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States 
shall--
 (1) conduct a study to determine the barriers to members of 
 the reserve components accessing the Extended Care Health 
 Option program and the Exceptional Family Member program of the 
 Department of Defense; and
 (2) submit to the Secretary of Defense and the 
 congressional defense committees a report containing the 
 findings of such study.
 (b) Elements.--The report under subsection (a)(2) shall include the 
following:
 (1) A description of the methodology used by the Department 
 of Defense to disseminate information regarding the eligibility 
 of members of the reserve components for the Extended Care 
 Health Option program and the Exceptional Family Member program 
 upon such members commencing the performance of Active Guard 
 and Reserve duty.
 (2) An identification of the timeline of the enrollment 
 process for members of the reserve components in such programs 
 and any effects of delayed enrollment, such as exclusion from 
 benefits or resources.
 (3) An identification of impediments to enrollment in such 
 programs among such members, including an assessment of the 
 following:
 (A) The availability of resources under such 
 programs, including specialist providers under the 
 Exceptional Family Member program, at the time of 
 enrollment in such programs.
 (B) The availability of support under such programs 
 at facilities of the reserve components.
 (C) Any misinformation provided to service members 
 seeking enrollment.
 (4) With respect to the Exceptional Family Member program--
 (A) an identification of the number of families 
 with a family member eligible to enroll in such 
 program, disaggregated by whether the member of the 
 reserve component in such family is performing Active 
 Guard and Reserve duty;
 (B) an assessment of the effects of navigating the 
 process of enrollment in such program on the mission to 
 which the member is assigned while performing Active 
 Guard and Reserve duty; and
 (C) an identification of the number of specialist 
 providers and staff who support reserve component 
 members through such program.
 (5) Recommendations on improving the dissemination of 
 information regarding the eligibility of members of the reserve 
 components for the Extended Care Health Option program and the 
 Exceptional Family Member program.
 (6) Recommendations on improvements to such programs with 
 respect to the reserve components.
 (c) Active Guard and Reserve Defined.--The term ``Active Guard and 
Reserve'' has the meaning given such term in section 101(b) of title 
10, United States Code.

SEC. 758. KYLE MULLEN NAVAL SAFETY ENHANCEMENTS.

 The Secretary of Defense, or his designee to Naval Special Warfare 
Command, shall conduct an appraisal of and provide recommended policies 
for improved medical care and oversight of individuals in the Navy 
engaged in high-stress training environments, in an effort to ensure 
sailor safety and prevent related long-term injury, illness, and death. 
The Secretary of the Navy shall ensure that such recommended polices 
are implemented to the full extent practicable and in a timely manner.

SEC. 759. REPORT ON OPERATIONAL AND PHYSICAL AND MENTAL HEALTH EFFECTS 
 OF LOW RECRUITMENT AND RETENTION TO ARMED FORCES.

 The Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a report on the current operational tempo resulting from low 
recruitment to and retention in the Armed Forces and the resulting 
effects on the physical and mental health of members of the Armed 
Forces.

SEC. 759A. REPORT ON MATERNAL MORTALITY RATES OF FEMALE MEMBERS OF THE 
 ARMED FORCES.

 Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a report on how maternal mortality rates may 
disproportionately affect female members of the Armed Forces (as 
compared with female civilians). Such report shall include an 
identification of any relevant barriers to the access of health care 
for such female members and any recommendations by the Secretary to 
improve such access and reduce such rates.

SEC. 759B. REPORT ON DEFENSE HEALTH AGENCY CONTRACTS.

 Not later than February 1, 2023, the Director of the Defense Health 
Agency shall submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the House of 
Representatives and the Senate a report that includes, with respect to 
fiscal years 2020, 2021, and 2022--
 (1) the total number of contracts awarded by the Defense 
 Health Agency during each such fiscal year; and
 (2) the number and percent of such contracts for each such 
 fiscal year that were--
 (A) protested and the protest was upheld;
 (B) standard professional services contracts;
 (C) issued as a direct award;
 (D) in the case of the contracts described in 
 subparagraph (C), exceeded $5 million in total value; 
 and
 (E) awarded to the following:
 (i) Businesses eligible to enter into a 
 contract under section 8(a) of the Small 
 Business Act (15 U.S.C. 637(a)).
 (ii) Qualified HUBZone small business 
 concerns.
 (iii) Small business concerns owned and 
 controlled by service-disabled veterans.
 (iv) Small business concerns owned and 
 controlled by women (as defined in section 
 8(m)(1) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 
 637(m)(1)).

 Subtitle D--Other Matters

SEC. 761. INCLUSION OF EXPOSURE TO PERFLUOROALKYL AND POLYFLUOROALKYL 
 SUBSTANCES AS COMPONENT OF PERIODIC HEALTH ASSESSMENTS.

 (a) Periodic Health Assessment.--Each Secretary concerned shall 
ensure that any periodic health assessment provided to a member of the 
Armed Forces includes an evaluation of whether the member has been--
 (1) based or stationed at a military installation 
 identified by the Secretary concerned as a location with a 
 known or suspected release of perfluoroalkyl substances or 
 polyfluoroalkyl substances during the period in which the 
 member was based or stationed at the military installation; or
 (2) exposed to such substances, including by evaluating any 
 information in the health record of the member.
 (b) Separation History and Physical Examinations.--Section 
1145(a)(5) of title 10, United States Code is amended by adding at the 
end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(D) The Secretary concerned shall ensure that each physical 
examination of a member under subparagraph (A) includes an assessment 
of whether the member was--
 ``(i) based or stationed at a military installation 
 identified by the Secretary concerned as a location with a 
 known or suspected release of perfluoroalkyl substances or 
 polyfluoroalkyl substances during the period in which the 
 member was based or stationed at the military installation; or
 ``(ii) exposed to such substances, including by assessing 
 any information in the health record of the member.''.
 (c) Deployment Assessments.--Section 1074f(b)(2) of title 10, 
United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subparagraph:
 ``(E) An assessment of whether the member was--
 ``(i) based or stationed at a military installation 
 identified by the Secretary concerned as a location 
 with a known or suspected release of perfluoroalkyl 
 substances or polyfluoroalkyl substances during the 
 period in which the member was based or stationed at 
 the military installation; or
 ``(ii) exposed to such substances, including by 
 assessing any information in the health record of the 
 member.''
 (d) Provision of Blood Testing to Determine Exposure to 
Perfluoroalkyl Substances or Polyfluoroalkyl Substances.--
 (1) Provision of blood testing.--
 (A) In general.--If a covered evaluation of a 
 member of the Armed Forces results in a positive 
 determination of potential exposure to perfluoroalkyl 
 substances or polyfluoroalkyl substances, the Secretary 
 concerned shall provide to that member, during the 
 covered evaluation, blood testing to determine and 
 document potential exposure to such substances.
 (B) Inclusion in health record.--The results of 
 blood testing of a member of the Armed Forces conducted 
 under subparagraph (A) shall be included in the health 
 record of the member.
 (2) Analysis of blood testing results.--
 (A) Plan.--Not later than one year after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense 
 shall submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the 
 House of Representatives and the Senate a plan, 
 consistent with Department of Defense Instruction 
 6055.05 (or such successor instruction), to track and 
 analyze, including through the identification and 
 analysis of trends, the results of blood testing 
 results provided pursuant to the paragraph (1) or under 
 section 707 of the National Defense Authorization Act 
 for Fiscal Year 2020 (Public Law 116-92; 133 Stat. 
 1441; 10 U.S.C. 1074m note).
 (B) Annual reports.--Not later than two years after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually 
 thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to the 
 Committees on Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives and the Senate a report containing a 
 summary of the results of blood testing provided 
 pursuant to paragraph (1), at a Department of Defense-
 wide level.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered evaluation'' means--
 (A) a periodic health assessment conducted in 
 accordance with subsection (a);
 (B) a separation history and physical examination 
 conducted under section 1145(a)(5) of title 10, United 
 States Code, as amended by subsection (b); or
 (C) a deployment assessment conducted under section 
 1074f(b)(2) of such title, as amended by subsection 
 (c).
 (2) The term ``Secretary concerned'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 101 of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 762. MANDATORY TRAINING ON HEALTH EFFECTS OF PERFLUOROALKYL OR 
 POLYFLUOROALKYL SUBSTANCES.

 The Secretary of Defense shall provide to each medical provider of 
the Department of Defense mandatory training with respect to the 
potential health effects of perfluoroalkyl or polyfluoroalkyl 
substances.

SEC. 763. NON-MEDICAL COUNSELING SERVICES FOR MILITARY FAMILIES.

 Section 1781 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding 
at the end the following new subsections:
 ``(d) Non-medical Counseling Services.--(1) In carrying out the 
duties of the Office under subsection (b), the Director of Military 
Family Readiness Policy may coordinate programs and activities for the 
provision of non-medical counseling services to military families 
through the Military and Family Counseling Program.
 ``(2) Notwithstanding any law regarding the licensure or 
certification of mental health professionals, a mental health 
professional described in paragraph (3) may provide non-medical 
counseling services through the Military and Family Counseling Program 
at any location in a State, the District of Columbia, or a 
Commonwealth, territory or possession of the United States, without 
regard to where the provider or recipient of such services is located 
or the mode of the delivery of such services, if the provision of such 
services is within the scope of the authorized Federal duties of the 
professional.
 ``(3) A mental health professional described in this paragraph is 
an individual who is--
 ``(A) a mental health professional who holds a current 
 license or certification that is--
 ``(i) issued by a State, the District of Columbia, 
 or a Commonwealth, territory, or possession of the 
 United States; and
 ``(ii) recognized by the Secretary of Defense;
 ``(B) a member of the uniformed services, a civilian 
 employee of the Department of Defense, or a contractor 
 designated by the Secretary of Defense; and
 ``(C) performing authorized duties for the Department of 
 Defense under a program or as part of an activity referred to 
 in paragraph (1).
 ``(e) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `Military and Family Counseling Program' 
 means the Military and Family Counseling Program of the 
 Department of Defense, or any successor program.
 ``(2) The term `non-medical counseling services' means 
 mental health care services that--
 ``(A) are non-clinical, short-term, and solution-
 focused; and
 ``(B) address topics related to personal growth, 
 development, and positive functioning.''.

SEC. 764. CLARIFICATIONS RELATING TO ANALYSIS OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 COMPREHENSIVE AUTISM DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM BY NATIONAL 
 ACADEMIES.

 (a) Clarifications.--Section 737 of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 135 Stat. 
1800) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)(2)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A), by inserting ``broadly'' 
 after ``disorder'';
 (B) in subparagraph (C), by inserting ``parental 
 involvement in applied behavior analysis treatment, 
 and'' after ``including'';
 (C) by amending subparagraph (D) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(D) A review of the health outcomes, including 
 mental health outcomes, for individuals who have 
 received applied behavioral analysis treatments over 
 time.'';
 (D) in subparagraph (E), by inserting ``, since the 
 inception of such program,'' after ``demonstration 
 program'';
 (E) in subparagraph (F), by striking 
 ``effectiveness'' and inserting ``cost effectiveness, 
 program effectiveness, and clinical effectiveness'';
 (F) in subparagraph (G), by inserting ``than in the 
 general population'' after ``military families'';
 (G) by redesignating subparagraph (H) as 
 subparagraph (I); and
 (H) by inserting after subparagraph (G), as amended 
 by subparagraph (F) of this paragraph, the following 
 new subparagraph:
 ``(H) An analysis on whether the diagnosis and 
 treatment of autism is more prevalent among the 
 children of military families than in the general 
 population.''; and
 (2) in subsection (c), by striking ``nine months'' and 
 inserting ``two years and seven months''.
 (b) Technical and Conforming Amendment.--Such section is further 
amended by striking ``demonstration project'' each place it appears and 
inserting ``demonstration program''.

SEC. 765. CLARIFICATION OF ELIGIBILITY FOR MEMBERSHIP TO INDEPENDENT 
 SUICIDE PREVENTION AND RESPONSE REVIEW COMMITTEE.

 Section 738(b)(3) of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 135 Stat. 1801) is amended by 
inserting ``, unless the individual is a retired member of the Armed 
Forces or a former civilian employee of the Department, or the 
individual is hired for the purpose of serving on such committee'' 
after ``Department of Defense''.

SEC. 766. IMPROVEMENT TO WOUNDED WARRIOR SERVICE DOG PROGRAM.

 Section 745 of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (134 Stat. 3710; Public Law 10 
U.S.C. 1071 note) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (b) as subsection (c); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (a) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(b) Grants.--
 ``(1) In general.--In carrying out the Wounded Warrior 
 Service Dog Program, the Secretary of Defense may award grants 
 to nonprofit organizations to provide assistance dogs under 
 such program.
 ``(2) Applications.--An applicant for a grant under 
 paragraph (1) shall submit an application at such time, in such 
 manner, and containing such information as the Secretary 
 determines.
 ``(3) Selection.--The Secretary shall select nonprofit 
 organizations that submit applications for the award of grants 
 under the Wounded Warrior Service Dog Program using a 
 competitive process.
 ``(4) Considerations for grant amount.--In determining the 
 amount of a grant to award to a nonprofit organization selected 
 under paragraph (3), the Secretary shall consider the 
 following:
 ``(A) The merits of the application submitted by 
 the nonprofit organization.
 ``(B) Whether, and to what extent, there is demand 
 by covered members or covered veterans for assistance 
 dogs provided by the nonprofit organization.
 ``(C) The capacity and capability of the nonprofit 
 organization to raise and train assistance dogs to meet 
 such demand.
 ``(D) Such other factors as the Secretary may 
 determine appropriate.
 ``(5) Limitation on grant amounts.--The amount of a grant 
 awarded to a nonprofit organization selected under paragraph 
 (3) may not exceed $2,000,000.''.

SEC. 767. IMPROVEMENTS RELATING TO BEHAVIORAL HEALTH CARE AVAILABLE 
 UNDER MILITARY HEALTH SYSTEM.

 (a) Expansion of Certain Behavioral Health Programs at the 
Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences.--
 (1) Establishment of graduate programs.--The Secretary of 
 Defense shall establish graduate degree-granting programs in 
 counseling and social work at the Uniformed Services University 
 of the Health Sciences.
 (2) Expansion of clinical psychology graduate program.--The 
 Secretary of Defense shall take such steps as may be necessary 
 to expand the clinical psychology graduate program of the 
 Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences.
 (3) Post-award employment obligation.--
 (A) Agreement with secretary.--Subject to 
 subparagraph (B), as a condition of enrolling in a 
 degree-granting program in clinical psychology, social 
 work, or counseling at the Uniformed Services 
 University of the Health Sciences, a civilian student 
 shall enter into an agreement with the Secretary of 
 Defense pursuant to which the student agrees that, if 
 the student does not become a member of a uniformed 
 service upon graduating such program, the student shall 
 work on a full-time basis as a covered civilian 
 behavioral health provider for a period of a duration 
 that is at least equivalent to the period during which 
 the student was enrolled in such program.
 (B) Other terms and conditions.--An agreement 
 entered into pursuant to subparagraph (A) may include 
 such other terms and conditions as the Secretary of 
 Defense may determine necessary to protect the 
 interests of the United States or otherwise appropriate 
 for purposes of this section, including terms and 
 conditions providing for limited exceptions from the 
 employment obligation specified in such subparagraph.
 (C) Repayment.--A civilian graduate who does not 
 complete the employment obligation required under the 
 agreement entered into pursuant to subparagraph (A) 
 shall repay to the Secretary of Defense a prorated 
 portion of the student's costs of attendance in the 
 program described in such paragraph. The amount of such 
 prorated portion shall be determined by the Secretary.
 (D) Applicability.--This subsection shall apply to 
 civilian students who enroll in the first year of a 
 degree-granting program in clinical psychology, social 
 work, or counseling at the Uniformed Services 
 University of the Health Sciences on or after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act.
 (4) Implementation plan.--Not later than one year after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit 
 to the congressional defense committees a plan for the 
 implementation of this subsection. Such plan shall include--
 (A) a determination as to the resources for 
 personnel and facilities required for such 
 implementation;
 (B) estimated timelines for such implementation; 
 and
 (C) a projection of the number of graduates from 
 the programs specified in paragraph (1) upon the 
 completion of such implementation.
 (b) Scholarship-for-service Program for Civilian Behavioral Health 
Providers.--
 (1) In general.--Beginning not later than two years after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense 
 shall carry out a program under which--
 (A) the Secretary may provide--
 (i) direct grants to cover tuition, fees, 
 living expenses, and other costs of attendance 
 at an institution of higher education to an 
 individual enrolled in a program of study 
 leading to a graduate degree in clinical 
 psychology, social work, counseling, or a 
 related field (as determined by the Secretary); 
 and
 (ii) student loan repayment assistance to a 
 credentialed behavioral health provider who has 
 a graduate degree in clinical psychology, 
 social work, counseling, or a related field (as 
 determined by the Secretary); and
 (B) in exchange for such assistance, the recipient 
 shall commit to work as a covered civilian behavioral 
 health provider in accordance with paragraph (2).
 (2) Post-award employment obligations.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), as a 
 condition of receiving assistance under paragraph (1), 
 the recipient of such assistance shall enter into an 
 agreement with the Secretary of Defense pursuant to 
 which the recipient agrees to work on a full-time basis 
 as a covered civilian behavioral health provider for a 
 period of a duration that is at least equivalent to the 
 period during which the recipient received assistance 
 under such paragraph.
 (B) Other terms and conditions.--An agreement 
 entered into pursuant to subparagraph (A) may include 
 such other terms and conditions as the Secretary of 
 Defense may determine necessary to protect the 
 interests of the United States or otherwise appropriate 
 for purposes of this section, including terms and 
 conditions providing for limited exceptions from the 
 post-award employment obligation specified in such 
 subparagraph.
 (3) Repayment.--An individual who receives assistance under 
 paragraph (1) and does not complete the employment obligation 
 required under the agreement entered into pursuant to paragraph 
 (2) shall repay to the Secretary of Defense a prorated portion 
 of the financial assistance received by the individual under 
 paragraph (1). The amount of such prorated portion shall be 
 determined by the Secretary.
 (4) Implementation plan.--Not later than one year after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense 
 shall submit to the congressional defense committees a plan for 
 the implementation of this subsection. Such plan shall 
 include--
 (A) a determination as to the resources required 
 for such implementation;
 (B) estimated timelines for such implementation; 
 and
 (C) a projection of the number of recipients of 
 assistance under paragraph (1) upon the completion of 
 such implementation.
 (c) Report on Behavioral Health Workforce.--
 (1) Report.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall conduct 
 an analysis of the behavioral health workforce under the direct 
 care component of the TRICARE program and submit to the 
 congressional defense committees a report containing the 
 results of such analysis. Such report shall include, with 
 respect to such workforce, the following:
 (A) The number of positions authorized for military 
 behavioral health providers within such workforce, and 
 the number of such positions filled, disaggregated by 
 the professions described in paragraph (2).
 (B) The number of positions authorized for civilian 
 behavioral health providers within such workforce, and 
 the number of such positions filled, disaggregated by 
 the professions described in paragraph (2).
 (C) For each military department, the ratio of 
 military behavioral health providers assigned to 
 military medical treatment facilities compared to 
 civilian behavioral health providers so assigned, 
 disaggregated by the professions described in paragraph 
 (2).
 (D) For each military department, the number of 
 military behavioral health providers authorized to be 
 embedded within an operational unit, and the number of 
 such positions filled, disaggregated by the professions 
 described in paragraph (2).
 (E) Data on the historical demand for behavioral 
 health services by members of the Armed Forces.
 (F) An estimate of the number of health care 
 providers necessary to meet the demand by such members 
 for behavioral health care services under the direct 
 care component of the TRICARE program, disaggregated by 
 provider type.
 (G) An identification of any shortfall between the 
 estimated number under subparagraph (F) and the total 
 number of positions for behavioral health providers 
 filled within such workforce.
 (H) Such other information as the Secretary may 
 determine appropriate.
 (2) Provider types.--The professions described in this 
 paragraph are as follows:
 (A) Clinical psychologists.
 (B) Social workers.
 (C) Counselors.
 (D) Such other professions as the Secretary may 
 determine appropriate.
 (3) Behavioral workforce at remote locations.--In 
 conducting the analysis of the behavioral health workforce 
 under paragraph (1), the Secretary of Defense shall ensure such 
 behavioral health workforce at remote locations (including Guam 
 and Hawaii) and any shortfalls thereof, is taken into account.
 (d) Plan to Address Shortfalls in Behavioral Health Workforce.--Not 
later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
Secretary shall submit to the congressional defense committees a plan 
to address any shortfall of the behavioral health workforce identified 
under subsection (c)(1)(G). Such plan shall address the following:
 (1) With respect to any such shortfall of military 
 behavioral health providers (addressed separately with respect 
 to such providers assigned to military medical treatment 
 facilities and such providers assigned to be embedded within 
 operational units), the recruitment, accession, retention, 
 special pay and other aspects of compensation, workload, role 
 of the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences and 
 the Armed Forces Health Professions Scholarship Program under 
 chapter 105 of title 10, United States Code, any additional 
 authorities or resources necessary for the Secretary to 
 increase the number of such providers, and such other 
 considerations as the Secretary may consider appropriate.
 (2) With respect to addressing any such shortfall of 
 civilian behavioral health providers, the recruitment, hiring, 
 retention, pay and benefits, workload, educational scholarship 
 programs, any additional authorities or resources necessary for 
 the Secretary to increase the number of such providers, and 
 such other considerations as the Secretary may consider 
 appropriate.
 (3) A recommendation as to whether the number of military 
 behavioral health providers in each military department should 
 be increased, and if so, by how many.
 (4) A plan to ensure that remote installations are 
 prioritized for the assignment of military behavioral health 
 providers.
 (5) Updated access standards for behavioral health care 
 under the military health system, taking into account--
 (A) the duration of time between a patient 
 receiving a referral for such care and the patient 
 receiving individualized treatment (following an 
 initial intake assessment) from a behavioral health 
 provider; and
 (B) the frequency of regular follow-up appointments 
 subsequent to the first appointment at which a patient 
 receives such individualized treatment.
 (6) A plan to expand access to behavioral health care under 
 the military health system using telehealth.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``behavioral health'' includes psychiatry, 
 clinical psychology, social work, counseling, and related 
 fields.
 (2) The term ``civilian behavioral health provider'' means 
 a behavioral health provider who is a civilian employee of the 
 Department of Defense.
 (3) The term ``cost of attendance'' has the meaning given 
 that term in section 472 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
 (20 U.S.C. 1087ll).
 (4) The term ``counselor'' means an individual who holds--
 (A) a master's or doctoral degree from an 
 accredited graduate program in--
 (i) marriage and family therapy; or
 (ii) clinical mental health counseling; and
 (B) a current license or certification from a State 
 that grants the individual the authority to provide 
 counseling services as an independent practitioner in 
 the respective field of the individual.
 (5) The term ``covered civilian behavioral health 
 provider'' means a civilian behavioral health provider whose 
 employment by the Secretary of Defense involves the provision 
 of behavioral health services at a military medical treatment 
 facility.
 (6) The term ``institution of higher education'' has the 
 meaning given that term in section 101 of the Higher Education 
 Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001).
 (7) The term ``military behavioral health provider'' means 
 a behavioral health provider who is a member of the Armed 
 Forces.
 (8) The term ``military installation'' has the meaning 
 given that term in section 2801 of title 10, United States 
 Code.
 (9) The term ``military medical treatment facility'' means 
 a facility specified in section 1073d of such title.
 (10) The term ``remote installation'' means a military 
 installation that the Secretary determines to be in a remote 
 location.
 (11) The term ``State'' means each of the several States, 
 the District of Columbia, and each commonwealth, territory or 
 possession of the United States.
 (12) The term ``TRICARE program'' has the meaning given 
 that term in section 1072 of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 768. ASSIGNMENT OF BEHAVIORAL HEALTH PROVIDERS AND TECHNICIANS TO 
 AIRCRAFT CARRIERS.

 (a) Assignment.--Beginning not later than December 31, 2023, the 
Secretary of the Navy shall ensure there is assigned to each aircraft 
carrier not fewer than two military behavioral health providers and not 
fewer than two behavioral health technicians.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``behavioral health'' includes clinical 
 psychology, social work, counseling, and related fields.
 (2) The term ``behavioral health technician'' means an 
 enlisted member of the Armed Forces who is trained to perform 
 clinical activities in support of a licensed behavioral health 
 provider.
 (3) The term ``military behavioral health provider'' means 
 a behavioral health provider who is a member of the Armed 
 Forces.

SEC. 769. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE INTERNSHIP PROGRAMS RELATING TO 
 CIVILIAN BEHAVIORAL HEALTH PROVIDERS.

 (a) Internship Programs for Civilian Behavioral Health.--
 (1) Establishment of programs.--The Secretary of Defense 
 shall establish paid pre-doctoral and post-doctoral internship 
 programs for the purpose of training clinical psychologists to 
 work as covered civilian behavioral health providers.
 (2) Employment obligation.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), as a 
 condition of participating in an internship program 
 under paragraph (1), the participant shall enter into 
 an agreement with the Secretary of Defense pursuant to 
 which the participant agrees to work on a full-time 
 basis as a covered civilian behavioral health provider 
 for a period of a duration that is at least equivalent 
 to the period of participation in such internship 
 program.
 (B) Other terms and conditions.--An agreement 
 entered into pursuant to subparagraph (A) may include 
 such other terms and conditions as the Secretary of 
 Defense may determine necessary to protect the 
 interests of the United States or otherwise appropriate 
 for purposes of this section, including terms and 
 conditions providing for limited exceptions from the 
 employment obligation specified in such subparagraph.
 (3) Repayment.--An individual who participates in an 
 internship program under paragraph (1) and does not complete 
 the employment obligation required under the agreement entered 
 into pursuant to paragraph (2) shall repay to the Secretary of 
 Defense a prorated portion of the cost of administering such 
 program with respect to such individual and of any payment 
 received by the individual under such program. The amount of 
 such prorated portion shall be determined by the Secretary.
 (4) Implementation plan.--Not later than one year after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense 
 shall submit to the congressional defense committees a plan for 
 the implementation of this subsection. Such plan shall include 
 an explanation of how the Secretary will adjust the workload 
 and staffing of behavioral health providers in military medical 
 treatment facilities to ensure sufficient capacity to supervise 
 participants in the internship programs under paragraph (1).
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``behavioral health'' includes psychiatry, 
 clinical psychology, social work, counseling, and related 
 fields.
 (2) The term ``behavioral health provider'' includes the 
 following:
 (A) A licensed professional counselor.
 (B) A licensed mental health counselor.
 (C) A licensed clinical professional counselor.
 (D) A licensed professional clinical counselor of 
 mental health.
 (E) A licensed clinical mental health counselor.
 (F) A licensed mental health practitioner.
 (3) The term ``covered civilian behavioral health 
 provider'' means a civilian behavioral health provider whose 
 employment by the Secretary of Defense involves the provision 
 of behavioral health services at a military medical treatment 
 facility.
 (4) The term ``civilian behavioral health provider'' means 
 a behavioral health provider who is a civilian employee of the 
 Department of Defense.
 (5) The term ``military medical treatment facility'' means 
 a facility specified in section 1073d of such title.

SEC. 770. BRAIN HEALTH INITIATIVE OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the 
Secretaries concerned, shall establish a comprehensive initiative for 
brain health to be known as the ``Warfighter Brain Health Initiative'' 
(in this section referred to as the ``Initiative'') for the purpose of 
unifying efforts and programs across the Department of Defense to 
improve the cognitive performance and brain health of members of the 
Armed Forces.
 (b) Objectives.--The objectives of the Initiative shall be the 
following:
 (1) To enhance, maintain, and restore the cognitive 
 performance of members of the Armed Forces through education, 
 training, prevention, protection, monitoring, detection, 
 diagnosis, treatment, and rehabilitation, including through the 
 following activities:
 (A) The establishment of a program to monitor 
 cognitive brain health across the Department of 
 Defense, beginning upon the accession of a member to 
 the Armed Forces and repeated at regular intervals 
 thereafter, with the goal of detecting any need for 
 cognitive enhancement or restoration resulting from 
 potential brain exposures of the member, to mitigate 
 possible evolution of injury or disease progression.
 (B) The identification and dissemination of 
 thresholds for blast pressure safety and associated 
 emerging scientific evidence.
 (C) The modification of high-risk training and 
 operational activities to mitigate the negative effects 
 of repetitive blast exposure.
 (D) The identification of individuals who perform 
 high-risk training or occupational activities, for 
 purposes of increased monitoring of the brain health of 
 such individuals.
 (E) The development and operational fielding of 
 non-invasive, portable, point-of-care medical devices, 
 to inform the diagnosis and treatment of traumatic 
 brain injury.
 (F) The establishment of a standardized monitoring 
 program that documents and analyzes blast exposures 
 that may affect the brain health of members of the 
 Armed Forces.
 (G) The development of a resource that would set 
 forth specific criteria used in the awarding of 
 potential grants for research projects relating to the 
 direct correlation of environmental exposures and brain 
 injuries to the brain health of members of the Armed 
 Forces.
 (H) The incorporation of the findings and 
 recommendations of the report of the National Academies 
 of Science, Engineering, and Medicine titled 
 ``Traumatic Brain Injury: A Roadmap for Accelerating 
 Progress'' and published in 2022 (relating to the 
 acceleration of progress in traumatic brain injury 
 research and care), or any successor report, into 
 activities of the Department relating to brain health, 
 as applicable.
 (2) To harmonize and prioritize the efforts of the 
 Department of Defense into a single approach to brain health, 
 to produce more efficient and effective results.
 (c) Strategy and Implementation Plan.--Not later than one year 
after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense 
shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report setting 
forth a strategy and implementation plan of the Department of Defense 
to achieve the objectives of the Initiative under subsection (b).
 (d) Annual Budget Justification Documents.--In the budget 
justification materials submitted to Congress in support of the 
Department of Defense budget for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2029 
(as submitted with the budget of the President under section 1105(a) of 
title 31, United States Code), the Secretary of Defense shall include a 
budget justification display that includes all activities of the 
Department relating to the Initiative.
 (e) Annual Reports.--Not later than January 31, 2024, and annually 
thereafter until January 31, 2030, the Secretary of Defense shall 
submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the 
Initiative that includes the following:
 (1) A description of the activities taken under the 
 Initiative and resources expended under the Initiative during 
 the prior fiscal year.
 (2) A summary of the progress made during the prior fiscal 
 year with respect to the objectives of the Initiative under 
 subsection (b).
 (f) Secretary Concerned Defined.--In this section, the term 
``Secretary concerned'' has the meaning given that term in section 101 
of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 771. AUTHORITY TO CONDUCT PILOT PROGRAM RELATING TO MONITORING OF 
 BLAST OVERPRESSURE EXPOSURE.

 (a) Authority.--The Director of the Defense Health Agency may 
conduct, as part of the initiative of the Department of Defense known 
as the ``Warfighter Brain Initiative'' (or any successor initiative), a 
pilot program under which the Director shall monitor blast overpressure 
exposure through the use of commercially available, off-the-shelf, 
wearable sensors, and document and evaluate data collected as a result 
of such monitoring.
 (b) Locations.--Monitoring activities under a pilot program 
conducted pursuant to subsection (a) shall be carried out in each 
training environment that the Director determines poses a risk for 
blast overpressure exposure.
 (c) Documentation and Sharing of Data.--If the Director conducts a 
pilot program pursuant to subsection (a), the Director shall--
 (1) ensure that any data collected pursuant to such pilot 
 program that is related to the health effects of the blast 
 overpressure exposure of a member of the Armed Forces who 
 participated in the pilot program is documented and maintained 
 by the Secretary of Defense in an electronic health record for 
 the member; and
 (2) to the extent practicable, and in accordance with 
 applicable provisions of law relating to data privacy, make 
 data collected pursuant to such pilot program available to 
 other academic and medical researchers for the purpose of 
 informing future research and treatment options.

SEC. 772. STANDARDIZATION ACROSS DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE OF POLICIES 
 RELATING TO SERVICE BY INDIVIDUALS DIAGNOSED WITH HBV.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the 
Secretaries concerned, shall--
 (1) review regulations, establish policies, and issue 
 guidance relating to service by individuals diagnosed with HBV, 
 consistent with the health care standards and clinical 
 guidelines of the Department of Defense; and
 (2) identify areas where regulations, policies, and 
 guidance of the Department relating to individuals diagnosed 
 with HBV (including with respect to enlistments, assignments, 
 deployments, and retention standards) may be standardized 
 across the Armed Forces.
 (b) Awareness, Education, and Training.--
 (1) Reviews and recommendations.--The Secretary of Defense 
 shall--
 (A) conduct a review of the education, training, 
 and resources furnished to members of the Armed Forces 
 regarding the regulations and policies of the 
 Department of Defense that govern the screening, 
 documentation, treatment, management, and practice 
 standards for individuals diagnosed with HBV, including 
 a review of the awareness and understanding of such 
 policies within clinical settings;
 (B) conduct a review of the resources and support 
 services furnished to members of the Armed Forces 
 diagnosed with HBV, including any resources containing 
 information on--
 (i) the health care options of the member; 
 or
 (ii) regulations or policies of the 
 Department relating to such diagnosed members; 
 and
 (C) identify recommendations, based on the findings 
 of the reviews conducted under subsections (A) and (B), 
 to improve the awareness and understanding of 
 regulations and policies of the Department for 
 individuals diagnosed with HBV.
 (2) Provision of education, training, resources, and 
 support.--The Secretary of Defense, taking into account the 
 recommendations under paragraph (1)(C), shall provide to 
 members of the Armed Forces--
 (A) education, training, and resources to increase 
 awareness and understanding of the regulations and 
 policies of the Department of Defense that govern the 
 screening, documentation, treatment, management, and 
 practice standards for individuals diagnosed with HBV, 
 including in health care settings; and
 (B) in the case of members of the Armed Forces 
 diagnosed with HBV, education, resources, and support 
 services regarding the regulations and policies of the 
 Department relating to such diagnosed members, 
 including with respect to enlistments, assignments, 
 deployments, retention standards, and health care 
 services available to such members.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``HBV'' means the Hepatitis B Virus.
 (2) The term ``Secretary concerned'' has the meaning given 
 that term in section 101 of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 773. CERTIFICATION PROGRAM IN PROVISION OF MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES 
 TO MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES, VETERANS, AND MILITARY 
 FAMILIES.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the 
Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the President of the Uniformed 
Services University of the Health Sciences, shall develop a curriculum 
and certification program to provide civilian mental health 
professionals and students in mental health-related disciplines with 
the specialized knowledge and skills necessary to address the unique 
mental health needs of members of the Armed Forces, veterans, and 
military families.
 (b) Implementation.--Not later than 90 days after completing the 
development of the curriculum and certification program under 
subsection (a), the Secretary of Defense shall implement such 
curriculum and certification program in the Uniformed Services 
University of the Health Sciences.
 (c) Authority to Disseminate Best Practices.--The Secretary of 
Defense may disseminate best practices based on the curriculum and 
certification program developed and implemented under this section to 
other institutions of higher education.
 (d) Termination.--The authority to carry out the curriculum and 
certification program under this section shall terminate on the date 
that is five years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (e) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the termination date 
specified in subsection (d), the Secretary of Defense shall submit to 
the appropriate congressional committees a report on the results of the 
curriculum and certification program developed and implemented under 
this section.
 (f) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the Committee on Armed Services and the 
 Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Armed Services and the 
 Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of 
 the Senate.
 (2) The term ``institution of higher education'' has the 
 meaning given that term in section 102 of the Higher Education 
 Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1002).

SEC. 774. PILOT PROGRAM ON CRYOPRESERVATION AND STORAGE.

 (a) Pilot Program.--The Secretary of Defense shall establish a 
pilot program to provide not more than 1,000 members of the Armed 
Forces serving on active duty with the opportunity to cryopreserve and 
store their gametes prior to deployment in support of combat or special 
operations.
 (b) Period.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall provide for the 
 cryopreservation and storage of gametes of a participating 
 member of the Armed Forces under subsection (a), at no cost to 
 the member, in a facility of the Department of Defense or at a 
 private entity pursuant to an agreement under subsection (d) 
 until the date that is one year after the retirement, 
 separation, or release of the member from the Armed Forces.
 (2) Continued cryopreservation and storage.--At the end of 
 the one-year period specified in paragraph (1), the Secretary 
 shall authorize an individual whose gametes were cryopreserved 
 and stored in a facility of the Department as described in such 
 paragraph to select, including pursuant to an advance medical 
 directive or military testamentary instrument completed under 
 subsection (c), one of the following options:
 (A) To continue such cryopreservation and storage 
 in such facility with the cost of such cryopreservation 
 and storage borne by the individual.
 (B) To transfer the gametes to a private 
 cryopreservation and storage facility selected by the 
 individual.
 (C) To authorize the Secretary to dispose of the 
 gametes of the individual not earlier than the date 
 that is 90 days after the end of the one-year period 
 specified in paragraph (1) with respect to the 
 individual.
 (c) Advance Medical Directive and Military Testamentary 
Instrument.--A member of the Armed Forces who elects to cryopreserve 
and store their gametes under this section shall complete an advance 
medical directive described in section 1044c(b) of title 10, United 25 
States Code, and a military testamentary instrument described in 
section 1044d(b) of such title, that explicitly specifies the use of 
their cryopreserved and stored gametes if such member dies or otherwise 
loses the capacity to consent to the use of their cryopreserved and 
stored gametes.
 (d) Agreements.--To carry out this section, the Secretary--
 (1) may enter into agreements with private entities that 
 provide cryopreservation and storage services for gametes; and
 (2) in selecting such private entities with which to enter 
 into agreements, shall (to the maximum extent practicable) 
 select such private entities that offer multi-site storage and 
 fertility testing services prior to cryopreservation.

SEC. 775. PILOT PROGRAM FOR PARTICIPATION BY MEMBERS OF SELECTED 
 RESERVE IN HEALTH PROFESSIONS SCHOLARSHIP AND FINANCIAL 
 ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS.

 (a) Pilot Program.--Notwithstanding section 2123 of title 10, 
United States Code, and in accordance with such regulations as may be 
prescribed by the Secretary of Defense for the purpose of carrying out 
this section, each Secretary of a military department shall carry out a 
pilot program under which that Secretary may modify service obligations 
for certain individuals under the health professions scholarship and 
financial assistance program of that military department, to expand 
participation in such program to such individuals.
 (b) Eligibility.--To be eligible for participation in the pilot 
program under subsection (a), in addition to meeting the eligibility 
requirements under section 2122 of title 10, United States Code, an 
individual may not have previously been a member of the health 
professions scholarship and financial assistance program.
 (c) Conditions on Participation.--
 (1) In general.--As a condition of participating in the 
 pilot program under subsection (a), an individual eligible 
 under subsection (b) shall enter into an agreement with the 
 Secretary of the military department concerned pursuant to 
 which the individual agrees--
 (A) to participate as a member of the health 
 professions scholarship and financial assistance 
 program of that military department;
 (B) to complete courses of study and specialized 
 training under such program in a health profession 
 discipline designated by that Secretary as a critically 
 needed wartime discipline; and
 (C) upon completion of participation in such 
 program, to satisfy, in lieu of the active duty 
 obligation under section 2123 of title 10, United 
 States Code, a service obligation in the Selected 
 Reserve of the Ready Reserve of that military 
 department for the period described in paragraph (2).
 (2) Length of period of service.--The period described in 
 this paragraph is a period of time of a length determined by 
 the Secretary of the military department concerned, except that 
 such period may not be shorter than a period equal to--
 (A) each year of participation in the health 
 professions scholarship and financial assistance 
 program pursuant to paragraph (1)(A) multiplied by two 
 and a half; plus
 (B) if such participation was for a period of two 
 years or fewer, an additional two and a half years.
 (3) Details of service obligation.--Unless otherwise 
 specified by the Secretary of the military department 
 concerned--
 (A) any period of time spent in intern or residency 
 training shall not be creditable in satisfying the 
 service obligation under paragraph (1)(C);
 (B) any period of time used to satisfy another 
 military service obligation shall not be creditable in 
 satisfying the service obligation under paragraph 
 (1)(C); and
 (C) the period described in paragraph (2) shall be 
 a consecutive period of time.
 (4) Failure to complete.--
 (A) Alternative obligations.--A participant in the 
 pilot program under subsection (a) who is relieved of 
 the service obligation under paragraph (1)(C) before 
 the completion of that service obligation may be given, 
 with or without the consent of the participant, either 
 of the following alternative obligations, as determined 
 by the Secretary of the military department concerned:
 (i) A service obligation in the Selected 
 Reserve of the Ready Reserve of another 
 military department for a period of time not 
 less than the remaining service obligation of 
 the participant.
 (ii) Repayment to the Secretary of Defense 
 of a percentage of the total cost incurred by 
 the Secretary under such pilot program on 
 behalf of the member pursuant to the repayment 
 provisions of section 303a(e) or 373 of title 
 37, United States Code.
 (B) Civilian employee alternative.--In addition to 
 the alternative obligations specified in subparagraph 
 (A), if a participant in the pilot program under 
 subsection (a) is relieved of the service obligation 
 under paragraph (1)(C) by reason of the separation of 
 the participant because of a physical disability, the 
 Secretary of the military department concerned may give 
 the participant a service obligation as a civilian 
 employee employed as a health care professional in a 
 facility of the uniformed services for a period of time 
 determined by that Secretary, but not to exceed the 
 remaining service obligation of the participant.
 (d) Metrics and Evaluations.--The Secretary of Defense shall 
establish metrics, and carry out evaluations using such metrics, to 
determine the effectiveness of the pilot program under subsection (a).
 (e) Termination.--The authority to carry out the pilot program 
under subsection (a) shall terminate on October 1, 2027.
 (f) Briefings.--Not later than 180 days prior to the date on which 
the pilot program under subsection (a) terminates, each Secretary of a 
military department shall provide to the Committees on Armed Services 
of the House of Representatives and the Senate a briefing on the 
effectiveness of the pilot program.
 (g) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The terms ``course of study'' and ``specialized 
 training'' have the meaning given those terms in section 2120 
 of title 10, United States Code.
 (2) The term ``health professions scholarship and financial 
 assistance program'' has the meaning given the term ``program'' 
 under such section.
 (3) The term ``member of the health professions scholarship 
 and financial assistance program'' has the meaning given the 
 term ``member of the program'' under such section.

SEC. 776. PILOT PROGRAM ON ENSURING PHARMACEUTICAL SUPPLY STABILITY.

 (a) In General.--Not later than January 1 2024, the Secretary of 
Defense, acting through the Director of the Defense Logistics Agency, 
shall establish a pilot program to acquire, manage, and replenish a 
180-day supply of at least 30 commonly used generic drugs at risk of 
shortage under the military health system as a result of a 
pharmaceutical supply chain disruption, to ensure the stability of such 
supply.
 (b) Military Medical Treatment Facilities.--The Secretary of 
Defense shall select for participation in the pilot program established 
under subsection (a) not fewer than five military medical treatment 
facilities that are--
 (1) located in the continental United States; and
 (2) at the greatest risk of pharmaceutical supply chain 
 disruption, as determined by the Secretary.
 (c) Elements.--In carrying out the pilot program established under 
subsection (a), the Secretary of Defense shall--
 (1) use the systems and processes of the Direct Vendor 
 Delivery System established by section 352 of the National 
 Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1996 (Public Law 104-
 106; 10 U.S.C. 2458 note);
 (2) include the establishment of a vendor managed inventory 
 approach to pharmaceutical distribution, to acquire, manage, 
 and replenish the vendor-held supply described in subsection 
 (a) to prevent product expiration and shortages; and
 (3) ensure guaranteed Department of Defense access to the 
 vendor managed inventory approach specified in paragraph (2).
 (d) Termination.--The pilot program established under this section 
shall terminate on the date that is three years after the date of the 
enactment of this Act.
 (e) Initial Report.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the 
establishment of the pilot program under subsection (a), the Secretary 
of Defense shall submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the 
House of Representatives and Senate a report on the design of the pilot 
program. Such report shall include--
 (1) a description of the military medical treatment 
 facilities selected under subsection (b) and the generic drugs 
 selected for the pilot program pursuant to subsection (a);
 (2) the plan for the implementation and management of the 
 pilot program; and
 (3) key performance indicators to measure the success of 
 the pilot program in ensuring the availability of generic drugs 
 selected for the pilot program pursuant to subsection (a).
 (f) Final Report.--Not later than 180 days after the termination 
date under subsection (d), the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
Committees on Armed Services of the House of Representatives and Senate 
a final report on the results of the pilot program. The report shall 
include--
 (1) measurements of key performance indicators identified 
 in the initial report required under subsection (e);
 (2) an analysis of the success of the pilot program in 
 preventing shortages of commonly used generic drugs within the 
 military medical treatment facilities selected under subsection 
 (b); and
 (3) recommendations for further expansions of the pilot 
 program, including any legislative or regulatory proposals the 
 Secretary determines would reduce supply chain risk to commonly 
 used generic drugs under the military health system.
 (g) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``generic drug'' means a drug (as defined in 
 section 201 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
 U.S.C. 231)) that is approved pursuant to section 505(j) of 
 such Act (21 U.S.C. 355(j)).
 (2) The term ``pharmaceutical supply chain disruption'' 
 means a disruption described in the report of the Inspector 
 General of the Department of Defense titled ``Evaluation of the 
 Department of Defense's Mitigation of Foreign Suppliers in the 
 Pharmaceutical Supply Chain'' (DODIG-2021-126) and published on 
 September 20, 2021.

SEC. 777. ESTABLISHMENT OF PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM BETWEEN UNITED STATES 
 AND UKRAINE FOR MILITARY TRAUMA CARE AND RESEARCH.

 Not later than February 24, 2023, the Secretary of Defense shall 
seek to enter into a partnership with the appropriate counterpart from 
the Government of Ukraine for the establishment of a joint program on 
military trauma care and research. Such program shall consist of the 
following:
 (1) The sharing of relevant lessons learned from the Russo-
 Ukraine War.
 (2) The conduct of relevant joint conferences and exchanges 
 with military medical professionals from Ukraine and the United 
 States.
 (3) Collaboration with the armed forces of Ukraine on 
 matters relating to health policy, health administration, and 
 medical supplies and equipment, including through knowledge 
 exchanges.
 (4) The conduct of joint research and development on the 
 health effects of new and emerging weapons.
 (5) The entrance into agreements with military medical 
 schools of Ukraine for reciprocal education programs under 
 which students at the Uniformed Services University of the 
 Health Sciences receive specialized military medical 
 instruction at the such military medical schools of Ukraine and 
 military medical personnel of Ukraine receive specialized 
 military medical instruction at the Uniformed Services 
 University of the Health Sciences, pursuant to section 2114(f) 
 of title 10, United States Code.
 (6) The provision of support to Ukraine for the purpose of 
 facilitating the establishment in Ukraine of a program 
 substantially similar to the Wounded Warrior Program in the 
 United States.
 (7) The provision of training to the armed forces of 
 Ukraine in the following areas:
 (A) Health matters relating to chemical, 
 biological, radiological, nuclear and explosive 
 weapons.
 (B) Preventive medicine and infectious disease.
 (C) Post traumatic stress disorder.
 (D) Suicide prevention.
 (8) The maintenance of a list of medical supplies and 
 equipment needed.
 (9) Such other elements as the Secretary of Defense may 
 determine appropriate.

SEC. 778. GRANT PROGRAM FOR INCREASED COOPERATION ON POST-TRAUMATIC 
 STRESS DISORDER RESEARCH BETWEEN UNITED STATES AND 
 ISRAEL.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the 
Secretary of Defense, acting through the Psychological Health and 
Traumatic Brain Injury Research Program, should seek to explore 
scientific collaboration between American academic institutions and 
nonprofit research entities, and Israeli institutions with expertise in 
researching, diagnosing, and treating post-traumatic stress disorder.
 (b) Grant Program.--The Secretary of Defense, in coordination with 
the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of State, shall 
award grants to eligible entities to carry out collaborative research 
between the United States and Israel with respect to post-traumatic 
stress disorders. The Secretary of Defense shall carry out the grant 
program under this section in accordance with the agreement titled 
``Agreement Between the Government of the United States of America and 
the Government of Israel on the United States-Israel Binational Science 
Foundation'', dated September 27, 1972.
 (c) Eligible Entities.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
this section, an entity shall be an academic institution or a nonprofit 
entity located in the United States.
 (d) Award.--The Secretary shall award grants under this section to 
eligible entities that--
 (1) carry out a research project that--
 (A) addresses a requirement in the area of post-
 traumatic stress disorders that the Secretary 
 determines appropriate to research using such grant; 
 and
 (B) is conducted by the eligible entity and an 
 entity in Israel under a joint research agreement; and
 (2) meet such other criteria that the Secretary may 
 establish.
 (e) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this 
section, an eligible entity shall submit an application to the 
Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such commitments 
and information as the Secretary may require.
 (f) Gift Authority.--The Secretary may accept, hold, and 
administer, any gift of money made on the condition that the gift be 
used for the purpose of the grant program under this section. Such 
gifts of money accepted under this subsection shall be deposited in the 
Treasury in the Department of Defense General Gift Fund and shall be 
available, subject to appropriation, without fiscal year limitation.
 (g) Reports.--Not later than 180 days after the date on which an 
eligible entity completes a research project using a grant under this 
section, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report that 
contains--
 (1) a description of how the eligible entity used the 
 grant; and
 (2) an evaluation of the level of success of the research 
 project.
 (h) Termination.--The authority to award grants under this section 
shall terminate on the date that is 7 years after the date on which the 
first such grant is awarded.

SEC. 779. SUICIDE CLUSTER: STANDARDIZED DEFINITION FOR USE BY 
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE; CONGRESSIONAL NOTIFICATION.

 (a) Standardization of Definition.--Not later than one year after 
the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in 
consultation with the Secretaries concerned, shall develop, for use 
across the Armed Forces, a standardized definition for the term 
``suicide cluster''.
 (b) Notification Required.--Beginning not later than one year after 
the date of the enactment of this Act, whenever the Secretary 
determines the occurrence of a suicide cluster (as that term is defined 
pursuant to subsection (a)) among members of the Armed Forces, the 
Secretary shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a 
notification of such determination.
 (c) Coordination Required.--In developing the definition under 
subsection (a) and the process for submitting required notifications 
under subsection (b), the Secretary of Defense shall coordinate with 
the Secretaries concerned.
 (d) Briefing.--Not later than April 1, 2023, the Secretary of 
Defense shall provide to the appropriate congressional committees a 
briefing on the following:
 (1) The methodology being used in the development of the 
 definition under subsection (a).
 (2) The progress made towards the development of the 
 process for submitting required notifications under subsection 
 (b).
 (3) An estimated timeline for the implementation of this 
 section.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means 
 the following:
 (A) The Committee on Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (B) The Committee on Armed Services of the Senate.
 (C) The Committee on Transportation and 
 Infrastructure of the House of Representatives.
 (D) The Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate.
 (2) The term ``Secretary concerned'' has the meaning given 
 that term in section 101 of title 10, United States Codes.

SEC. 780. LIMITATION ON REALIGNMENT OR REDUCTION OF MILITARY MEDICAL 
 MANNING END STRENGTH: CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENT AND OTHER 
 REFORMS.

 (a) Limitation.--
 (1) In general.--In addition to the limitation under 
 section 719 of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
 Fiscal Year 2020 (Public Law 116-92; 133 Stat. 1454), as most 
 recently amended by section 731 of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 135 
 Stat. 1795), the Secretary of Defense and the Secretaries 
 concerned may not realign or reduce military medical end 
 strength authorizations during the period described in 
 paragraph (2), and after such period, may not realign or reduce 
 such authorizations unless--
 (A) the report is submitted under subsection (b); 
 and
 (B) the certification is submitted under subsection 
 (c).
 (2) Covered period.--The period described in this paragraph 
 is a period of at least three years that begins on the date of 
 the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Report on Composition of Military Medical Workforce 
Requirements.--The Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the 
Secretaries of the military departments, shall conduct an assessment of 
military medical manning requirements and submit to Committees on Armed 
Services of the House of Representatives and the Senate a report 
containing the findings of such assessment. Such assessment shall be 
informed by the following:
 (1) The National Defense Strategy submitted under section 
 113(g) of title 10, United States Code.
 (2) The National Military Strategy prepared under section 
 153(b) of such title.
 (3) The campaign plans of the combatant commands.
 (4) Theater strategies.
 (5) The joint medical estimate under section 732 of the 
 John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
 Year 2019 (Public Law 115-232; 132 Stat. 1817).
 (6) The plan of the Department of Defense on integrated 
 medical operations, as updated pursuant to paragraph (1) of 
 section 724(a) of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
 Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 135 Stat. 1793; 10 U.S.C. 
 1096 note).
 (7) The plan of the Department of Defense on global patient 
 movement, as updated pursuant to paragraph (2) of such section.
 (8) The biosurveillance program of the Department of 
 Defense established pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 
 6420.02 (relating to biosurveillance).
 (9) Requirements for graduate medical education.
 (10) The report of the COVID-19 Military Health System 
 Review Panel under section 731 of the William M. (Mac) 
 Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
 2021 (Public Law 116-283; 134 Stat. 3698).
 (11) The report of the Inspector General of the Department 
 of Defense titled ``Evaluation of Department of Defense 
 Military Medical Treatment Facility Challenges During the 
 Coronavirus Disease-2019 (COVID-19) Pandemic in Fiscal Year 
 2021 (DODIG-2022-081)'' and published on April 5, 2022.
 (12) Such other reports as may be determined appropriate by 
 the Secretary of Defense.
 (c) Certification.--The Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
Committees on Armed Services of the House of Representatives and the 
Senate a certification containing the following:
 (1) A certification of the completion of a comprehensive 
 review of military medical manning, including with respect to 
 the medical corps (or other health- or medical-related 
 component of a military department), designator, profession, 
 occupation, and rating of medical personnel.
 (2) A justification for any proposed increase, realignment, 
 reduction, or other change to the specialty and occupational 
 composition of military medical end strength authorizations, 
 which may include compliance with a requirement or 
 recommendation set forth in a strategy, plan, or other matter 
 specified in subsection (b).
 (3) A certification that, in the case that any change to 
 such specialty or occupational composition is required, a 
 vacancy resulting from such change may not be filled with a 
 position other than a health- or medical-related position until 
 such time as there are no military medical billets remaining to 
 fill the vacancy.
 (4) A risk analysis associated with the potential 
 realignment or reduction of any military medical end strength 
 authorizations.
 (5) An identification of any plans of the Department to 
 backfill military medical personnel positions with civilian 
 personnel.
 (6) A plan to address persistent vacancies for civilian 
 personnel in health- or medical-related positions, and a risk 
 analysis associated with the hiring, onboarding, and retention 
 of such civilian personnel, taking into account provider 
 shortfalls across the United States.
 (7) A comprehensive plan to mitigate any risk identified 
 pursuant to paragraph (4) or (6), including with respect to 
 funding necessary for such mitigation across fiscal years.
 (d) Interim Briefings and Final Report.--
 (1) Initial briefing.--Not later than April 1, 2023, the 
 Secretary of Defense shall provide to the Committees on Armed 
 Services of the House of Representatives and the Senate a 
 briefing on how the Secretary plans to meet the report 
 requirement under subsection (b) and the certification 
 requirement under subsection (c).
 (2) Briefing on progress.--Not later than two years after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense 
 shall provide to the Committees on Armed Services of the House 
 of Representatives and the Senate a briefing on the progress 
 made towards completion of such requirements.
 (3) Final report.--Not later than three years after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense 
 shall submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the House 
 of Representatives and the Senate a final report on the 
 completion of such requirements. Such final report shall be in 
 addition to the report required under subsection (b) and the 
 certification required under subsection (c).
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``medical personnel'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 115a(e) of such title.
 (2) The term ``theater strategy'' means an overarching 
 construct outlining the vision of a combatant commander for the 
 integration and synchronization of military activities and 
 operations with other national power instruments to achieve the 
 strategic objectives of the United States.

SEC. 781. REVIEW AND UPDATE OF POLICY RELATING TO COMMAND NOTIFICATION 
 PROCESS AND REDUCTION OF MENTAL HEALTH STIGMA.

 (a) Review and Update.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than October 1, 2023, the 
 Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the Secretaries of 
 the military departments, shall review and update the 
 Department of Defense Instruction 6490.08, titled ``Command 
 Notification Requirements to Dispel Stigma in Providing Mental 
 Health Care to Service Members'', or any successor instruction.
 (2) Elements.--In carrying out the review and update of the 
 instruction under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall ensure the 
 updated version--
 (A) provides health care providers with clear 
 guidance on the process and timeline for making a 
 required command notification;
 (B) provides for the protection of the privacy of 
 mental health information shared through such 
 notification process, including by--
 (i) restricting access to such information 
 to personnel for whom such specific knowledge 
 is necessary for the conduct of official 
 duties;
 (ii) requiring that military commanders, 
 and any other personnel with access to such 
 information, treat such information as any 
 other health information, including with 
 respect to applicable privacy laws; and
 (iii) setting forth updated training 
 requirements for military commanders on the 
 treatment of such information; and
 (C) directs military commanders to take steps to 
 further reduce the stigma of mental health among 
 members of the Armed Forces, including by promoting 
 mental health care as equivalent to other types of 
 health care.
 (b) Report.--Not later than April 1, 2023, the Secretary of Defense 
shall submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the House of 
Representatives and the Senate a report on the progress made towards 
the completion of the review and update under subsection (a).

SEC. 782. GRANT PROGRAM TO STUDY TREATMENT OF POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS 
 DISORDER USING CERTAIN PSYCHEDELIC SUBSTANCES.

 (a) Grant Program.--The Secretary of Defense shall carry out a 
program to award grants to eligible entities to conduct research on the 
treatment of members of the Armed Forces serving on active duty with 
post-traumatic stress disorder using covered psychedelic substances.
 (b) Criterion for Approval.--The Secretary may award a grant under 
this section to an eligible entity to conduct research if the Secretary 
determines that the research involves a therapy that has the potential 
to demonstrate significant medical evidence of a therapeutic advantage.
 (c) Eligible Entities.--The Secretary may award a grant under this 
section to any of the following:
 (1) A department or agency of the Federal Government or a 
 State government.
 (2) An academic institution.
 (3) A nonprofit entity.
 (d) Use of Grant Funds.--A recipient of a grant awarded under this 
section may use the grant to--
 (1) conduct one or more phase two clinical trials for the 
 treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder that--
 (A) include members of the Armed Forces serving on 
 active duty as participants in the clinical trial; and
 (B) use individual or group therapy assisted by 
 covered psychedelic substances; or
 (2) train practitioners to provide treatment to members of 
 the Armed Forces serving on active duty for post-traumatic 
 stress disorder using covered psychedelic substances.
 (e) Participation in Clinical Trials.--The Secretary may authorize 
a member of the Armed Forces to participate in a clinical trial that is 
conducted using a grant awarded under this section or funds provided 
under subsection (f) and is authorized pursuant to section 505 of the 
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 355), without regard 
to--
 (1) whether the clinical trial involves a substance 
 included in the schedule under section 202 of the Controlled 
 Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 812); or
 (2) section 912a of title 10, United States Code (article 
 112a of the Uniform Code of Military Justice).
 (f) Additional Authority.--In addition to awarding grants under 
this section, the Secretary may provide funds for a clinical research 
trial using covered psychedelic substances that is authorized pursuant 
to section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 
355) and includes members of the Armed Forces as participants in the 
trial.
 (g) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered psychedelic substances'' means any 
 of the following:
 (A) 3,4-methylenedioxy-methamphetamine (commonly 
 known as ``MDMA'').
 (B) Psilocybin.
 (C) Ibogaine.
 (D) 5-Methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine (commonly 
 known as ``5-MeO-DMT'').
 (2) The term ``State'' includes any State, district, 
 territory, or possession of the United States.

SEC. 783. PILOT PROGRAMS OF DEFENSE HEALTH AGENCY RELATING TO SEXUAL 
 HEALTH.

 (a) Telehealth Pilot Program on Sexual Health.--
 (1) Establishment.--The Director of the Defense Health 
 Agency shall carry out a five-year telehealth pilot program for 
 sexual health (in this subsection referred to as the 
 ``telehealth pilot program'').
 (2) Eligibility.--An individual is eligible to participate 
 in the telehealth pilot program if the individual is a member 
 of the uniformed services on active duty enrolled in TRICARE 
 Prime, without regard to whether a health care professional has 
 referred the individual for such participation.
 (3) Applications.--
 (A) In general.--Eligible individuals seeking to 
 participate in the telehealth pilot program shall 
 submit to the Director an application for participation 
 at such time, in such form, and containing such 
 information as the Director may prescribe.
 (B) Online accessibility.--Any application form 
 under subparagraph (A) shall be accessible online.
 (4) Number of participants.--In selecting participants for 
 the telehealth pilot program from among eligible individuals 
 who have submitted an application in accordance with paragraph 
 (3), the Director may establish a cap limiting the number of 
 such participants only if--
 (A) the Director determines that such limited 
 participation is necessary as a result of limited 
 provider availability; and
 (B) not later than 30 days after making such 
 determination, the Director submits to the 
 congressional defense committees a report that 
 includes--
 (i) a description of the limited provider 
 availability upon which the Director has based 
 such determination;
 (ii) an identification of the total number 
 of eligible individuals who have submitted an 
 application in accordance with paragraph (3); 
 and
 (iii) an estimated timeline for lifting the 
 cap established.
 (5) Telehealth screenings.--
 (A) In general.--Under the telehealth pilot 
 program, the Director shall furnish to any eligible 
 individual who elects to participate in such program a 
 telehealth screening. During such screening, a health 
 care provider shall--
 (i) conduct a remote assessment with 
 respect to the individual's sexual health, 
 including any medication conditions related to 
 the individual's sexual health
 (ii) provide comprehensive counseling on 
 the full range of methods of contraception 
 available to the individual, in accordance with 
 the clinical practice guidelines established 
 under section 718 of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 (Public 
 Law 114-92; 129 Stat. 686; 10 U.S.C. 1074d 
 note);
 (iii) as applicable, diagnose the 
 individual or, pursuant to subparagraph (B), 
 order appropriate follow-up diagnostic services 
 as necessary as a result of the assessment 
 under clause (i); and
 (iv) prescribe such prescription 
 medications, including contraceptives or Pre-
 Exposure Prophylaxis, as may be determined 
 necessary by the provider as a result of such 
 assessment.
 (B) Laboratory diagnostic services.--In diagnosing 
 an individual under subparagraph (A)(iii), a health 
 care provider may furnish to the individual such 
 laboratory diagnostic services as may be necessary for 
 the diagnosis (including mail-order laboratory 
 diagnostic services).
 (C) Prescriptions.--The Director shall ensure that 
 prescriptions under subparagraph (A)(iv) may be filled 
 through either military medical treatment facility 
 pharmacies or the national mail-order pharmacy program 
 under the TRICARE program.
 (6) Follow-up remote appointments.--If a health care 
 provider prescribes medications to an individual pursuant to a 
 screening under the telehelath pilot program, that health care 
 provider shall conduct such follow-up remote appointments as 
 may be necessary to monitor the health of the individual 
 following fulfilment of the prescription.
 (7) Coordination with facilities.--The Director shall 
 coordinate with each military commander or director of a 
 military medical treatment facility to facilitate the provision 
 through the facility of laboratory and other services necessary 
 for the furnishment of screenings and the fulfilment of 
 prescriptions under the telehealth pilot program.
 (8) Contract authority.--In carrying out the telehealth 
 pilot program, the Director may enter into contracts under such 
 program with providers of mail-order laboratory services and 
 providers of mail-order contraceptives or Pre-Exposure 
 Prophylaxis for the furnishment of laboratory services or the 
 fulfilment of prescriptions under paragraph (5).
 (9) Reports.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter for five years, 
 the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional 
 defense committees a report on the status and effects of the 
 telehealth pilot program. Each such report shall include, with 
 respect to the year covered by the report, the following:
 (A) The number of health care providers who have 
 furnished services under the telehealth pilot program, 
 dissagregated by whether the provider is a TRICARE 
 network provider.
 (B) The average wait time for screenings under the 
 telehealth pilot program.
 (C) Any effect of the telehealth pilot program with 
 respect to the Defense Health Agency.
 (D) Such other information relating to the status 
 or effect of the telehealth pilot program as may be 
 determined relevant by the Secretary.
 (b) Pilot Program on Required Sexual Health Screenings.--
 (1) In general.--The Director of the Defense Health Agency 
 shall carry out a five-year pilot program to require certain 
 sexual health screenings (in this subsection referred to as the 
 ``pilot program'').
 (2) Sexual health screenings.--
 (A) In general.--Under the pilot program, the 
 Director shall ensure that, during the period in which 
 the pilot program is carried out, each covered member 
 completes a sexual health screening on an annual basis 
 and prior to any deployment of the covered member.
 (B) Notice requirement.--The Director shall ensure 
 that, prior to a covered member receiving a sexual 
 health screening under the pilot program, the covered 
 member is provided notice, and submits an 
 acknowledgment, that the results of such screening 
 shall be subject to the confidentiality provisions 
 under paragraph (3).
 (C) Option for follow-up appointment.--Following 
 the provision of a sexual health screening to a covered 
 member under the pilot program, the covered member may 
 elect to receive a follow-up appointment related to 
 such screening. Any such follow-up appointment shall be 
 conducted by the provider specified in paragraph (4) 
 responsible for reviewing the results of the screening.
 (3) Confidentiality.--
 (A) Transmission of results outside chain of 
 command.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the 
 results of a sexual health screening furnished to a 
 covered member under the pilot program shall be 
 transmitted for review to the provider specified in 
 paragraph (4) at the military medical treatment 
 facility nearest to the location at which the screening 
 was furnished. Such results may not be transmitted to 
 or otherwise accessed by the following:
 (i) Any individual in the chain of command 
 of the covered member.
 (ii) The primary health care provider for 
 the unit of the covered member.
 (B) Exception at election of member.--The results 
 of a sexual health screening furnished to a covered 
 member under the pilot program may be transmitted for 
 review to, or otherwise accessed by, the primary health 
 care provider for the unit of the covered member at the 
 election of the covered member.
 (C) Severability of results.--If a sexual health 
 screening under the pilot program is furnished as part 
 of a periodic health assessment (or other similar 
 assessment) provided to a covered member, the results 
 of such screening shall be separated from the other 
 results of the assessment for purposes of separate 
 transmission and review in accordance with subparagraph 
 (A).
 (4) Sexual health or infectious disease health care 
 providers.--The Director shall ensure that at each military 
 medical treatment facility there is a health care provider with 
 a specialty in sexual health or infectious diseases who shall 
 review screening results under the pilot program.
 (5) Reports.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter for five years, 
 the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional 
 defense committees a report on the status and effects of the 
 pilot program.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered member'' means a member of a 
 uniformed service described in section 1074(a)(2) of title 10, 
 United States Code.
 (2) The term ``military medical treatment facility'' means 
 a facility specified in section 1073d of title 10, United 
 States Code.
 (3) The terms ``TRICARE Prime'' and ``TRICARE program'' 
 have the meaning given those terms in section 1072 of such 
 title.

SEC. 784. DROP BOXES ON MILITARY INSTALLATIONS FOR DEPOSIT OF UNUSED 
 PRESCRIPTION DRUGS.

 (a) Drop Boxes.--The Secretary of Defense shall ensure there is 
maintained on each military installation a drop box that is accessible 
to members of the Armed Forces and the family members thereof, into 
which such members and family members may deposit unused prescription 
drugs.
 (b) Prescription Drug Defined.--In this section, the term 
``prescription drug'' has the meaning given that term in section 
1074g(i) of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 785. FUNDING FOR PANCREATIC CANCER RESEARCH.

 (a) Increase.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 1405 for the Defense Health Program, as specified in the 
corresponding funding table in section 4501, for Defense Health 
Program, R&D research is hereby increased by $5,000,000 (with the 
amount of such increase to be used in support of the CRDMP Program for 
Pancreatic Cancer Research).
 (b) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 301 for operation and maintenance, Defense-wide, as specified 
in the corresponding funding table in section 4301, for administration 
and service-wide activities, Defense Human Resources Activity, line 
240, is hereby reduced by $5,000,000.

SEC. 786. PSYCHOLOGICAL EVALUATIONS FOR MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES 
 RETURNING FROM KABUL.

 (a) Initial Evaluation.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall provide an 
initial psychological evaluation to each member of the Armed Forces 
who--
 (1) served at the Hamid Karzai International Airport in 
 Kabul, Afghanistan, between August 15 and August 29, 2021; and
 (2) has not already received a psychological evaluation 
 with respect to such service.
 (b) Additional Evaluations.--The Secretary of Defense shall provide 
to each member of the Armed Forces who receives a psychological 
evaluation under subsection (a), or would have received such an 
evaluation but for the application of subsection (a)(2)--
 (1) an additional psychological evaluation not later than 
 two years after the date of the enactment of this Act; and
 (2) a second additional psychological evaluation not later 
 than five years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (c) Reporting Requirement.--Not later than 220 days after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to 
the congressional defense committees a report on the number of members 
of the Armed Forces, broken down by component (National Guard, Reserve, 
and Active), that are eligible for, and receive, an initial 
psychological evaluation--
 (1) under subsection (a); or
 (2) otherwise resulting from service at the Hamid Karzai 
 International Airport in Kabul, Afghanistan, between August 15 
 and August 29, 2021.

SEC. 787. ANNUAL REVIEW AND UPDATE OF ONLINE INFORMATION RELATING TO 
 SUICIDE PREVENTION.

 Not later than September 30, 2023, and on an annual basis 
thereafter, each Secretary of a military department shall--
 (1) review any information relating to suicide prevention 
 or behavioral health, including any contact information for 
 related resources, that is published on an Internet website of 
 the military department at the installation level;
 (2) make updates to such information as may be necessary; 
 and
 (3) submit to the congressional defense committees a 
 certification that such information is up-to-date.

SEC. 788. FUNDING FOR POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER.

 (a) Funding.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated by 
section 1405 for the Defense Health Program, as specified in the 
corresponding funding table in such division, is hereby increased by 
$2,500,000 for post-traumatic stress disorder.
 (b) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated by 
section 1405 for the Defense Health Program, as specified in the 
corresponding funding tables in division D, for Private Sector Care is 
hereby reduced by $2,500,000.

SEC. 789. INCREASED COLLABORATION WITH NIH TO COMBAT TRIPLE NEGATIVE 
 BREAST CANCER.

 (a) In General.--The Office of Health of the Department of Defense 
shall work in collaboration with the National Institutes of Health to--
 (1) identify specific genetic and molecular targets and 
 biomarkers for triple negative breast cancer; and
 (2) provide information useful in biomarker selection, drug 
 discovery, and clinical trials design that will enable both--
 (A) triple negative breast cancer patients to be 
 identified earlier in the progression of their disease; 
 and
 (B) the development of multiple targeted therapies 
 for the disease.
 (b) Funding.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated by 
section 1405 for the Defense Health Program, as specified in the 
corresponding funding tables in division D, is hereby increased by 
$10,000,000 to carry out subsection (a).
 (c) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated by 
section 1405 for the Defense Health Program, as specified in the 
corresponding funding tables in division D, for Private Sector Care is 
hereby reduced by $10,000,000.

SEC. 790. PILOT PROGRAM TO IMPROVE MILITARY READINESS THROUGH NUTRITION 
 AND WELLNESS INITIATIVES.

 (a) Pilot Program.--The Secretary of Defense, in consultation with 
the Secretaries of the military departments, shall carry out a pilot 
program to improve military readiness through nutrition and wellness 
initiatives.
 (b) Unit Selection.--The Secretary of Defense shall select for 
participation in the pilot program under subsection (a) a unit at a 
basic training facility or an early instructional facility of a 
military department.
 (c) Elements.--The pilot program under subsection (a) shall include 
the following activities:
 (1) The development, and administration to the unit 
 selected pursuant to subsection (b), of an educational 
 curriculum relating to nutrition, physical fitness, the proper 
 use of supplements, and any other human performance elements 
 determined relevant by the Secretary of the military department 
 with jurisdiction over the unit.
 (2) The provision to the unit of health-related testing.
 (3) The provision to the unit of dietary supplements.
 (d) Implementing Partner.--
 (1) Selection.--The Secretary of Defense shall select as an 
 implementing partner a single contractor to both carry out all 
 of the activities under subsection (c) and manufacture at a 
 manufacturing facility owned by the contractor the dietary 
 supplements to be provided pursuant to subsection (c)(3). In 
 making such selection, the Secretary shall ensure that the 
 contractor enforces an appropriate level of third-party review 
 with respect to the quality and safety of products 
 manufactured, as determined by the Secretary.
 (2) Considerations.-- In selecting the contractor under 
 paragraph (1), the Secretary shall consider the following:
 (A) Whether the contractor has the ability to carry 
 out each activity under subsection (c), in addition to 
 the ability to manufacture the dietary supplements to 
 be provided pursuant to subsection (c)(3).
 (B) Whether the manufacturing facility of the 
 contractor is a fully independent, third-party 
 certified, manufacturing facility that holds the 
 highest ``Good Manufacturing Practice'' certification 
 or rating possible, as issued by a regulatory agency of 
 the Federal government.
 (C) Whether the manufacturing facility of the 
 contractor, and all finished products manufactured 
 therein, have been verified by a third-party as free 
 from banned substances and contaminants.
 (D) Whether the contractor is in compliance with 
 the adverse event reporting policy and third-party 
 adverse event monitoring policy of the Food and Drug 
 Administration.
 (E) Whether the contractor implements a stability 
 testing program that supports product expiration 
 dating.
 (F) Whether the contractor has a credible and 
 robust environment, social, and governance policy that 
 articulates responsibilities and annual goals.
 (G) Whether the contractor has demonstrated at 
 least five years of operation as a business in good 
 standing in the industry.
 (H) Whether the contractor has a demonstrated 
 history of maintaining relationships with nationally-
 recognized medical and health organizations.
 (e) Coordination.--In carrying out the pilot program under 
subsection (a), the contractor selected under subsection (d) shall 
coordinate with the following:
 (1) Command, training, and medical officers and 
 noncommissioned officers.
 (2) Outside experts (including experts with relevant 
 experience from research and testing organizations, credible 
 medical committees, or hospitals) that may lend personalized 
 support, capture data, and facilitate third-party adverse event 
 reporting.
 (f) Duration.--The pilot program under subsection (a) shall be for 
a period of six months.
 (g) Report.--Upon the termination of the pilot program under 
subsection (a), the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report on the results of the pilot 
program, including any findings or data from the pilot program, and a 
recommendation by the Secretary of Defense for improvements to the 
readiness of the Armed Forces based on such findings and data.

SEC. 791. GUIDANCE FOR ADDRESSING HEALTHY RELATIONSHIPS AND INTIMATE 
 PARTNER VIOLENCE THROUGH TRICARE PROGRAM.

 The Secretary of Defense shall disseminate guidance on--
 (1) the provision through the TRICARE Program of universal 
 education on healthy relationships and intimate partner 
 violence; and
 (2) implementation of protocols through the TRICARE Program 
 for--
 (A) routine assessment of intimate partner violence 
 and sexual assault; and
 (B) promotion and strategies for trauma-informed 
 care plans.

 TITLE VIII--ACQUISITION POLICY, ACQUISITION MANAGEMENT, AND RELATED 
 MATTERS

 Subtitle A--Acquisition Policy and Management

SEC. 801. WRITING AWARD TO ENCOURAGE CURIOSITY AND PERSISTENCE IN 
 OVERCOMING OBSTACLES IN ACQUISITION.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 87 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended by inserting after section 1742 the following new section:
``Sec. 1743. Writing award to encourage curiosity and persistence in 
 overcoming obstacles in the defense acquisition system
 ``(a) Establishment.--The President of the Defense Acquisition 
University shall establish an award to recognize members of the 
acquisition workforce who use an iterative writing process to document 
a first-hand account of using independent judgment to overcome an 
obstacle the member faced while working within the defense acquisition 
system (as defined in section 3001 of this title).
 ``(b) Submission Required.--A member of the acquisition workforce 
desiring an award under this section shall submit to the President such 
first-hand account.
 ``(c) Amount of Award.--A recipient of an award under this section 
shall receive $10,000.
 ``(d) Number of Awards.--The President of the Defense Acquisition 
University may make not more than five awards each year.
 ``(e) Webpage.--The President of the Defense Acquisition University 
shall establish and maintain a webpage to serve as a repository for 
submissions made under subsection (b). Such webpage shall allow for 
public comments and discussion.
 ``(f) Contents of Submission.--The recipient of an award under this 
section shall demonstrate in the submission described under subsection 
(b)--
 ``(1) an original and engaging idea documenting the use of 
 independent judgment to overcome an obstacle the recipient 
 faced while working within the defense acquisition system; and
 ``(2) the use of an iterative writing process, including 
 evidence of--
 ``(A) critical thinking;
 ``(B) incorporation of feedback from diverse 
 perspectives; and
 ``(C) editing to achieve plain writing (as defined 
 in section 3 of the Plain Writing Act of 2010 (5 U.S.C. 
 301 note)).
 ``(g) Funding.--The Secretary of Defense shall use funds from the 
Defense Acquisition Workforce Development Account to carry out this 
section.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
such chapter is amended by inserting after section 1742 the following 
new item:

``1743. Writing award to encourage curiosity and persistence in 
 overcoming obstacles in acquisition.''.

SEC. 802. DATA REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL ITEM PRICING NOT BASED ON 
 ADEQUATE PRICE COMPETITION.

 (a) Information Required.--Section 3455 of title 10, United States 
Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)--
 (A) by inserting ``(1)'' before ``A subsystem'';
 (B) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B), respectively; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(2) With respect to a subsystem for which a contracting officer 
made a determination under paragraph (1)(B) and for a subsystem 
proposed as commercial (as defined in section 103(1) of title 41, 
United States Code) and that has not previously been determined 
commercial in accordance with section 3703(d) of this title, the 
offeror shall provide the following information:
 ``(A) An identification of a comparable commercial product 
 that is customarily used by the general public or 
 nongovernmental entities that serves as the basis for assertion 
 that the proposed subsystem is a commercial product.
 ``(B) A comparison of the essential physical 
 characteristics and functionality between the proposed 
 subsystem and the comparable commercial product in support of 
 such assertion.
 ``(C) The national stock number (as defined in section 101-
 30.101-3 of title 41, Code of Federal Regulations (or a 
 successor regulation)), if available, for the comparable 
 commercial product and the proposed subsystem.'';
 (2) in subsection (c), by adding at the end the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(3) With respect to components or spare parts proposed as 
commercial for which a contracting officer made a determination under 
paragraph (1)(B), the offeror shall provide the following information 
for components or spare parts proposed as commercial (as defined in 
section 103(1) of title 41, United States Code) and that have not 
previously been determined commercial in accordance with section 
3703(d) of this title:
 ``(A) An identification of a comparable commercial product 
 that is customarily used by the general public or 
 nongovernmental entities that serves as the basis for the 
 assertion that the proposed components or spare parts are 
 commercial products.
 ``(B) A comparison of the essential physical 
 characteristics and functionality between the proposed 
 components or spare parts and the comparable commercial product 
 in support of such assertion.
 ``(C) The national stock number (as defined in section 101-
 30.101-3 of title 41, Code of Federal Regulations (or a 
 successor regulation)), if available, for the comparable 
 commercial product and the proposed components or spare 
 parts.''.
 (b) Modifications to Information Submitted.--Section 3455(d) is 
amended--
 (1) in the subsection heading, by inserting ``for Certain 
 Procurements'' after ``Submitted'';
 (2) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by 
 striking ``section,'' and all that follows through ``to 
 submit'' and inserting ``section that are not subject 
 to the exceptions in section 3703(a)(1) of this title, 
 the offeror shall be required to submit to or to 
 provide access to the contracting officer, on an 
 unredacted basis'';
 (B) in subparagraph (A)--
 (i) by inserting ``all'' before ``prices 
 paid''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``, and the contents of 
 such terms and conditions'' after ``commercial 
 customers'';
 (C) in subparagraph (B)--
 (i) by striking ``information on'' and all 
 that follows through ``same or similar'' and 
 inserting ``information on prices for the same 
 or similar'';
 (ii) by striking ``conditions;'' and 
 inserting ``conditions, and the contents of 
 such terms and conditions; and''; and
 (iii) by striking clauses (ii), (iii), and 
 (iv).
 (D) in subparagraph (C)--
 (i) by striking ``reasonableness of 
 price,'' and inserting the following: 
 ``reasonableness of price because the 
 comparable products provided by the offeror are 
 not a valid basis for a price analysis, or the 
 contracting officer determines the proposed 
 price is not reasonable after evaluating prices 
 paid, the offeror shall be required to 
 provide''; and
 (ii) by inserting before the period at the 
 end the following: ``, where a request for cost 
 data shall be approved at a level above the 
 contracting officer''.

SEC. 803. PREFERENCE FOR DOMESTIC FOODS FOR MILITARY WORKING DOGS.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 287 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new section:
``Sec. 3906. Preference for domestic foods for military working dogs
 ``With respect to the acquisition of food for military working dogs 
by the Defense Logistics Agency, the Director of the Defense Logistic 
Agency shall give a preference for the acquisition of food that is 
manufactured or produced--
 ``(1) in the United States;
 ``(2) by an entity that is based in the United States; and
 ``(3) using only ingredients and materials that were grown, 
 mined, manufactured, or produced in the United States.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters for chapter 287 of 
title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the 
following new item:

``3906. Preference for domestic food for military working dogs.''.

SEC. 804. LIFE CYCLE MANAGEMENT AND PRODUCT SUPPORT.

 Section 4324(b) of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by designating the matter preceding subparagraph (A), 
 as so redesignated, as paragraph (1);
 (2) by redesignating paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), 
 (6), (7), and (8) as subparagraphs (A), (B), (C), (D), (E), 
 (F), (G), and (I), respectively;
 (3) in paragraph (1), as so designated--
 (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), as so 
 redesignated--
 (i) by inserting ``In general.--'' before 
 ``Before granting'' ; and
 (ii) by inserting after ``approved life 
 cycle sustainment plan'' the following: 
 ``approved by all covered individuals for such 
 covered system'';
 (B) by amending subparagraph (G), as so 
 redesignated, to read as follows:
 ``(G) an intellectual property management plan for 
 product support, including access to technical data and 
 computer software, as well as contract delivery 
 requirements for the data rights;'';
 (C) by inserting after subparagraph (G), as so 
 redesignated, the following new subparagraph:
 ``(H) an estimate of the number of personnel needed 
 to operate and maintain the covered system;'';
 (D) in subparagraph (I), as so redesignated, by 
 striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and'' 
 at the end; and
 (E) by inserting after subparagraph (I), as so 
 redesignated, the following new subparagraph:
 ``(J) a product support business case analysis 
 that--
 ``(i) addresses--
 ``(I) the costs, benefits, and 
 risks to sustainment associated with 
 the performance goals;
 ``(II) the engineering and design 
 considerations;
 ``(III) intellectual property, 
 including access to technical data and 
 computer software; and
 ``(IV) the number of personnel 
 needed to operate and maintain the 
 covered system; and
 ``(ii) explicitly addresses--
 ``(I) the tradeoffs made between 
 the factors described in clause (i); 
 and
 ``(II) the associated implications 
 of such tradeoffs for--
 ``(aa) design, development, 
 production, and operating and 
 support costs;
 ``(bb) operational and 
 materiel availability;
 ``(cc) the mix of active 
 and reserve components of the 
 military, Government civilian 
 employee, host nation support, 
 and contractor personnel to 
 operate and maintain the 
 covered system; and
 ``(dd) the ability of the 
 Government to retain core 
 logistics capability identified 
 under section 2464 and comply 
 with the requirements under 
 section 2466.''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
 ``(2) Subsequent phases.--Before granting approval for 
 entry of the covered system into each subsequent phase of the 
 acquisition after the phase described in section 4172(e)(7), 
 the milestone decision authority shall ensure that the life 
 cycle sustainment plan described in paragraph (1) for such 
 covered system has been updated and again approved by all 
 covered individuals for such covered system.
 ``(3) Covered individuals defined.--In this subsection, the 
 term `covered individuals' means--
 ``(A) a product support manager described in 
 subsection (c);
 ``(B) a program manager (as defined in section 
 1737(a));
 ``(C) a program executive officer (as defined in 
 section 1737(a)); and
 ``(D) an appropriate materiel, logistics, or fleet 
 representative.''.

SEC. 805. EXTENSION OF REQUIREMENT TO SUBMIT SELECTED ACQUISITION 
 REPORTS.

 (a) Repeal of Termination.--Section 4351 of title 10, United States 
Code, is amended by striking subsection (j).
 (b) Repeal of Termination of Certain Additional Reports.--Section 
1051(x) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 
is amended by striking paragraph (4).

SEC. 806. AMENDMENTS TO CONTRACTOR EMPLOYEE PROTECTIONS FROM REPRISAL 
 FOR DISCLOSURE OF CERTAIN INFORMATION.

 (a) Defense Contracts.--
 (1) Addition of grantees, subgrantees, and personal 
 services contractors.--Section 4701 of title 10, United States 
 Code, is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a), in paragraphs (2)(G) and 
 (3)(A), by striking ``or subcontractor'' and inserting 
 ``, subcontractor, grantee, subgrantee, or personal 
 services contractor'';
 (B) in subsection (a)(2), by adding at the end the 
 following new subparagraphs:
 ``(H) The Pandemic Response Accountability 
 Committee (established under section 15010 of title V 
 of division B of the CARES Act (Public Law 116-136)).
 ``(I) The Integrity Committee of the Council of the 
 Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency.''.
 (C) in subsection (b)--
 (i) in paragraph (1)--
 (I) by striking ``contractor 
 concerned'' and inserting ``contractor, 
 subcontractor, grantee, subgrantee, or 
 personal services contractor 
 concerned'';
 (II) by inserting before the period 
 at the end of the first sentence the 
 following: ``, or to the Special 
 Inspector General for Pandemic Recovery 
 or the Chair of the Pandemic Response 
 Accountability Committee'';
 (III) by striking ``Inspector 
 General determines'' and inserting 
 ``Inspector General, Special Inspector 
 General, or Chair (as applicable) 
 determines''; and
 (IV) by striking ``Inspector 
 General shall'' and inserting 
 ``Inspector General, Special Inspector 
 General, or Chair (as applicable) 
 shall'';
 (ii) in paragraph (2), by striking 
 ``Inspector General'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``Inspector General, Special 
 Inspector General, or Chair (as applicable)''; 
 and
 (iii) in paragraph (3), by striking 
 ``Inspector General'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``Inspector General, Special 
 Inspector General, or Chair (as applicable)'';
 (D) in subsection (c)--
 (i) in the matter preceding subparagraph 
 (A) of paragraph (1), by striking ``contractor 
 concerned'' and inserting ``contractor, 
 subcontractor, grantee, subgrantee, or personal 
 services contractor concerned''; and
 (ii) in paragraph (1), by inserting after 
 ``Order the contractor'' each place it appears 
 the following: ``, subcontractor, grantee, 
 subgrantee, or personal services contractor'';
 (iii) in paragraph (2), by inserting after 
 ``contractor'' the following: ``, 
 subcontractor, grantee, subgrantee, or personal 
 services contractor'';
 (E) in subsection (d), by striking ``and 
 subcontractors'' and inserting ``, subcontractors, 
 grantees, subgrantees, and personal services 
 contractors''; and
 (F) in subsection (e)(2)--
 (i) in the matter preceding subparagraph 
 (A), by striking ``or grantee of'' and 
 inserting ``grantee, subgrantee, or personal 
 services contractor of''; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``or 
 grantee'' and inserting ``grantee, or 
 subgrantee''.
 (2) Additional amendments.--Such section is further amended 
 in subsection (c)(1) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(D) Consider disciplinary or corrective action against 
 any Department or Administration official, if appropriate.''.
 (b) Civilian Agency Contracts.--
 (1) In general.--Section 4712 of title 41, United States 
 Code, is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)(2)(G), by striking ``or 
 subgrantee'' and inserting ``subgrantee, or personal 
 services contractor'';
 (B) in subsection (a)(2), by adding at the end the 
 following new subparagraphs:
 ``(H) The Pandemic Response Accountability 
 Committee (established under section 15010 of title V 
 of division B of the CARES Act (Public Law 116-136)).
 ``(I) The Integrity Committee of the Council of the 
 Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency.'';
 (C) in subsection (b)(1), by striking ``or 
 subgrantee'' and inserting ``subgrantee, or personal 
 services contractor'';
 (D) in subsection (c)--
 (i) in paragraph (1)--
 (I) by striking ``or subgrantee'' 
 each place it appears and inserting 
 ``subgrantee, or personal services 
 contractor''; and
 (II) by adding at the end the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(D) Consider disciplinary or corrective action 
 against any executive branch official, if 
 appropriate.''; and
 (ii) in paragraph (2), by striking ``or 
 subgrantee'' and inserting ``subgrantee, or 
 personal services contractor'';
 (E) in subsection (d), by striking ``and 
 subgrantees'' and inserting ``subgrantees, and personal 
 services contractors'';
 (F) in subsection (f)(2)--
 (i) in the matter preceding subparagraph 
 (A), by striking ``or subgrantee'' and 
 inserting ``subgrantee, or personal services 
 contractor''; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``or 
 subgrantee'' and inserting ``subgrantee, or 
 personal services contractor''; and
 (G) by amending subsection (g)(2) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(2) The term `Inspector General' means any Inspector 
 General established by Federal law, including--
 ``(A) an Inspector General appointed under the 
 Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.);
 ``(B) the Special Inspector General for Pandemic 
 Recovery;
 ``(C) the Special Inspector General for Afghanistan 
 Reconstruction;
 ``(D) the Special Inspector General for the 
 Troubled Asset Relief Program; and
 ``(E) any Inspector General that receives funding 
 from, or has oversight over contracts awarded for or on 
 behalf of, the executive agency concerned.''.
 (2) Additional amendments.--
 (A) In general.--Section 4705 of title 41, United 
 States Code, is repealed.
 (B) Conforming amendments.--
 (i) Title 38.--Subchapter II of chapter 7 
 of title 38, United States Code, is amended--
 (I) in section 731(c)(4)--
 (aa) by striking ``section 
 4705(b) or''; and
 (bb) by striking ``, as the 
 case may be''; and
 (II) in section 733(a)(5), by 
 striking ``section 4705 or''.
 (ii) Title 49.--Section 40110(d)(2)(C) of 
 title 49, United States Code, is amended by 
 inserting ``, as in effect immediately before 
 the enactment of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022,'' 
 before ``shall apply''.

SEC. 807. ENHANCED DOMESTIC CONTENT REQUIREMENT FOR MAJOR DEFENSE 
 ACQUISITION PROGRAMS.

 (a) Assessment Required.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than one year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall 
 submit to the congressional defense committees a report 
 assessing the domestic source content of procurements carried 
 out in connection with a major defense acquisition program.
 (2) Information repository.--The Secretary of Defense shall 
 establish an information repository for the collection and 
 analysis of information related to domestic source content for 
 products the Secretary deems critical, where such information 
 can be used for continuous data analysis and program management 
 activities.
 (b) Enhanced Domestic Content Requirement.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), for 
 purposes of chapter 83 of title 41, United States Code, 
 manufactured articles, materials, or supplies procured in 
 connection with a major defense acquisition program are 
 manufactured substantially all from articles, materials, or 
 supplies mined, produced, or manufactured in the United States 
 if the cost of such component articles, materials, or 
 supplies--
 (A) supplied not later than the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, exceeds 60 percent of cost of 
 the manufactured articles, materials, or supplies 
 procured;
 (B) supplied during the period beginning January 1, 
 2024, and ending December 31, 2028, exceeds 65 percent 
 of the cost of the manufactured articles, materials, or 
 supplies; and
 (C) supplied on or after January 1, 2029, exceeds 
 75 percent of the cost of the manufactured articles, 
 materials, or supplies.
 (2) Exclusion for certain manufactured articles.--Paragraph 
 (1) shall not apply to manufactured articles that consist 
 wholly or predominantly of iron, steel, or a combination of 
 iron and steel.
 (3) Rulemaking to create a fallback threshold.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of 
 Defense shall issue rules to determine the treatment of 
 the lowest price offered for a foreign end product for 
 which 55 percent or more of the component articles, 
 materials, or supplies of such foreign end product are 
 manufactured substantially all from articles, 
 materials, or supplies mined, produced, or manufactured 
 in the United States if--
 (i) the application paragraph (1) results 
 in an unreasonable cost; or
 (ii) no offers are submitted to supply 
 manufactured articles, materials, or supplies 
 manufactured substantially all from articles, 
 materials, or supplies mined, produced, or 
 manufactured in the United States.
 (B) Termination.--Rules issued under this paragraph 
 shall cease to have force or effect on January 1, 2030.
 (4) Applicability.--The requirements of this subsection--
 (A) shall apply to contracts entered into on or 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act; and
 (B) shall not apply to a country that is a member 
 of the national technology and industrial base (as 
 defined by section 4801 of title 10, United States 
 Code).
 (c) Major Defense Acquisition Program Defined.--The term ``major 
defense acquisition program'' has the meaning given in section 4201 of 
title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 808. MISSION-BASED RAPID ACQUISITION ACCOUNT.

 (a) Establishment.--There is established in the Department of 
Defense an account to be known as the ``Mission-Based Rapid Acquisition 
Account'' (in this section referred to as the ``Account'') to support 
the pilot program.
 (b) Use of Funds.--The Deputy Secretary of Defense may use the 
funds in the Account to carry out the pilot program.
 (c) Semiannual Briefing.--The Deputy Secretary of Defense shall 
include in each briefing submitted under subsection (f)(1)(A) of 
section 871 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
2022 (Public Law 117-81; 135 Stat. 1855; 10 U.S.C. 191 note) after the 
date of the enactment of this Act a briefing on the use of funds in the 
Account, including--
 (1) how the Deputy Secretary of Defense has used such funds 
 to incent new small businesses to enter transactions for 
 prototype projects with the Department;
 (2) support the rapid transition of the solutions described 
 in subsection (c)(2)(B) of such section 871 to warfighters; and
 (3) whether additional funding flexibility is needed to 
 scale technologies.
 (d) Pilot Program Defined.--In this section, the term ``pilot 
program'' means the pilot program established under section 871 of the 
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 
117-81; 135 Stat. 1855; 10 U.S.C. 191 note).

SEC. 809. PREFERENCE FOR OFFERORS THAT MEET CERTAIN REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 241 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 3310. PREFERENCE FOR OFFERORS THAT MEET CERTAIN REQUIREMENTS.

 ``(a) In General.--In awarding contracts for the procurement of 
goods or services, the Secretary of Defense shall prioritize offerors 
that meet any of the following qualifications:
 ``(1) The offeror has entered into an agreement--
 ``(A) with a labor organization;
 ``(B) that provides the manner in which the offeror 
 will--
 ``(i) act with respect to lawful efforts by 
 such labor organization to organize the 
 employees of such offeror, including an 
 agreement that the offeror will not assist, 
 deter, or promote such efforts; and
 ``(ii) engage in collective bargaining with 
 such labor organization; and
 ``(C) that is effective for the duration of the 
 contract to be awarded.
 ``(2) The offeror has entered into an agreement with a 
 majority of the employees of the offeror or a labor 
 organization, effective for the duration of the contract to be 
 awarded, not to hire individuals to replace any employee of the 
 offeror engaged in any strike, picketing, or other concerted 
 refusal to work or to close a business in response to such a 
 strike, picketing, or other refusal to work.
 ``(3) The offeror has a collective bargaining agreement 
 with a labor organization or a majority of the employees of the 
 offeror.
 ``(b) Prioritization Order.--The Secretary of Defense shall further 
prioritize an offeror under subsection (a) for each qualification 
described in such subsection that such offeror meets.
 ``(c) Application.--The prioritization required under this section 
shall--
 ``(1) be applied after any other preference or priority 
 applicable to the award of the contract;
 ``(2) be accorded weight that is not less than such other 
 preference or priority; and
 ``(3) not be construed as superseding or replacing any such 
 other preference or priority.
 ``(d) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to preempt, displace, or supplant any provision of the 
National Labor Relations Act (29 U.S.C. 151 et seq.).
 ``(e) Employee; Employer; Labor Organization Defined.--In this 
section, the terms `employee', `employer', and `labor organization' 
have the meanings given such terms in section 2 of the National Labor 
Relations Act (29 U.S.C. 152).''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for Chapter 241 of 
title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the 
following new item:

``3310. Preference for offerors that meet certain requirements.''.
 (c) Applicability.--This section and the amendments made by this 
section shall apply only with respect to contracts entered into on or 
after the date of the enactment of this Act.

Subtitle B--Amendments to General Contracting Authorities, Procedures, 
 and Limitations

SEC. 811. MEMBERSHIP OF COAST GUARD ON STRATEGIC MATERIALS PROTECTION 
 BOARD.

 Section 187(a)(2) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(F) A senior official of the Coast Guard, as designated 
 by the Secretary of the agency or department in which the Coast 
 Guard operates, only with respect to matters of the Board 
 relating to the Coast Guard.''.

SEC. 812 . COMPTROLLER GENERAL ASSESSMENT OF ACQUISITION PROGRAMS AND 
 EFFORTS.

 Section 3072 of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in the section heading, by striking ``initiatives'' and 
 inserting ``efforts'';
 (2) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by striking ``initiatives'' and inserting 
 ``efforts''; and
 (B) by striking ``2023'' and inserting ``2026'';
 (3) in subsection (b), by striking ``initiatives'' each 
 place it appears and inserting ``efforts''; and
 (4) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in the subsection heading, by striking 
 ``Initiatives'' and inserting ``Efforts''; and
 (B) by striking ``initiatives'' each place it 
 appears and inserting ``efforts''.

SEC. 813. SUBCONTRACTING REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN CONTRACTS AWARDED TO 
 EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 3204 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(h) Subcontracting Requirements for Contracts Awarded to 
Educational Institutions.--
 ``(1) In general.--The head of an agency shall require that 
 a contract awarded to an educational institution pursuant to 
 subsection (a)(3)(B) includes a requirement that the 
 educational institution subcontract with one or more minority 
 institutions for a total amount of not less than 2 percent of 
 the amount awarded in the contract.
 ``(2) Minority institution.--In this subsection, the term 
 `minority institution' means--
 ``(A) a part B institution (as that term is defined 
 in section 322(2) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
 (20 U.S.C. 1061(2))); or
 ``(B) any other institution of higher education (as 
 that term is defined in section 101 of such Act (20 
 U.S.C. 1001)) for which not less than 50 percent of the 
 total student enrollment consists of students from 
 ethnic groups that are underrepresented in the fields 
 of science and engineering.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall--
 (1) take effect on October 1, 2026; and
 (2) apply with respect to contracts awarded by the 
 Secretary of Defense on or after such date.

SEC. 814. CLARIFICATION TO FIXED-PRICE INCENTIVE CONTRACT REFERENCES.

 (a) Authority to Acquire Innovative Commercial Products and 
Commercial Services Using General Solicitation Competitive 
Procedures.--Section 3458(c)(2) of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended by striking ``fixed-price incentive fee contracts'' and 
inserting ``fixed-price incentive contracts''.
 (b) Contractor Incentives to Achieve Savings and Improve Mission 
Performance.--Section 832 of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2017 (Public Law 114-328; 10 U.S.C. 1746 note) is amended 
by striking ``fixed-price incentive fee contracts'' and inserting 
``fixed-price incentive contracts''.

SEC. 815. MODIFICATION TO INDEMNIFICATION AUTHORITY FOR RESEARCH AND 
 DEVELOPMENT CONTRACTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 3861 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``Secretary of the 
 military department concerned'' and inserting ``Secretary of 
 Defense'';
 (2) in subsection (c), by striking ``Secretary'' and all 
 that follows through ``by him,'' and inserting ``Secretary of 
 Defense''; and
 (3) in subsection (d), by striking ``Secretary concerned'' 
 and inserting ``Secretary of Defense''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 1684 of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 135 Stat. 
2123) is amended by inserting ``or the Secretary of Defense, as 
applicable,'' after ``Secretary concerned''.
 (c) Applicability.--This section and the amendments made by this 
section shall apply to contracts entered into on or after the date of 
the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 816. COMPETITION REQUIREMENTS FOR PURCHASES FROM FEDERAL PRISON 
 INDUSTRIES.

 (a) Competition Requirements for Purchases From Federal Prison 
Industries.--Section 3905 of title 10, United States Code, is amended 
by striking subsections (a) and (b) and inserting the following new 
sections:
 ``(a) Market Research.--Before purchasing a product listed in the 
latest edition of the Federal Prison Industries catalog published under 
section 4124(d) of title 18, the Secretary of Defense shall conduct 
market research to determine whether such product--
 ``(1) is comparable to products available from the private 
 sector; and
 ``(2) best meets the needs of the Department of Defense in 
 terms of price, quality, and time of delivery.
 ``(b) Competition Requirement.--If the Secretary determines that a 
Federal Prison Industries product is not comparable to products 
available from the private sector and does not best meet the needs of 
the Department of Defense in terms of price, quality, or time of 
delivery, the Secretary shall use competitive procedures or make an 
individual purchase under a multiple award contract for the procurement 
of the product. In conducting such a competition or making such a 
purchase, the Secretary shall consider a timely offer from Federal 
Prison Industries.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
take effect on February 1, 2023.

SEC. 817. CLARIFICATION OF AUTHORITY OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE TO 
 CARRY OUT CERTAIN PROTOTYPE PROJECTS.

 Subsection (f) of section 4022 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended to read as follows:
 ``(f) Follow-on Production Contracts or Transactions.--(1) A 
transaction entered into under this section for a prototype project 
shall provide for the award of a follow-on production contract or 
transaction to the participants in the transaction. A transaction 
includes all individual prototype subprojects awarded under the 
transaction to a consortium of United States industry and academic 
institutions.
 ``(2) A follow-on production contract or transaction provided for 
in a transaction under paragraph (1) may be awarded to the participants 
in the transaction without the use of competitive procedures, 
notwithstanding the requirements of chapter 221 of this title and even 
if explicit notification was not listed within the request for proposal 
for the transaction if--
 ``(A) competitive procedures were used for the selection of 
 parties for participation in the transaction; and
 ``(B) the participants in the transaction successfully 
 completed the prototype project provided for in the 
 transaction.''.

SEC. 818. REQUIREMENTS FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF CERTAIN COMPONENTS FOR 
 CERTAIN NAVAL VESSELS AND AUXILIARY SHIPS.

 (a) Requirements for the Procurement of Certain Components for 
Naval Vessels.--Section 4864(a)(2) of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(G) Ship shafts and propulsion system components 
 (including reduction gears and propellers).''.
 (b) Requirement That Certain Auxiliary Ship Components Be 
Manufactured in the National Technology and Industrial Base.--
 (1) Technical amendment.--Section 4864 of title 10, United 
 States Code, is amended by redesignating subsection (l) 
 (relating to ``Implementation of auxiliary ship component 
 limitation'') as subsection (k).
 (2) Components for auxiliary ships.--Paragraph (3) of 
 section 4864(a) of title 10, United States Code, is amended to 
 read as follows:
 ``(3) Components for auxiliary ships.--Subject to 
 subsection (k), the following components:
 ``(A) Large medium-speed diesel engines.
 ``(B) Propulsion system components, including 
 reduction gears and propellers.''.
 (3) Implementation.--Subsection (k) of section 4864 of 
 title 10, United States Code, as redesignated by paragraph (1), 
 is amended to read as follows:
 ``(k) Implementation of Auxiliary Ship Component Limitation.--
Subsection (a)(3) shall apply only with respect to contracts awarded by 
a Secretary of a military department for construction of a new class of 
auxiliary ship after the date of the enactment of this Act using funds 
available for National Defense Sealift Fund programs or Shipbuilding 
and Conversion, Navy.''.

SEC. 819. MODIFICATION TO PROHIBITION ON OPERATION OR PROCUREMENT OF 
 FOREIGN-MADE UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS.

 Section 848 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2020 (Public Law 116-92; 10 U.S.C. 4871 note) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsections (b), (c), and (d) as 
 subsections (c), (d), and (e), respectively;
 (2) by inserting after subsection (a) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(b) Prohibition on Certain Contracts.--The Secretary of Defense 
may not--
 ``(1) procure or obtain, or extend or renew a contract to 
 procure or obtain any equipment, system, or service that uses 
 any equipment or service related to unmanned aircraft systems 
 provided by a covered unmanned aircraft system company; or
 ``(2) enter into a contract (or extend or renew a contract) 
 with an entity that uses any equipment, system, or services 
 provided by a covered unmanned aircraft system company.'';
 (3) in subsection (c) (as so redesignated), by striking 
 ``the restriction under subsection (a) if the operation or 
 procurement'' and inserting ``any restrictions under 
 subsections (a) or (b) if the operation, procurement, or 
 obtainment'';
 (4) in subsection (d) (as so redesignated)--
 (A) by striking ``the restriction under subsection 
 (a)'' and inserting ``any restrictions under 
 subsections (a) or (b)''; and
 (B) by striking ``operation or procurement'' and 
 inserting ``operation, procurement, or obtainment''; 
 and
 (5) in subsection (e) (as so redesignated), by inserting 
 the following new paragraph (3):
 ``(3) Covered unmanned aircraft system companies.--The term 
 `covered unmanned aircraft system companies' means any of the 
 following:
 ``(A) Da-Jiang Innovations (or any subsidiary or 
 affiliate of Da-Jiang Innovations).
 ``(B) Any entity that produces or provides unmanned 
 aircraft systems and is included on Consolidated 
 Screening List maintained by the International Trade 
 Administration of the Department of Commerce.
 ``(C) Any entity that produces or provides unmanned 
 aircraft systems and--
 ``(i) is domiciled in a covered foreign 
 country; or
 ``(ii) is subject to unmitigated foreign 
 ownership, control or influence by a covered 
 foreign country, as determined by the Secretary 
 of Defense unmitigated foreign ownership, 
 control or influence in accordance with the 
 National Industrial Security Program (or any 
 successor to such program).''.

SEC. 820. EXTENSION OF PILOT PROGRAM TO ACCELERATE CONTRACTING AND 
 PRICING PROCESSES.

 Section 890 of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization 
Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115-232) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(2), by striking ``of'' before 
 ``chapter 271''; and
 (2) in subsection (c), by striking ``January 2, 2023'' and 
 inserting ``January 2, 2024''.

SEC. 821. EXTENSION AND MODIFICATION OF NEVER CONTRACT WITH THE ENEMY.

 Subtitle E of title VIII of the Carl Levin and Howard P. ``Buck'' 
McKeon National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2015 (Public 
Law 113-291; 10 U.S.C. 4871 note prec.) is amended--
 (1) in section 841--
 (A) in subsection (i)(1)--
 (i) in the matter preceding subparagraph 
 (A), by striking ``2016, 2017, and 2018'' and 
 inserting ``2023, and annually thereafter''; 
 and
 (ii) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraphs:
 ``(C) Specific examples where the authorities under 
 this section can not be used to mitigate national 
 security threats posed by vendors supporting Department 
 operations because of the restriction on using such 
 authorities only with respect to contingency 
 operations.
 ``(D) A description of the policies ensuring that 
 oversight of the use of the authorities in this section 
 is effectively carried out by a single office in the 
 Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for 
 Acquisition and Sustainment.''; and
 (B) in subsection (n), by striking ``December 31, 
 2023'' and inserting ``December 31, 2025''; and
 (2) in section 842(b)(1), by striking ``2016, 2017, and 
 2018'' and inserting ``2023, 2024, and 2025''.

SEC. 822. REQUIRE FULL DOMESTIC PRODUCTION OF FLAGS OF THE UNITED 
 STATES ACQUIRED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE.

 (a) In General.--Section 4862 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by inserting ``and in subsection 
 (l)'' after ``subsections (c) through (h)''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(l) Flag of the United States.--Notwithstanding subsection (a), 
funds appropriated or otherwise available to the Department of Defense 
may not be used for the procurement of a flag of the United States 
unless such flag is manufactured--
 ``(1) in the United States; and
 ``(2) from articles, materials, and supplies grown, mined, 
 produced, or manufactured in the United States.''.
 (b) Applicability.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply only with respect to contracts entered into on or after the date 
of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 823. GUIDELINES AND RESOURCES ON THE ACQUISITION OR LICENSING OF 
 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY.

 Section 3791 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding 
at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(c) Guidelines and Resources.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense, acting through 
 the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment, 
 shall develop guidelines and resources on the acquisition or 
 licensing of intellectual property, including--
 ``(A) model forms for specially negotiated licenses 
 described under section 3774(c) of this title (as 
 appropriate); and
 ``(B) an identification of definitions, key terms, 
 examples, and case studies that resolve ambiguities in 
 the differences between--
 ``(i) detailed manufacturing and process 
 data;
 ``(ii) form, fit, and function data; and
 ``(iii) data required for operations, 
 maintenance, installation, and training.
 ``(2) Consultation.--In developing the guidelines and 
 resources described in paragraph (1), the Secretary shall 
 regularly consult with appropriate persons.''.

SEC. 824. COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES FOR INVESTIGATING THE PROHIBITION ON 
 CRIMINAL HISTORY INQUIRIES BY FEDERAL CONTRACTORS PRIOR 
 TO CONDITIONAL OFFER.

 (a) Defense Contracts.--Section 4657 of title 10, United States 
Code, is amended--
 (1) by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
 ``(b) Compliance.--
 ``(1) Procedures for submission of complaint.--The 
 Secretary of Defense shall establish, and make available to the 
 public, procedures under which an applicant for a position with 
 a Department of Defense contractor may submit to the Secretary 
 a complaint, or any other information, relating to compliance 
 by the contractor with subsection (a)(1)(B).
 ``(2) Investigation of compliance.--In addition to the 
 authority to investigate compliance by a contractor with 
 subsection (a)(1)(B) pursuant to a complaint submitted under 
 paragraph (1) of this subsection, the Secretary of Defense may 
 investigate compliance with subsection (a)(1)(B) in conducting 
 a compliance evaluation under section 60-1.20, 60-300.60, or 
 60-741.60 of title 41, Code of Federal Regulations (or any 
 successor regulation).''; and
 (2) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by inserting ``, based upon the results 
 of a complaint investigation or compliance 
 evaluation conducted by the Secretary of 
 Defense under section 60-1.20, 60-300.60, or 
 60-741.60 of title 41, Code of Federal 
 Regulations (or any successor regulation)'' 
 after ``determines'';
 (ii) in subparagraph (C), by striking 
 ``warning'' and inserting ``notice''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) by inserting ``, based upon the results 
 of a complaint investigation or compliance 
 evaluation conducted by the Secretary of 
 Defense under section 60-1.20, 60-300.60, or 
 60-741.60 of title 41, Code of Federal 
 Regulations (or any successor regulation),'' 
 after ``determines'';
 (ii) by inserting ``as may be necessary'' 
 after ``Federal agencies''; and
 (iii) by striking subparagraph (C) and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(C) taking an action to impose a sanction 
 described under section 202(7) of Executive Order 11246 
 (related to equal employment opportunity) and section 
 60-1.27 of title 41, Code of Federal Regulations (or 
 any successor regulation).''.
 (b) Civilian Agency Contracts.--Section 4714(b) of title 41, United 
States Code, is amended--
 (1) by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
 ``(b) Compliance.--
 ``(1) Procedures for submission of complaint.--The 
 Secretary of Labor shall establish, and make available to the 
 public, procedures under which an applicant for a position with 
 a Federal contractor may submit to the Secretary a complaint, 
 or any other information, relating to compliance by the 
 contractor with subsection (a)(1)(B).
 ``(2) Investigation of compliance.--In addition to the 
 authority to investigate compliance by a contractor with 
 subsection (a)(1)(B) pursuant to a complaint submitted under 
 paragraph (1) of this subsection, the Secretary of Labor may 
 investigate compliance with subsection (a)(1)(B) in conducting 
 a compliance evaluation under section 60-1.20, 60-300.60, or 
 60-741.60 of title 41, Code of Federal Regulations (or any 
 successor regulation).''; and
 (2) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by striking ``head of an executive 
 agency'' and inserting ``Secretary of Labor'';
 (ii) by inserting ``, based upon the 
 results of a complaint investigation or 
 compliance evaluation conducted by the 
 Secretary of Labor under section 60-1.20, 60-
 300.60, or 60-741.60 of title 41, Code of 
 Federal Regulations (or any successor 
 regulation)'' after ``determines'';
 (iii) by striking ``such head'' and 
 inserting ``the Secretary of Labor''; and
 (iv) in subparagraph (C), by striking 
 ``warning'' and inserting ``notice''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) by striking ``head of an executive 
 agency'' and inserting ``Secretary of Labor'';
 (ii) by inserting ``, based upon the 
 results of a complaint investigation or 
 compliance evaluation conducted by the 
 Secretary of Labor under section 60-1.20, 60-
 300.60, or 60-741.60 of title 41, Code of 
 Federal Regulations (or any successor 
 regulation),'' after ``determines'';
 (iii) by striking ``such head'' and 
 inserting ``the Secretary of Labor'';
 (iv) by inserting ``as may be necessary'' 
 after ``Federal agencies''; and
 (v) by striking subparagraph (C) and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(C) taking an action to impose a sanction 
 described under section 202(7) of Executive Order 11246 
 (related to equal employment opportunity) and section 
 60-1.27 of title 41, Code of Federal Regulations (or 
 any successor regulation).''.
 (c) Effective Date.--This Act, and the amendments made by this Act, 
shall apply with respect to contracts awarded on or after December 20, 
2022.

SEC. 825. REESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION ON WARTIME CONTRACTING.

 (a) In General.--There is hereby reestablished in the legislative 
branch under section 841 of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2008 (Public Law 110-181; 122 Stat. 230) the Commission on 
Wartime Contracting.
 (b) Amendment to Duties.--Section 841(c)(1) of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008 (Public Law 110-181; 122 Stat. 
231) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(1) General duties.--The Commission shall study the 
 following matters:
 ``(A) Federal agency contracting funded by overseas 
 contingency operations funds.
 ``(B) Federal agency contracting for the logistical 
 support of coalition forces operating under the 
 authority of the 2001 or 2002 Authorization for the Use 
 of Military Force.
 ``(C) Federal agency contracting for the 
 performance of security functions in countries where 
 coalition forces operate under the authority of the 
 2001 or 2002 Authorization for the Use of Military 
 Force.''.
 (c) Conforming Amendments.--Section 841 of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008 (Public Law 110-181; 122 Stat. 
230) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``the Committee 
 on Oversight and Government Reform'' each place it 
 appears and inserting ``the Committee on Oversight and 
 Reform'';
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``of this Act'' 
 and inserting ``of the date of the enactment of the 
 National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
 2023''; and
 (C) in paragraph (4), by striking ``was first 
 established'' each place it appears and inserting ``was 
 reestablished by the National Defense Authorization Act 
 for Fiscal Year 2023''; and
 (2) in subsection (d)(1), by striking ``On March 1, 2009'' 
 and inserting ``Not later than one year after the date of 
 enactment of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
 Year 2023''.

 Subtitle C--Provisions Relating to Acquisition Workforce

SEC. 831. KEY EXPERIENCES AND ENHANCED PAY AUTHORITY FOR ACQUISITION 
 WORKFORCE EXCELLENCE.

 (a) Participation in the Public-private Talent Exchange Program.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1701a(b) of title 10, United 
 States Code, is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (9)(C), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in paragraph (10), by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(11) ensure participation in the public-private talent 
 exchange program established under section 1599g of this 
 title--
 ``(A) for a total of 100 members of the acquisition 
 workforce in fiscal year 2024;
 ``(B) for a total of 500 such members in fiscal 
 year 2025; and
 ``(C) for a total of 1,000 such members in fiscal 
 year 2026 and each fiscal year thereafter.''.
 (2) Technical amendment.--Section 1701a(b)(2) of title 10, 
 United States Code, is further amended by striking ``as 
 defined'' and all that follows through ``this title'' and 
 inserting ``as defined in section 3001 of this title''.
 (b) Enhanced Pay Authority for Positions in Department of Defense 
Field Activities and Defense Agencies.--Section 1701b(e)(2) of title 
10, United States Code, is amended to read as follows:
 ``(2) Number of positions.--The authority in subsection (a) 
 may not be used at any one time with respect to--
 ``(A) more than five positions, in total, in 
 Department of Defense Field Activities and Defense 
 Agencies;
 ``(B) more than five positions in the Office of the 
 Secretary of Defense; and
 ``(C) more than five positions in each military 
 department.''.
 (c) Report Requirements.--
 (1) Report on public-private talent exchanges.--Section 
 1599g of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at 
 the end the following new subsection:
 ``(k) Report.--Each member of the acquisition workforce that 
participates in the program established under this section shall, upon 
completion of such participation, submit to the President of the 
Defense Acquisition University for inclusion in the report required 
under section 1746a(e) a description and evaluation of such 
participation.''.
 (2) Report on acquisition workforce educational 
 partnerships.--Section 1746a(e) of title 10, United States 
 Code, is amended by striking ``and the congressional defense 
 committees'' and inserting ``, the congressional defense 
 committees, the Committee on Oversight and Reform of the House 
 of Representatives, and the Committee on Homeland Security and 
 Government Affairs of the Senate''.

SEC. 832. DEFENSE ACQUISITION UNIVERSITY REFORMS.

 (a) In General.--Section 1746 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)--
 (A) by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows:
 ``(2) The Secretary of Defense shall ensure the defense acquisition 
university structure includes relevant expert lecturers from extramural 
institutions (as defined in section 1746a(g) of this title), industry, 
or federally funded research and development centers to advance 
acquisition workforce competence regarding commercial business 
interests, acquisition process-related innovations, and other relevant 
leading practices of the private sector.'';
 (B) by striking paragraph (3); and
 (C) by redesignating paragraphs (4) and (5) as 
 paragraphs (3) and (4), respectively;
 (2) in subsection (c), by striking ``commercial training 
 providers'' and inserting ``extramural institutions (as defined 
 in section 1746a(g) of this title)''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(e) President Appointment.--(1) The Under Secretary of Defense 
for Acquisition and Sustainment shall appoint the President of the 
Defense Acquisition University.
 ``(2) When determining who to appoint under paragraph (1), the 
Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment shall, in 
consultation with the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and 
Engineering and the service acquisition executives, consider only 
highly qualified candidates who have--
 ``(A) demonstrated leadership abilities;
 ``(B) experience using leading practices to develop talent 
 in the private sector; and
 ``(C) other qualifying factors, including experience with 
 and an understanding of the defense acquisition system (as 
 defined in section 3001 of this title), an understanding of 
 emerging technologies and the defense applications of such 
 technologies, experience partnering with States, national 
 associations, and academia, and experience with learning 
 technologies.
 ``(3) The term of the President of the Defense Acquisition 
University shall be not more than five years. The preceding sentence 
does not apply to the President of the Defense Acquisition University 
serving on January 1, 2022.''.
 (b) Implementation Report.--Not later than March 1, 2023, the 
Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a plan to modify the defense acquisition university 
structure to comply with section 1746(b)(2) of title 10, United States 
Code, as amended by subsection (a). Such plan shall establish a date of 
not later than March 1, 2026, for such modification to be completed.

SEC. 833. MODIFICATIONS TO DEFENSE CIVILIAN TRAINING CORPS.

 Section 2200g of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by striking ``For the purposes of'' and all that 
 follows through ``establish and maintain'' and inserting the 
 following: ``The Secretary of Defense, acting through the Under 
 Secretary for Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment, shall 
 establish and maintain'';
 (2) by designating the text of such section, as amended by 
 paragraph (1), as subsection (a); and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subsections:
 ``(b) Purpose.--The purpose of the Defense Civilian Training Corps 
is to target critical skills gaps necessary to achieve the objectives 
of each national defense strategy required by section 113(g) of this 
title and each national security strategy required by section 108 of 
the National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3043) by preparing 
students selected for the Defense Civilian Training Corps for 
Department of Defense careers relating to acquisition, digital 
technologies, critical technologies, science, engineering, finance, and 
other civilian occupations determined by the Secretary of Defense.
 ``(c) Use of Resources and Programs.--The Under Secretary of 
Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment shall use the resources and 
programs of the acquisition research organization within a civilian 
college or university that is described under section 4142(a) of this 
title (commonly referred to as the `Acquisition Innovation Research 
Center') to carry out the requirements of this chapter.
 ``(d) Consultation.--In planning and implementing the Defense 
Civilian Training Corps program, the Under Secretary of Defense for 
Acquisition and Sustainment shall consult with the following:
 ``(1) The Under Secretary of Defense for Research and 
 Engineering, including the Director of the Defense Innovation 
 Unit and the Strategic Engagements Director of the National 
 Security Innovation Network.
 ``(2) The Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence Officer 
 (as established by the memorandum of the Deputy Secretary of 
 Defense titled `Establishment of the Chief Digital and 
 Artificial Intelligence Officer' issued on December 8, 2021).
 ``(3) The Chief Information Officer of the Department of 
 Defense.
 ``(4) The Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and 
 Readiness.
 ``(5) The Secretaries of the military departments.
 ``(6) The Superintendents of the Service Academies (as 
 defined in section 347 of this title).
 ``(7) The Commanding General, U.S. Army Cadet Command.
 ``(8) The Commander, Jeanne M. Holm Center for Officer 
 Accessions and Citizen Development.
 ``(9) The Commander, Naval Service Training Command.''.

SEC. 834. REPEAL OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS RELATING TO ACQUISITION 
 WORKFORCE INCENTIVES.

 (a) Exchange Program for Acquisition Workforce Employees.--Section 
884 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 
(Public Law 115-232; 132 Stat. 1915; 10 U.S.C. 1701 note) is repealed.
 (b) Pilot Program on Temporary Exchange of Financial Management and 
Acquisition Personnel.--Section 1110 of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 (10 U.S.C. 1701 note) is 
repealed.
 (c) Flexibility in Contracting Award Program.--Section 834 of the 
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017 (Public Law 
114-328; 130 Stat. 2285; 10 U.S.C. 1701a note) is repealed.

SEC. 835. ACQUISITION WORKFORCE INCENTIVES RELATING TO TRAINING ON AND 
 AGREEMENTS WITH CERTAIN SOFTWARE BUSINESSES.

 (a) Training.--
 (1) Curricula.--Not later than one year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the head of the Acquisition 
 Innovation Research Center shall develop one or more curricula 
 for members of the acquisition workforce on financing and 
 operations of start-up businesses, with a focus on covered 
 start-up businesses.
 (2) Elements.--Courses under curricula developed under 
 paragraph (1) shall be offered with varying course lengths and 
 level of study.
 (3) Incentives.--The Secretary of Defense shall develop a 
 program to offer incentives to a member of the acquisition 
 workforce that completes a curriculum developed under paragraph 
 (1).
 (4) Additional training materials.--In developing curricula 
 required under paragraph (1), the head of the Acquisition 
 Innovation Research Center shall consider and incorporate 
 appropriate training materials from curricula in business, law, 
 or public policy.
 (b) Exchanges.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense shall establish a 
 pilot program under which the Secretary shall, in accordance 
 with section 1599g of title 10, United States Code, arrange for 
 the temporary assignment of one or more members of the 
 acquisition workforce to a covered start-up business, or from a 
 covered start-up business to an office of the Department of 
 Defense.
 (2) Priority.--The Secretary shall prioritize for 
 participation in the pilot program established under this 
 subsection members of the acquisition workforce who have 
 completed a curricula required under paragraph (1).
 (3) Termination.--The Secretary may not carry out the pilot 
 program authorized by this subsection after the date that is 
 three years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (c) Conferences.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense shall organize a 
 conference, to take place not less frequently than biannually, 
 to facilitate discussion between participants listed in 
 subsection (b) on the following:
 (A) Best practices relating to acquisition of 
 software.
 (B) Methods of effective collaboration between such 
 participants.
 (2) Participants.--Participants in a conference organized 
 under paragraph (1) may include the following:
 (A) Members of the acquisition workforce.
 (B) Employees of and investors in covered start-up 
 businesses.
 (d) Pilot Program.--
 (1) Establishment.--Not later than 18 months after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall 
 establish a pilot program to test the feasibility of unique 
 approaches to negotiating and establishing software data rights 
 in agreements for the procurement of software.
 (2) Authority.--To the maximum extent practicable, the 
 Secretary shall--
 (A) ensure that a member of the acquisition 
 workforce who has completed a curricula required under 
 subsection (a) is able to exercise authority to apply 
 an approach described in paragraph (1); and
 (B) provide incentives to such member to exercise 
 such authority.
 (3) Elements.--An agreement described in paragraph (1) 
 shall include the following:
 (A) Flexible requirements relating to the 
 acquisition or licensing of intellectual property based 
 on the software to be acquired under the agreement.
 (B) An identification and definition of the 
 technical interoperability standards required for such 
 software.
 (C) Flexible mechanisms for delivery of code for 
 such software, where each such mechanism includes 
 documentation of the costs and benefits of such 
 mechanism.
 (4) Parameters.--The United States shall seek to avoid 
 asserting unlimited rights or government purpose rights to 
 software acquired under an agreement entered into pursuant to 
 the pilot program established under this section.
 (5) Termination.--The Secretary may not carry out the pilot 
 program authorized by this subsection after the date that is 5 
 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``Acquisition Innovation Research Center'' 
 means the acquisition research organization within a civilian 
 college or university that is described under section 4142(a) 
 of title 10, United States Code.
 (2) The term ``acquisition workforce'' has the meaning 
 given in section 101 of title 10, United States Code.
 (3) The term ``covered start-up businesses'' means a start-
 up business that is a party to, or is seeking to enter into, an 
 agreement with the Department of Defense, the products and 
 services of which include software as a substantial component 
 of the offer for such agreement.
 (4) The term ``start-up business'' means a business that is 
 not publicly traded and that has not been acquired by a prime 
 contractor.

 Subtitle D--Provisions Relating to Software and Technology

SEC. 841. PRIZES FOR ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY ACHIEVEMENTS.

 Section 4025 of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by striking ``that have'' and inserting 
 ``that--''
 ``(1) have'';
 (B) by striking ``Defense.'' and inserting 
 ``Defense; or''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(2) demonstrate management practices that improve the 
 schedule or performance, reduce the costs, or otherwise support 
 the transition of technology into acquisition programs or 
 operational use.'';
 (2) in subsection (b), by striking ``of research results, 
 technology developments, and prototypes'';
 (3) in subsection (d), by striking ``to acquire, support, 
 or stimulate basic, advanced and applied research, technology 
 development, or prototype projects'';
 (4) in subsection (f), by striking ``section 2304'' and 
 inserting ``chapter 221''; and
 (5) in subsection (g)(2)--
 (A) by redesignating subparagraphs (B) and (C) as 
 subparagraphs (D) and (E), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the 
 following new subparagraphs:
 ``(B) if applicable, a summary of the management 
 practice that contributed to an improvement to schedule 
 or performance or a reduction in cost relating to the 
 transition of technology;
 ``(C) an identification of any program executive 
 officer (as defined in section 1737 of this title) 
 responsible for implementation or oversight of research 
 results, technology development, prototype development, 
 or management practices (as applicable) for which an 
 award was made under this section, and a brief summary 
 of lessons learned by such program executive officer in 
 carrying out such implementation or oversight;''.

SEC. 842. CONGRESSIONAL NOTIFICATION FOR PILOT PROGRAM TO ACCELERATE 
 THE PROCUREMENT AND FIELDING OF INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGIES.

 Section 834 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 135 Stat. 1835; 10 U.S.C. 4061 note) is 
amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (f) as subsection (g); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (e) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(f) Congressional Notification.--The Secretary of Defense shall 
notify congressional defense committees within 30 days after funding 
has been provided for a proposal selected for an award under the pilot 
program established under this section.''.

SEC. 843. CURRICULA ON SOFTWARE ACQUISITIONS AND CYBERSECURITY SOFTWARE 
 OR HARDWARE ACQUISITIONS FOR COVERED INDIVIDUALS.

 (a) Curricula.--The President of the Defense Acquisition 
University, shall develop training curricula related to software 
acquisitions and cybersecurity software or hardware acquisitions and 
offer such curricula to covered individuals to increase digital 
literacy related to such acquisitions by developing the ability of such 
covered individuals to use technology to identify, critically evaluate, 
and synthesize data and information related to such acquisitions.
 (b) Elements.--Curricula developed pursuant to subsection (a) shall 
provide information on--
 (1) cybersecurity, information technology systems, computer 
 networks, cloud computing, artificial intelligence, machine 
 learning, distributed ledger technologies, and quantum 
 technologies;
 (2) cybersecurity threats and capabilities;
 (3) operational efforts of United States Cyber Command to 
 combat cyber threats;
 (4) mission requirements and current capabilites and 
 systems of United States Cyber Command;
 (5) activities that encompass the full range of threat 
 reduction, vulnerability reduction, deterrence, incident 
 response, resiliency, and recovery policies and activities, 
 including activities relating to computer network operations, 
 information assurance, military missions, and intelligence 
 missions to the extent such activities relate to the security 
 and stability of cyberspace; and
 (6) the industry best practices relating to software 
 acquisitions and cybersecurity software or hardware 
 acquisitions.
 (c) Plan.--Not later than 180 days after enactment of this Act, the 
Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the President of the Defense 
Acquisition University, shall submit to Congress a comprehensive plan 
to implement the curricula developed under subsection (a). Such plan 
shall include a list of resources required for and costs associated 
with such implementation, including--
 (1) curriculum development;
 (2) hiring instructors to teach the curriculum;
 (3) facilities; or
 (4) website development.
 (d) Implementation.--Not later than one year after the date on 
which the plan described in subsection (d) is submitted to Congress, 
the President of the Defense Acquisition University shall offer the 
curricula developed under subsection (a) to covered individuals.
 (e) Report.--Not later than one year after the date on which the 
plan described in subsection (d) is submitted to Congress, Secretary of 
Defense, in consultation with the President of the Defense Acquisition 
University, shall submit to Congress a report assessing the costs and 
benefits of requiring all covered individuals to complete the curricula 
developed under subsection (a).
 (f) Covered Individuals Defined.--In this section, the term 
``covered individuals'' means--
 (1) a contracting officer of the Department of Defense with 
 responsibilities are related to software acquisitions or 
 cybersecurity software or hardware acquisitions; or
 (2) a individual serving in a position designated under 
 section 1721(b) of title 10, United States Code, who is 
 regularly consulted for software acquisitions or cybersecurity 
 software or hardware acquisitions.

SEC. 844. REPORT ON COVERED SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT.

 (a) Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter through December 31, 
2028, the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment, 
in consultation with the Chief Information Officer of the Department of 
Defense and the Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence Officer, 
shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the 
following:
 (1) A description of covered software delivered during the 
 fiscal year preceding the date of the report that is being 
 developed using iterative development, including a description 
 of the capabilities delivered for operational use.
 (2) For such covered software not developed using iterative 
 development, an explanation for not using iterative development 
 and a description of the development method used.
 (3) For each such covered software being developed using 
 iterative development, the frequency with which capabilities of 
 such covered software were delivered, disaggregated as follows:
 (A) Covered software for which capabilities were 
 delivered during period of less than three months.
 (B) Covered software for which capabilities were 
 delivered during period of more than three months and 
 less than six months.
 (C) Covered software for which capabilities were 
 delivered during period of more than six months and 
 less than nine months.
 (D) Covered software for which capabilities were 
 delivered during period of more than nine months and 
 less than 12 months.
 (4) With respect to covered software described in paragraph 
 (2) for which capabilities of such covered software were not 
 delivered in fewer than 12 months, an explanation of why such 
 delivery was not possible.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence 
 Officer'' means--
 (A) the official designated as the Chief Digital 
 and Artificial Intelligence Officer of the Department 
 of Defense pursuant to the memorandum of the Secretary 
 of Defense titled ``Establishment of the Chief Digital 
 and Artificial Intelligence Officer'' dated December 8, 
 2021; or
 (B) if there is no official designated as such 
 Officer, the official within the Office of the 
 Secretary of Defense with primary responsibility for 
 digital and artificial intelligence matters.
 (2) The term ``covered software'' means software that is 
 being developed that--
 (A) was acquired using a software acquisition 
 pathway established under section 800 of the National 
 Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020 (Public 
 Law 116-92);
 (B) is a covered defense business system, as 
 defined in section 2222(i) of title 10, United States 
 Code;
 (C) is a major defense acquisition program, as 
 defined in section 4201 of such title; or
 (D) is a major system, as defined in section 3041 
 of such title.
 (3) The term ``iterative development'' has the meaning 
 given the term ``agile or iterative development'' in section 
 891 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
 2018 (Public Law 115-91; 131 Stat. 1509; 10 U.S.C. 1746 note).

SEC. 845. OTHER TRANSACTION AUTHORITY CLARIFICATION.

 Section 4022 of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1)--
 (A) by striking ``military personnel and the 
 supporting'' and inserting ``personnel of the 
 Department of Defense or improving''; and
 (B) by striking ``or materials in use'' and 
 inserting ``materials, or installations in use''; and
 (2) in subsection (e), by adding at the end the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(3) The term `prototype project' means a project that 
 addresses--
 ``(A) a proof of concept, model, or process, 
 including a business process;
 ``(B) reverse engineering to address obsolescence;
 ``(C) a pilot or novel application of commercial 
 technologies for defense purposes;
 ``(D) agile development activity, creation, design, 
 development, or demonstration of operational utility; 
 or
 ``(E) any combination of subparagraphs (A) through 
 (D).''.

SEC. 846. EXISTING AGREEMENT LIMITS FOR OPERATION WARP SPEED.

 (a) In General.--Any award made to a consortium under section 4022 
of title 10, United States Code, by the Department of Defense on or 
after March 1, 2020, to address the COVID-19 pandemic through vaccines 
and other therapeutic measures using funds made available under a 
covered award shall not be counted toward any limit established prior 
to March 1, 2020, on the total estimated amount of all projects to be 
issued for a specified fiscal year (except that such funds shall count 
toward meeting any guaranteed minimum value).
 (b) Follow-on Contracts.--The Secretary of Defense may not award a 
follow-on contract, agreement, or grant for any award described in 
subsection (a)--
 (1) until the limit described in subsection (a) has been 
 reached;
 (2) until the term of the award described in subsection (a) 
 has expired; or
 (3) unless such follow-on contract, agreement, or grant is 
 made accordance with the terms and conditions of the award 
 described in subsection (a).
 (c) Covered Award Defined.--In this section, the term ``covered 
award'' means an award made in support of the efforts led by the 
Department of Health and Human Services and the Department of Defense, 
known as Operation Warp Speed, to accelerate the development, 
acquisition, and distribution of vaccines and other therapies to 
address the COVID-19 pandemic, and any successor efforts.

 Subtitle E--Industrial Base Matters

SEC. 851. RECOGNITION OF AN ASSOCIATION OF ELIGIBLE ENTITIES THAT 
 PROVIDE PROCUREMENT TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.

 (a) Regulations.--Section 4953 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended by inserting ``, and shall consult with an association 
recognized under section 4954(f) regarding any revisions to such 
regulations'' before the period at the end.
 (b) Cooperative Agreements.--Section 4954 of title 10, United 
States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsections:
 ``(f) Association Recognition and Duties.--Eligible entities that 
provide procurement technical assistance pursuant to this chapter may 
form an association to pursue matters of common concern. If more than a 
majority of such eligible entities are members of such an association, 
the Secretary shall--
 ``(1) recognize the existence and activities of such an 
 association; and
 ``(2) jointly develop with such association a model 
 cooperative agreement that may be used at the option of the 
 Secretary and an eligible entity.''.
 (c) Funding.--Section 4955(a)(1) of title 10, United States Code, 
is amended by striking ``$1,000,000'' and inserting ``$1,500,000''.
 (d) Administrative and Other Logistical Costs.--Section 4961 of 
title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking 
 ``Director of the Defense Logistics Agency'' and inserting 
 ``Secretary'';
 (2) in paragraph (1), by striking ``three'' and inserting 
 ``four''; and
 (3) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A)--
 (i) by striking ``Director'' and inserting 
 ``Secretary''; and
 (ii) by striking ``entities --'' and 
 inserting ``entities--''; and
 (B) in subparagraph (A), by inserting ``, including 
 meetings of an association recognized under section 
 4954(f),'' after ``meetings''.

SEC. 852. UPDATE TO PLAN ON REDUCTION OF RELIANCE ON SERVICES, 
 SUPPLIES, OR MATERIALS FROM COVERED COUNTRIES.

 Section 847 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 135 Stat. 1843; 10 U.S.C. 4811 note) is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (b), by adding at the end the following: 
 ``The report shall--
 ``(1) identify the services, supplies, or materials 
 described in subsection (a) that are necessary to meet critical 
 defense requirements in the event of a crisis or conflict;
 ``(2) assess the priority of such services, supplies, and 
 materials; and
 ``(3) provide options for reducing the reliance of the 
 United States on services, supplies, or materials obtained from 
 sources located in geographic areas controlled by covered 
 countries.'';
 (2) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (e); and
 (3) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new 
 subsections:
 ``(c) Biennial Review.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than two years after the date 
 on which the Secretary of Defense submits the report under 
 subsection (b), and every two years thereafter, the Secretary 
 shall review and update the plan required under subsection (a) 
 to ensure that the plan continues to accomplish the goals 
 described in such subsection.
 ``(2) Report.--
 ``(A) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the 
 Secretary of Defense completes a review under paragraph 
 (1), the Secretary shall submit to the congressional 
 defense committees a report on such review, including--
 ``(i) a description of the steps taken to 
 implement the plan required under subsection 
 (a);
 ``(ii) a description of, and explanation 
 for, any updates made to such plan under 
 paragraph (1); and
 ``(iii) an updated assessment of the 
 priority of the services, supplies, or 
 materials described in subsection (a) that are 
 necessary to meet critical defense requirements 
 in the event of a crisis or conflict.
 ``(B) Sunset.--This paragraph shall terminate on 
 the date that is six years after the date on which the 
 Secretary submits the first report required under 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(d) Report Form.--The reports required under subsection (b) and 
(c)(2) shall be submitted in an unclassified form, but may contain a 
classified annex.''.

SEC. 853. MODIFICATION TO PROHIBITION ON CERTAIN PROCUREMENTS FROM THE 
 XINJIANG UYGHUR AUTONOMOUS REGION.

 Section 848(a) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 10 U.S.C. 4651 note prec.; 135 Stat. 
1843) is amended by striking ``for fiscal year 2022''.

SEC. 854. CODIFICATION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE MENTOR-PROTEGE 
 PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--Section 831 of the National Defense Authorization 
Act for Fiscal Year 1991 (10 U.S.C. 4901 note prec.) is transferred to 
subchapter I of chapter 387 of title 10, United States Code, inserted 
after section 4901, and redesignated as section 4902.
 (b) Amendments.--Section 4902 of title 10, United States Code, as 
so transferred and redesignated, is amended--
 (1) in the heading, by striking ``mentor-protege pilot'' 
 and inserting ``department of defense mentor-protege'';
 (2) in subsections (a) and (c), by striking the term 
 ``pilot'' each place it appears;
 (3) in subsection (d)(1)(B)(iii)--
 (A) in subclause (I), by striking ``$100,000,000'' 
 and inserting ``$25,000,000''; and
 (B) in subclause (II), by striking ``subsection 
 (k)'' and inserting ``subsection (j)'';
 (4) in subsection (e)(2), by striking ``two years'' each 
 place it appears and inserting ``three years'';
 (5) in subsection (f)(1)(B), by inserting ``manufacturing, 
 test and evaluation,'' after ``inventory control,'';
 (6) in subsection (g)(3)(C), by striking ``subsection (k)'' 
 and inserting ``subsection (j)'';
 (7) by striking subsection (j);
 (8) by redesignating subsections (k) through (n) as 
 subsections (j) through (m), respectively;
 (9) in subsection (j), as so redesignated--
 (A) by striking the term ``pilot'' each place it 
 appears;
 (B) by striking ``by which mentor firms'' and 
 inserting ``by which the parties''; and
 (C) by striking ``The Secretary shall publish'' and 
 all that follows through ``270 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act.'';
 (10) in subsection (l), as so redesignated, by striking 
 ``subsection (l)'' and inserting ``subsection (k)'';
 (11) by amending subsection (m), as so redesignated, to 
 read as follows:
 ``(m) Transition Report.--Not later than July 1, 2023, the 
Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a report on the implementation of the amendments to the 
Mentor-Protege Program made in the National Defense Authorization Act 
for Fiscal Year 2023, including the efforts made to establish 
performance goals and outcome-based metrics and an evaluation of 
whether the Mentor-Protege Program is achieving such performance goals 
and outcome-based metrics.''; and
 (12) by inserting after subsection (m), as so redesignated, 
 the following new subsection:
 ``(n) Protege Technical Reimbursement Pilot Program.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than July 1, 2023, the 
 Director of the Office of Small Business Programs of the 
 Department of Defense shall establish a pilot program under 
 which a protege firm may receive up to 25 percent of the 
 reimbursement for which the mentor firm of such protege firm is 
 eligible under the Mentor-Protege Program for engineering, 
 software development, or manufacturing customization that the 
 protege firm must perform for a technology solution of the 
 protege firm to be ready for integration with programs or 
 systems of the Department of Defense.
 ``(2) Termination.--The pilot program established under 
 paragraph (1) shall terminate on the date that is five years 
 after the date on which the pilot program is established.''.
 (c) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subchapter I of 
chapter 387 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at 
the end the following new item:

``4902. Department of Defense Mentor-Protege Program.''.
 (d) Conforming Amendment.--
 (1) Buy indian act.--Section 23(a)(2) of the Act of June 
 25, 1910 (commonly known as the ``Buy Indian Act'') (36 Stat. 
 861, 25 U.S.C. 47(a)(2)) is amended by striking ``section 
 831(c) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
 Year 1991 (10 U.S.C. 2302 note; Public Law 101-510)'' and 
 inserting ``section 4902(c) of title 10, United States Code''.
 (2) Small business act.--Section 8(d)(12) of the Small 
 Business Act (15 U.S.C. 637(d)(12)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``the pilot Mentor-Protege Program 
 established pursuant to section 831 of the National 
 Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1991 (Public 
 Law 101-510; 10 U.S.C. 2301 note)'' and inserting ``the 
 Mentor-Protege Program established under section 4902 
 of title 10, United States Code,''; and
 (B) by striking ``subsection (g)'' and inserting 
 ``subsection (f)''.
 (e) Regulations.--Not later than December 31, 2023, the Secretary 
of Defense shall issue regulations for carrying out section 4902 of 
title 10, United States Code, as amended by this section.
 (f) Agreements Under Pilot Program.--The amendments made by this 
section shall not apply with respect to any agreement entered into 
under the program as established under section 831 of the National 
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1991 (Public Law 101-510; 104 
Stat. 1607) prior to the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 855. MICROLOAN PROGRAM; DEFINITIONS.

 Paragraph (11) of section 7(m) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 
636(m)(11)) is amended--
 (1) in clause (ii) of subparagraph (C), by striking 
 ``rural'' and all that follows to the end of the clause and 
 inserting ``rural;'';
 (2) in subparagraph (D), by striking the period at the end 
 and inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(E) the term `State' means each of the several 
 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of 
 Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands of the United States, 
 Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, 
 and American Samoa.''.

SEC. 856. SMALL BUSINESS INNOVATION PROGRAM EXTENSION.

 Section 9 of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 638) is amended by 
striking ``2022'' each place it appears and inserting ``2024''.

SEC. 857. PROHIBITION ON COVERED AIRPORT CONTRACTS WITH CERTAIN 
 ENTITIES.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense may not award a contract 
for the procurement of infrastructure or equipment for a passenger 
boarding bridge at a covered airport to a covered contractor.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered airport'' means a military airport 
 designated by the Secretary of Transportation under section 
 47118(a) of title 49, United States Code.
 (2) The term ``covered contractor'' means a contractor of 
 the Department of Defense--
 (A) that--
 (i) is owned, directed, or subsidized by 
 the People's Republic of China; and
 (ii) has been determined by a Federal court 
 to have misappropriated intellectual property 
 or trade secrets from an entity organized under 
 the laws of the United States or any 
 jurisdiction within the United States; and
 (B) that--
 (i) owns or controls, is owned or 
 controlled by, is under common ownership or 
 control with, or is a successor to an entity 
 described in subparagraph (A); or
 (ii) has entered into an agreement, 
 partnership, or other contractual arrangement 
 with such an entity; or
 (iii) has accepted funding (regardless of 
 whether such funding is in the form of minority 
 investment interest or debt) from such an 
 entity.

SEC. 858. RISK MANAGEMENT FOR DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE SUPPLY CHAINS.

 (a) Risk Management for All Department of Defense Supply Chains.--
Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment shall--
 (1) develop and issue implementing guidance for risk 
 management for Department of Defense supply chains for materiel 
 for the Department, including pharmaceuticals;
 (2) identify, in coordination with the Commissioner of Food 
 and Drugs, supply chain information gaps regarding reliance on 
 foreign suppliers of drugs, including active pharmaceutical 
 ingredients and final drug products; and
 (3) submit to Congress a report regarding--
 (A) existing information streams, if any, that may 
 be used to assess the reliance by the Department of 
 Defense on high-risk foreign suppliers of drugs;
 (B) vulnerabilities in the drug supply chains of 
 the Department of Defense; and
 (C) any recommendations to address--
 (i) information gaps identified under 
 paragraph (2); and
 (ii) any risks related to such reliance on 
 foreign suppliers.
 (b) Risk Management for Department of Defense Pharmaceutical Supply 
Chain.--The Director of the Defense Health Agency shall--
 (1) not later than one year after the issuance of the 
 guidance required by subsection (a)(1), develop and publish 
 implementing guidance for risk management for the Department of 
 Defense supply chain for pharmaceuticals; and
 (2) establish a working group--
 (A) to assess risks to the pharmaceutical supply 
 chain;
 (B) to identify the pharmaceuticals most critical 
 to beneficiary care at military treatment facilities; 
 and
 (C) to establish policies for allocating scarce 
 pharmaceutical resources in case of a supply 
 disruption.
 (c) Responsiveness Testing of Defense Logistics Agency 
Pharmaceutical Contracts.--The Director of the Defense Logistics Agency 
shall modify Defense Logistics Agency Instructions 5025.03 and 
3110.01--
 (1) to require Defense Logistics Agency Troop Support to 
 coordinate annually with customers in the military departments 
 to conduct responsiveness testing of the Defense Logistics 
 Agency's contingency contracts for pharmaceuticals; and
 (2) to include the results of that testing, as reported by 
 customers in the military departments, in the annual reports of 
 the Warstopper Program.

SEC. 859. REVIEW OF ADVANCES IN DOMESTIC PRODUCTION OF CARBON FIBER.

 (a) Review Required.--The Secretary of Defense shall conduct a 
review of the Department of Defense carbon fiber requirements necessary 
for current and future weapon system production and sustainment, 
including--
 (1) an examination of the access to domestically produced 
 carbon fiber to meet the requirements of the Department; and
 (2) a review of developments in advanced carbon fiber 
 production processes that can--
 (A) lower embedded energy consumption and improve 
 sustainability;
 (B) enable scalable production of carbon fiber and 
 lower production costs; and
 (C) enhance competition and resilience in the 
 United States industrial base.
 (b) Report.--Not later than June 1, 2023, the Secretary of Defense 
shall provide to the congressional defense committees a report of the 
findings of the review described in subsection (a), including any 
recommendations the Secretary may have for ensuring the Department of 
Defense access to sustainable, affordable, and domestically produced 
carbon fiber.

SEC. 859A. EXTENSION OF TRANSFER DATE FOR THE VERIFICATION OF SMALL 
 BUSINESS CONCERNS OWNED AND CONTROLLED BY VETERANS OR 
 SERVICE-DISABLED VETERANS TO THE SMALL BUSINESS 
 ADMINISTRATION.

 Section 862(a) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283; 15 U.S.C. 657f) by striking ``means'' 
and all that follows through the period at the end and inserting 
``means January 1, 2024.''.

SEC. 859B. APPLICATION OF PRICE EVALUATION PREFERENCE FOR QUALIFIED 
 HUBZONE SMALL BUSINESS CONCERNS TO CERTAIN CONTRACTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 31(c)(3) of the Small Business Act (15 
U.S.C. 657a(c)(3)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subparagraph:
 ``(E) Application to certain contracts.--The 
 requirements of subparagraph (A) shall apply to an 
 unrestricted order issued under an unrestricted 
 multiple award contract or the unrestricted portion of 
 a contract that is partially set aside for competition 
 restricted to small business concerns.''.
 (b) Rulemaking.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this section, the Administrator of the Small Business 
Administration shall revise any rule or guidance to implement the 
requirements of this section.

SEC. 859C. CODIFICATION OF SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION SCORECARD.

 (a) In General.--Section 868(b) of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 (15 U.S.C. 644 note) is 
transferred to section 15 of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 644), 
inserted after subsection (x), redesignated as subsection (y), and 
amended--
 (1) by striking paragraphs (1), (6), and (7);
 (2) by redesignating paragraph (2), (3), and (4) as 
 paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), respectively;
 (3) by redesignating paragraph (8) as paragraph (6);
 (4) in paragraph (1) (as so redesignated), by striking 
 ``Beginning in'' and all that follows through ``to evaluate'' 
 and inserting ``The Administrator shall use a scorecard to 
 annually evaluate'';
 (5) in paragraph (2) (as so redesignated)--
 (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A)--
 (i) by striking ``developed under paragraph 
 (1)''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``and Governmentwide'' 
 after ``each Federal agency''; and
 (B) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``section 
 15(g)(1)(B) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 
 644(g)(1)(B))'' and inserting ``subsection (g)(1)(B)'';
 (6) in paragraph (3) (as so redesignated)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``paragraph 
 (3)(A)'' and inserting ``paragraph (2)(A)''; and
 (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``paragraph 
 (3)'' and inserting ``paragraph (2)'';
 (7) by inserting after paragraph (3) (as so redesignated) 
 the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Additional requirements for scorecards.--The 
 scorecard shall include, for each Federal agency and 
 Governmentwide, the following information with respect to prime 
 contracts:
 ``(A) The number (expressed as a percentage) and 
 total dollar amount of awards made to small business 
 concerns owned and controlled by women through sole 
 source contracts and competitions restricted to small 
 business concerns owned and controlled by women under 
 section 8(m).
 ``(B) The number (expressed as a percentage) and 
 total dollar amount of awards made to small business 
 concerns owned and controlled by qualified HUBZone 
 small business concerns through sole source contracts 
 and competitions restricted to qualified HUBZone small 
 business concerns under section 31(c)(2).
 ``(C) The number (expressed as a percentage) and 
 total dollar amount of awards made to small business 
 concerns owned and controlled by service-disabled 
 veterans through sole source contracts and competitions 
 restricted to small business concerns owned and 
 controlled by service-disabled veterans under section 
 36.
 ``(D) The number (expressed as a percentage) and 
 total dollar amount of awards made to socially and 
 economically disadvantaged small business concerns 
 under section 8(a) through sole source contracts and 
 competitions restricted to socially and economically 
 disadvantaged small business concerns, disaggregated by 
 awards made to such concerns that are owned and 
 controlled by individuals and awards made to such 
 concerns that are owned and controlled by an entity.'';
 (8) in paragraph (5), by striking ``section 15(h)(2) of the 
 Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 644(h)(2))'' and inserting 
 ``subsection (h)(2)''; and
 (9) by amending paragraph (6) (as so redesignated) to read 
 as follows:
 ``(6) Scorecard defined.--In this subsection, the term 
 `scorecard' means any summary using a rating system to evaluate 
 the efforts of a Federal agency to meet goals established under 
 subsection (g)(1)(B) that--
 ``(A) includes the measures described in paragraph 
 (2); and
 ``(B) assigns a score to each Federal agency 
 evaluated.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 15(x)(2) of the Small Business 
Act is amended by striking ``scorecard described in section 868(b) of 
the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 (15 U.S.C. 
644 note)'' and inserting ``scorecard (as defined in subsection (y))''.

SEC. 859D. MODIFICATIONS TO THE NONMANUFACTURER RULE.

 (a) In General.--Section 8(a)(17) of the Small Business Act (15 
U.S.C. 637(a)(17)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subparagraphs:
 ``(D) Denials.--Upon denial of a waiver under subparagraph 
 (B)(iv)(I), the Administrator shall provide a justification of 
 such denial, and if appropriate, make recommendations 
 (including examples) for resubmitting a request for a waiver.
 ``(E) Information required for granted waivers.--A waiver 
 granted under subparagraph (B)(iv)(I) shall include the 
 following information:
 ``(i) The date on which the waiver terminates.
 ``(ii) A statement specifying that the contract to 
 supply any product for which the waiver was granted 
 must be awarded prior to the termination date in clause 
 (i).
 ``(iii) The total dollar value of the products that 
 are subject to the waiver.
 ``(iv) An exclusive list of specific products 
 identified by the Administrator that are subject to the 
 waiver, regardless of the determination of the 
 contracting officer submitted under such subparagraph.
 ``(v) A list of actions taken by the contracting 
 Federal agency for which a new such determination shall 
 be required, including--
 ``(I) modifications to the scope of the 
 contract for which the waiver was granted; and
 ``(II) modifications to the contract type 
 of such contract.
 ``(F) Modifications.--If a Federal agency modifies a 
 contract for which a waiver was granted under subparagraph 
 (B)(iv)(I) in a manner described in subparagraph (E)(v), the 
 head of such Federal agency shall notify the Administrator and 
 seek a new waiver under subparagraph (B)(iv)(I).''.
 (b) Congressional Notification and Publication.--Not later than 15 
days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator of 
the Small Business Administration shall publish on a website of the 
Administration and submit to the Committee on Small Business of the 
House of Representatives and the Committee on Small Business and 
Entrepreneurship of the Senate any program guidance or standard 
operating procedures of the Administration relating to the process by 
which the Administrator grants waivers under section 8(a)(17)(B)(iv)(I) 
of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 637(a)(17)(B)(iv)(I)).

SEC. 859E. STUDY ON SMALL BUSINESS ASSISTANCE TO FOREIGN-BASED 
 COMPANIES.

 (a) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall 
conduct a study to determine the amount of small business assistance 
that has been received by foreign-based small business concerns during 
the period beginning on March 1, 2020, and ending on the date of the 
enactment of this Act.
 (b) Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall submit 
 to Congress a report on the findings of the study conducted 
 under subsection (a), including the amount of small business 
 assistance that has been received by foreign-based small 
 business concerns in total and disaggregated by country of 
 origin.
 (2) Identifiable or proprietary information.--The 
 Comptroller General shall ensure that the report submitted 
 under paragraph (1) does not include any identifiable or 
 proprietary information of any foreign-based small business 
 concern.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Country of origin.--The term ``country of origin'' 
 means the country, other than the United States--
 (A) in which a foreign-based small business concern 
 is headquartered;
 (B) under the laws of which an entity owning or 
 holding, directly or indirectly, not less than 25 
 percent of the economic interest of a foreign-based 
 small business concern is organized; or
 (C) of which a person owning or holding, directly 
 or indirectly, not less than 25 percent of the economic 
 interest of a foreign-based small business concern is a 
 citizen.
 (2) Foreign-based small business concern.--The term 
 ``foreign-based small business concern'' means a small business 
 concern--
 (A) that is headquartered in a country other than 
 the United States; or
 (B) for which an entity organized under the laws of 
 a country other than the United States, or a citizen of 
 such a country, owns or holds, directly or indirectly, 
 not less than 25 percent of the economic interest of 
 the small business concern, including as equity shares 
 or a capital or profit interest in a limited liability 
 company or partnership.
 (3) Small business assistance.--The term ``small business 
 assistance'' means any Federal funds and other benefits 
 available to small business concerns under programs 
 administered by the Small Business Administration, including--
 (A) loans, whether directly or indirectly made;
 (B) grants; and
 (C) contracting preferences.
 (4) Small business concern.--The term ``small business 
 concern'' has the meaning given such term under section 3 of 
 the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 632).

SEC. 859F. REPORT ON STRATEGIC AND CRITICAL MATERIALS.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds that the annex provided by the 
Department of Defense under section 851 of the William M. (Mac) 
Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 
(Public Law 116-283; 134 Stat. 3773) did not contain every element 
required under such section.
 (b) Report Required.--Not later than June 1, 2023, the Under 
Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment shall submit to 
the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and the House of 
Representatives a report describing strategic and critical materials 
requirements of the Department of Defense, including the gaps and 
vulnerabilities in supply chains of such materials.
 (c) Elements.--The Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and 
Sustainment shall include in the report required by subsection (b) the 
following:
 (1) The overall annual tonnage of each strategic or 
 critical material used by the Department of Defense during the 
 10-year period ending on December 31, 2021.
 (2) An evaluation of the benefits of a robust domestic 
 supply chain for strategic and critical materials.
 (3) An evaluation of the effects of the use of waivers by 
 the Strategic Materials Protection Board established under 
 section 187 of title 10, United States Code, on the domestic 
 supply of strategic and critical materials.
 (4) An identification of the improvements to the National 
 Defense Stockpile that are required to further ensure that the 
 Department of Defense has access to strategic and critical 
 materials, aligning the goals of the stockpile with those of 
 the Department and prioritize existing and future needs for 
 emerging technologies.
 (5) An evaluation of the domestic processing and 
 manufacturing capacity required to supply strategic and 
 critical materials to the Department of Defense, including 
 identifying, in consultation with the Director of the United 
 States Geological Survey, domestic locations of proven sources 
 of such strategic and critical materials with existing 
 commercial manufacturing capabilities.
 (6) An identification of all minerals that are strategic 
 and critical materials, and supply chains for such minerals, 
 that originate in or pass through the Russian Federation.
 (7) An evaluation of the process required to immediately 
 halt the procurement of minerals described in paragraph (6) or 
 products by the Government without adversely affecting national 
 security.
 (8) Any limits on the availability of information 
 preventing or limiting the Under Secretary from fully 
 addressing an element described in paragraphs (1) through (7) 
 in the report.
 (9) Any legislative recommendations, statutory authority, 
 or appropriations necessary to improve the ability of the 
 Department to monitor and address its strategic and critical 
 materials requirements.
 (d) Form.--The report required in subsection (b) shall be submitted 
in unclassified form but may include a classified annex.
 (e) Strategic and Critical Materials Defined.--In this section, the 
term ``strategic and critical materials'' has the meaning given such 
term in section 12 of the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling 
Act (50 U.S.C. Sec. 98h-3).

SEC. 859G. REPORT AND MODIFICATION TO THE NATIONAL TECHNOLOGY AND 
 INDUSTRIAL BASE.

 (a) Modification to the National Technology and Industrial Base.--
Section 4801(1) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
inserting ``New Zealand,'' after ``Australia,''.
 (b) Report Required.--Not later than March 1, 2023, the Secretary 
of Defense (or a designee) shall brief the Committees on Armed Services 
of the House of Representatives and the Senate on integration of the 
national technology and industrial base (as defined in section 4801 of 
title 10, United States Code). The report shall include, at a minimum, 
the following elements:
 (1) Progress towards implementation of the plan to increase 
 integration of the national technology and industrial base 
 developed pursuant to section 881(a) of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017 (Public Law 114-328; 10 
 U.S.C. 2501 note).
 (2) Examples of successful cross border integration under 
 the national technology and industrial base that has enhanced 
 national security and reduced barriers to collaboration.
 (3) Recommendations for improving the integration of the 
 national technology and industrial base.

SEC. 859H. SENSE OF CONGRESS ON MODERNIZING DEFENSE SUPPLY CHAIN 
 MANAGEMENT.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) The continued modernize Department of Defense supply 
 chain management using private sector best practices where 
 applicable is imperative to run effective domestic and overseas 
 operations, ensure timely maintenance, and sustain military 
 forces.
 (2) Congress supports the continued development and 
 integration by the Secretary of Defense of advanced digital 
 supply chain management and capabilities. These capabilities 
 should include tools that digitize data flows in order to 
 transition from older, inefficient manual systems, modernize 
 warehouse operations of the Department of Defense to use 
 digitized data management and inventory control, and maximize 
 cybersecurity protection of logistics processes.
 (b) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that, to meet 
the unique needs of the Department of Defense regarding continuity of 
supply chain management in both garrison and deployed or austere 
environments, the Department must prioritize digital supply chain 
management solutions that use durable devices and technologies designed 
to operate in remote regions with limited network connectivity.

SEC. 859I. PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF LOGINK.

 (a) Prohibition.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense, each Secretary 
 of a military department, and a defense contractor may not use 
 LOGINK.
 (2) Applicability.--With respect to defense contractors, 
 the prohibition in subsection (a) shall apply--
 (A) with respect to any contract of the Department 
 of Defense entered into on or after the date of the 
 enactment of this section;
 (B) with respect to the use of LOGINK in the 
 performance of such contract.
 (b) Contracting Prohibition.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense and each 
 Secretary of a military department may not enter into any 
 contract with an entity that uses LOGINK and shall prohibit the 
 use of LOGINK in any contract entered into by the Department of 
 Defense.
 (2) Defense contractor.--With respect to any contract of 
 the Department of Defense, a defense contractor may not enter 
 into a subcontract with an entity that uses LOGINK.
 (3) Applicability.--This subsection applies with respect to 
 any contract entered into on or after the date of the enactment 
 of this section.
 (c) LOGINK Defined.--In this section, the term ``LOGINK'' means the 
public, open, shared logistics information network known as the 
National Public Information Platform for Transportation & Logistics by 
the Ministry of Transport of China.

SEC. 859J. REPORT ON TRANSITION TO PHASE III FOR SMALL BUSINESS 
 INNOVATION RESEARCH AND SMALL BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY 
 TRANSFER PROGRAM AWARDS.

 (a) Report Required.--On an annual basis, each Secretary of a 
military department (as defined in section 101 of title 10, United 
States Code) shall collect and submit to the President for inclusion in 
each budget submitted to Congress under section 1105 of title 31, 
United States Code, data on the Phase I, Phase II, and Phase III awards 
under the SBIR and STTR programs of the military department of the 
Secretary for the immediately preceding five fiscal years, including--
 (1) the aggregate funding amount for Phase III awards in 
 relevant program offices, as selected by the each Secretary of 
 a military department;
 (2) the change in Phase III funding during the period 
 covered by the report such selected program offices;
 (3) the number of SBIR awards made by such selected program 
 offices in under 180 days during the period covered by the 
 report; and
 (4) where possible, an identification of specific 
 recommendations from each Secretary of a military department on 
 opportunities to identify and expand best practices that 
 demonstrate growth in Phase III award funding.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section, the terms ``Phase I'', ``Phase 
II'', ``Phase III'', ``SBIR'', and ``STTR'' have the meanings given 
those terms, respectively, in section 9(e) of the Small Business Act 
(15 U.S.C. 638(e)).

SEC. 859K. EXTENSION OF PARTICIPATION IN 8(A) PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--A covered small business concern may, subject to 
the regulations issued by the Administrator of the Small Business 
Administration under subsection (b), elect to extend the period in 
which such covered small business concern participates in the program 
established under section 8(a) of such Act (15 U.S.C. 637(a)) by one 
year.
 (b) Emergency Rulemaking Authority.--Not later than 45 days after 
the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Small 
Business Administration shall issue regulations to carry out this 
section without regard to the notice requirements under section 553(b) 
of title 5, United States Code.
 (c) Covered Small Business Concern Defined.--
 (1) In general.--In this section, the term ``covered small 
 business concern'' means a small business concern (as defined 
 under section 3 of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 632)) 
 that--
 (A) participated in the program established under 
 section 8(a) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 
 637(a)) at any point during the period beginning on 
 September 10, 2020, and ending on the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, including a small business 
 concern that graduated during such period;
 (B) was not terminated or early graduated from such 
 program during such period; and
 (C) did not voluntarily elect to cease 
 participating in such program during such period as an 
 alternative to termination or early graduation from 
 such program, as determined by the Administrator of the 
 Small Business Administration.

SEC. 859L. ACCESS TO CONTRACT BUNDLING DATA.

 Section 15(p) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 644(p)) is 
amended--
 (1) by amending paragraph (1) to read as follows:
 ``(1) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Bundled contract.--The term `bundled 
 contract' has the meaning given such term in section 
 3(o) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 632(o)).
 ``(B) Consolidated contract.--The term 
 `consolidated contract' means a contract resulting from 
 the consolidation of contracting requirements (as 
 defined in section 44(a) of the Small Business Act (15 
 U.S.C. 657q(a))).'';
 (2) in paragraph (4)--
 (A) in the heading, by inserting ``and 
 consolidation'' after ``bundling'';
 (B) in subparagraph (A), by inserting ``and 
 consolidation'' after ``contract bundling''; and
 (C) in subparagraph (B)--
 (i) in clause (i), by inserting ``or 
 consolidated'' after ``of bundled''; and
 (ii) in clause (ii)--
 (I) in the matter preceding 
 subclause (I), by inserting ``or 
 consolidated'' after ``previously 
 bundled'';
 (II) in subclause (I), by inserting 
 ``or consolidated'' after ``were 
 bundled''; and
 (III) in subclause (II)--
 (aa) by inserting ``or 
 consolidated'' after ``to each 
 bundled'';
 (bb) in item (aa), by 
 inserting ``or consolidation'' 
 after ``the bundling'';
 (cc) in item (bb), by 
 inserting ``or consolidating'' 
 after ``by bundling'';
 (dd) in item (cc), by 
 inserting ``or consolidated'' 
 after ``the bundled'';
 (ee) in item (dd), by 
 inserting ``or consolidating'' 
 after ``the bundling''; and
 (ff) in item (ee)--

 (AA) by inserting 
 ``or consolidating'' 
 after ``the bundling''; 
 and

 (BB) by inserting 
 ``bundled or'' after 
 ``as prime contractors 
 for the''; and

 (3) in paragraph (5)(B), by striking ``provide, upon 
 request'' and all that follows and inserting the following: 
 ``provide to the Administration procurement information 
 referred to in this subsection for the contracting agency, 
 including the data and information described in paragraph (2) 
 and the information described in paragraph (4).''.

SEC. 859M. REPORT ON SMALL BUSINESS CONCERNS OWNED AND CONTROLLED BY 
 WOMEN.

 (a) In General.--Section 8(m) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 
637(m)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(9) Report.--Not later than May 1, 2023, and annually 
 thereafter, the Administrator shall submit to the Committee on 
 Small Business of the House of Representatives and the 
 Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship of the Senate 
 a report on small business concerns owned and controlled by 
 women. Such report shall include, for the fiscal year preceding 
 the date of the report, the following:
 ``(A) The total number of concerns certified as 
 small business concerns owned and controlled by women, 
 disaggregated by the number of concerns certified by--
 ``(i) the Administrator; or
 ``(ii) a national certifying entity 
 approved by the Administrator.
 ``(B) The amount of fees, if any, charged by each 
 national certifying entity for such certification.
 ``(C) The total dollar amount and total percentage 
 of prime contracts awarded to small business concerns 
 owned and controlled by women pursuant to paragraph (2) 
 or pursuant to a waiver granted under paragraph (3).
 ``(D) The total dollar amount and total percentage 
 of prime contracts awarded to small business concerns 
 owned and controlled by women pursuant to paragraphs 
 (7) and (8).
 ``(E) With respect to a contract incorrectly 
 awarded pursuant to this subsection because it was 
 awarded based on an industry in which small business 
 concerns owned and controlled by women are not 
 underrepresented--
 ``(i) the number of such contracts;
 ``(ii) the Federal agencies that issued 
 such contracts; and
 ``(iii) any steps taken by Administrator to 
 train the personnel of such Federal agency on 
 the use of the authority provided under this 
 subsection.
 ``(F) With respect to an examination described in 
 paragraph (5)(B)--
 ``(i) the number of examinations due 
 because of recertification requirements and the 
 actual number of such examinations conducted; 
 and
 ``(ii) the number of examinations conducted 
 for any other reason.
 ``(G) The number of small business concerns owned 
 and controlled by women that were found to be 
 ineligible to be awarded a contract under this 
 subsection as a result of an examination conducted 
 pursuant to paragraph (5)(B) or failure to request an 
 examination pursuant to section 127.400 of title 13, 
 Code of Federal Regulations (or a successor rule).
 ``(H) The number of small business concerns owned 
 and controlled by women that were decertified.
 ``(I) Any other information the Administrator 
 determines necessary.''.
 (b) Technical Amendment.--Section 8(m)(2)(C) of the Small Business 
Act is amended by striking ``paragraph (3)'' and inserting ``paragraph 
(4)''.

SEC. 859N. NATIVE HAWAIIAN ORGANIZATIONS.

 (a) Competitive Thresholds.--Section 8020 of title VIII of division 
A of the Department of Defense, Emergency Supplemental Appropriations 
to Address Hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico, and Pandemic Influenza 
Act, 2006 (15 U.S.C. 637 note) is amended by striking ``with agencies 
of the Department of Defense'' and inserting ``with agencies and 
departments of the Federal Government''.
 (b) Rulemaking.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, in order to carry out the amendments made by 
subsection (a)--
 (1) the Administrator of the Small Business Administration, 
 in consultation with the Administrator for Federal Procurement 
 Policy, shall promulgate regulations; and
 (2) the Federal Acquisition Regulatory Council established 
 under section 1302(a) of title 41, United States Code, shall 
 amend the Federal Acquisition Regulation.

 Subtitle F--Other Matters

SEC. 861. TECHNICAL CORRECTION TO EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE TRANSFER OF 
 CERTAIN TITLE 10 ACQUISITION PROVISIONS.

 (a) In General.--The amendments made by section 1701(e) and 
paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 802(b) of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81) shall be 
deemed to have taken effect immediately before the amendments made by 
section 1881 of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283; 134 Stat. 
4293).
 (b) Treatment of Section 4027 Requirements.--An individual or 
entity to which the requirements under section 4027 of title 10, United 
States Code, were applicable during the period beginning on January 1, 
2022, and ending on the date of the enactment of this Act pursuant to 
subsection (a) shall be deemed to have complied with such requirements 
during such period.

SEC. 862. REGULATIONS ON USE OF FIXED-PRICE TYPE CONTRACTS FOR MAJOR 
 DEFENSE ACQUISITION PROGRAMS.

 (a) Modification of Regulations.--Not later than 120 days after the 
date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall 
revise the Department of Defense Supplement to the Federal Acquisition 
Regulation and any regulations issued pursuant to section 818 of the 
John Warner National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2007 
(Public Law 109-364; 120 Stat. 2329) regarding the use of fixed-price 
type contracts for a major defense acquisition program.
 (b) Elements.--The revisions described in subsection (a) shall 
require the following:
 (1) That the number of low-rate initial production lots 
 associated with a major defense acquisition program may not be 
 more than one if--
 (A) the milestone decision authority authorizes the 
 use of a fixed-price type contract at the time of a 
 decision on Milestone B approval; and
 (B) the scope of work of the fixed-price type 
 contract includes both the development and low-rate 
 initial production of items for such major defense 
 acquisition program.
 (2) The limitation in paragraph (1) may be waived on a 
 case-by-case basis by the applicable service acquisition 
 executive. This waiver authority may not be delegated below the 
 level of service acquisition executive.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``low-rate initial production'' has the 
 meaning given under section 4231 of title 10, United States 
 Code.
 (2) The term ``milestone decision authority'' has the 
 meaning given in section 4211 of title 10, United States Code.
 (3) The term ``major defense acquisition program'' has the 
 meaning given in section 4201 of title 10, United States Code.
 (4) The term ``Milestone B approval'' has the meaning given 
 in section 4172(e) of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 863. NOTIFICATION ON RETENTION RATE POLICY.

 (a) Notice and Wait.--A determination of the Secretary of the Navy 
that a contract for non-nuclear surface ship repair and maintenance 
made to a private entity requires the Secretary of the Navy to retain 
more than 1 percent of the overall contract value may only be carried 
out after the end of a 30-day period beginning on the date on which the 
congressional defense committees receive the notification from the 
Secretary of the Navy under subsection (b).
 (b) Contents.--The notification described in subsection (a) shall 
include the following:
 (1) A description of the rationale for making such 
 determination.
 (2) A description of the potential impact on the defense 
 industrial base because of such determination.
 (3) A description of how the Navy plans to use, to a 
 greater extent, the flexibility on retention rates pursuant to 
 chapter 277 of title 10, United States Code.
 (c) Termination.--This section and the requirements of this section 
shall terminate on the later of--
 (1) the date on which the National Defense Authorization 
 Act for Fiscal Year 2024 is enacted; or
 (2) September 30, 2023.

SEC. 864. SECURITY CLEARANCE BRIDGE PILOT PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the 
Director of National Intelligence, shall conduct a pilot program to 
enable employees of innovative technology companies to begin work under 
contracts more quickly by allowing the Defense Counterintelligence and 
Security Agency to administer the personal security clearances of the 
employees of innovative technology companies while the Government 
completes the adjudication of the facility clearance application of the 
innovative technology company.
 (b) Personal Security Clearance Authority.--
 (1) In general.--Under the pilot program, the Defense 
 Counterintelligence and Security Agency may nominate and 
 administer the personal security clearances of the employees of 
 an innovative technology company while the Government completes 
 the adjudication of the facility clearance application of the 
 innovative technology company if the innovative technology 
 company is a contractor of the Department of Defense under a 
 contract the performance of which requires that the innovative 
 technology company have access to classified information.
 (2) Limitation.--Under the pilot program, the Defense 
 Counterintelligence and Security Agency may administer the 
 personal security clearances of employees of not more than--
 (A) 25 innovative technology companies in Fiscal 
 Year 2023;
 (B) 50 innovative technology companies in Fiscal 
 Year 2024;
 (C) 75 innovative technology companies in Fiscal 
 Year 2025;
 (D) 100 innovative technology companies in Fiscal 
 Year 2026; and
 (E) 125 innovative technology companies in Fiscal 
 Year 2027.
 (c) Clearance Transfer.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 30 days after an innovative 
 technology company is granted facility clearance, the Defense 
 Counterintelligence and Security Agency shall transfer any 
 personal clearances of employees of the innovative technology 
 company held by the Defense Counterintelligence and Security 
 Agency under the pilot program back to the innovative 
 technology company.
 (2) Denial of facility clearance.--Not later than 10 days 
 after an innovative technology company is denied facility 
 clearance, the Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency 
 shall release any personal clearances of employees of the 
 innovative technology company held by the Defense 
 Counterintelligence and Security Agency under the pilot 
 program.
 (d) Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than one year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Under 
 Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Under 
 Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security shall 
 jointly submit to the congressional defense committees, the 
 Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of 
 Representatives, and the Select Committee on Intelligence of 
 the Senate a report on the progress of the pilot program.
 (2) Contents.--Each report required under paragraph (1) 
 shall include--
 (A) an assessment of--
 (i) the extent to which the authority under 
 the pilot program has been used; and
 (ii) the usefulness of such authority;
 (B) the number of innovative technology companies 
 for which the Defense Counterintelligence and Security 
 Agency administered a personal security clearance of an 
 employee under the pilot program;
 (C) the number of programs of the Department of 
 Defense affected by the pilot program;
 (D) an analysis of the demand for additional 
 innovative technology companies to participate in the 
 pilot program, including who may have been excluded 
 from the program due to the limitation in subsection 
 (b)(2);
 (E) the length of time required for the facility 
 clearance adjudication of each innovative technology 
 company for which the Defense Counterintelligence and 
 Security Agency administered a personal security 
 clearance of an employee under the pilot program;
 (F) an estimate of the time saved on each contract 
 with respect to which the authority under the pilot 
 program is exercised by enabling employees of 
 innovative technology companies to begin work before 
 the Government completes the adjudication of the 
 facility clearance application of the innovative 
 technology company;
 (G) an assessment of any foreign intelligence 
 threats posed by the pilot program;
 (H) an assessment of the administrative costs and 
 benefits of the pilot program; and
 (I) such other information that the Under Secretary 
 of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Under 
 Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security 
 jointly determine appropriate.
 (e) Participant Selection.--The Defense Innovation Unit shall 
select innovative technology companies to participate in the pilot 
program.
 (f) Sunset.--The pilot program shall terminate on December 31, 
2028.
 (g) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Facility clearance.--The term ``facility clearance'' 
 has the meaning given the term ``Facility Clearance'' in 
 section 95.5 of title 10, Code of Federal Regulations, or any 
 successor regulation.
 (2) Innovative technology company.--The term ``innovative 
 technology company'' means a company that--
 (A) provides goods or services related to--
 (i) one or more of the fourteen critical 
 technology areas described in the memorandum by 
 the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and 
 Engineering issued on February 1, 2022, 
 entitled ``USD(R&E) Technology Vision for an 
 Era of Competition''; or
 (ii) information technology, software, or 
 hardware that is unavailable from any other 
 entity that possesses a facility clearance; and
 (B) is selected by the Defense Innovation Unit 
 under subsection (e) to participate in the pilot 
 program.
 (3) Personal security clearance.--The term ``personal 
 security clearance'' means the security clearance of an 
 individual who has received approval from the Department of 
 Defense to access classified information.
 (4) Pilot program.--The term ``pilot program'' means the 
 pilot program established under subsection (a).

SEC. 865. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE NATIONAL IMPERATIVE FOR INDUSTRIAL 
 SKILLS PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense, acting through the 
Industrial Base Analysis and Sustainment program of the Department of 
Defense, shall evaluate and further develop workforce development 
training programs as defined by the Secretary of Defense for training 
the skilled industrial workers defined by the Secretary of Defense and 
needed in the defense industrial base through the National Imperative 
for Industrial Skills Program of the Department of Defense (or a 
successor program).
 (b) Priorities.--In carrying out the program, the Secretary shall 
prioritize workforce development training programs that--
 (1) are innovative, lab-based, or experientially-based;
 (2) rapidly train skilled industrial workers for employment 
 with entities in the defense industrial base faster than 
 traditional classroom-based workforce development training 
 programs and at the scale needed to measurably reduce, as 
 rapidly as possible, the shortages of skilled industrial 
 workers in the defense industrial base; and
 (3) address the specific manufacturing requirements and 
 skills that are unique to critical industrial sectors of the 
 defense industrial base as defined by the Secretary of Defense, 
 such as naval shipbuilding.

SEC. 866. TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF COVID-19 VACCINE MANDATE FOR 
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE CONTRACTORS.

 (a) Independent Report.--The Comptroller General of the United 
States shall--
 (1) conduct a study on the predicted effects of the 
 requirement for contractors of the Department of Defense to 
 receive a COVID-19 vaccine on the performance of such a 
 contractor on a contract; and
 (2) submit to the congressional defense committees a report 
 containing the results of such study.
 (b) Temporary Suspension.--The Secretary of Defense may not 
implement a requirement for contractors of the Department of Defense to 
receive a COVID-19 vaccine until such time as the Comptroller General 
submits to the congressional defense committees the report under 
subsection (a).

SEC. 867. GAO REPORT ON DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE CONTRACT FINANCING AND 
 COMMERCIAL BEST PRACTICES.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds as follows:
 (1) In a 2019 report, the Comptroller General of the United 
 States directed the Department of Defense to ensure it conducts 
 a comprehensive assessment of the effect that its contract 
 financing and profit policies have on the defense industry and 
 update that assessment on a recurring basis.
 (2) The Department of Defense has commissioned an 
 independent study to evaluate--
 (A) free cash flow in the defense sector;
 (B) impacts to cash flow depending on contract type 
 and financing;
 (C) financing and its impact on small businesses; 
 and
 (D) the government accounting system requirements 
 for contractors.
 (b) Study and Report.--Not later than 6 months after the date of 
the completion of the study described in subsection (a)(2), the 
Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report assessing such study, 
including an evaluation of the tools and authorities the Department of 
Defense has available to ensure fair and reasonable pricing of 
commercial products and services.

SEC. 868. PROHIBITION ON CONTRACTING WITH EMPLOYERS THAT VIOLATED THE 
 NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS ACT.

 (a) Prohibition.--Except as provided in subsection (b), the 
Secretary of Defense may not enter into a contract with an employer 
found to have violated section 8(a) of the National Labor Relations Act 
(29 U.S.C. 158) during the three-year period preceding the proposed 
date of award of the contract.
 (b) Exceptions.--The Secretary of Defense may enter into a contract 
with a employer described in subsection (a) if--
 (1) before awarding a contract, such employer has settled 
 all violations described under subsection (a) in a manner 
 approved by the National Labor Relations Board and the employer 
 is in compliance with the requirements of any settlement 
 relating to any such violation; or
 (2)(A) each employee of such employer is represented by a 
 labor organization for the purposes of collective bargaining; 
 and
 (B) such labor organization certifies to the Secretary that 
 the employer--
 (i) is in compliance with any relevant collective 
 bargaining agreement on the date on which such contract 
 is awarded and will continue to preserve the rights, 
 privileges, and benefits established under any such 
 collective bargaining agreement; or
 (ii) before, on, and after the date on which such 
 contract is awarded, has bargained and will bargain in 
 good faith to reach a collective bargaining agreement.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section, the terms ``employer'', 
``employee'', and ``labor organization'' have the meanings given such 
terms, respectively, in section 2 of the National Labor Relations Act 
(29 U.S.C. 152).
 (d) Applicability.--This section and the requirements of this 
section shall apply to a contract entered into on or after September 
30, 2023.

SEC. 869. AMENDMENTS TO CONTRACTING AUTHORITY FOR CERTAIN SMALL 
 BUSINESS CONCERNS.

 (a) Socially and Economically Disadvantaged Small Business 
Concerns.--Section 8(a)(1)(D)(i)(II) of the Small Business Act (15 
U.S.C. 637(a)(1)(D)(i)(II)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``$7,000,000'' and inserting 
 ``$10,000,000''; and
 (2) by striking ``$3,000,000'' and inserting 
 ``$8,000,000''.
 (b) Certain Small Business Concerns Owned and Controlled by 
Women.--Section 8(m) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C.637(m)) is 
amended--
 (1) in paragraph (7)(B)--
 (A) in clause (i), by striking ``$7,000,000'' and 
 inserting ``$10,000,000''; and
 (B) in clause (ii), by striking ``$4,000,000'' and 
 inserting ``$8,000,000''; and
 (2) in paragraph (8)(B)--
 (A) in clause (i), by striking ``$7,000,000'' and 
 inserting ``$10,000,000''; and
 (B) in clause (ii), by striking ``$4,000,000'' and 
 inserting ``$8,000,000''.
 (c) Qualified Hubzone Small Business Concerns.--Section 
31(c)(2)(A)(ii) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 657a(c)(2)(A)(ii)) 
is amended--
 (1) in subclause (I), by striking ``$7,000,000'' and 
 inserting ``$10,000,000''; and
 (2) in subclause (II), by striking ``$3,000,000'' and 
 inserting ``$8,000,000''.
 (d) Small Business Concerns Owned and Controlled by Service-
disabled Veterans.--Section 36(c)(2) of the Small Business Act (15 
U.S.C. 657f(c)(2)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``$7,000,000'' and 
 inserting ``$10,000,000''; and
 (2) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``$3,000,000'' and 
 inserting ``$8,000,000''.
 (e) Certain Veteran-owned Concerns.--Section 8127(c)(2) of title 
38, United States Code, is amended by striking ``$5,000,000'' and 
inserting ``the dollar thresholds under section 36(c)(2) of the Small 
Business Act (15 U.S.C. 657f(c)(2))''.

SEC. 870. EQUITABLE ADJUSTMENTS TO CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 15 of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 
644) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (x) as subsection (y); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (w) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(x) Interim Partial Payments for Equitable Adjustments to 
Construction Contracts.--
 ``(1) Request for an equitable adjustment.--A small 
 business concern that was awarded a construction contract by an 
 agency may submit a request for an equitable adjustment to the 
 contracting officer of such agency if the contracting officer 
 directs a change in the terms of the contract performance 
 without the agreement of the small business concern. Such 
 request shall--
 ``(A) be timely made pursuant to the terms of the 
 contract; and
 ``(B) specify the estimated amount required to 
 cover additional costs resulting from such change in 
 the terms.
 ``(2) Amount.--Upon receipt of a request for equitable 
 adjustment from a small business concern under paragraph (1), 
 the agency shall provide to such concern an interim partial 
 payment in an amount equal to not less than 50 percent of the 
 estimated amount under paragraph (1)(B).
 ``(3) Limitation.--Any interim partial payment made under 
 this section may not be deemed to be an action to definitize 
 the request for an equitable adjustment.
 ``(4) Flow-down of interim partial payment amounts.--A 
 small business concern that receives an equitable adjustment 
 under this subsection shall pay to a first tier subcontractor 
 of such concern the portion of each interim partial payment 
 received that is attributable to the increased costs of 
 performance incurred by such subcontractor due to the change in 
 the terms of the contract performance described in paragraph 
 (1). A first tier subcontractor that receives a portion of an 
 interim partial payment under this section shall pay to a 
 subcontractor (at any tier) the appropriate portion of such 
 payment.''.
 (b) Implementation.--The Administrator of the Small Business 
Administration shall implement the requirements of this section not 
later than the earlier of the following dates:
 (1) The first day of the first full fiscal year beginning 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) October 1, 2024.

SEC. 871. MANUFACTURING OF INSULIN.

 (a) Manufacturing of Insulin.--For the purposes of manufacturing 
insulin for use under the military health system, including under the 
TRICARE program, the Secretary of Defense may--
 (1) select one or more Government-owned, contractor-
 operated facilities to manufacture insulin;
 (2) use existing pharmaceutical manufacturing facilities of 
 the Department of Defense to produce insulin; or
 (3) establish new pharmaceutical manufacturing facilities 
 to produce insulin.
 (b) Sale.--Any insulin manufactured under the authority of this 
section may be provided at a price not to exceed the cost to 
manufacture and distribute the insulin.

SEC. 872. NEED FOR DEVELOPMENT AND ACQUISITION OF NATURAL RUBBER FROM 
 DOMESTIC HERBACIOUS PLANT SOURCES.

 (a) Report Required.--Not later than 120 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition 
and Sustainment, in consultation with the Under Secretary of Defense 
for Research and Engineering and the Assistant Secretary of Defense for 
Industrial Policy, shall submit to the congressional defense committees 
a plan for future investment by the Department of Defense in the 
development, testing, and evaluation of domestic natural rubber from 
herbaceous plants for military applications, including a timeline for 
acquiring critical defense components and products using natural rubber 
from domestic sources.
 (b) Contents.--The plan submitted under subsection (a) shall 
include the following:
 (1) An unclassified assessment of the direct and indirect 
 influence of China on the commercial availability of natural 
 rubber, including the effects on national security and the 
 long-term implications for the defense supply chain, 
 specifically for military aircraft and vehicle tires.
 (2) An overview of the current investment of the Department 
 of Defense in domestic natural rubber production and the plans 
 of the Department for scaling and expanding such production to 
 offset one percent of the annual importation of natural rubber 
 into the United States.
 (3) A plan to provide additional funding for the 
 initiatives identified in paragraph (2) to achieve fielding of 
 products and components with natural rubber from domestic 
 sources not later than the end of fiscal year 2027.
 (4) A strategy of United States-based rubber industry 
 partners and component manufacturers for collaboration, 
 codevelopment, and joint interest.
 (5) A detailed description of the policies, procedures, 
 budgets, and accelerated acquisition and contracting mechanisms 
 of the Department of Defense for near-term insertion of 
 domestic natural rubber content to test and evaluate 
 performance of natural rubber from domestic sources for 
 tactical aircraft performance.

SEC. 873. INCREASED COMPETITIVE OPPORTUNITIES AND STRATEGY FOR CERTAIN 
 CRITICAL TECHNOLOGY CONTRACTORS.

 (a) Authorities.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense shall seek to 
 increase competitive opportunities for appropriate U.S. 
 companies to be awarded prime contracts, grants, cooperative 
 agreements, or other transactions for commercial products or 
 dual-use capabilities of which any component primarily relates 
 to critical technology.
 (2) Strategy.--Not later than 120 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall 
 develop and implement a comprehensive strategy to increase 
 competitive opportunities available for appropriate U.S. 
 companies and protect the integrity of the defense industrial 
 base. The strategy shall include the following:
 (A) A description of methods to enhance the 
 availability of funds authorized by sections 4021 and 
 4022 of title 10, United States Code, for appropriate 
 U.S. companies to develop end items of critical 
 technologies, to rapidly prototype such end items, to 
 conduct continuous experimentation to improve such end 
 items, and to deliver capabilities to the Department of 
 Defense.
 (B) Processes to monitor and mitigate risks to the 
 defense industrial base.
 (C) Processes to improve coordination by the 
 military departments and other elements of the 
 Department of Defense to carry out subparagraphs (A) 
 and (B).
 (b) Report.--Along with the report required under section 4814 of 
title 10, United States Code, that is due after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with 
appropriate U.S. companies, shall submit a report on the implementation 
of the strategy required in subsection (a)(2) and progress made to 
monitor and mitigate risks to the defense industrial base.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate U.S. company'' means--
 (A) a nontraditional defense contractor, as defined 
 in section 3014 of title 10, United States Code; or
 (B) a prime contractor that has entered into a 
 cooperative agreement with a nontraditional defense 
 contractor with the express intent to pursue funding 
 authorized by sections 4021 and 4022 of title 10, 
 United States Code, in the development, testing, or 
 prototyping of critical technologies.
 (2) The term ``commercial product'' has the meaning given 
 in section 3011 of title 10, United States Code.
 (3) The term ``dual-use'' has the meaning given in section 
 4801 of title 10, United States Code.
 (4) The term ``critical technology'' means a technology 
 identified as critical by the Secretary of Defense, which shall 
 include--
 (A) biotechnology;
 (B) quantum science;
 (C) advanced materials;
 (D) artificial intelligence and machine learning;
 (E) microelectronics;
 (F) space technology;
 (G) advanced computing and software;
 (H) hypersonics;
 (I) integrated sensing and cyber;
 (J) autonomous systems;
 (K) unmanned systems;
 (L) advanced sensing systems; and
 (M) advanced communications systems.

SEC. 874. DUTIES OF SMALL BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT CENTER COUNSELORS.

 Section 21 of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 648) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(o) Cyber Strategy Training for Small Business Development 
Centers.--
 ``(1) Definitions.--In this subsection--
 ``(A) the term `cyber strategy' means resources and 
 tactics to assist in planning for cybersecurity and 
 defending against cyber risks and cyber attacks; and
 ``(B) the term `lead small business development 
 center' means a small business development center that 
 has received a grant from the Administration.
 ``(2) Certification program.--The Administrator shall 
 establish a cyber counseling certification program, or approve 
 a similar existing program, to certify the employees of lead 
 small business development centers to provide cyber planning 
 assistance to small business concerns.
 ``(3) Number of certified employees.--The Administrator 
 shall ensure that the number of employees of each lead small 
 business development center who are certified in providing 
 cyber planning assistance under this subsection is not fewer 
 than the lesser of--
 ``(A) 5; or
 ``(B) 10 percent of the total number of employees 
 of the lead small business development center.
 ``(4) Consideration of small business development center 
 cyber strategy.--In carrying out this subsection, the 
 Administrator, to the extent practicable, shall consider any 
 cyber strategy methods included in the Small Business 
 Development Center Cyber Strategy developed under section 
 1841(a) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
 Year 2017 (Public Law 114-328; 130 Stat. 2662).
 ``(5) Reimbursement for certification.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to the availability of 
 appropriations and subparagraph (B), the Administrator 
 shall reimburse a lead small business development 
 center for costs relating to the certification of an 
 employee of the lead small business development center 
 under the program established under paragraph (2).
 ``(B) Limitation.--The total amount reimbursed by 
 the Administrator under subparagraph (A) may not exceed 
 $350,000 in any fiscal year.''.

 TITLE IX--DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT

 Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Defense and Related Matters

SEC. 901. INCREASE IN AUTHORIZED NUMBER OF ASSISTANT AND DEPUTY 
 ASSISTANT SECRETARIES OF DEFENSE.

 (a) Increase in Authorized Number of Assistant Secretaries of 
Defense.--
 (1) Increase.--Section 138(a)(1) of title 10, United States 
 Code, is amended by striking ``15'' and inserting ``18''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Section 5315 of title 5, United 
 States Code, is amended by striking ``(14)'' after ``Assistant 
 Secretaries of Defense'' and inserting ``(18)''.
 (b) Increase in Authorized Number of Deputy Assistant Secretaries 
of Defense.--
 (1) Increase.--Section 138 of such title is amended by 
 adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(e) The maximum number of Deputy Assistant Secretaries of Defense 
is 57.''.
 (2) Conforming repeal.--Section 908 of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 (Public Law 115-91; 10 
 U.S.C. 138 note) is repealed.

SEC. 902. RESPONSIBILITIES OF ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR 
 SPECIAL OPERATIONS AND LOW INTENSITY CONFLICT.

 Section 138(b)(2)(A) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
inserting ``(including explosive ordnance disposal)'' after ``low 
intensity conflict activities''.

 Subtitle B--Other Department of Defense Organization and Management 
 Matters

SEC. 911. ELIGIBILITY OF CHIEF OF THE NATIONAL GUARD BUREAU FOR 
 APPOINTMENT AS CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF.

 Section 152(b)(1)(B) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
striking ``the Commandant of the Marine Corps, or the Chief of Space 
Operations'' and inserting ``the Commandant of the Marine Corps, the 
Chief of Space Operations, or the Chief of the National Guard Bureau''.

SEC. 912. CLARIFICATION OF PEACETIME FUNCTIONS OF THE NAVY.

 Section 8062(a) of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in the second sentence, by striking ``primarily'' and 
 inserting ``for the peacetime promotion of the national 
 security interests and prosperity of the United States and''; 
 and
 (2) in the third sentence, by striking ``for the effective 
 prosecution of war'' and inserting ``for the duties described 
 in the preceding sentence''.

SEC. 913. EXPLOSIVE ORDNANCE DISPOSAL DEFENSE PROGRAM.

 Section 2284(b) of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``and'' after 
 the semicolon;
 (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``the 
 Department of Defense'' and all that follows and 
 inserting ``the Program;'';
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraphs:
 ``(C) direct the executive agent to designate a 
 joint program executive officer for the Program; and
 ``(D) assign the Director of the Defense Threat 
 Reduction Agency to manage the Defense-wide program 
 element funding for the Program.''.
 (2) by striking paragraph (4);
 (3) by redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph (4);
 (4) in paragraph (4), as so redesignated, by striking the 
 period at the end and inserting a semicolon; and
 (5) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
 ``(5) the Secretary of the Navy shall designate a Navy 
 explosive ordnance disposal-qualified admiral officer to serve 
 as the co-chair of the Program; and
 ``(6) the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special 
 Operations and Low Intensity Conflict shall designate the 
 Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations 
 and Combating Terrorism as the co-chair of the Program.''.

SEC. 914. MODIFICATION OF REPORT REGARDING THE DESIGNATION OF THE 
 EXPLOSIVE ORDNANCE DISPOSAL CORPS AS A BASIC BRANCH OF 
 THE ARMY.

 Section 582(b)(2) of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2018 (Public Law 115-91; 10 U.S.C. 3063 note) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (F), by inserting ``National Guard 
 Bureau,'' before ``Army Forces Command''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(H) The Secretary of the Army has designated an 
 Assistant Secretary of the Army as the key individual 
 responsible for developing and overseeing policy, 
 plans, programs, and budgets, and issuing guidance and 
 providing direction on the explosive ordnance disposal 
 activities of the Army.''.

SEC. 915. CLARIFICATION OF ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES FOR FORCE 
 MODERNIZATION EFFORTS OF THE ARMY.

 (a) Plan Required.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Army shall submit to the 
Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and the House of 
Representatives a plan that comprehensively defines the roles and 
responsibilities of officials and organizations of the Army with 
respect to the force modernization efforts of the Army.
 (b) Elements.--The plan under subsection (a) shall--
 (1) identify the official within the Army who shall have 
 primary responsibility for the force modernization efforts of 
 the Army, and specify the roles, responsibilities, and 
 authorities of that official;
 (2) clearly define the roles, responsibilities, and 
 authorities of the Army Futures Command and the Assistant 
 Secretary of the Army for Acquisition, Logistics, and 
 Technology with respect to such efforts;
 (3) clarify the roles, responsibilities, and authorities of 
 officials and organizations of the Army with respect to 
 acquisition in support of such efforts; and
 (4) include such other information as the Secretary of the 
 Army determines appropriate.
 (c) Role of Army Futures Command.--In the event the Secretary of 
the Army does not submit the plan required under subsection (a) by the 
expiration of the 180 day period specified in such subsection, then 
beginning at the expiration of such period--
 (1) the Commanding General of the Army Futures Command 
 shall have the roles, responsibilities, and authorities 
 assigned to the Commanding General pursuant to Army Directive 
 2020-15 (``Achieving Persistent Modernization'') as in effect 
 on November 16, 2020; and
 (2) any provision of Army Directive 2022-07 (``Army 
 Modernization Roles and Responsibilities''), or any successor 
 directive, that modifies or contravenes a provision of the 
 directive specified in paragraph (1) shall have no force or 
 effect.

SEC. 916. REPORT ON POTENTIAL TRANSITION OF ALL MEMBERS OF SPACE FORCE 
 INTO A SINGLE COMPONENT.

 (a) Report Required.--Not later than March 1, 2023, the Secretary 
of Defense shall submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the 
Senate and the House of Representatives a report on the proposal of the 
Air Force to transition the Space Force into a single component (in 
this section referred to as the Space Component)--
 (1) that consists of all members of the Space Force, 
 without regard to whether such a member is, under laws in 
 effect at the time of the report, in the active or reserve 
 component of the Space Force; and
 (2) in which such members may transfer between duty 
 statuses more freely than would otherwise be allowed under the 
 laws in effect at the time of the report.
 (b) Elements.--The report required under subsection (a) shall 
include the following:
 (1) A plan that describes any rules, regulations, policies, 
 guidance, and statutory provisions that may be implemented to 
 govern--
 (A) the ability of a member of the Space Component 
 to transfer between duty statuses, the number of 
 members authorized to make such transfers, and the 
 timing of such transfers;
 (B) the retirement of members of the Space 
 Component, including the determination of a member's 
 eligibility for retirement and the calculation of the 
 retirement benefits (including benefits under laws 
 administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs) to 
 which the member would be entitled based on a career 
 consisting of service in duty statuses of the Space 
 Component; and
 (C) the composition and operation of promotion 
 selection boards with respect to members of the Space 
 Component, including the treatment of general officers 
 by such boards.
 (2) A comprehensive analysis of how such proposal may 
 affect the ability of departments and agencies of the Federal 
 Government (including departments and agencies outside the 
 Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans Affairs) 
 to accurately calculate the pay or determine the benefits, 
 including health care benefits under chapter 55 of title 10, 
 United States Code, to which a member or former member of the 
 Space Component is entitled at any given time.
 (3) Draft legislative text, prepared by the Office of 
 Legislative Counsel within the Office of the General Counsel of 
 the Department of Defense, that comprehensively sets forth all 
 amendments and modifications to Federal statutes needed to 
 effectively implement the proposal described in subsection (a), 
 including--
 (A) amendments and modifications to titles 10, 37, 
 and 38, United States Code;
 (B) amendments and modifications to Federal 
 statutes outside of such titles; and
 (C) an analysis of each provision of Federal 
 statutory law that refers to the duty status of a 
 member of an Armed Force, or whether such member is in 
 an active or reserve component, and, for each such 
 provision--
 (i) a written determination indicating 
 whether such provision requires amendment or 
 other modification to clarify its applicability 
 to a member of the Space Component; and
 (ii) if such an amendment or modification 
 is required, draft legislative text for such 
 amendment or modification.

SEC. 917. SENSE OF CONGRESS ON THE ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM SUPERIORITY 
 STRATEGY.

 It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the Department of Defense released the Electromagnetic 
 Spectrum Superiority Strategy (October 2020) and an 
 Implementation Plan for such strategy (August 2021);
 (2) the purpose of the Electromagnetic Spectrum Superiority 
 Strategy is to align electromagnetic spectrum activities across 
 the Department of Defense to solve persistent gaps in the 
 ability of the United States to project, achieve, and sustain 
 electromagnetic spectrum superiority against adversaries and 
 peer competitors, most notably Russia and People's Republic of 
 China;
 (3) a goal of the Electromagnetic Spectrum Superiority 
 Strategy is to ``Establish Effective EMS Governance'' to unify 
 Department of Defense-wide electromagnetic spectrum enterprise 
 activities, develop a continuous process improvement culture, 
 and promote policies that support Department of Defense 
 electromagnetic spectrum capabilities and operations;
 (4) electromagnetic spectrum superiority underpins each of 
 the four priorities of the 2022 National Defense Strategy of 
 the Department of Defense;
 (5) the projecting, achievement, and sustainment of 
 electromagnetic spectrum superiority is inherently a joint 
 operational mission that is fundamental to the success of 
 military missions carried out by the United States and its 
 allies across all warfighting domains;
 (6) electromagnetic spectrum operations leadership in the 
 Pentagon must be consolidated and unambiguous to address 
 persistent gaps in coordination of joint electronic warfare 
 among the services and fragmentation in guidance from 
 leadership in the Department of Defense; and
 (7) the Secretary of Defense--
 (A) should provide to Congress an unclassified 
 version of the Implementation Plan for the 
 Electromagnetic Spectrum Superiority Strategy in all 
 future updates to the plan; and
 (B) as part of implementing the Electromagnetic 
 Spectrum Superiority Strategy, should--
 (i) strengthen governance reforms to ensure 
 necessary senior operational leadership; and
 (ii) provide a coherent response to 
 persistent gaps in joint electromagnetic 
 spectrum operations across the areas of 
 Doctrine, Organization, Training, Materiel, 
 Leadership, Personnel, Facilities and Policy 
 (DOTMLPF-P);

 Subtitle C--Space National Guard

SEC. 921. ESTABLISHMENT OF SPACE NATIONAL GUARD.

 (a) Establishment.--
 (1) In general.--There is established a Space National 
 Guard that is part of the organized militia of the several 
 States and Territories, Puerto Rico, and the District of 
 Columbia--
 (A) in which the Space Force operates or where 
 there are significant space launch or mission control 
 facilities; and
 (B) active and inactive.
 (2) Reserve component.--There is established a Space 
 National Guard of the United States that is the reserve 
 component of the United States Space Force all of whose members 
 are members of the Space National Guard.
 (b) Composition.--The Space National Guard shall be composed of the 
Space National Guard forces of the several States and Territories, 
Puerto Rico and the District of Columbia--
 (1) in which the Space Force operates or where there are 
 significant space launch or mission control facilities; and
 (2) active and inactive.

SEC. 922. NO EFFECT ON MILITARY INSTALLATIONS.

 Nothing in this subtitle, or the amendments made by this subtitle, 
shall be construed to authorize or require the relocation of any 
facility, infrastructure, or military installation of the Space 
National Guard or Air National Guard.

SEC. 923. IMPLEMENTATION OF SPACE NATIONAL GUARD.

 (a) Requirement.--Except as specifically provided by this subtitle, 
the Secretary of the Air Force and Chief of the National Guard Bureau 
shall implement this subtitle, and the amendments made by this 
subtitle, not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.
 (b) Briefings.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, and annually for the five subsequent years, the 
Secretary of the Air Force, Chief of the Space Force and Chief of the 
National Guard Bureau shall jointly provide to the congressional 
defense committees a briefing on the status of the implementation of 
the Space National Guard pursuant to this subtitle and the amendments 
made by this subtitle. This briefing shall address the current 
missions, operations and activities, personnel requirements and status, 
and budget and funding requirements and status of the Space National 
Guard, and such other matters with respect to the implementation and 
operation of the Space National Guard as the Secretary and the Chiefs 
jointly determine appropriate to keep Congress fully and currently 
informed on the status of the implementation of the Space National 
Guard.

SEC. 924. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS AND CLARIFICATION OF AUTHORITIES.

 (a) Definitions.--
 (1) Title 10, united states code.--Title 10, United States 
 Code, is amended--
 (A) in section 101--
 (i) in subsection (c)--
 (I) by redesignating paragraphs (6) 
 and (7) as paragraphs (8) and (9), 
 respectively; and
 (II) by inserting after paragraph 
 (5) the following new paragraphs:
 ``(6) The term `Space National Guard' means that part of 
 the organized militia of the several States and territories, 
 Puerto Rico, and the District Of Columbia, active and inactive, 
 that--
 ``(A) is a space force;
 ``(B) is trained, and has its officers appointed 
 under the sixteenth clause of section 8, article I of 
 the Constitution;
 ``(C) is organized, armed, and equipped wholly or 
 partly at Federal expense; and
 ``(D) is federally recognized.
 ``(7) The term `Space National Guard of the United States' 
 means the reserve component of the Space Force all of whose 
 members are members of the Space National Guard.''; and
 (B) in section 10101--
 (i) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), 
 by inserting ``the following'' before the 
 colon; and
 (ii) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(8) The Space National Guard of the United States.''.
 (2) Title 32, united states code.--Section 101 of title 32, 
 United States Code is amended--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (8) through (19) as 
 paragraphs (10) and (21), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting after paragraph (7) the following 
 new paragraphs:
 ``(8) The term `Space National Guard' means that part of 
 the organized militia of the several States and territories, 
 Puerto Rico, and the District Of Columbia, in which the Space 
 Force operates, active and inactive, that--
 ``(A) is a space force;
 ``(B) is trained, and has its officers appointed 
 under the sixteenth clause of section 8, article I of 
 the Constitution;
 ``(C) is organized, armed, and equipped wholly or 
 partly at Federal expense; and
 ``(D) is federally recognized.
 ``(9) The term `Space National Guard of the United States' 
 means the reserve component of the Space Force all of whose 
 members are members of the Space National Guard.''.
 (b) Reserve Components.--Chapter 1003 of title 10, United States 
Code, is amended--
 (1) by adding at the end the following new sections:
``Sec. 10115. Space National Guard of the United States: composition
 ``The Space National Guard of the United States is the reserve 
component of the Space Force that consists of--
 ``(1) federally recognized units and organizations of the 
 Space National Guard; and
 ``(2) members of the Space National Guard who are also 
 Reserves of the Space Force.
``Sec. 10116. Space National Guard: when a component of the Space Force
 ``The Space National Guard while in the service of the United 
States is a component of the Space Force.
``Sec. 10117. Space National Guard of the United States: status when 
 not in Federal service
 ``When not on active duty, members of the Space National Guard of 
the United States shall be administered, armed, equipped, and trained 
in their status as members of the Space National Guard.''; and
 (2) in the table of sections at the beginning of such 
 chapter, by adding at the end the following new items:

``10115. Space National Guard of the United States: composition.
``10116. Space National Guard: when a component of the Space Force.
``10117. Space National Guard of the United States: status when not in 
 Federal service.''.

 TITLE X--GENERAL PROVISIONS

 Subtitle A--Financial Matters

SEC. 1001. GENERAL TRANSFER AUTHORITY.

 (a) Authority to Transfer Authorizations.--
 (1) Authority.--Upon determination by the Secretary of 
 Defense that such action is necessary in the national interest, 
 the Secretary may transfer amounts of authorizations made 
 available to the Department of Defense in this division for 
 fiscal year 2023 between any such authorizations for that 
 fiscal year (or any subdivisions thereof). Amounts of 
 authorizations so transferred shall be merged with and be 
 available for the same purposes as the authorization to which 
 transferred.
 (2) Limitation.--Except as provided in paragraph (3), the 
 total amount of authorizations that the Secretary may transfer 
 under the authority of this section may not exceed 
 $6,000,000,000.
 (3) Exception for transfers between military personnel 
 authorizations.--A transfer of funds between military personnel 
 authorizations under title IV shall not be counted toward the 
 dollar limitation in paragraph (2).
 (b) Limitations.--The authority provided by subsection (a) to 
transfer authorizations--
 (1) may only be used to provide authority for items that 
 have a higher priority than the items from which authority is 
 transferred; and
 (2) may not be used to provide authority for an item that 
 has been denied authorization by Congress.
 (c) Effect on Authorization Amounts.--A transfer made from one 
account to another under the authority of this section shall be deemed 
to increase the amount authorized for the account to which the amount 
is transferred by an amount equal to the amount transferred.
 (d) Notice to Congress.--The Secretary shall promptly notify 
Congress of each transfer made under subsection (a).

SEC. 1002. DETERMINATION OF BUDGETARY EFFECTS.

 The budgetary effects of this Act, for the purpose of complying 
with the Statutory Pay-As-You-Go Act of 2010, shall be determined by 
reference to the latest statement titled ``Budgetary Effects of PAYGO 
Legislation'' for this Act, submitted for printing in the Congressional 
Record by the Chairman of the House Budget Committee, provided that 
such statement has been submitted prior to the vote on passage.

SEC. 1003. SENSE OF CONGRESS RELATING TO ENLISTED PERSONNEL 
 SUBSISTENCE.

 It is the sense of Congress that the Secretary of Defense should 
establish clear and consistent definitions of key terms for use in 
reporting budgetary and financial information related to enlisted 
personnel subsistence. This information should be provided to Congress 
as part of the Department of Defense budget justification materials 
relating to military personnel.

SEC. 1004. SENSE OF CONGRESS RELATING TO THE CORRECTIVE ACTION PLANS 
 REVIEW PROCESS.

 It is the sense of Congress that the Deputy Chief Financial Officer 
should incorporate appropriate steps to improve its corrective action 
plans review process, including notices of findings and recommendations 
are appropriately linked to the correct corrective action plans to 
address such notices. The Deputy Chief Financial Officer should also 
update Department of Defense guidance to instruct the Department and 
components of the Department to document root cause analysis when 
needed to address deficiencies auditors identified. The Deputy Chief 
Financial Officer must provide a briefing to the relevant congressional 
committees on the efforts of the Department of Defense to link notices 
of findings and recommendations with the correct corrective action 
plans.

SEC. 1005. SENSE OF CONGRESS RELATING TO THE FRAUD REDUCTION TASK 
 FORCE.

 It is the sense of Congress that the Deputy Chief Financial 
Officer should ensure that the Secretary of Defense designates all 
representatives to the Fraud Reduction Task Force as quickly as 
possible.

 Subtitle B--Counterdrug Activities

SEC. 1011. EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY TO SUPPORT A UNIFIED COUNTERDRUG AND 
 COUNTERTERRORISM CAMPAIGN IN COLOMBIA.

 Section 1021 of the Ronald W. Reagan National Defense Authorization 
Act for Fiscal Year 2005 (Public Law 108-375; 118 Stat. 2042), as most 
recently amended by section 1007 of the National Defense Authorization 
Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 135 Stat. 1889), is 
further amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ``2023'' and 
 inserting ``2025''; and
 (2) in subsection (c), by striking ``2023'' and inserting 
 ``2025''.

 Subtitle C--Naval Vessels and Shipyards

SEC. 1021. NAVY CONSULTATION WITH MARINE CORPS ON MAJOR DECISIONS 
 DIRECTLY CONCERNING MARINE CORPS AMPHIBIOUS FORCE 
 STRUCTURE AND CAPABILITY.

 (a) In General.--Section 8026 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended by inserting ``or amphibious force structure and capability'' 
after ``Marine Corps aviation''.
 (b) Clerical Amendments.--
 (1) Section heading.--The heading of such section is 
 amended by inserting ``or amphibious force structure and 
 capability''.
 (2) Table of sections.--The table of sections at the 
 beginning of chapter 803 of such title is amended by striking 
 the item relating to section 8026 and inserting the following 
 new item:

``8026. Consultation with Commandant of the Marine Corps on major 
 decisions directly concerning Marine Corps 
 aviation or amphibious force structure and 
 capability.''.

SEC. 1022. NUMBER OF NAVY OPERATIONAL AMPHIBIOUS SHIPS.

 Section 8062 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding 
at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(g) The naval combat forces of the Navy shall include not less 
than 31 operational amphibious ships, comprised of LSD-41 class ships, 
LSD-49 class ships, LPD-17 class ships, LPD-17 Flight II class ships, 
LHD-1 class ships, LHA-6 Flight 0 class ships, and LHA-6 Flight I class 
ships. For purposes of this subsection, an operational amphibious ship 
includes an amphibious ship that is temporarily unavailable for 
worldwide deployment due to routine or scheduled maintenance or 
repair.''.

SEC. 1023. AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS FOR RETIREMENT OR INACTIVATION OF 
 LANDING DOCK SHIPS.

 None of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this Act or 
otherwise made available for fiscal year 2023 for the Department of 
Defense may be obligated or expended to retire, prepare to retire, 
inactivate, or place in storage any of the following ships:
 (1) USS Germantown (LSD-42).
 (2) USS Gunston Hall (LSD-44).
 (3) USS Tortuga (LSD-46).
 (4) USS Ashland (LSD-48).

SEC. 1024. AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS FOR RETIREMENT OR INACTIVATION OF 
 GUIDED MISSILE CRUISERS.

 (a) In General.--Subject to subsection (b), none of the funds 
authorized to be appropriated by this Act or otherwise made available 
for fiscal year 2023 for the Department of Defense may be obligated or 
expended to retire, prepare to retire, inactivate, or place in storage 
more than four guided missile cruisers.
 (b) USS Vicksburg.--The USS Vicksburg may not be retired, prepared 
to retire, inactivated, or placed in storage pursuant to subsection 
(a).

SEC. 1025. BUSINESS CASE ANALYSES ON DISPOSITION OF CERTAIN GOVERNMENT-
 OWNED DRY-DOCKS.

 (a) AFDM-10.--Not later than March 1, 2023, the Secretary of the 
Navy shall submit to the congressional defense committees the results 
of a business case analysis under which the Secretary shall present a 
comparison of the following four options for Auxiliary Floating Dock, 
Medium-10 in Seattle, Washington (in this section referred to as 
``AFDM-10''):
 (1) The continued use of AFDM-10, in the same location and 
 under the same lease authorities in effect on the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.
 (2) The relocation and use of AFDM-10 in alternate 
 locations under the same lease authorities in effect on the 
 date of the enactment of this Act.
 (3) The relocation and use of AFDM-10 in alternate 
 locations under alternative lease authorities.
 (4) The conveyance of AFDM-10 at a fair market rate to an 
 appropriate non-Government entity with expertise in the non-
 nuclear ship repair industry.
 (b) Graving Dock at Naval Base, San Diego.--Not later than March 1, 
2023, the Secretary of the Navy shall submit to the congressional 
defense committees the results of a business case analysis under which 
the Secretary shall present a comparison of the following two options 
for the Government-owned graving dock at Naval Base San Diego, 
California:
 (1) The continued use of such graving dock, in accordance 
 with the utilization strategy described in the May 25, 2022 
 report to Congress entitled ``Navy Dry Dock Strategy for 
 Surface Ship Maintenance and Repair''.
 (2) The lease of such graving dock to an appropriate non-
 Government entity with expertise in the non-nuclear ship repair 
 industry.

SEC. 1026. PROHIBITION ON USE OF FUNDS FOR RETIREMENT OF LEGACY 
 MARITIME MINE COUNTERMEASURES PLATFORMS.

 (a) Prohibition.--Except as provided in subsection (b), the 
Secretary of the Navy may not obligate or expend funds to discontinue 
or prepare to discontinue, including by making a substantive reduction 
in training and operational employment, the Marine Mammal System 
program, that has been used, or is currently being used, for--
 (1) port security at Navy bases, known as Mark-6 systems; 
 or
 (2) mine search capabilities, known as Mark-7 systems.
 (b) Waiver.--The Secretary of the Navy may waive the prohibition 
under subsection (a) if the Secretary, with the concurrence of the 
Director of Operational Test and Evaluation, certifies in writing to 
the congressional defense committees that the Secretary has--
 (1) identified a replacement capability and the necessary 
 quantity of such capability to meet all operational 
 requirements currently being met by the Marine Mammal System 
 program, including a detailed explanation of such capability 
 and quantity;
 (2) achieved initial operational capability of all 
 capabilities referred to in paragraph (1), including a detailed 
 explanation of such achievement; and
 (3) deployed a sufficient quantity of capabilities referred 
 to in paragraph (1) that have achieved initial operational 
 capability to continue to meet or exceed all operational 
 requirements currently being met by Marine Mammal System 
 program, including a detailed explanation of such deployment.

SEC. 1027. DEADLINE FOR 75 PERCENT MANNING FILL FOR SHIPS UNDERGOING 
 NUCLEAR REFUELING OR DEFUELING.

 By not later than December 31, 2023, the Secretary of the Navy 
shall ensure that the manning fill for each ship undergoing nuclear 
refueling or defueling, and any concurrent complex overhaul, is not 
less than--
 (1) 75 percent overall; and
 (2) 75 percent for enlisted grades E-6 and above.

SEC. 1028. PROHIBITION ON DEACTIVATION OF NAVY COMBAT DOCUMENTATION 
 DETACHMENT 206.

 None of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this Act or 
otherwise made available for fiscal year 2023 for the Navy may be 
obligated or expended to deactivate, or prepare to deactivate Navy 
Combat Documentation Detachment 206.

SEC. 1029. WITHHOLDING OF CERTAIN INFORMATION ABOUT SUNKEN MILITARY 
 CRAFTS.

 Section 1406 of the Sunken Military Craft Act (title XIV of Public 
Law 108-375; 10 U.S.C. 113 note) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subsection: (j)
 ``(j) Withholding of Certain Information.--Pursuant to 
subparagraphs (A)(ii) and (B) of section 552(b)(3) of title 5 United 
States Code, the Secretary concerned may withhold from public 
disclosure information and data about the location or character of a 
sunken military craft under the jurisdiction of the Secretary, if such 
disclosure would increase the risk of the unauthorized disturbance of 
one or more sunken military craft.''.

SEC. 1030. AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS FOR RETIREMENT OR INACTIVATION OF 
 EXPEDITIONARY TRANSFER DOCK SHIPS.

 None of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this Act or 
otherwise made available for fiscal year 2023 for the Department of 
Defense may be obligated or expended to retire, prepare to retire, 
inactivate, or place in storage the following ships:
 (1) ESD-1.
 (2) ESD-2.

SEC. 1031. AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS FOR RETIREMENT OR INACTIVATION OF 
 LITTORAL COMBAT SHIPS.

 None of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this Act or 
otherwise made available for fiscal year 2023 for the Department of 
Defense may be obligated or expended to retire, prepare to retire, 
inactivate, or place in storage more than four Littoral Combat Ships.

SEC. 1032. BRIEFING ON FIELDING OF SPEIR ON ALL SURFACE COMBATANT 
 VESSELS.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of the Navy shall provide to the congressional 
defense committees a briefing on an assessment, including cost, of 
fielding SPEIR on all surface combatant vessels.

SEC. 1033. REPORT ON EFFECTS OF MULTIPLE AWARD CONTRACT-MULTI ORDER 
 CONTRACTING.

 (a) In General.--Not later than October 1, 2023, the Secretary of 
the Navy shall submit to the congressional defense committees a 
comprehensive report on the effects of Multiple Award Contract-multi 
Order contracting (in this section referred to as ``MAC-MO'') on battle 
force ship availability and maintenance costs.
 (b) Matters for Inclusion.--The report required by subsection (a) 
shall include each of the following:
 (1) An analysis plan for the MAC-MO strategy.
 (2) Lessons learned from the MAC-MO strategy 
 implementation.
 (3) A description of the effects of competition 
 opportunities following the shift to MAC-MO.
 (4) An identification of best practices from the previous 
 Multi-ship Multi-Option strategy that have been identified and 
 applied to the MAC-MO strategy.
 (5) An assessment of current perform-to-plan metrics and 
 how such metrics have influenced ongoing contracting processes.
 (6) An assessment of MAC-MO strategy on ship maintenance 
 availabilities.
 (7) An assessment of ship maintenance workload 
 predictability under the MAC-MO strategy.
 (8) An identification of any planned changes to account for 
 schedule delays.
 (9) An assessment of possible maintenance delays due to 
 contract award processing that cross fiscal years.

SEC. 1034. CONGRESSIONAL NOTIFICATION REGARDING PENDING RETIREMENT OF 
 NAVAL VESSELS VIABLE FOR ARTIFICIAL REEFING.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the 
Secretary of the Navy should explore and solicit artificial reefing 
opportunities with appropriate entities for any naval vessel planned 
for retirement before initiating any plans to dispose of the vessel.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 90 days before the retirement from the 
Naval Vessel Register of any naval vessel that is a viable candidate 
for artificial reefing, the Secretary of the Navy shall submit to the 
Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of Representatives 
notice of the pending retirement of such vessel.

SEC. 1034A. AWARD OF CONTRACTS FOR SHIP REPAIR WORK TO NON-HOMEPORT 
 SHIPYARDS TO MEET SURGE CAPACITY.

 Section 8669a of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding 
at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(d) In order to meet surge capacity, the Secretary of the Navy 
may solicit proposals from, and award contracts for ship repair to, 
non-homeport shipyards that otherwise meet the requirements of the Navy 
for ship repair work.''.

 Subtitle D--Counterterrorism

SEC. 1035. PROHIBITION ON USE OF FUNDS FOR TRANSFER OR RELEASE OF 
 INDIVIDUALS DETAINED AT UNITED STATES NAVAL STATION, 
 GUANTANAMO BAY, CUBA, TO CERTAIN COUNTRIES.

 No amounts authorized to be appropriated or otherwise made 
available for the Department of Defense may be used during the period 
beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act and ending on 
December 31, 2023, to transfer, release, or assist in the transfer or 
release of any individual detained in the custody or under the control 
of the Department of Defense at United States Naval Station, Guantanamo 
Bay, Cuba, to the custody or control of any country, or any entity 
within such country, as follows:
 (1) Libya.
 (2) Somalia.
 (3) Syria.
 (4) Yemen.
 (5) Afghanistan.

SEC. 1036. REPORT ON THREAT POSED BY DOMESTIC TERRORISTS.

 (a) Report Required.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with 
the officials specified in subsection (c), shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report that includes an evaluation 
of the nature and extent of the domestic terror threat and domestic 
terrorist groups.
 (b) Elements.--The report under subsection (a) shall--
 (1) describe the manner in which domestic terror activity 
 is tracked and reported;
 (2) identify all known domestic terror groups, whether 
 formal in nature or loosely affiliated ideologies, including 
 groups motivated by a belief system of white supremacy such as 
 the Proud Boys and Boogaloo;
 (3) include a breakdown of the ideology of each group; and
 (4) describe the efforts of such groups, if any, to 
 infiltrate or target domestic constitutionally protected 
 activity by citizens for cooption or to carry out attacks, and 
 the number of individuals associated or affiliated with each 
 group that engages in such efforts.
 (c) Officials Specified.--The officials specified in this 
subsection are the following:
 (1) The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
 (2) The Under Secretary of Homeland Security for 
 Intelligence and Analysis.
 (3) The Director of National Intelligence.

SEC. 1037. CONSIDERATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS RECORDS OF RECIPIENTS OF 
 SUPPORT OF SPECIAL OPERATIONS TO COMBAT TERRORISM.

 Section 127e of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (c)(2) by adding at the end of the 
 following new subparagraph--
 ``(D) The processes through which the Secretary, in 
 consultation with the Secretary of State, shall ensure 
 that, prior to a decision to provide any support to 
 foreign forces, irregular forces, groups, or 
 individuals, full consideration is given to any 
 credible information available to the Department of 
 State relating to violations of human rights by such 
 entities.''.
 (2) in subsection (d)(2)--
 (A) in subparagraph (H), by inserting ``, including 
 the promotion of good governance and rule of law and 
 the protection of civilians and human rights'' before 
 the period at the end;
 (B) in subparagraph (I)--
 (i) by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting ``or violations of the laws of armed 
 conflict, including the Geneva Conventions of 
 1949, including--''; and
 (ii) by adding at the end the following new 
 clauses:
 ``(i) vetting units receiving such support 
 for violations of human rights;
 ``(ii) providing human rights training to 
 units receiving such support; and
 ``(iii) providing for the investigation of 
 allegations of gross violations of human rights 
 and termination of such support in cases of 
 credible information of such violations.''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(J) A description of the human rights record of 
 the recipient, including for purposes of section 362 of 
 this title, and any relevant attempts by such recipient 
 to remedy such record.'';
 (3) in subsection (i)(3) by adding at the end the following 
 new subparagraph:
 ``(I) An assessment of how support provided under 
 this section advances United States national security 
 priorities and aligns with other United States 
 Government efforts to address underlying risk factors 
 of terrorism and violent extremism, including 
 repression, human rights abuses, and corruption.''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following new subsections:
 ``(j) Prohibition on Use of Funds.--(1) Except as provided in 
paragraphs (2) and (3), no funds may be used to provide support to any 
foreign forces, irregular forces, groups, or individuals if the 
Secretary of Defense has credible information that the unit has 
committed a gross violation of human rights.
 ``(2) The Secretary of Defense, after consultation with the 
Secretary of State, may waive the prohibition under paragraph (1) if 
the Secretary determines that the waiver is required by extraordinary 
circumstances.
 ``(3) The prohibition under paragraph (1) shall not apply with 
respect to the foreign forces, irregular forces, groups, or individuals 
of a country if the Secretary of Defense determines that--
 ``(A) the government of such country has taken all 
 necessary corrective steps; or
 ``(B) the support is necessary to assist in disaster relief 
 operations or other humanitarian or national security 
 emergencies.
 ``(k) Savings Clause.--Nothing in this section shall be construed 
to constitute a specific statutory authorization for any of the 
following:
 ``(1) The conduct of a covert action, as such term is 
 defined in section 503(e) of the National Security Act of 1947 
 (50 U.S.C. 3093).
 ``(2) The introduction of United States armed forces, 
 within the meaning of section 5(b) of the War Powers 
 Resolution, into hostilities or into situations wherein 
 hostilities are clearly indicated by the circumstances.
 ``(3) The provision of support to regular forces, irregular 
 forces, groups, or individuals for the conduct of operations 
 that United States Special Operations Forces are not otherwise 
 legally authorized to conduct themselves.
 ``(4) The conduct or support of activities, directly or 
 indirectly, that are inconsistent with the laws of armed 
 conflict.''.

SEC. 1038. CONSIDERATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS RECORDS OF RECIPIENTS OF 
 SUPPORT OF SPECIAL OPERATIONS FOR IRREGULAR WARFARE.

 Section 1202 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2018 (Public Law 115-91; 131 Stat. 1639) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (c)(2), by adding at the end of the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(D) The processes through which the Secretary 
 shall, in consultation with the Secretary of State, 
 ensure that prior to a decision to provide support to 
 individual members or units of foreign forces, 
 irregular forces, or groups in a foreign country full 
 consideration is given to any credible information 
 available to the Department of State relating to gross 
 violations of human rights by such individuals or 
 units.'';
 (2) in subsection (d)(2) of such section--
 (A) by redesignating subparagraph (G) as 
 subparagraph (H); and
 (B) by inserting after subparagraph (F) the 
 following new subparagraph (G):
 ``(G) A description of the human rights record of 
 the recipient, including for purposes of section 362 of 
 title 10, United States Code, and any relevant attempts 
 by such recipient to remedy such record.'';
 (3) in subsection (h)(3), by adding at the end the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(I) An assessment of how support provided under 
 this section advances United States national security 
 priorities and aligns with other United States 
 Government interests in countries in which activities 
 under the authority in this section are ongoing.'';
 (4) by redesignating subsection (i) as subsection (j); and
 (5) by inserting after subsection (h) the following new 
 subsection (i):
 ``(i) Prohibition on Use of Funds.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and 
 (3), no funds may be used to provide support to any individual 
 member or unit of a foreign force, irregular force, or group in 
 a foreign country if the Secretary of Defense has credible 
 information that such individual or unit has committed a gross 
 violation of human rights.
 ``(2) Waiver authority.--The Secretary of Defense, after 
 consultation with the Secretary of State, may waive the 
 prohibition under paragraph (1) if the Secretary determines 
 that the waiver is required by extraordinary circumstances.
 ``(3) Exception.--The prohibition under paragraph (1) shall 
 not apply with respect to individual members or units of such 
 foreign forces, irregular forces, or groups if the Secretary of 
 Defense, after consultation with the Secretary of State, 
 determines that--
 ``(A) the government of such country has taken all 
 necessary corrective steps; or
 ``(B) the support is necessary to assist in 
 disaster relief operations or other humanitarian or 
 national security emergencies.''.

 Subtitle E--Miscellaneous Authorities and Limitations

SEC. 1041. MODIFICATION OF AUTHORITY FOR HUMANITARIAN DEMINING 
 ASSISTANCE AND STOCKPILED CONVENTIONAL MUNITIONS 
 ASSISTANCE.

 (a) Location of Assistance.--Section 407 of title 10, United States 
Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1)--
 (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A)--
 (i) by striking ``carry out'' and inserting 
 ``provide''; and
 (ii) by striking ``in a country'' and 
 inserting ``to a country''; and
 (B) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``in which the 
 activities are to be carried out'' and inserting ``to 
 which the assistance is to be provided''; and
 (2) in subsection (d)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by striking ``in which'' and inserting 
 ``to which''; and
 (ii) by striking ``carried out'' and 
 inserting ``provided'';
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``carried out 
 in'' and inserting ``provided to'';
 (C) in paragraph (3)--
 (i) by striking ``in which'' and inserting 
 ``to which''; and
 (ii) by striking ``carried out'' and 
 inserting ``provided''; and
 (D) in paragraph (4), by striking ``in carrying out 
 such assistance in each such country'' and inserting 
 ``in providing such assistance to each such country''.
 (b) Expenses.--Subsection (c) of such section 407 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2), by adding at the end the following 
 new subparagraph:
 ``(C) Travel, transportation, and subsistence expenses of 
 foreign personnel to attend training provided by the Department 
 of Defense under this section.''; and
 (2) in paragraph (3), by striking ``$15,000,000'' and 
 inserting ``$20,000,000''.
 (c) Report.--Subsection (d) of such section 407, as amended by 
subsection (a)(2) of this section, is further amended in the matter 
preceding paragraph (1), by striking ``include in the annual report 
under section 401 of this title a separate discussion of'' and 
inserting ``submit to the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee 
on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on Armed Services 
and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives a 
report on''.

SEC. 1042. SECURITY CLEARANCES FOR RECENTLY SEPARATED MEMBERS OF THE 
 ARMED FORCES AND CIVILIAN EMPLOYEES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF 
 DEFENSE.

 (a) Improvements.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in subsection (b), 
 beginning on the date on which a covered individual separates 
 from the Armed Forces or the Department of Defense (as the case 
 may be), if the Secretary of Defense determines that the 
 covered individual held a security clearance immediately prior 
 to such separation and requires a security clearance of an 
 equal or lower level for employment as a covered contractor, 
 the Secretary shall--
 (A) during the one-year period following such date, 
 treat the previously held security clearance as an 
 active security clearance for purposes of such 
 employment; and
 (B) during the two-year period following the 
 conclusion of the period specified in subparagraph (A), 
 ensure that the adjudication of any request submitted 
 by the covered employee for the reactivation of the 
 previously held security clearance for purposes of such 
 employment is completed by not later than 180 days 
 after the date of such submission.
 (2) Coast guard.--In the case of a member of the Armed 
 Forces who is a member of the Coast Guard, the Secretary of 
 Defense shall carry out paragraph (1) in consultation with the 
 Secretary of the Department in which the Coast Guard is 
 operating.
 (b) Exceptions.--
 (1) In general.--Subsection (a) shall not apply with 
 respect to a covered individual--
 (A) whose previously held security clearance is, or 
 was as of the date of separation of the covered 
 individual, under review as a result of one or more 
 potentially disqualifying factors or conditions that 
 have not been fully investigated or mitigated; or
 (B) in the case of a member of the Armed Forces, 
 who separated from the Armed Forces under other than 
 honorable conditions.
 (2) Clarification of review exception.--The exception 
 specified in paragraph (1)(A) shall not apply with respect to a 
 routine periodic reinvestigation or a continuous vetting 
 investigation in which no potentially disqualifying factors or 
 conditions have been found.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered contractor'' means an individual who 
 is employed by an entity that carries out work under a contract 
 with the Department of Defense or an element of the 
 intelligence community.
 (2) The term ``covered individual'' means a former member 
 of the Armed Forces or a former civilian employee of the 
 Department of Defense.
 (3) The term ``intelligence community'' has the meaning 
 given that term in section 3 of the National Security Act of 
 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3003).

SEC. 1043. SUBMISSION OF NATIONAL DEFENSE STRATEGY IN UNCLASSIFIED 
 FORM.

 Section 113(g)(1)(D) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
striking ``in classified form with an unclassified summary.'' and 
inserting ``in unclassified form, but may include a classified 
annex.''.

SEC. 1044. COMMON ACCESS CARDS FOR DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE FACILITIES FOR 
 CERTAIN CONGRESSIONAL STAFF.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense shall develop processes 
and procedures under which the Secretary shall issue common access 
cards to staff of the congressional defense committees who need such 
access to facilitate the performance of required congressional 
oversight activities. Such common access cards shall provide such staff 
with access to all Department of Defense installations and facilities.
 (b) Implementation.--The Secretary shall implement the processes 
and procedures developed under subsection (a) by not later than 180 
days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (c) Interim Briefing.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of the Act, the Secretary of Defense shall provide to the 
congressional defense committees an interim briefing on the status of 
the processes and procedures required to be developed under subsection 
(a).

SEC. 1045. INTRODUCTION OF ENTITIES IN TRANSACTIONS CRITICAL TO 
 NATIONAL SECURITY.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense may facilitate the 
introduction of entities for the purpose of discussing a covered 
transaction that the Secretary has determined is in the national 
security interests of the United States.
 (b) Covered Transaction Defined.--The term ``covered transaction'' 
means a transaction that the Secretary has reason to believe would 
likely involve an entity affiliated with a strategic competitor unless 
an alternative transaction were to occur.

SEC. 1046. REPOSITORY OF LOCAL NATIONALS WORKING FOR OR ON BEHALF OF 
 FEDERAL GOVERNMENT IN THEATER OF COMBAT OPERATIONS.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) there are well documented administrative issues with 
 current and former Special Immigrant Visa programs that 
 significantly increase the application timeline and impact 
 applicants seeking to verify their eligibly for these programs;
 (2) administrative issues such a verification of 
 employment, characterization of service, personnel data, and 
 biographical data needed for employment by a local national 
 employee but not centrally maintained should not be a barrier 
 for an applicant who has put themselves or their family at risk 
 by providing faithful and valuable service in support the 
 United States Government;
 (3) upon studying existing databases within the federal 
 government, none meet the requirement that would provide a 
 centralized database that all federal departments and agencies 
 could utilize to ensure that in the future, eligible applicants 
 do not have applications delayed or denied due to missing 
 administrative data;
 (4) the creation of such a database, exercising current 
 privacy data control policies, would streamline the application 
 process and provide independent and centralized verification 
 that an applicant is indeed eligible for the program; and
 (5) Special Immigrant Visa programs are consistent with our 
 national values, and therefore, it is an obligation to make 
 sure the accurate data necessary to verify and complete these 
 applications expeditiously is available when needed.
 (b) Database.--Not later than one year after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the 
Secretary of State, shall establish and maintain a database listing all 
foreign nationals working for the United States Government or any 
contractor or subcontractor (at any tier) of the Department of Defense, 
the Department of State, or any other agency or instrumentality of the 
Executive branch in a theater of combat operations. This section and 
the requirements of this section shall be carried out consistent with 
the Privacy Act of 1974.
 (c) Requirements.--The database established under subsection (b) 
shall be electronic and searchable, and shall include, with respect to 
each foreign national so listed, the following:
 (1) Full name and date of birth.
 (2) Contact information.
 (3) Local national or State ID Number.
 (4) Passport number, if applicable.
 (5) Job location.
 (6) The component of Government or contractor contact 
 information.
 (7) Start and end dates, total length of service, and 
 whether the foreign national has met the length of service 
 requirement for the Special Immigrant Visa program in that 
 country, if applicable.
 (8) A thorough description of work duties and the location 
 where duties were performed.
 (9) Any other information the Secretary of Defense or 
 Secretary of State deems appropriate.
 (d) Notification.--The Secretary of Defense, Secretary of State, 
the head of any other agency or instrumentality of the Executive 
branch, and each contractor or subcontractor (at any tier) of the 
Department of Defense, the Department of State, or such other agency or 
instrumentality, shall provide to any foreign national employee in the 
database established under subsection (b), at the end of each year of 
employment with the Government, contractor, or subcontractor (at any 
tier) (as the case may be) and on the date such employment terminates, 
a written certification regarding such employee's total length of 
service.

SEC. 1047. TRANSFERS AND PAY OF NONAPPROPRIATED FUND EMPLOYEES.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall update policies 
and procedures, as needed, to expedite the process for interservice 
transfers of nonappropriated fund employees. The Secretary shall 
provide an update to the appropriate committees on the completion of 
such updates.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Secretary shall submit a report to the congressional 
defense committees on the following:
 (1) The impact of the change on the processing time for 
 transfers of nonappropropriated fund employees between 
 nonappropriated fund instrumentaliteis in different military 
 services.
 (2) The impact of the changes on the processing time for 
 reinstatement of nonappropriated fund employees to a 
 nonappropriated fund instrumentality in a military service that 
 is different from the military service where the individual was 
 previously employed by a nonappropriated fund instrumentality.
 (3) The impact of the changes on recruitment and retention 
 of nonappropriated fund employees in general and specifically 
 for nonappropriated fund employees of military child 
 development centers.

SEC. 1048. ESTABLISHMENT OF JOINT TRAINING PIPELINE BETWEEN UNITED 
 STATES NAVY AND ROYAL AUSTRALIAN NAVY.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the AUKUS partnership between Australia, the United 
 Kingdom, and the United States presents a significant 
 opportunity to enhance security cooperation in the Indo-Pacific 
 region;
 (2) parties to the AUKUS partnership should work 
 expeditiously to implement a strategic roadmap to successfully 
 deliver capabilities outlined in the agreement;
 (3) the United States should engage with industry partners 
 to develop a comprehensive understanding of the requirements 
 needed to increase capacity and capability;
 (4) Australia should continue to expand its industrial base 
 to support production and delivery of future capabilities;
 (5) the delivery of a nuclear-powered submarine to the 
 Government of Australia would require the appropriate training 
 and development of future commanding officers to operate such 
 submarines for the Royal Australian Navy; and
 (6) in order to uphold the stewardship of the Naval Nuclear 
 Propulsion Program, the Secretary of Defense should work to 
 coordinate an exchange program to integrate and train 
 Australian sailors for the operation and maintenance of 
 nuclear-powered submarines.
 (b) Exchange Program.--The Secretary of Defense, in consultation 
with the Secretary of Energy, shall carry out an exchange program for 
Australian submarine officers during 2023 and each subsequent year. 
Under the program, each year, a minimum of two Australian submarine 
officers shall be selected to participate in the program. Each such 
participant shall--
 (1) receive training in the Navy Nuclear Propulsion School;
 (2) following such training and by not later than July 1 of 
 the year of participation, enroll in the Submarine Office Basic 
 Course; and
 (3) following completion of such course, be assigned to 
 duty on an operational United States submarine at sea.
 (c) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report on a notional exchange 
program for Australian submarine officers that includes initial, 
follow-on, and recurring training that could be provided to Australian 
submarine officers in order prepare such officers for command of 
nuclear-powered Australian submarines.

SEC. 1049. INSPECTOR GENERAL OVERSIGHT OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 ACTIVITIES IN RESPONSE TO RUSSIA'S FURTHER INVASION OF 
 UKRAINE.

 The Inspector General of the Department of Defense Inspector 
General shall carry out comprehensive oversight and conduct reviews, 
audits, investigations, and inspections of the activities conducted by 
the Department of Defense in response to Russia's further invasion of 
Ukraine, initiated on February 24, 2022, including military assistance 
provided to Ukraine by the Department of Defense.

SEC. 1050. CONSULTATION OF CONGRESSIONAL DEFENSE COMMITTEES IN 
 PREPARATION OF NATIONAL DEFENSE STRATEGY.

 Section 113(g)(1) of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (D) through (F) as 
 subparagraphs (E) through (G), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following new 
 subparagraph (D):
 ``(D) In addressing the matters referred to in subparagraph (B)(i) 
and (ii), the Secretary may seek the advice and views of the 
congressional defense committees, through the Chair and Ranking Members 
of the congressional defense committees. The congressional defense 
committees, through the Chair and Ranking Member of the congressional 
defense committees, may submit their advice and views to the Secretary 
in writing. Any such written views shall be published as an annex to 
the national defense strategy.''.

SEC. 1051. PROHIBITION ON USE OF FUNDS FOR AERIAL FUMIGATION IN 
 COLOMBIA.

 None of the amounts authorized to be appropriated by this Act or 
otherwise made available for the Department of Defense for fiscal year 
2022 may be used to directly conduct, support, assist, or contribute to 
the performance of the aerial fumigation of crops in Colombia.

SEC. 1052. ASSESSMENT OF SUICIDE RISK AT MILITARY INSTALLATIONS.

 (a) Procedure.--The Secretary of Defense, acting through the Under 
Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness and in collaboration 
with the Defense Suicide Prevention Office. shall establish a procedure 
for assessing suicide risk at military installations.
 (b) Report.-- Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report on the strategy and procedure 
for assessing suicide risk at military installations.

 Subtitle F--Studies and Reports

SEC. 1061. BRIEFING ON GLOBAL FORCE MANAGEMENT ALLOCATION PLAN.

 Section 1074(c) of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) For each major modification to global force 
 allocation made during the preceding fiscal year that deviated 
 from the Global Force Management Allocation Plan for that 
 fiscal year--
 ``(A) an analysis of the costs of such 
 modification;
 ``(B) an assessment of the risks associated with 
 such modification, including strategic risks, 
 operational risks, and risks to readiness; and
 ``(C) a description of any strategic trade-offs 
 associated with such modification.''.

SEC. 1062. EXTENSION AND MODIFICATION OF REPORTING REQUIREMENT 
 REGARDING ENHANCEMENT OF INFORMATION SHARING AND 
 COORDINATION OF MILITARY TRAINING BETWEEN DEPARTMENT OF 
 HOMELAND SECURITY AND DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE.

 Section 1014 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2017 (Public Law 114-328) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (d)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)(B)(iv), by adding at the end 
 the following new subclauses:
 ``(VIII) The methodology used for 
 making cost estimates in the evaluation 
 of a request for assistance.
 ``(IX) The extent to which the 
 fulfillment of the request for 
 assistance affected readiness of the 
 Armed Forces, including members of the 
 reserve components.''; and
 (B) in paragraph (3), by striking ``December 31, 
 2023'' and inserting ``December 31, 2024''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(f) Quarterly Briefings.--Not later than 30 days after the last 
day of each fiscal quarter, the Secretary of Defense shall provide to 
the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of 
Representatives a briefing on any assistance provided by the Department 
of Defense to the border security mission of the Department of Homeland 
Security at the international borders of the United States during the 
quarter covered by the briefing. Each such briefing shall include each 
of the elements specified in subsection (d)(1)(B) for such quarter.''.

SEC. 1063. CONTINUATION OF REQUIREMENT FOR ANNUAL REPORT ON NATIONAL 
 GUARD AND RESERVE COMPONENT EQUIPMENT.

 (a) In General.--Section 1080(a) of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 (Public Law 114-92; 129 Stat. 
1000; 10 U.S.C. 111 note) does not apply to the report required to be 
submitted to Congress under section 10541 of title 10, United States 
Code.
 (b) Conforming Repeal.--Section 1061(c) of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017 (Public Law 114-328); 130 Stat. 
2402; 10 U.S.C. 111 note) is amended by striking paragraph (62).

SEC. 1064. COMBATANT COMMAND RISK ASSESSMENT FOR AIRBORNE INTELLIGENCE, 
 SURVEILLANCE, AND RECONNAISSANCE.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 60 days after the date on which the 
Secretary of Defense submits to Congress the materials in support of 
the budget for any fiscal year, or the date on which any of the 
military departments otherwise proposes to retire or otherwise divest 
any airborne intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance 
capabilities, the Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, in 
coordination with the commanders of each of the geographic combatant 
commands, shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report 
containing an assessment of the level of operational risk to each such 
command posed by the proposed retirement or divestment with respect to 
the capability of the command to meet near-, mid-, and far-term 
contingency and steady-state requirements against adversaries in 
support of the objectives of the national defense strategy under 
section 113(g) of title 10, United States Code.
 (b) Risk Assessment.--In assessing levels of operational risk for 
the purposes of subsection (a), the Vice Chairman and the commanders of 
the geographic combatant commands shall use the military risk matrix of 
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, as described in CJCS 
Instruction 3401.01E, or any successor instruction.
 (c) Geographic Combatant Command.--In this section, the term 
``geographic combatant command'' means any of the following:
 (1) United States European Command.
 (2) United States Indo-Pacific Command.
 (3) United States Africa Command.
 (4) United States Southern Command.
 (5) United States Northern Command.
 (6) United States Central Command.
 (d) Termination.--The requirement to submit a report under this 
section shall terminate on the date that is five years after the date 
of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 1065. REPORTS ON EFFECTS OF STRATEGIC COMPETITOR NAVAL FACILITIES 
 IN AFRICA.

 (a) Initial Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than May 15, 2023, the Secretary 
 of Defense shall submit to the appropriate congressional 
 committees a report on the effects on the national security of 
 the United States of current or planned covered naval 
 facilities in Africa.
 (2) Elements.--The report required under paragraph (1) 
 shall include the following:
 (A) An identification of--
 (i) any location in Africa where a covered 
 naval facility has been established; and
 (ii) any location in Africa where a covered 
 naval facility is planned for construction.
 (B) A detailed description of--
 (i) any agreement entered into between 
 China or Russia and a country or government in 
 Africa providing for or enabling the 
 establishment or operation of a covered naval 
 facility in Africa; and
 (ii) any efforts by the Department of 
 Defense to change force posture, deployments, 
 or other activities in Africa as a result of 
 current or planned covered naval facilities in 
 Africa.
 (C) An assessment of--
 (i) the effect that each current covered 
 naval facility has had on United States 
 interests, allies, and partners in and around 
 Africa;
 (ii) the effect that each planned covered 
 naval facility is expected to have on United 
 States interests, allies, and partners in and 
 around Africa;
 (iii) the policy objectives of China and 
 Russia in establishing current and future 
 covered naval facilities at the locations 
 identified under subparagraph (A); and
 (iv) the specific military capabilities 
 supported by each current or planned covered 
 naval facility.
 (b) Update to Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than March 1, 2024, the 
 Secretary of Defense shall submit to the appropriate 
 congressional committees a report containing an update to the 
 report required under subsection (a).
 (2) Elements.--The report required under paragraph (1) 
 shall include the following:
 (A) An identification of--
 (i) any location in Africa where a covered 
 naval facility has been established since the 
 date of the submittal of the report under 
 subsection (a); and
 (ii) any location in Africa where a covered 
 naval facility has been planned for 
 construction since such date.
 (B) A detailed description of--
 (i) any agreement entered into between 
 China or Russia and country or government in 
 Africa since such date providing for or 
 enabling the establishment of a covered naval 
 facility in Africa; and
 (ii) any efforts by the Department of 
 Defense since such date to change force 
 posture, deployments, or other activities in 
 Africa as a result of current or planned 
 covered naval facilities in Africa.
 (C) An updated assessment of--
 (i) the effect that each current covered 
 naval facility has had on United States 
 interests, allies, and partners in and around 
 Africa since such date;
 (ii) the effect that each planned covered 
 naval facility has had on United States 
 interests, allies, and partners in and around 
 Africa since such date;
 (iii) the policy objectives of China and 
 Russia, including new objectives and changes to 
 objectives, in establishing current and future 
 covered naval facilities at the locations 
 identified in the report required under 
 subsection (a) or in subparagraph (A); and
 (iv) the specific military capabilities 
 supported by each current or planned covered 
 naval facility at such locations, including new 
 capabilities and changes to capabilities.
 (D) A detailed description of--
 (i) the policy of the Department of Defense 
 surrounding strategic competitor efforts to 
 establish and maintain covered naval facilities 
 in Africa; and
 (ii) any actual or planned actions taken by 
 the Department in response to such efforts and 
 in coordination with global Department 
 priorities, as identified in the national 
 defense strategy under section 113(g) of title 
 10, United States Code.
 (c) Form.--A report required under subsection (a) or (b) shall be 
submitted in unclassified form without any designation relating to 
dissemination control, but may include a classified annex.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``Africa'' means all countries in the area of 
 operations of United States Africa Command and Egypt.
 (2) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee 
 on Foreign Affairs, and the Permanent Select Committee 
 on Intelligence of the House of Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee 
 on Foreign Relations, and the Select Committee on 
 Intelligence of the Senate.
 (3) The term ``covered naval facility'' means a naval 
 facility owned, operated, or otherwise controlled by the 
 People's Republic of China or the Russian Federation.
 (4) The term ``naval facility'' means a naval base, 
 civilian sea port with dual military uses, or other facility 
 intended for the use of warships or other naval vessels for 
 refueling, refitting, resupply, force projection, or other 
 military purposes.

SEC. 1066. ANNUAL REPORTS ON SAFETY UPGRADES TO THE HIGH MOBILITY 
 MULTIPURPOSE WHEELED VEHICLE FLEETS.

 (a) Annual Reports.--Not later than March 1, 2023, and annually 
thereafter until the date specified in subsection (c), the Secretaries 
of the Army, Navy, and Air Force shall each submit to the Committees on 
Armed Services of the Senate and House of Representatives a report on 
the installation of safety upgrades to the high mobility multipurpose 
wheeled vehicle fleets under the jurisdiction of the Secretary 
concerned, including anti-lock brakes, electronic stability control, 
and fuel tanks.
 (b) Matters for Inclusion.--Each report required under subsection 
(a) shall include, for the year covered by the report, each of the 
following:
 (1) The total number of safety upgrades necessary for the 
 high mobility multipurpose wheeled vehicle fleets under the 
 jurisdiction of the Secretary concerned.
 (2) The total cumulative number of such upgrades completed 
 prior to the year covered by the report.
 (3) A description of any such upgrades that were planned 
 for the year covered by the report.
 (4) A description of any such upgrades that were made 
 during the year covered by the report and, if the number of 
 such upgrades was less than the number of upgrades planned for 
 such year, an explanation of the variance.
 (5) If the total number of necessary upgrades has not been 
 made, a description of the upgrades planned for each year 
 subsequent to the year covered by the report.
 (c) Termination.--No report shall be required under this section 
after March 1, 2026.

SEC. 1067. QUARTERLY REPORTS ON OPERATION SPARTAN SHIELD.

 (a) In General.--The Inspector General of the Department of Defense 
shall submit to the congressional defense committees, and make publicly 
available on an appropriate website of the Department, quarterly 
reports on Operation Spartan Shield in a manner consistent with section 
8L of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.).
 (b) Form of Reports.--Each report required under subsection (a) 
shall be submitted in unclassified form, but may contain a classified 
annex.
 (c) Deadline for First Report.--The Inspector General shall submit 
the first quarterly report required under subsection (a) by not later 
than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 1068. CONGRESSIONAL NOTIFICATION OF MILITARY INFORMATION SUPPORT 
 OPERATIONS IN THE INFORMATION ENVIRONMENT.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 15 days before the Secretary of 
Defense exercises the authority of the Secretary to conduct a new 
military information support operation in the information environment, 
as affirmed in section 1631(b) of the National Defense Authorization 
Act for Fiscal Year 2020 (Public Law 116-92; 10 U.S.C. 397 note), the 
Secretary shall provide to the appropriate congressional committees 
notice in writing of the intent to use such authority to conduct such 
operation.
 (b) Elements.--A notification under subsection (a) shall include 
each of the following:
 (1) A description of the type of support to be provided in 
 the operation.
 (2) A description of the personnel engaged in supporting or 
 facilitating the operation.
 (3) The amount obligated under the authority to provide 
 support.
 (4) The expected duration of the operation and the desired 
 outcome of the operation.
 (c) Annual Report.--Not later than 90 days after the last day of 
any fiscal year during which the Secretary conducts a military support 
operation in the information environment, the Secretary shall submit to 
the appropriate congressional committees a report on all such 
operations during such fiscal year. Such report shall include each of 
the following for each activity conducted pursuant to such an 
operation:
 (1) The name of the activity.
 (2) A description of the activity.
 (3) The combatant command responsible for the activity.
 (4) The desired outcome of the activity.
 (5) The target audience for the activity.
 (6) Any means of dissemination used in the conduct of the 
 activity.
 (7) The cost of conducting the activity.
 (8) An assessment of the effectiveness of the activity.
 (d) Appropriate Congressional Committees.--In this section, the 
term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the congressional defense committees;
 (2) the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence and the 
 Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives; 
 and
 (3) the Select Committee on Intelligence and the Committee 
 on Foreign Relations of the Senate.

SEC. 1069. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE DELAYS IN PROVIDING COMMENTS ON 
 GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE REPORTS.

 (a) Reports Required.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, and once every 180 days thereafter until the 
date that is 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report on the extent to which the 
Department of Defense provided comments and sensitivity and security 
reviews (for drafts tentatively identified as containing controlled 
unclassified information or classified information) in a timely manner 
and in accordance with the protocols of the Government Accountability 
Office during the 180-day period preceding the date of the submittal of 
the report.
 (b) Requirements for GAO Report.--Each report under subsection (a) 
shall include the following information for the period covered by the 
report:
 (1) The number of draft Government Accountability Office 
 reports for which the Government Accountability Office 
 requested comments from the Department of Defense, including an 
 identification of the reports for which a sensitivity or 
 security review was requested (separated by reports potentially 
 containing only controlled unclassified information and reports 
 potentially containing classified information) and the reports 
 for which such a review was not requested.
 (2) The median and average number of days between the date 
 of the request for Department of Defense comments and the 
 receipt of such comments.
 (3) The average number of days between the date of the 
 request for a Department of Defense sensitivity or security 
 review and the receipt of the results of such review.
 (4) In the case of any such draft report for which the 
 Department of Defense failed to provide such comments or review 
 within 30 days of the request for such comments or review--
 (A) the number of days between the date of the 
 request and the receipt of such comments or review; and
 (B) a unique identifier, for purposes of 
 identifying the draft report.
 (5) In the case of any such draft report for which the 
 Government Accountability Office provided an extension to the 
 Department of Defense--
 (A) whether the Department provided the comments or 
 review within the time period of the extension; and
 (B) a unique identifier, for purposes of 
 identifying the draft report.
 (6) Any other information the Comptroller General 
 determines appropriate.
 (c) DOD Responses.--Not later than 30 days after the Comptroller 
General submits a report under subsection (a), the Secretary of Defense 
shall submit to the congressional defense committees a response to such 
report that includes each of the following:
 (1) An identification of factors that contributed to any 
 delays identified in the report with respect to Department of 
 Defense comments and sensitivity or security reviews requested 
 by the Government Accountability Office.
 (2) A description of any actions the Department of Defense 
 has taken or plans to take to address such factors.
 (3) A description of any improvements the Department has 
 made in the ability to track timeliness in providing such 
 comments and sensitivity or security reviews.
 (4) Any other information the Secretary determines relevant 
 to the information contained in the report submitted by the 
 Comptroller General.

SEC. 1070. REPORTS ON HOSTILITIES INVOLVING UNITED STATES ARMED FORCES.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 48 hours after any incident in 
which the United States Armed Forces are involved in an attack or 
hostilities, whether in an offensive or defensive capacity, the 
President shall transmit to the congressional defense committees, the 
Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate, and the Committee on 
Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives a report on the 
incident, unless the President--
 (1) otherwise reports the incident within 48 hours pursuant 
 to section 4 of the War Powers Resolution (50 U.S.C. 1543); or
 (2) has determined prior to the incident, and so reported 
 pursuant to section 1264 of the National Defense Authorization 
 Act for Fiscal Year 2018 (50 U.S.C. 1549), that the United 
 States Armed Forces involved in the incident would be operating 
 under specific statutory authorization within the meaning of 
 section 5(b) of the War Powers Resolution (50 U.S.C. 1544(b)).
 (b) Matters to Be Included.--Each report required by subsection (a) 
shall include--
 (1) the statutory and operational authorities under which 
 the United States Armed Forces were operating when the incident 
 occurred, including any relevant executive orders and an 
 identification of the operational activities authorized under 
 any such executive orders;
 (2) the date, location, and duration of the incident and 
 the other parties involved;
 (3) a description of the United States Armed Forces 
 involved in the incident and the mission of such Armed Forces;
 (4) the numbers of any combatant casualties and civilian 
 casualties that occurred as a result of the incident; and
 (5) any other information the President determines 
 appropriate.
 (c) Form.--Each report required by subsection (a) shall be 
submitted in unclassified form, but may include a classified annex.

SEC. 1071. ANNUAL REPORT ON CIVILIAN CASUALTIES IN CONNECTION WITH 
 UNITED STATES MILITARY OPERATIONS.

 Section 1057(b) of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2018 (Public Law 115-91) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``that were confirmed, or 
 reasonably suspected, to have resulted in civilian casualties'' 
 and inserting ``that resulted in civilian casualties that have 
 been confirmed or are reasonably suspected to have occurred'';
 (2) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) in subparagraph (B), by inserting ``, 
 including, to the extent practicable, geographic 
 coordinates of any strike resulting in civilian 
 casualties occurring as a result of the conduct of the 
 operation.'' after ``location'';
 (B) in subparagraph (D), by inserting before the 
 period the following: ``, including the justification 
 for each strike conducted as part of the operation'';
 (C) in subparagraph (E), by inserting before the 
 period at the end the following: ``, formulated as a 
 range, if necessary, and including, to the extent 
 practicable, information regarding the number of men, 
 women, and children involved''; and
 (D) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraphs:
 ``(F) For each strike carried out as part of the 
 operation, an assessment of the destruction of civilian 
 property.
 ``(G) A summary of the determination of each 
 completed civilian casualty assessment or 
 investigation.
 ``(H) For each investigation into an incident that 
 resulted in civilian casualties--
 ``(i) whether the Department conducted any 
 witness interviews or site visits occurred, and 
 if not, an explanation of why not; and
 ``(ii) whether information pertaining to 
 the incident that was collected by one or more 
 non-governmental entities was considered, if 
 such information exists.''; and
 (3) by striking paragraph (4) and inserting the following 
 new paragraph (4):
 ``(4) A description of any new or updated civilian harm 
 policies and procedures implemented by the Department of 
 Defense.''.

SEC. 1072. JUSTIFICATION FOR TRANSFER OR ELIMINATION OF FLYING 
 MISSIONS.

 (a) In General.--Prior to the relocation or elimination of any 
flying mission, either with respect to an active or reserve component 
of a covered Armed Force, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report describing the justification 
of the Secretary for the decision to relocate or eliminate such 
mission. Such report shall include each of the following:
 (1) A description of how the decision supports the national 
 defense strategy, the national military strategy, the North 
 American Aerospace Defense Command strategy, and other relevant 
 strategies.
 (2) A specific analysis and metrics supporting such 
 decision.
 (3) An analysis and metrics to show that the elimination or 
 relocation of the flying mission would not negatively affect 
 the homeland defense mission.
 (4) A plan for how the Department of Defense intends to 
 fulfill or continue the mission requirements of the eliminated 
 or relocated flying mission.
 (5) An assessment of the effect of the elimination or 
 relocation on the national defense strategy, the national 
 military strategy, the North American Aerospace Defense Command 
 strategy, and the homeland defense mission.
 (6) An analysis and metrics to show that the elimination or 
 relocation of the flying mission and its secondary and tertiary 
 impacts would not degrade capabilities and readiness of the 
 Joint Force.
 (7) An analysis and metrics to show that the elimination or 
 relocation of the flying mission would not negatively affect 
 the national military airspace system.
 (b) Covered Armed Force.--In this section, the term ``covered Armed 
Force'' means--
 (1) The Army.
 (2) The Navy.
 (3) The Air Force.

SEC. 1073. EQUIPMENT OF ARMY RESERVE COMPONENTS: ANNUAL REPORT TO 
 CONGRESS.

 Section 10541(b)(10) of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (E), by striking ``and'';
 (2) by redesignating subparagraph (F) as subparagraph (G); 
 and
 (3) by inserting, after subparagraph (E), the following new 
 subparagraph (F):
 ``(F) MQ-1C Gray Eagle Extended Range; and''.

SEC. 1074. PUBLIC AVAILABILITY OF REPORTS.

 (a) Requirements for Withholding Certain Reports.--Section 
122a(b)(2)(D) of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by striking the period at the end and inserting ``, if 
 the Secretary--'';
 (2) by adding at the end the following new clauses:
 ``(A) gives public notice that the report will be 
 withheld pursuant to such determination; and
 ``(B) submits to the congressional defense 
 committees the reason for the determination that the 
 information should not be made available to the 
 public.''.
 (b) Report to Congress.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees, and make publicly available on an 
appropriate website of the Department of Defense, a report on the 
implementation of section 122a of title 10, United States Code, as 
amended by subsection (a). Such report shall address--
 (1) the procedures under which members of the public may 
 request a covered report under subsection (a)(2) of such 
 section 122a; and
 (2) the procedures and criteria under which the Secretary 
 determines that a report that would otherwise be a covered 
 report should not be made publicly available pursuant to 
 subsection (b)(2)(D) of such section, as amended by subsection 
 (a).

SEC. 1075. QUARTERLY REPORTS ON EXPENDITURES FOR PLANNING AND DESIGN OF 
 INFRASTRUCTURE TO SUPPORT PERMANENT UNITED STATES FORCE 
 PRESENCE ON EUROPE'S EASTERN FLANK.

 (a) In General.--The Commander of United States European Command 
shall submit to the congressional defense committees quarterly reports 
on the use of the funds described in subsection (c) until the date on 
which all such funds are expended.
 (b) Contents.--Each report required under subsection (a) shall 
include an expenditure plan for the establishment of infrastructure to 
support permanent United States force presence in the covered region.
 (c) Funds Described.--The funds described in this subsection are 
the amounts authorized to be appropriated or otherwise made available 
for fiscal year 2023 for--
 (1) Operation and Maintenance, Air Force, for Advanced 
 Planning for Infrastructure to Support Presence on NATO's 
 Eastern Flank;
 (2) Operation and Maintenance, Army, for Advanced Planning 
 for Infrastructure to Support Presence on NATO's Eastern Flank; 
 and
 (3) Military Construction, Defense-wide, Planning & Design: 
 EUCOM-Infrastructure to Support Presence on NATO's Eastern 
 Flank.
 (d) Covered Region.--In this section, the term ``covered region'' 
means Romania, Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Hungary, Bulgaria, 
and Slovakia.

SEC. 1076. STUDY ON MILITARY TRAINING ROUTES AND SPECIAL USE AIR SPACE 
 NEAR WIND TURBINES.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) renewable energy development is expanding rapidly as 
 the United States continues to invest in diversifying its 
 energy portfolio;
 (2) this expansion has to be carefully considered in its 
 potential impacts to low-level military training routes and 
 special use airspace of the Department of Defense;
 (3) it is imperative that the United States preserves 
 access to national airspace for military test and training and 
 activities to ensure military readiness while facilitating 
 deployment of renewable energy projects, such as wind turbines, 
 that enhance national and economic security in ways that are 
 compatible with military airspace needs; and
 (4) the rapid proliferation of wind turbines around the 
 world may require the Armed Forces to develop tactics, 
 training, and procedures for operations in the vicinity of wind 
 turbines in order to exploit potential adversaries' turbines 
 for tactical advantage.
 (b) Study and Report.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense shall seek to 
 enter into an agreement with a federally funded research and 
 development center to conduct a study to identify low-level 
 military training routes and special use airspace that may be 
 used by the Department of Defense to conduct realistic training 
 over and near wind turbines.
 (2) Elements.--As part of the study under paragraph (1), 
 the federally funded research and development center that 
 conducts the study shall--
 (A) identify and define the requirements for 
 military airspace that may be used for the training 
 described in paragraph (1), taking into consideration--
 (i) the operational and training needs of 
 the Armed Forces; and
 (ii) the threat environments of adversaries 
 of the United States, including the People's 
 Republic of China;
 (B) identify possibilities for combining live, 
 virtual, and constructive flight training near wind 
 projects, both onshore and offshore;
 (C) describe the airspace inventory required for 
 low-level training proficiency given current and 
 projected force structures;
 (D) provide recommendations for redesigning and 
 properly sizing special use air space and military 
 training routes to combine live and synthetic training 
 in a realistic environment;
 (E) describe ongoing research and development 
 programs being utilized to mitigate impacts of wind 
 turbines on low-level training routes; and
 (F) identify current training routes impacted by 
 wind turbines, any previous training routes that are no 
 longer in use because of wind turbines, and any 
 training routes projected to be lost due to wind 
 turbines.
 (3) Coordination.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the 
 Secretary of Defense shall coordinate with--
 (A) the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel 
 and Readiness;
 (B) the Department of Defense Policy Board on 
 Federal Aviation; and
 (C) the Federal Aviation Administration.
 (4) Submittal to dod.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than one year after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the federally funded 
 research and development center that conducts the study 
 under paragraph (1) shall submit to the Secretary of 
 Defense a report on the results of the study.
 (B) Form.--The report under paragraph (1) shall be 
 submitted in unclassified form but may include a 
 classified annex.
 (5) Submittal to congress.--Not later than 60 days after 
 the date on which the Secretary of Defense receives the report 
 under paragraph (4), the Secretary shall submit to the 
 appropriate congressional committees an unaltered copy of the 
 report together with any comments the Secretary may have with 
 respect to the report.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means 
 the following:
 (A) The congressional defense committees.
 (B) The Committee on Transportation and 
 Infrastructure of the House of Representatives.
 (C) The Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate.
 (2) The term ``impacted by wind turbines'' means a 
 situation in which the presence of wind turbines in the area of 
 a low-level military training route or special use airspace--
 (A) prompted the Department of Defense to alter a 
 testing and training mission or to reduce previously 
 planned training activities; or
 (B) prevented the Department from meeting testing 
 and training requirements.

SEC. 1077. STUDY ON JOINT TASK FORCE INDO-PACIFIC.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Commander of United States Indo-Pacific 
Command shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report 
on the results of a study conducted by the Commander on the 
desirability and feasibility of establishing any of the following for 
the Indo-Pacific region:
 (1) A Joint Task Force.
 (2) A sub-unified command.
 (3) Another organizational structure to assume command and 
 control responsibility for contingency response in the region.
 (b) Elements.--The study conducted under subsection (a) shall 
include each of the following:
 (1) An assessment of whether an additional organizational 
 structure would better facilitate the planning and execution of 
 contingency response in the Indo-Pacific region.
 (2) An assessment of existing components and sub-unified 
 commands to determine if any such components or commands are 
 best positioned to assume the role of such an additional 
 organizational structure.
 (3) An assessment of the risks and benefits of 
 headquartering such an additional organizational structure on 
 Guam (or additional locations if the Commander determines 
 appropriate), including a description and expected cost of any 
 required command and control or associated upgrades.
 (4) An identification of any additional entities that could 
 be integrated, on a standing basis, into the staff of such an 
 additional organizational structure, along with associated 
 benefits, risks, and options to mitigate any risks.
 (5) An assessment of whether the best option for such an 
 additional organizational structure would be a Joint Task 
 Force, a sub-unified command, or another organizational 
 structure, and what the best relationship would be with respect 
 to other current or future United States commands and task 
 forces in the Indo-Pacific region.
 (6) A description of any additional resources or 
 authorizations that would be required to establish such an 
 additional organizational structure.
 (c) Form of Report.--The report required under subsection (a) shall 
be submitted in unclassified form, but may contain a classified annex.

SEC. 1078. BIANNUAL DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE INSPECTOR GENERAL REPORTING 
 ON RESPONSE TO RUSSIAN AGGRESSION AND ASSISTANCE TO 
 UKRAINE.

 (a) In General.--The Inspector General of the Department of Defense 
shall provide to the appropriate congressional committees biannual 
briefings on the status and findings of Inspector General oversight, 
reviews, audits, and inspections of the activities conducted by the 
Department of Defense response to Russia's further invasion of Ukraine, 
initiated on February 24, 2022, including military assistance provided 
to Ukraine by the Department of Defense and the programs, operations, 
and contracts carried out with such funds, including--
 (1) the oversight and accounting of the obligation and 
 expenditure of funds used to assist Ukraine and to respond to 
 Russia's further invasion of Ukraine;
 (2) the monitoring and review of contracts supported by 
 such funds;
 (3) the investigation of any relevant overpayments issues 
 and of legal compliance by Department of Defense officials, 
 contractors, and other relevant entities; and
 (4) the investigation of any end-use monitoring issues 
 associated with articles provided to Ukraine.
 (b) Termination.--No briefing shall be required under subsection 
(a) after December 31, 2026.
 (c) Appropriate Congressional Committees.--In this section, the 
term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the congressional defense committees;
 (2) the Committee on Oversight and Reform and the Committee 
 on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives; and
 (3) the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental 
 Affairs and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate.

SEC. 1079. REVIEW OF SECURITY ASSISTANCE PROVIDED TO ELIE WIESEL 
 COUNTRIES.

 (a) Review Required.--Not later than 30 days after the transmission 
of the first report required after the date of the enactment of this 
Act under section 5 of the Elie Wiesel Genocide and Atrocities 
Prevention Act of 2018 (Public Law 115-441; 22 U.S.C. 2651 note), the 
Secretary of Defense shall conduct a review of risks related to the 
Department of Defense provision of security assistance to countries 
identified in the report as being at high or medium risk for 
atrocities. Such review shall include an assessment of risk associated 
with providing weapons and other forms of security cooperation programs 
and assistance, including special operations forces programs, to the 
governments of such countries, with respect to atrocities, conflict, 
violence, and other forms of instability.
 (b) Congressional Notification of Certain Changes.--If, as a result 
of the review required under subsection (a), the Secretary determines 
that the Department of Defense should stop or change the security 
assistance provided to a country, the Secretary shall submit notice of 
such determination to--
 (1) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Foreign Relations of the Senate.

SEC. 1079A. REPORT ON DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE PRACTICES REGARDING 
 DISTINCTION BETWEEN COMBATANTS AND CIVILIANS IN UNITED 
 STATES MILITARY OPERATIONS.

 (a) Report.--The Secretary of Defense shall seek to enter into an 
agreement with a federally funded research and development center to 
conduct an independent report on Department of Defense practices 
regarding distinguishing between combatants and civilians in United 
States military operations.
 (b) Elements.--The report required under subsection (a) shall 
include the following matters:
 (1) A description of how the Department of Defense and 
 individual members of the Armed Forces have differentiated 
 between combatants and civilians in both ground and air 
 operations since 2001, including in Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria, 
 Somalia, Libya, and Yemen, including--
 (A) relevant policy and legal standards and how 
 these standards were implemented in practice;
 (B) target engagement criteria; and
 (C) whether military-aged males were presumptively 
 targetable.
 (2) A description of how the Department of Defense has 
 differentiated between combatants and civilians when assessing 
 allegations of civilian casualties since 2001, including in 
 Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria, Somalia, Libya, and Yemen, 
 including--
 (A) relevant policy and legal standards and the 
 factual indicators these standards were applied to in 
 assessing claims of civilian casualties; and
 (B) any other matters the Secretary of Defense 
 determines appropriate.
 (c) Submission of Report.--Not later than one year after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to 
the congressional defense committees a report setting forth an 
unaltered copy of the assessment under this section, together with the 
views of the Secretary on the assessment.
 (d) Definition of United States Military Operation.--In this 
section, the term ``United States military operations'' includes any 
mission, strike, engagement, raid, or incident involving United States 
Armed Forces.

SEC. 1079B. REPORT ON DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE RECRUITMENT ADVERTISING TO 
 RACIAL AND ETHNIC MINORITY COMMUNITIES.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) efforts by the Armed Forces to ensure diversity among 
 the force are commendable;
 (2) it is cause for concern that efforts by the Armed 
 Forces to ensure that the Armed Forces of the United States 
 reflect the society of the United States are being reduced by 
 the use of advertising that does not adequately target racial 
 and ethnic minority communities;
 (3) the Armed Forces face many challenges but should 
 maintain, and where possible, increase advertising within 
 racial and ethnic minority communities to support the 
 commitment of the Armed Forces to ensuring a strong diverse 
 force;
 (4) to adequately reach minority communities, the Armed 
 Forces should use minority-owned media outlets and advertising 
 agencies that have demonstrated an ability to connect with 
 racial and ethnic minority communities;
 (5) recruitment advertising within minority communities is 
 an important avenue toward building interest and understanding 
 in serving the United States in uniform; and
 (6) the Armed Forces and the Department of Defense should 
 maintain a commitment to diversity recruiting and retention.
 (b) Report.--Not later than June 1, 2023, the Secretary of Defense 
shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the 
efforts of the Department of Defense to increase marketing and 
advertising with minority-owned media outlets and advertising agencies 
to adequately reach racial and ethnic minority communities.

SEC. 1079C. PUBLIC AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION ABOUT COST OF UNITED 
 STATES OVERSEAS MILITARY FOOTPRINT.

 Section 1090 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2017 (Public Law 114-328) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new subsections:
 ``(c) Additional Information.--For fiscal year 2023 and each 
subsequent fiscal year, the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with 
the Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service and the Director of 
the Bureau of Economic Analysis, shall post on the public Internet 
website of the Department of Defense the costs to each United States 
taxpayer of the overseas military footprint of the United States, 
including--
 ``(1) the costs of building, maintaining, staffing and 
 operating all overseas military bases and installations;
 ``(2) the personnel costs, including compensation, housing 
 and health care, for all members of the Armed Forces deployed 
 overseas at any point throughout the fiscal year;
 ``(3) the costs paid to contractors providing goods and 
 services in support of overseas military bases, installations, 
 and operations;
 ``(4) the costs of conducting all overseas military 
 operations, including operations conducted by United States 
 Armed Forces, operations conducted using unmanned weapons 
 systems, covert operations, and operations undertaken by, with, 
 and through partner forces;
 ``(5) the costs of all overseas military exercises 
 involving United States Armed Forces; and
 ``(6) the costs of all military training and assistance 
 provided by the United States to overseas partner forces.
 ``(d) Display of Information.--The information required to be 
posted under subsections (a) and (c) shall--
 ``(1) be posted directly on the website of the Department 
 of Defense, in an accessible and clear format;
 ``(2) include corresponding documentation as links or 
 attachments; and--
 ``(3) include, for each overseas operation--
 ``(A) both the total cost to each taxpayer, and the 
 cost to each taxpayer for each fiscal year, of 
 conducting the overseas operation;
 ``(B) a list of countries where the overseas 
 operations have taken place; and
 ``(C) for each such country, both the total cost to 
 each taxpayer, and the cost to each taxpayer for each 
 fiscal year, of conducting the overseas operations in 
 that country.''.

SEC. 1079D. STUDY AND REPORT ON POTENTIAL INCLUSION OF BLACK BOX DATA 
 RECORDERS IN TACTICAL VEHICLES.

 (a) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall 
conduct a study to evaluate the feasability and advisability of 
equipping all tactical vehicles of the Armed Forces with black box data 
recorders.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report on the results of the study 
conducted under subsection (a).

SEC. 1079E. REPORT ON THE STRATEGY AND ENGAGEMENT EFFORTS OF THE ARMED 
 FORCES IN HAWAII.

 (a) In General.--The Commander of the United States Indo-Pacific 
Command shall, in collaboration with installation commanders and the 
relevant service commands, develop and implement--
 (1) a strategy to improve the engagement efforts of the 
 military with the local community in the State of Hawaii; and
 (2) enhanced coordinated community engagement efforts (as 
 described in section 587 of the National Defense Authorization 
 Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81)) in the State of 
 Hawaii.
 (b) Report Required.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Commander shall submit to the congressional 
defense committees a report that describes the results of the strategy 
and engagement efforts implemented pursuant to subsection (a).

SEC. 1079F. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE ENGAGEMENT WITH NATIVE HAWAIIAN 
 ORGANIZATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than March 30, 2023, the Assistant 
Secretary of Defense for Energy, Installations, and Environment shall 
submit to the Committee on Armed Services of the House of 
Representatives a report on Department of Defense plans to identify, 
standardize, and coordinate best practices with respect to consultation 
and engagement with the Native Hawaiian community.
 (b) Contents of Report.--The report required under subsection (a) 
shall include, at a minimum, the following:
 (1) Plans for conducting education and training programs 
 relating to consultation and engagement with the Native 
 Hawaiian community, including--
 (A) outreach activities for fiscal years 2023 and 
 2024; and
 (B) the degree to which Native Hawaiian community 
 members have been involved in development of curricula, 
 tentative dates, locations, required attendees, and 
 topics for the education and training programs.
 (2) A list of all Native Hawaiian community groups involved 
 or to be involved in the consultation process to update 
 Department of Defense Instruction 4710.03 (or any successor 
 document).
 (3) A description of how Department of Defense Instruction 
 4710.03 can be improved to reflect best practices and provide 
 continuity across the military departments in practices, 
 policies, training, and personnel who conduct consultation with 
 the Native Hawaiian community.
 (4) A timeline for issuing the next update or successor 
 document to Department of Defense Instruction 4710.03.
 (5) A description of how the Department of Defense can 
 enhance and expand education and training programs relating to 
 consultation and engagement with the Native Hawaiian community 
 and outreach activities for all commands and installations 
 within the State of Hawaii.

SEC. 1079G. FFRDC STUDY ON SHIPYARD INFRASTRUCTURE OPTIMIZATION PROGRAM 
 EFFORTS TO OPTIMIZE, RECAPITALIZE AND RECONFIGURE 
 FACILITIES AND INDUSTRIAL PLANT EQUIPMENT.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Navy shall seek to enter into 
an agreement with an appropriate federally funded research and 
development center for the conduct of a detailed analysis of the 
efforts of the Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization Program to 
optimize, recapitalize, and reconfigure facilities and industrial plant 
equipment at the Navy's public shipyard. Such analysis shall not cover 
any dry dock project.
 (b) Matters for Consideration.--An analysis conducted pursuant to 
an agreement under subsection (a) shall include a consideration of each 
of the following items with respect to the Shipyard Infrastructure 
Optimization Program:
 (1) The adequacy of the cost estimate guidance and 
 methodology used by the Navy.
 (2) The estimated long-term cost and maintenance 
 availability time savings offered from the specific, major 
 proposed facility and equipment improvements.
 (3) The methodology of the Navy for prioritizing the 
 proposed facility and equipment improvements beyond their 
 expected service lives.
 (4) A comparison of current Navy policies and procedures 
 for large facility improvements in excess of $500,000,000 to 
 best practices used by other Federal agencies and the private 
 sector.
 (5) Options for improving the management and oversight of 
 the program, including staffing and contracting options for 
 ensuring the adequate oversight of contracted activities, 
 support provided to the public shipyards and local shipyard 
 construction agents, and best practices for the management of 
 large multi-contractor projects.
 (6) Estimates for current public shipyard facility 
 restoration and modernization backlogs and the plans of the 
 Secretary of the Navy to mitigate the current backlog either 
 within the Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization Program or 
 through another program.
 (7) Recommendations for improving the Shipyard 
 Infrastructure Optimization Program based on the results of the 
 analysis.
 (c) Briefing.--Not later than 60 days after the completion of an 
analysis pursuant to an agreement under subsection (a), the Secretary 
of Navy shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report 
on the results of the analysis.
 (d) Public Availability.--An agreement entered into pursuant to 
subsection (a) shall specify that the federally funded research and 
development center shall make an unclassified version of the report 
provided by the Secretary publicly available on an appropriate website 
of the center.

SEC. 1079H. STUDY ON EFFORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE TO REDUCE THE 
 USE OF SINGLE-USE PLASTICS.

 (a) Study Required.--
 (1) In general.--The Comptroller General of the United 
 States shall conduct a study on the efforts of the Department 
 of Defense to reduce reliance on single-use plastics.
 (2) Elements.--The study required under paragraph (1) shall 
 address--
 (A) the extent to which the Department of Defense--
 (i) collects and tracks data on its use of 
 single-use plastics; and
 (ii) has set targets for reducing the use 
 of such plastics;
 (B) the status of the implementation of Department 
 of Defense Instruction 4715.23 and Executive Order 
 14057 as that instruction and order relate to single-
 use plastics;
 (C) any Department-wide or military service-
 specific initiatives to reduce reliance on single use 
 plastics;
 (D) any challenges that the Department faces in 
 reducing its reliance on single-use plastics and 
 possible mechanisms to address those challenges;
 (E) any recommendations to improve the Department's 
 efforts to reduce single-use plastics; and
 (F) any other matter the Comptroller General 
 determines is significant and relevant to the purposes 
 of the study.
 (b) Interim Briefing.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall provide to the 
congressional defense committees a briefing on any preliminary findings 
of the study conducted under subsection (a).
 (c) Final Results.--The Comptroller General shall provide the final 
results of the study conducted under subsection (a) to the 
congressional defense committees at such time and in such format as is 
mutually agreed upon by the committees and the Comptroller General.

SEC. 1079I. REPORT ON LITTORAL EXPLOSIVE ORDNANCE NEUTRALIZATION 
 PROGRAM OF RECORD.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Commandant of the Marine Corps shall submit 
to the congressional defense committees a report on the Littoral 
Explosive Ordnance Neutralization (in this section referred to as 
``LEON'') program of record.
 (b) Matters for Inclusion.--The report required under subsection 
(a) shall include each of the following:
 (1) A detailed plan of action and milestones for the 
 implementation plan for the LEON program of record to enable 
 such program to reach fully operational capable status.
 (2) An identification of any manning, training, equipping, 
 or funding shortfalls or other barriers that could prevent the 
 LEON program of record from reaching fully operational capable 
 status.
 (3) A review of achievable, effective, and suitable 
 capabilities supporting technical architectures to collect, 
 store, manage, and disseminate information collected by LEON 
 sensors.
 (c) Consideration.--In preparing the report required under 
subsection (a), the Commandant shall take into consideration the 
necessity of the Marine Corps explosive ordnance disposal requirements 
pertaining to the very shallow water mine countermeasures mission.

SEC. 1079J. ASSESSMENT, PLAN, AND REPORTS ON THE AUTOMATED SURFACE 
 OBSERVING SYSTEM.

 (a) Joint Assessment and Plan.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense, in collaboration 
 with the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration 
 and the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere, 
 shall--
 (A) conduct an assessment of resources, personnel, 
 procedures, and activities necessary to maximize the 
 functionality and utility of the automated surface 
 observing system of the United States that identifies--
 (i) key system upgrades needed to improve 
 observation quality and utility for weather 
 forecasting, aviation safety, and other users;
 (ii) improvements needed in observations 
 within the planetary boundary layer, including 
 mixing height;
 (iii) improvements needed in public 
 accessibility of observational data;
 (iv) improvements needed to reduce latency 
 in reporting of observational data;
 (v) relevant data to be collected for the 
 production of forecasts or forecast guidance 
 relating to atmospheric composition, including 
 particulate and air quality data, and aviation 
 safety;
 (vi) areas of concern regarding operational 
 continuity and reliability of the system, which 
 may include needs for on-night staff, 
 particularly in remote and rural areas and 
 areas where system failure would have the 
 greatest negative impact to the community;
 (vii) stewardship, data handling, data 
 distribution, and product generation needs 
 arising from upgrading and changing the 
 automated surface observation systems;
 (viii) possible solutions for areas of 
 concern identified under clause (vi), including 
 with respect to the potential use of backup 
 systems, power and communication system 
 reliability, staffing needs and personnel 
 location, and the acquisition of critical 
 component backups and proper storage location 
 to ensure rapid system repair necessary to 
 ensure system operational continuity; and
 (ix) research, development, and transition 
 to operations needed to develop advanced data 
 collection, quality control, and distribution 
 so that the data are provided to models, users, 
 and decision support systems in a timely 
 manner; and
 (B) develop and implement a plan that addresses the 
 findings of the assessment conducted under subparagraph 
 (A), including by seeking and allocating resources 
 necessary to ensure that system upgrades are 
 standardized across the Department of Defense, the 
 Federal Aviation Administration, and the National 
 Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to the extent 
 practicable.
 (2) Standardization.--Any system standardization 
 implemented under paragraph (1)(B) shall not impede activities 
 to upgrade or improve individual units of the system.
 (3) Remote automatic weather station coordination.--The 
 Secretary of Defense, in collaboration with relevant Federal 
 agencies and the National Interagency Fire Center, shall assess 
 and develop cooperative agreements to improve coordination, 
 interoperability standards, operations, and placement of remote 
 automatic weather stations for the purpose of improving utility 
 and coverage of remote automatic weather stations, automated 
 surface observation systems, and other similar stations and 
 systems for weather and climate operations.
 (b) Report to Congress.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in 
 collaboration with the Administrator of the Federal Aviation 
 Administration and the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans 
 and Atmosphere, shall submit to the appropriate congressional 
 committees a report that--
 (A) details the findings of the assessment required 
 by subparagraph (A) of subsection (a)(1); and
 (B) the plan required by subparagraph (B) of such 
 subsection.
 (2) Elements.--The report required by paragraph (1) shall 
 include a detailed assessment of appropriations required--
 (A) to address the findings of the assessment 
 required by subparagraph (A) of subsection (a)(1); and
 (B) to implement the plan required by subparagraph 
 (B) of such subsection.
 (c) Government Accountability Office Report.--Not later than 4 
years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller 
General of the United States shall submit to the appropriate 
congressional committees a report that--
 (1) evaluates the functionality, utility, reliability, and 
 operational status of the automated surface observing system 
 across the Department of Defense, the Federal Aviation 
 Administration, and the Administration;
 (2) evaluates the progress, performance, and implementation 
 of the plan required by subsection (a)(1)(B);
 (3) assesses the efficacy of cross-agency collaboration and 
 stakeholder engagement in carrying out the plan and provides 
 recommendations to improve such activities;
 (4) evaluates the operational continuity and reliability of 
 the system, particularly in remote and rural areas and areas 
 where system failure would have the greatest negative impact to 
 the community, and provides recommendations to improve such 
 continuity and reliability;
 (5) assesses Federal coordination regarding the remote 
 automatic weather station network, air resource advisors, and 
 other Federal observing assets used for weather and climate 
 modeling and response activities, and provides recommendations 
 for improvements; and
 (6) includes such other recommendations as the Comptroller 
 General determines are appropriate to improve the system.
 (d) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the following:
 (1) The Committee on Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (2) The Committee on Armed Services of the Senate.
 (3) The Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of 
 the House of Representatives.
 (4) The Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation 
 of the Senate.
 (5) The Committee on Science, Space, and Technology of the 
 House of Representatives.

SEC. 1079K. ANNUAL REPORT ON USE OF SOCIAL MEDIA BY FOREIGN TERRORIST 
 ORGANIZATIONS.

 (a) Annual Report.--The Director of National Intelligence, in 
coordination with the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense, 
shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees an annual 
report on--
 (1) the use of online social media platforms by entities 
 designated as foreign terrorist organizations by the Department 
 of State for recruitment, fundraising, and the dissemination of 
 information; and
 (2) the threat posed to the national security of the United 
 States by the online radicalization of terrorists and violent 
 extremists.
 (b) Appropriate Congressional Committees.--In this section, the 
appropriate congressional committees are--
 (1) the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on 
 Foreign Affairs, and the Permanent Select Committee on 
 Intelligence of the House of Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on 
 Foreign Relations, and the Select Committee on Intelligence of 
 the Senate.

SEC. 1079L. REPORT ON PROTECTION OF MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES FROM 
 RUSSIAN-SPONSORED ARMED ATTACKS.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to Congress a report on the 
actions taken to protect members of the Armed Forces of the United 
States from armed attacks conducted by militants and terrorists in 
pursuit of bounties and inducements the agencies, organizations, or 
entities aligned with the Russian Federation.

SEC. 1079M. REPORT ON DESALINIZATION TECHNOLOGY.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of the Navy shall submit to the congressional 
defense committees a report on the application of desalinization 
technology for defense and national security purposes to provide 
drought relief to areas affected by sharp declines in water resources.

SEC. 1079N. REPORT ON DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE MILITARY CAPABILITIES IN 
 THE CARIBBEAN.

 (a) In General.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with 
the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Homeland Security, shall 
submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of 
Representatives a report on United States military capabilities in the 
Caribbean basin, particularly in and around Puerto Rico and the United 
States Virgin Islands.
 (b) Elements.--The report required by subsection (a) shall include 
the following:
 (1) An assessment of the value, feasibility, and cost of 
 increasing United States military capabilities in the Caribbean 
 basin, particularly in and around Puerto Rico and the United 
 States Virgin Islands, to--
 (A) combat transnational criminal organizations and 
 illicit narcotics and weapons trafficking in the 
 Caribbean basin, particularly in and around Puerto Rico 
 and the United States Virgin Islands;
 (B) improve surveillance capabilities and maximize 
 the effectiveness of counter-trafficking operations in 
 the Caribbean region;
 (C) ensure, to the greatest extent possible, that 
 United States Northern Command and United States 
 Southern Command have the necessary assets to support 
 and increase measures to detect, interdict, disrupt, or 
 curtail illicit narcotics and weapons trafficking 
 activities within their respective areas of operations 
 in the Caribbean basin;
 (D) respond to malign influences of foreign 
 governments, particularly including non-market 
 economies, in the Caribbean basin that harm United 
 States national security and regional security 
 interests in the Caribbean basin and in the Western 
 Hemisphere;
 (E) increase supply chain resiliency and near-
 shoring in global trade; and
 (F) strengthen the ability of the security sector 
 to respond to, and become more resilient in the face 
 of, major disasters, including to ensure critical 
 infrastructure and ports can come back online rapidly 
 following disasters.
 (2) An assessment of United States military force posture 
 in the Caribbean basin, particularly in and around Puerto Rico 
 and the United States Virgin Islands, and relevant locations in 
 the Caribbean basin.
 (c) Form of Report.--The report required under subsection (a) shall 
be submitted in unclassified form without any designation relating to 
dissemination control, but may include a classified annex.

SEC. 1079O. ANNUAL REPORT ON UNFUNDED PRIORITIES OF DEFENSE POW/MIA 
 ACCOUNTING AGENCY.

 Chapter 9 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting 
after section 222c the following new section:
``Sec. 222d. Unfunded priorities of Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency: 
 annual report
 ``(a) Reports.--(a) Reports.-Not later than 10 days after the date 
on which the budget of the President for a fiscal year is submitted to 
Congress pursuant to section 1105 of title 31, the Director of the 
Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency shall submit to the Secretary of 
Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and to the 
congressional defense committees, a report on the unfunded priorities 
of the Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency.
 ``(b) Elements.--(1) Each report under subsection (a) shall 
specify, for each unfunded priority covered by such report, the 
following:
 ``(A) A summary description of such priority, including the 
 objectives to be achieved if such priority is funded (whether 
 in whole or in part).
 ``(B) The additional amount of funds recommended in 
 connection with the objectives under subparagraph (A).
 ``(C) Account information with respect to such priority, 
 including the following (as applicable):
 ``(i) Line Item Number (LIN) for applicable 
 procurement accounts.
 ``(ii) Program Element (PE) number for applicable 
 research, development, test, and evaluation accounts.
 ``(iii) Sub-activity group (SAG) for applicable 
 operation and maintenance accounts.
 ``(2) Each report under subsection (a) shall present the unfunded 
priorities covered by such report in order of urgency of priority.
 ``(c) Unfunded Priority Defined.-- In this section, the term 
`unfunded priority', in the case of a fiscal year, means a program, 
activity, or mission requirement of the POW/MIA Accounting Agency 
that--
 ``(1) is not funded in the budget of the President for the 
 fiscal year as submitted to Congress pursuant to section 1105 
 of title 31, United States Code;
 ``(2) is necessary to fulfill a requirement associated with 
 an operational or contingency plan of a combatant command or 
 other validated requirement; and
 ``(3) would have been recommended for funding through the 
 budget referred to in paragraph (1) by the Director of the POW/
 MIA Accounting Agency in connection with the budget if 
 additional resources had been available for the budget to fund 
 the program, activity, or mission requirement.''.

SEC. 1079P. REVIEW OF NAVY STUDY ON REQUIREMENTS FOR AND POTENTIAL 
 BENEFITS OF REALISTICALLY SIMULATING REAL WORLD AND NEAR 
 PEER ADVERSARY SUBMARINES.

 The Secretary of the Navy shall conduct a review of the study 
conducted by the Chief of Naval Operations, N94 entitled ``Requirements 
for and Potential Benefits of Realistically Simulating Real World and 
Near Peer Adversary Submarines'', published November 1, 2021, to 
determine compliance with congressional intent and reconcile the 
findings of the study with instructions provided by Congress through 
the conference report 116-617 accompanying H.R. 6395, the William M. 
(Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
2021 (Public Law 116-283). Such review shall include an addendum that 
includes--
 (1) views from Navy commands responsible for responding to 
 foreign threats from adversary manned, diesel-powered 
 submarines including the Navy's Fifth and Seventh Fleets, 
 including views on the ability to conduct threat assessments 
 related to submersibles operated by third world and near-peer 
 adversaries in the areas of operations of such commands; and
 (2) input from relevant training schools and range 
 operators associated with antisubmarine warfare regarding 
 current training platforms intended to replicate such threats 
 and the effectiveness of such training platforms.

SEC. 1079Q. REPORT ON UNMANNED TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS AT MILITARY 
 BASES AND INSTALLATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
appropriate congressional committees a report that includes--
 (1) a detailed description of the threat of aerial drones 
 and unmanned aircraft to United States national security; and
 (2) an assessment of the unmanned traffic management 
 systems of every military base and installation (within and 
 outside the United States) to determine whether the base or 
 installation is adequately equipped to detect, disable, and 
 disarm hostile or unidentified unmanned aerial systems.
 (b) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the following:
 (1) The Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on 
 Commerce, Science, and Transportation, and the Committee on 
 Foreign Relations of the Senate.
 (2) The Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on 
 Foreign Affairs, and the Committee on Transportation and 
 Infrastructure of the House of Representatives.

SEC. 1079R. REPORT ON NON-DOMESTIC FUEL USE.

 Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a report on the total dollar amount the Department of 
Defense spent on fuel from non-domestic sources during the period 
beginning on January 1, 2021, and ending on the date of the enactment 
of this Act.

SEC. 1079S. REPORT ON HUMAN TRAFFICKING AS A RESULT OF RUSSIAN INVASION 
 OF UKRAINE.

 The Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the Secretary of 
State, shall submit to the congressional defense committees, the 
Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives, and the 
Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate a report on human 
trafficking as a result of the Russian invasion of Ukraine.

 Subtitle G--Other Matters

SEC. 1081. TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.

 (a) Title 10, United States Code.--Title 10, United States Code, is 
amended as follows:
 (1) The table of chapters at the beginning of subtitle A is 
 amended by striking the item relating to the second chapter 19 
 (relating to cyber matters).
 (2) Section 113 is amended--
 (A) in subsection (l)(2)(F), by inserting a period 
 after ``inclusion in the armed forces''; and
 (B) in subsection (m), by redesignating the section 
 paragraph (8) as paragraph (9).
 (3) The section heading for section 2691 is amended by 
 striking ``state'' and inserting ``State''.
 (4) Section 3014 is amended by striking ``section 4002(a) 
 or 4003'' and inserting ``section 4021(a) or 4023''.
 (5) Section 4423(e) is amended by striking ``section 4003'' 
 and inserting ``section 4023''.
 (6) Section 4831(a) is amended by striking ``section 4002'' 
 and inserting ``section 4022''.
 (7) Section 4833(c) is amended by striking ``section 4002'' 
 and inserting ``section 4022''.
 (b) NDAA for Fiscal Year 2022.--Effective as of December 27, 2021, 
and as if included therein as enacted, the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81) is amended 
as follows:
 (1) Section 907(a) is amended by striking ``116-283'' and 
 inserting ``115-232''.
 (c) National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020.--
Effective as of December 27, 2021, and as if included therein as 
enacted, the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020 
(Public Law 116-92) is amended as follows:
 (1) Section 905 is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)(2), by inserting a period at 
 the end; and
 (B) in subsection (d)(1), by striking 
 ``subparagraph (B)'' and inserting ``paragraph (2)''.
 (d) National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2014.--
Effective as of December 27, 2021, and as if included therein as 
enacted, the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 
(Public Law 117-81) is amended as follows:
 (1) Section 932(c)(2)(D) of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2014 (Public Law 113-66; 10 
 U.S.C. 2224 note) is amended by striking ``of subsection 
 (c)(3)'' and inserting ``paragraph (3)''.
 (e) Automatic Execution of Conforming Changes to Tables of 
Sections, Tables of Contents, and Similar Tabular Entries in Defense 
Laws.--
 (1) Elimination of need for separate conforming 
 amendment.--Chapter 1 of title 10, United States Code, is 
 amended by adding at the end the following new section:
``Sec. 102. Effect of certain amendments on conforming changes to 
 tables of sections, tables of contents, and similar 
 tabular entries
 ``(a) Automatic Execution of Conforming Changes.--When an amendment 
to a covered defense law adds a section or larger organizational unit 
to the covered defense law, repeals or transfers a section or larger 
organizational unit in the covered defense law, or amends the 
designation or heading of a section or larger organizational unit in 
the covered defense law, that amendment also shall have the effect of 
amending any table of sections, table of contents, or similar tabular 
entries in the covered defense law to alter the table to conform to the 
changes made by the amendment.
 ``(b) Exceptions.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to an amendment 
described in such subsection when--
 ``(1) the amendment or a clerical amendment enacted at the 
 same time expressly amends a table of sections, table of 
 contents, or similar tabular entries in the covered defense law 
 to alter the table to conform to the changes made by the 
 amendment; or
 ``(2) the amendment otherwise expressly exempts itself from 
 the operation of this section.
 ``(c) Covered Defense Law.--In this section, the term `covered 
defense law' means--
 ``(1) this title;
 ``(2) titles 32 and 37;
 ``(3) any national defense authorization Act that 
 authorizes funds to be appropriated for a fiscal year to the 
 Department of Defense; and
 ``(4) any other law designated in the text thereof as a 
 covered defense law for purposes of application of this 
 section.''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--The heading of chapter 1 of 
 title 10, United States Code, is amended to read as follows:

``CHAPTER 1--DEFINITIONS, RULES OF CONSTRUCTION, CROSS REFERENCES, AND 
 RELATED MATTERS''.

 (3) Application of amendment.--Section 102 of title 10, 
 United States Code, as added by paragraph (1), shall apply to 
 the amendments made by this section and other amendments made 
 by this Act.
 (f) Coordination With Other Amendments Made by This Act.--For 
purposes of applying amendments made by provisions of this Act other 
than this section, the amendments made by this section shall be treated 
as having been enacted immediately before any such amendments by other 
provisions of this Act.

SEC. 1082. RONALD V. DELLUMS MEMORIAL FELLOWSHIP FOR WOMEN OF COLOR IN 
 STEAM.

 (a) Establishment.--The Secretary of Defense shall establish a 
fellowship program, which shall be known as the ``Ronald V. Dellums 
Memorial Fellowship for Women of Color in STEAM'', to provide 
scholarships and internships for eligible students with high potential 
talent in STEAM.
 (b) Objectives.--In carrying out the program, the Secretary shall--
 (1) consult with institutions of higher education and 
 relevant professional associations, nonprofit organizations, 
 and relevant defense industry representatives on the design of 
 the program; and
 (2) design the program in a manner such that the program--
 (A) increases awareness of and interest in 
 employment in the Department of Defense among 
 underrepresented students in the STEAM fields, 
 particularly women of color, who are pursuing a degree 
 in a STEAM field;
 (B) supports the academic careers of 
 underrepresented students, especially women of color, 
 in STEAM fields; and
 (C) builds a pipeline of women of color with 
 exemplary academic achievements in a STEAM field 
 relevant to national security who can pursue careers in 
 national security and in areas of national need.
 (c) Components.--The fellowship program shall consist of--
 (1) a scholarship program under subsection (d); and
 (2) an internship program under subsection (e).
 (d) Selection.--
 (1) In general.--Each fiscal year, subject to the 
 availability of funds, the Secretary shall seek to select at 
 least 30 eligible students to participate in the fellowship 
 program under this section.
 (2) Students from minority-serving institutions and 
 historically black colleges and universities.--The Secretary 
 may not award fewer than 50 percent of the fellowships under 
 this section to eligible students who attend historically Black 
 colleges and universities and minority-serving institutions.
 (3) Priority.--In awarding scholarships under this section, 
 the Secretary shall give priority to students who are eligible 
 to receive Federal Pell Grants under section 401 of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a).
 (4) Scholarship.--
 (A) Award.--Each fellow shall receive a scholarship 
 for each academic year of the fellowship program.
 (B) Amount.--The amounts of scholarships awarded 
 under this section shall not exceed--
 (i) $10,000 per student in an academic 
 year; and
 (ii) $40,000 per student in the aggregate.
 (C) Use of scholarship funds.--A fellow who 
 receives a scholarship may only use the scholarship 
 funds to pay for the cost of attendance at an 
 institution of higher education.
 (5) Consideration of underrepresented students in steam 
 fields.--In awarding a fellowship under this section, the 
 Secretary shall consider--
 (A) the number and distribution of minority and 
 female students nationally in science and engineering 
 majors;
 (B) the projected need for highly trained 
 individuals in all fields of science and engineering;
 (C) the present and projected need for highly 
 trained individuals in science and engineering career 
 fields in which minorities and women are 
 underrepresented; and
 (D) the lack of minorities and women in national 
 security, especially in science and engineering fields 
 in which such individuals are traditionally 
 underrepresented.
 (6) Student agreement.--As a condition of the receipt of a 
 scholarship under this section, a fellow shall agree--
 (A) to maintain standard academic progress;
 (B) to complete an internship described in 
 subsection (e) in a manner that the Secretary 
 determines is satisfactory; and
 (C) upon completion of the degree that the student 
 pursues while in the fellowship program, to work for 
 the Federal Government or in the field of education in 
 the area of study for which the scholarship or 
 fellowship was awarded, for a period specified by the 
 Secretary, which shall not be longer than the period 
 for which scholarship assistance was provided to such 
 student.
 (7) Enforcement of agreement.--The Secretary may enforce 
 the agreement under paragraph (6) as the Secretary determines 
 appropriate.
 (8) Direct hire authority.--Any appointment of a fellow 
 under paragraph (6)(C) to a position in the Federal Government 
 shall be made without regard to the provisions of section 3304 
 and sections 3309 through 3318 of title 5, United States Code.
 (e) Internship.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish an 
 internship program that provides each student who is awarded a 
 fellowship under this section with an internship in a an 
 organization or element of the Department of Defense.
 (2) Requirements.--Each internship shall--
 (A) to the extent practicable, last for a period of 
 at least 10 weeks;
 (B) include a stipend for transportation and living 
 expenses incurred by the fellow during the fellowship; 
 and
 (C) be completed during the initial 2-year period 
 of the fellowship.
 (3) Mentorship.--To the extent practicable, each fellow 
 shall be paired with a mid-level or a senior-level official of 
 the relevant organization or element of the Department of 
 Defense who shall serve as a mentor during the internship.
 (f) Duration and Extensions.--
 (1) Duration.--Each fellowship awarded under this section 
 shall be for a period of two years.
 (2) Extensions.--Subject to this paragraphs (3) through 
 (6), a fellow may apply for, and the Secretary may grant, a 1-
 year extension of the fellowship.
 (3) Number of extensions.--There shall be no limit on the 
 number of extensions under paragraph (1) that the Secretary may 
 grant an eligible student.
 (4) Limitation on degrees.--A fellow may use an extension 
 of a fellowship under this section for the pursuit of not more 
 than the following number of graduate degrees:
 (A) Two master's degrees, each of which must be in 
 a STEAM field.
 (B) One doctoral degree in a STEAM field.
 (5) Treatment of extensions.--An extension granted under 
 this subsection does not count for the purposes of 
 determining--
 (A) the number of fellowships authorized to be 
 granted for a year under subsection (d)(1); or
 (B) the percentage of fellowships granted to 
 eligible students for a year, as determined under 
 subsection (d)(2).
 (6) Extension requirements.--A fellow may receive an 
 extension under this subsection only if--
 (A) the fellow is in good academic standing with 
 the institution of higher education in which the fellow 
 is enrolled;
 (B) the fellow has satisfactorily completed an 
 internship under subsection (e); and
 (C) the fellow is currently enrolled full-time at 
 an institution of higher education and pursuing, in a 
 STEAM field--
 (i) a bachelor's degree;
 (ii) a master's degree; or
 (iii) a doctoral degree.
 (g) Limitation on Administrative Costs.--For each academic year, 
the Secretary may use not more than 5 percent of the funds made 
available to carry out this section for administrative purposes, 
including for purposes of--
 (1) outreach to institutions of higher education to 
 encourage participation in the program; and
 (2) promotion of the program to eligible students.
 (h) Administration of Program.--The Secretary may appoint a lead 
program officer to administer the program and to market the program 
among students and institutions of higher education.
 (i) Reports.--Not later than 2 years after the date on which the 
first fellowship is awarded under this section, and each academic year 
thereafter, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the appropriate 
congressional committees a report containing--
 (1) a description and analysis of the demographic 
 information of students who receive fellowships under this 
 section, including information with respect to such students 
 regarding--
 (A) race, in the aggregate and disaggregated by the 
 same major race groups as the decennial census of the 
 population;
 (B) ethnicity;
 (C) gender identity;
 (D) eligibility to receive a Federal Pell Grant 
 under section 401 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
 (20 U.S.C. 1070a); and
 (E) in the case of graduate students, whether the 
 students would be eligible to receive a Federal Pell 
 Grant under section 401 of the Higher Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a) if they were studying at the 
 undergraduate level;
 (2) an analysis of the effects of the program;
 (3) a description of--
 (A) the total number of students who obtain a 
 degree with fellowship funds each year; and
 (B) the type and total number of degrees obtained 
 by fellows; and
 (4) recommendations for changes to the program and to this 
 section to ensure that women of color are being effectively 
 served by such program.
 (j) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the congressional defense committees;
 (B) the Committee on Help, Education, Labor, and 
 Pensions of the Senate; and
 (C) the Committee on Education and Labor of the 
 House of Representatives.
 (2) The term ``cost of attendance'' has the meaning given 
 that term in section 472 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
 (20 U.S.C. 1087II).
 (3) The term ``eligible student'' means an individual who--
 (A) submits an application for a fellowship under 
 this section;
 (B) is enrolled, or will be enrolled for the first 
 year for which the student applies for a fellowship, in 
 either the third or fourth year of a four-year academic 
 program; and
 (C) is enrolled, or will be enrolled for the first 
 year for which the student applies for a fellowship, in 
 an institution of higher education on at least a half-
 time basis.
 (4) The term ``fellow'' means a student that was selected 
 for the fellowship program under subsection (d).
 (5) The term ``historically Black college or university'' 
 has the meaning given the term ``part B institution'' in 
 section 322 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 1061).
 (6) The term ``institution of higher education'' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 101 of the Higher Education 
 Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001).
 (7) The term ``minority-serving institution'' means an 
 institution specified in section 371(a) of the Higher Education 
 Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1067q(a)).
 (8) The term ``STEAM'' means science, technology, 
 engineering, arts, and mathematics.
 (9) The term ``underrepresented student in a STEAM field'' 
 means a student who is a member of a minority group for which 
 the number of individuals in such group who receive bachelor's 
 degrees in STEAM fields per 10,000 individuals in such group is 
 substantially fewer than the number of White, non-Hispanic 
 individuals who receive bachelor's degrees in STEAM fields per 
 10,000 such individuals.

SEC. 1083. COMBATING MILITARY RELIANCE ON RUSSIAN ENERGY.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) reliance on Russian energy poses a critical challenge 
 for national security activities in area of responsibility of 
 the United States European Command; and
 (2) in order to reduce the vulnerability of United States 
 military facilities to disruptions caused by reliance on 
 Russian energy, the Department of Defense should establish and 
 implement plans to reduce reliance on Russian energy for all 
 main operating bases in area of responsibility of the United 
 States European Command.
 (b) Eliminating Use of Russian Energy.--It shall be the goal of the 
Department of Defense to eliminate the use of Russian energy on each 
main operating base in the area of responsibility of the United States 
European Command by not later than five years after the date of the 
completion of an installation energy plan for such base, as required 
under this section.
 (c) Installation Energy Plans for Main Operating Bases.--
 (1) Identification of installations.--Not later than June 
 1, 2023, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
 congressional defense committees a list of main operating bases 
 within the area of responsibility of the United States European 
 Command ranked according to mission criticality and 
 vulnerability to energy disruption.
 (2) Submittal of plans.--Not later than 12 months after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense 
 shall submit to the congressional defense committees--
 (A) an installation energy plan for each main 
 operating base on the list submitted under paragraph 
 (1); and
 (B) an assessment of the feasibility of reaching 
 the goal for the elimination of the use of Russian 
 energy pursuant to subsection (b) on that base, 
 including--
 (i) a description of the steps that would 
 be required to meet such goal; and
 (ii) an analysis of the effects such steps 
 would have on the national security of the 
 United States.
 (d) Content of Plans.--Each installation energy plan for a main 
operating base shall include each of the following with respect to that 
base:
 (1) An assessment of the energy resilience requirements, 
 resiliency gaps, and energy-related cybersecurity requirements 
 of the base, including with respect to operational technology, 
 control systems, and facilities-related control systems.
 (2) An identification of investments in technology required 
 to improve energy resilience, reduce demand, strengthen energy 
 conservation, and support mission readiness.
 (3) An identification of investments in infrastructure, 
 including microgrids, required to strengthen energy resilience 
 and mitigate risk due to grid disturbance.
 (4) Recommendations related to opportunities for the use of 
 renewable energy, clean energy, nuclear energy, and energy 
 storage projects to reduce dependence on natural gas.
 (5) An assessment of how the requirements and 
 recommendations included pursuant to paragraphs (2) through (4) 
 interact with the energy policies of the country where the base 
 is located, both at present and into the future.
 (e) Implementation of Plans.--
 (1) Deadline for implementation.--Not later than 30 days 
 after the date on which the Secretary submits an installation 
 energy plan for a base under subsection (c)(2), the Secretary 
 shall--
 (A) begin implementing the plan; and
 (B) provide to the congressional defense committees 
 a briefing on the contents of the plan and the strategy 
 of the Secretary for implementing the mitigation 
 measures identified in the plan.
 (2) Prioritization of certain projects.--In implementing an 
 installation energy plan for a base under this section, the 
 Secretary shall prioritize projects requested under section 
 2914 of title 10, United States Code, to mitigate assessed 
 risks and improve energy resilience, energy security, and 
 energy conservation at the base.
 (3) Nonapplication of certain other authorities.--
 Subsection (d) of section 2914 of title 10, United States Code, 
 shall not apply with respect to any project carried out 
 pursuant to this section or pursuant to an installation energy 
 plan for a base under this section.
 (f) Policy for Future Bases.--The Secretary of Defense shall 
establish a policy to ensure that any new military base in the area of 
responsibility of the United States European Command is established in 
a manner that proactively includes the consideration of energy 
security, energy resilience, and mitigation of risk due to energy 
disruption.
 (g) Annual Congressional Briefings.--The Secretary of Defense shall 
provide to the congressional defense committees annual briefings on the 
installation energy plans required under this section. Such briefings 
shall include an identification of each of the following:
 (1) The actions each main operating base is taking to 
 implement the installation energy plan for that base.
 (2) The progress that has been made toward reducing the 
 reliance of United States bases on Russian energy.
 (3) The steps being taken and planned across the future-
 years defense program to meet the goal of eliminating reliance 
 on Russian energy.

SEC. 1084. COMMISSION ON CIVILIAN HARM.

 (a) Establishment.--There is hereby established a commission, to be 
known as the ``Commission on Civilian Harm'' (in this section referred 
to as the ``Commission'').
 (b) Responsibilities.--
 (1) General responsibilities.--The Commission shall carry 
 out a study of the following:
 (A) Civilian harm resulting from, or incidental to, 
 the use of force by the United States Armed Forces that 
 occurred during the period of inquiry.
 (B) The policies, procedures, rules, and 
 regulations of the Department of Defense for the 
 prevention of, mitigation of, and response to civilian 
 harm that were in effect during the period of inquiry.
 (2) Particular duties.--In carrying out the general 
 responsibilities of the Commission under paragraph (1), the 
 Commission shall carry out the following:
 (A) Conduct an investigation into the record of the 
 United States with respect to civilian harm during the 
 period of inquiry, including by investigating a 
 representative sample of incidents of civilian harm 
 that occurred where the United States used military 
 force (including incidents confirmed by media and civil 
 society organizations and dismissed by the Department 
 of Defense) by conducting hearings, witness interviews, 
 document and evidence review, and site visits, when 
 practicable.
 (B) Identify the recurring causes of civilian harm, 
 as well as the factors contributing to civilian harm, 
 resulting from the use of force by United States Armed 
 Forces during the period of inquiry and assess whether 
 such causes and factors could be addressed and, if so, 
 whether they were resolved.
 (C) Assess the extent to which the United States 
 Armed Forces have implemented the recommendations of 
 Congress, the Department of Defense, other Government 
 agencies, or civil society organizations, or the 
 recommendations contained in studies sponsored or 
 commissioned by the United States Government, with 
 respect to the protection of civilians and efforts to 
 minimize, investigate, and respond to civilian harm 
 resulting from, or incidental to, United States 
 military operations.
 (D) Assess the responsiveness of the Department of 
 Defense to incidents of civilian harm and the practices 
 for responding to such incidents, including--
 (i) assessments;
 (ii) investigations;
 (iii) acknowledgment; and
 (iv) the provision of compensation 
 payments, including the use of congressionally 
 authorized ex gratia payments, assistance, and 
 other responses.
 (E) Assess the extent to which the United States 
 Armed Forces comply with the rules, procedures, 
 policies, memoranda, directives, and doctrine of the 
 Department of Defense for preventing, mitigating, and 
 responding to civilian harm.
 (F) Assess the extent to which the policies, 
 protocols, procedures, and practices of the Department 
 of Defense for preventing, mitigating, and responding 
 to civilian harm comply with applicable international 
 humanitarian law, applicable international human rights 
 law, and United States law, including the Uniform Code 
 of Military Justice.
 (G) Assess incidents of civilian harm that 
 occurred, or allegedly occurred, during the period of 
 inquiry, by--
 (i) determining whether any such incidents 
 were concealed, and if so by assessing the 
 actions taken to conceal;
 (ii) assessing the policies and procedures 
 for whistle-blowers to report such incidents;
 (iii) determining the extent of the 
 responsiveness and effectiveness of Inspector 
 General oversight, as applicable, regarding 
 reports of incidents of civilian harm; and
 (iv) assessing the accuracy of the United 
 States Government public civilian casualty 
 estimates.
 (H) Assess the short-, medium-, and long-term 
 consequences of incidents of civilian harm that 
 occurred during the period of inquiry on--
 (i) the affected communities, including 
 humanitarian consequences;
 (ii) the strategic interests of the United 
 States; and
 (iii) the foreign policy goals and 
 objectives of the United States.
 (I) Assess the extent to which the Department of 
 Defense Instruction on Responding to Civilian Harm in 
 Military Operations, as required by section 936 of the 
 John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for 
 Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115-232; 10 U.S.C. 134 
 note), addresses issues identified during the 
 investigation of the Commission and what further 
 measures are needed to address issues that the 
 Commission identifies during its operations.
 (J) Assess the extent to which United States 
 diplomatic goals and objectives were affected by the 
 incidents of civilian harm during the period of 
 inquiry.
 (c) Authorities.--
 (1) Security clearances.--The appropriate Federal 
 departments or agencies shall cooperate with the Commission in 
 expeditiously providing to the members and staff of the 
 Commission appropriate security clearances, to the extent 
 possible, pursuant to existing procedures and requirements. No 
 person shall be provided with access to classified information 
 under this section without the appropriate security clearances.
 (2) Hearings and evidence.--The Commission or, on the 
 authority of the Commission, any portion thereof, may, for the 
 purpose of carrying out this section--
 (A) hold such hearings and sit and act at such 
 times and places, take such testimony, receive such 
 evidence, and administer such oaths as the Commission, 
 or such portion thereof, may determine advisable; and
 (B) provide for the attendance and testimony of 
 such witnesses and the production of such books, 
 records, correspondence, memoranda, papers, and 
 documents as the Commission, or such portion thereof, 
 may determine advisable.
 (3) Inability to obtain documents or testimony.--In the 
 event that the Commission is unable to obtain testimony or 
 documents needed to conduct its work, the Commission shall 
 notify the congressional defense committees and appropriate 
 investigative authorities.
 (4) Access to information.--The Commission may secure 
 directly from the Department of Defense any information or 
 assistance that the Commission considers necessary to enable 
 the Commission to carry out the requirements of this section. 
 Upon receipt of a request of the Commission for information or 
 assistance, the Secretary of Defense shall furnish such 
 information or assistance expeditiously to the Commission. 
 Whenever information or assistance requested by the Commission 
 is unreasonably refused or not provided, the Commission shall 
 report the circumstances to Congress without delay.
 (d) Composition.--
 (1) Number and appointment.--The Commission shall be 
 composed of 12 members who are civilian individuals not 
 employed by the Federal Government.
 (2) Membership.--The members shall be appointed as follows:
 (A) The Majority Leader and the Minority Leader of 
 the Senate shall each appoint one member.
 (B) The Speaker of the House of Representatives and 
 the Minority Leader shall each appoint one member.
 (C) The Chair and the Ranking Member of the 
 Committee on Armed Services of the Senate shall each 
 appoint one member.
 (D) The Chair and the Ranking Member of the 
 Committee on Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives shall each appoint one member.
 (E) The Chair and the Ranking Member of the 
 Committee on Appropriations of the Senate shall each 
 appoint one member.
 (F) The Chair and Ranking Member of the Committee 
 on Appropriations of the House of Representatives shall 
 each appoint one member.
 (3) Chair and vice chair.--The Commission shall elect a 
 Chair and Vice Chair from among its members.
 (4) Deadline for appointment.--Members shall be appointed 
 to the Commission under paragraph (1) not later than 90 days 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (5) Nongovernmental appointees.--An individual appointed to 
 serve as a member of the Commission may not be an officer or 
 employee of the Federal Government or of any State or local 
 government or a member of the United States Armed Forces 
 serving on active duty.
 (e) Meetings.--
 (1) Initial meeting.--The Commission shall meet and begin 
 the operations of the Commission not later than 120 days after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) Quorum; vacancies.--After its initial meeting, the 
 Commission shall meet upon the call of the Chair or a majority 
 of its members. Five members of the Commission shall constitute 
 a quorum. Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its 
 powers, but shall be filled in the same manner in which the 
 original appointment was made.
 (f) Staffing.--
 (1) Appointment and compensation.--The Chair, in accordance 
 with rules agreed upon by the Commission, may appoint and fix 
 the compensation of a staff director and such other personnel 
 as may be necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its 
 functions, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United 
 States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, 
 and without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and 
 subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to 
 classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that no 
 rate of pay fixed under this paragraph may exceed the 
 equivalent of that payable for a position at level V of the 
 Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States 
 Code.
 (2) Personnel.--The Commission shall have the authorities 
 provided in section 3161 of title 5, United States Code, and 
 shall be subject to the conditions set forth in such section, 
 except to the extent that such conditions would be inconsistent 
 with the requirements of this section.
 (3) Personnel as federal employees.--
 (A) In general.--The staff director and any 
 personnel of the Commission who are employees shall be 
 employees under section 2105 of title 5, United States 
 Code, for purposes of chapters 63, 81, 83, 84, 85, 87, 
 89, and 90 of that title.
 (B) Members of commission.--Subparagraph (A) shall 
 not be construed to apply to members of the Commission.
 (4) Qualifications.--Commission personnel should have 
 experience and expertise in areas including--
 (A) international humanitarian law;
 (B) human rights law;
 (C) investigations;
 (D) humanitarian response;
 (E) United States military operations;
 (F) national security policy;
 (G) the languages, histories, and cultures of 
 regions that have experienced civilian harm during the 
 period of inquiry; and
 (H) other such areas the members of the Commission 
 determine necessary to carry out the responsibilities 
 of the Commission under subsection (b).
 (5) Contracting.--The Commission may, to such extent and in 
 such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts, enter into 
 contracts to enable the Commission to discharge its duties 
 under this section.
 (6) Consultant services.--The Commission is authorized to 
 procure the services of experts and consultants in accordance 
 with section 3109 of title 5, United States Code, but at rates 
 not to exceed the daily rate paid a person occupying a position 
 at level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of 
 title 5, United States Code.
 (g) Reports.--
 (1) Interim report.--Not later than June 1, 2024, the 
 Commission shall submit to the appropriate congressional 
 committees an interim report on the study referred to in 
 subsection (b)(1), including the results and findings of such 
 study as of that date.
 (2) Other reports.--The Commission may, from time to time, 
 submit to the appropriate congressional committees such other 
 reports on such study as the Commission considers appropriate.
 (3) Final report.--Not later than two years after the date 
 of the appointment of all of the members of the Commission 
 under subsection (d), the Commission shall submit to the 
 appropriate congressional committees a final report on such 
 study. The report shall include--
 (A) the findings of the Commission; and
 (B) recommendations based on the findings of the 
 Commission to improve the prevention, mitigation, 
 assessment, and investigation of incidents of civilian 
 harm.
 (4) Public availability.--The Commission shall make 
 publicly available on an appropriate internet website an 
 unclassified version of each report submitted by the Commission 
 under this subsection and shall ensure that such versions are 
 minimally redacted only for legitimately classified 
 information.
 (h) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the congressional defense committees;
 (B) the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Committee 
 on Oversight and Reform, the Committee on 
 Transportation and Infrastructure, and the Permanent 
 Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (C) the Committee on Foreign Relations, the 
 Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental 
 Affairs, the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation, and the Select Committee on 
 Intelligence of the Senate.
 (2) The term ``civilian harm'' means--
 (A) the death or injury of a civilian; or
 (B) destruction of civilian property.
 (3) The term ``period of inquiry'' means the period 
 beginning on the date of the enactment of the Authorization for 
 Use of Military Force (Public Law 107-40; 50 U.S.C. 1541 note) 
 and ending on the date of the enactment of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023.

SEC. 1085. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE CENTER FOR EXCELLENCE IN CIVILIAN HARM 
 MITIGATION.

 (a) Center for Excellence in Civilian Harm Mitigation.--
 (1) In general.--Chapter 7 of title 10, United States Code, 
 is amended by inserting after section 183a the following new 
 section:
``Sec. 184. Center for Excellence in Civilian Harm Mitigation
 ``(a) Establishment.--The Secretary of Defense shall operate a 
Center for Excellence in Civilian Harm Mitigation. The purpose of the 
center shall be to institutionalize and advance knowledge, practices, 
and tools for preventing, mitigating, and responding to civilian harm.
 ``(b) Purpose.--The Center shall be used to--
 ``(1) develop more standardized civilian-harm operational 
 reporting and data management processes to improve data 
 collection, sharing, and learning to enable the Department of 
 Defense to better learn from disparate investigations and 
 events;
 ``(2) develop, recommend, and review guidance, and the 
 implementation of guidance, on how the Department responds to 
 civilian harm;
 ``(3) develop recommended guidance for addressing civilian 
 harm across the full spectrum of armed conflict and for use in 
 doctrine and operational plans;
 ``(4) develop and recommend training and exercises for the 
 prevention and investigation of civilian harm;
 ``(5) develop a repository of civilian casualty and 
 civilian harm information; and
 ``(6) perform such other functions as the Secretary of 
 Defense may specify.
 ``(c) Annual Report.--The Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees, and make publicly available on an 
appropriate website of the Department, an annual report on the 
activities of the Center.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the 
 beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the 
 item relating to section 183a the following new item:

``184. Center for Excellence in Civilian Harm Mitigation.''.
 (b) Deadline for Establishment.--The Center for Excellence in 
Civilian Harm Mitigation, as required under section 184 of title 10, 
United States Code, as added by subsection (a), shall be established by 
not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (c) Report to Congress.--Not later than 90 days after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report on the establishment of such 
Center for Excellence in Civilian Harm Mitigation.

SEC. 1086. SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING NAMING A WARSHIP THE USS 
 FALLUJAH.

 It is the sense of Congress that the Secretary of the Navy should 
name a warship the ``USS Fallujah''.

SEC. 1087. STANDARDIZATION OF SECTIONAL BARGE CONSTRUCTION FOR 
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE USE ON RIVERS AND INTERCOASTAL 
 WATERWAYS.

 The Secretary of Defense shall ensure that any sectional barge used 
by the Department of Defense--
 (1) is built to a design that has been reviewed and 
 approved, to the extent possible, by the American Bureau of 
 Shipping, for the intended barge service, and using the rule 
 set of the American Bureau of Shipping for building and 
 classing steel vessels for service on rivers and intercoastal 
 waterways; and
 (2) has a deck design that provides for a minimum 
 concentrated load capacity of 10,000 pounds per square foot.

SEC. 1088. SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING NAMING WARSHIPS AFTER DECEASED 
 NAVY MEDAL OF HONOR RECIPIENTS.

 It is the sense of Congress that the Secretary of the Navy should 
name warships after deceased Navy recipients of the Medal of Honor from 
World War I to the present, who have not had a vessel named in their 
honor, as follows:
 (1) Tedford H. Cann.
 (2) Ora Graves.
 (3) John MacKenzie.
 (4) Patrick McGunigal.
 (5) John H. Balch.
 (6) Joel T. Boone.
 (7) Jesse W. Covington.
 (8) Edouard Izac.
 (9) David E. Hayden.
 (10) Alexander G. Lyle.
 (11) Francis E. Ormsbee, Jr.
 (12) Orlando H. Petty.
 (13) Oscar Schmidt, Jr.
 (14) Daniel A. J. Sullivan.
 (15) Frank M. Upton.
 (16) John O. Siegel.
 (17) Henry Breault.
 (18) Thomas J. Ryan.
 (19) George R. Cholister.
 (20) Thomas Eadie.
 (21) William R. Huber.
 (22) William Badders.
 (23) James H. McDonald.
 (24) John Mihalowski.
 (25) Samuel G. Fuqua.
 (26) William E. Hall.
 (27) Herbert Schonland.
 (28) Nathan G. Gordon.
 (29) Arthur M. Preston.
 (30) Eugene B. Fluckey.
 (31) Robert Bush.
 (32) Rufus G. Herring.
 (33) Franklin J. Pierce.
 (34) George L. Street.
 (35) George E. Wahlen.
 (36) William L. McGonagle.

SEC. 1089. SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING THE SERVICE AND CREW OF THE USS 
 OKLAHOMA CITY.

 (a) Findings.--Congress makes the following findings:
 (1) The USS Oklahoma City is a nuclear-powered fast attack 
 submarine named after Oklahoma City, the capital and most 
 populous city in Oklahoma, and is the second ship in the 
 history of the Navy to bear that name.
 (2) The motto of the USS Oklahoma City is ``The Sooner, The 
 Better'', which is a testament to both the spirit of the people 
 of Oklahoma City and the readiness of the 140-person crew of 
 the USS Oklahoma City.
 (3) The USS Oklahoma City was christened and launched on 
 November 2, 1985, sponsored by Linda M. Nickles, and was 
 commissioned for service on July 9, 1988, with Commander Kevin 
 John Reardon as the first commanding officer of the submarine.
 (4) Since the commissioning of the USS Oklahoma City, the 
 USS Oklahoma City has traveled around the globe multiple times 
 and has served in the Mediterranean, the Persian Gulf, the 
 Pacific, and, most recently, Apra Harbor, Guam.
 (5) In the aftermath of the April 19, 1995, bombing of the 
 Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City, the crew of 
 the USS Oklahoma City donated blood in support of the victims 
 of the deadliest act of home- grown terrorism in the history of 
 the United States, which resulted in the deaths of 168 
 individuals.
 (6) The USS Oklahoma City was the first Navy submarine to 
 transition from navigation using paper charts to an all-
 electronic navigation suite.
 (7) On Friday, May 20, 2022, the inactivation ceremony for 
 the USS Oklahoma City was held in Puget Sound Naval Shipyard to 
 honor nearly 34 years of service.
 (8) Throughout the career of the USS Oklahoma City, the USS 
 Oklahoma City supported a range of missions, including anti-
 surface warfare, anti-submarine warfare, targeted strike 
 missions, and intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance 
 missions.
 (b) Sense of Congress.--Congress recognizes the service of the Los 
Angeles-class attack submarine the USS Oklahoma City and the crew of 
the USS Oklahoma City, who served the United States with valor and 
bravery.

SEC. 1090. TARGET DATE FOR DEPLOYMENT OF 5G WIRELESS BROADBAND 
 INFRASTRUCTURE AT ALL MILITARY INSTALLATIONS.

 (a) Target Required.--The Secretary of Defense shall--
 (1) establish a target date by which the Secretary plans to 
 deploy 5G wireless broadband infrastructure at all military 
 installations; and
 (2) establish metrics, which shall be identical for each of 
 the military departments, to measure progress toward reaching 
 the target required by paragraph (1).
 (b) Annual Report.--The Secretary shall submit to the congressional 
defense committees and annual report that includes--
 (1) the metrics in use pursuant to subsection (a)(2); and
 (2) the progress of the Secretary in reaching the target 
 required by subsection (a)(1).
 (c) Termination.--No report shall be required under subsection (b) 
after the date that is five years after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 1091. INCLUSION OF AIR FORCE STUDENT PILOTS IN PERSONNEL METRICS 
 FOR ESTABLISHING AND SUSTAINING DINING FACILITIES AT AIR 
 EDUCATION AND TRAINING COMMANDS.

 The Secretary of the Air Force shall revise the personnel metrics 
with respect to establishing and sustaining dining facilities at Air 
Education and Training Commands in the United States to include Air 
Force student pilots.

SEC. 1092. SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING CONDUCT OF INTERNATIONAL NAVAL 
 REVIEW ON JULY 4, 2026.

 (a) Finding.--Congress finds that July 4, 2026, is the 250th 
birthday of the United States of America.
 (b) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the Navy 
should conduct an international naval review on July 4, 2026.

SEC. 1093. SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING CRISIS AT THE SOUTHWEST BORDER.

 (a) Findings.--Congress makes the following findings:
 (1) Noncitizens with criminal convictions are routinely 
 encountered at ports of entry and between ports of entry on the 
 Southwest land border.
 (2) Some of the inadmissible individuals encountered on the 
 southwest border are known or suspected terrorists.
 (3) Transnational criminal organizations routinely move 
 illicit drugs, counterfeit products, and trafficked humans 
 across the Southwest land border.
 (b) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the current level of illegal crossings and trafficking 
 on the Southwest border represents a national security threat;
 (2) the Department of Defense has rightly contributed 
 personnel to aid the efforts of the United States Government to 
 address the crisis at the Southwest border;
 (3) the National Guard and active duty members of the Armed 
 Forces are to be commended for their hard work and dedication 
 in their response to the crisis at the Southwest land border; 
 and
 (4) border security is a matter of national security and 
 the failure to address the crisis at the Southwest border 
 introduces significant risk to the people of the United States.

SEC. 1094. NATIONAL COMMISSION ON THE FUTURE OF THE NAVY.

 (a) National Commission on the Future of the Navy.--
 (1) Establishment.--There is established the National 
 Commission on the Future of the Navy (in this section referred 
 to as the ``Commission'').
 (2) Membership.--
 (A) Composition.--The Commission shall be composed 
 of eight members, of whom--
 (i) two shall be appointed by the Chairman 
 of the Committee on Armed Services of the 
 Senate, one of whom shall be a Member of the 
 Senate and one whom shall not be;
 (ii) two shall be appointed by the Ranking 
 Member of the Committee on Armed Services of 
 the Senate, one of whom shall be a Member of 
 the Senate and one whom shall not be;
 (iii) two shall be appointed by the 
 Chairman of the Committee on Armed Services of 
 the House of Representatives, one of whom shall 
 be a Member of the House of Representatives and 
 one whom shall not be; and
 (iv) two shall be appointed by the Ranking 
 Member of the Committee on Armed Services of 
 the House of Representatives, one of whom shall 
 be a Member of the House of Representatives and 
 one whom shall not be.
 (B) Appointment date.--The appointments of the 
 members of the Commission shall be made not later than 
 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (C) Effect of lack of appointment by appointment 
 date.--If one or more appointments under subparagraph 
 (A)(i) is not made by the appointment date specified in 
 subparagraph (B), the authority to make such 
 appointment or appointments shall expire, and the 
 number of members of the Commission shall be reduced by 
 the number equal to the number of appointments so not 
 made. If an appointment under subparagraph (A)(ii), 
 (iii), (iv), or (v) is not made by the appointment date 
 specified in subparagraph (B), the authority to make an 
 appointment under such subparagraph shall expire, and 
 the number of members of the Commission shall be 
 reduced by the number equal to the number otherwise 
 appointable under such subparagraph.
 (D) Expertise.--In making appointments under this 
 subsection, consideration should be given to 
 individuals with expertise in naval policy and 
 strategy, naval forces capability, naval nuclear 
 weapons, Naval force structure design, organization, 
 and employment, shipbuilding, and shipbuilding 
 infrastructure.
 (3) Period of appointment; vacancies.--Members shall be 
 appointed for the life of the Commission. Any vacancy in the 
 Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in 
 the same manner as the original appointment.
 (4) Chair and vice chair.--The Commission shall select a 
 Chair and Vice Chair from among its members.
 (5) Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date 
 on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the 
 Commission shall hold its initial meeting.
 (6) Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the 
 Chair.
 (7) Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission 
 shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may 
 hold hearings.
 (b) Duties of the Commission.--
 (1) Study on naval force structure.--
 (A) In general.--The Commission shall undertake a 
 comprehensive study of the structure of the Navy and 
 policy assumptions related to the size and force 
 mixture of the Navy, in order--
 (i) to make recommendations on the size and 
 force mixture of ships; and
 (ii) to make recommendations on the size 
 and force mixture of naval aviation;
 (B) Considerations.--In undertaking the study 
 required by paragraph (1), the Commission shall carry 
 out each of the following:
 (i) An evaluation and identification of a 
 structure for the Navy that--
 (I) has the depth and scalability 
 to meet current and anticipated 
 requirements of the combatant commands;
 (II) assumes three different 
 funding levels of 2023 appropriated 
 plus inflation; 2023 appropriated with 
 3-5 percent real growth; and 
 unconstrained to meet the needs for war 
 in the area of responsibility of United 
 States Indo-Pacific Command and the 
 area of responsibility of United States 
 European Command;
 (III) ensures that the Navy has the 
 capacity needed to support current and 
 anticipated homeland defense and 
 disaster assistance missions in the 
 United States;
 (IV) provides for sufficient 
 numbers of members of the Navy to 
 ensure a 115 percent manning level of 
 all deployed ships, similar to United 
 States Special Operations Command;
 (V) recommends a peacetime rotation 
 force operational tempo goals;
 (VI) recommends forward stationing 
 requirements; and
 (VII) manages strategic and 
 operational risk by making tradeoffs 
 among readiness, efficiency, 
 effectiveness, capability, and 
 affordability.
 (ii) An evaluation and identification of 
 combatant command demand and fleet size, 
 including recommendations to support a balance 
 of--
 (I) readiness;
 (II) training;
 (III) routine ship maintenance;
 (IV) personnel;
 (V) forward presence; and
 (VI) depot level ship maintenance.
 (iii) A detailed review of the cost of the 
 recapitalization of the Nuclear Triad in the 
 Department of Defense and its effect on the 
 Navy's budget.
 (iv) A review of Navy personnel policies 
 and training to determine changes needed across 
 all personnel activities to improve training 
 effectiveness and force tactical readiness and 
 reduce operational stress.
 (2) Study on shipbuilding and innovation.--
 (A) In general.--The Commission shall conduct a 
 detail study on shipbuilding, shipyards, and 
 integrating advanced information technologies such as 
 augmented reality an artificial intelligence on the 
 current fleet.
 (B) Considerations.--In conducting the study 
 required by subparagraph (A), the Commission shall 
 consider the following:
 (i) Recommendations for specific changes to 
 the Navy's Shipyard Infrastructure Optimization 
 Program, to include legislative changes to 
 providing a multi-year appropriation; 
 additionally provides recommendations for 
 bringing into the shipyards innovative 
 technology companies as part of the overall 
 modernization effort.
 (ii) Recommendations for changes to the 
 ship design and build program, to reduce risk, 
 reduce cost, accelerate build timelines, and 
 takes an incremental approach to change in 
 future ship building.
 (iii) Recommendations for changes to the 
 ship depot maintenance program in order to 
 reduce overhaul timelines, integrate current 
 technologies into ships, and reduces costs.
 (3) Report.--Not later than July 1, 2024, the Commission 
 shall submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate 
 and House of Representatives an unclassified report, with 
 classified annexes if necessary, that includes the findings and 
 conclusions of the Commission as a result of the studies 
 required by paragraphs (1) and (2), together with its 
 recommendations for such legislative actions as the Commission 
 considers appropriate in light of the results of the studies.
 (c) Powers of the Commission.--
 (1) Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit 
 and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and 
 receive such evidence as the Commission considers advisable to 
 carry out its duties under this section.
 (2) Information from federal agencies.--The Commission may 
 secure directly from any Federal department or agency such 
 information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out 
 its duties under this section. Upon request of the Chair of the 
 Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish 
 such information to the Commission.
 (3) Postal services.--The Commission may use the United 
 States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions 
 as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
 (d) Commission Personnel Matters.--
 (1) Compensation of members.--Each member of the Commission 
 who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government may 
 be compensated at a rate not to exceed the daily equivalent of 
 the annual rate of $155,400 for each day (including travel 
 time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of 
 the duties of the Commission. All members of the Commission who 
 are officers or employees of the United States or Members of 
 Congress shall serve without compensation in addition to that 
 received for their services as officers or employees of the 
 United States.
 (2) Travel expenses.--The members of the Commission shall 
 be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of 
 subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies 
 under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States 
 Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business 
 in the performance of services for the Commission.
 (3) Staff.--
 (A) In general.--The Chair of the Commission may, 
 without regard to the civil service laws and 
 regulations, appoint and terminate an executive 
 director and such other additional personnel as may be 
 necessary to enable the Commission to perform its 
 duties. The employment of an executive director shall 
 be subject to confirmation by the Commission.
 (B) Compensation.--The Chair of the Commission may 
 fix the compensation of the executive director and 
 other personnel without regard to chapter 51 and 
 subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States 
 Code, relating to classification of positions and 
 General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay 
 for the executive director and other personnel may not 
 exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive 
 Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
 (4) Detail of government employees.--Any Federal Government 
 employee may be detailed to the Commission without 
 reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or 
 loss of civil service status or privilege.
 (5) Procurement of temporary and intermittent services.--
 The Chair of the Commission may procure temporary and 
 intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United 
 States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the 
 daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for 
 level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such 
 title.
 (e) Termination of the Commission.--
 (1) In general.--The Commission shall terminate on the date 
 that is five years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) Inapplicability of termination requirement under 
 faca.--Section 14 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 
 U.S.C. App.) shall not apply to the activities of the 
 Commission under this section.

SEC. 1095. TRANSFER OF AIRCRAFT TO OTHER DEPARTMENTS FOR WILDFIRE 
 SUPPRESSION AND OTHER PURPOSES.

 Section 1098(c)(1) of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2014 (Public Law 113-66) is amended by inserting ``, search 
and rescue, or emergency operations pertaining to wildfires'' after 
``purposes''.

SEC. 1096. NATIONAL MUSEUM OF INTELLIGENCE AND SPECIAL OPERATIONS.

 (a) Recognition.--The privately-funded museum to honor the 
intelligence community and special operations forces that is planned to 
be constructed in Ashburn, Virginia, may be recognized, upon 
completion, as the ``National Museum of Intelligence and Special 
Operations''.
 (b) Purposes.--The purpose of recognizing the National Museum of 
Intelligence and Special Operations under subsection (a) are to--
 (1) commemorate the members of the intelligence community 
 and special operations forces who have been critical to 
 securing the Nation against enemies of the United States for 
 nearly a century;
 (2) preserve and support the historic role that the 
 intelligence community and special operations forces have 
 played, and continue to play, both in secrecy as well as 
 openly, to keep the United States and its values and way of 
 life secure; and
 (3) foster a greater understanding of the intelligence 
 community and special operations forces to ensure a common 
 understanding, dispel myths, recognize those who are not 
 otherwise able to be publicly recognized, and increase science, 
 technology, engineering, and math education through museum 
 programs designed to promote more interest and greater 
 diversity in recruiting with respect to the intelligence and 
 special operations career field.

SEC. 1097. AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION REGARDING PROCUREMENT OF 
 EQUIPMENT BY STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS THROUGH THE 
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE.

 Section 281 of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (d) as subsection (e); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (f) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(d) Availability of Information.--(1) The Secretary, in 
coordination with the Administrator of General Services, shall 
establish and maintain a publicly available internet website that 
provides up-to-date and comprehensive information, in a searchable 
format, on the purchase of equipment under the procedures established 
under subsection (a) and the recipients of such equipment.
 ``(2) The information required to be made publicly available under 
paragraph (1) includes all unclassified information pertaining to such 
purchases, including--
 ``(A) the catalog of equipment available for purchase under 
 subsection (c);
 ``(B) for each purchase of equipment under the procedures 
 established under subsection (a)--
 ``(i) the recipient State or unit of local 
 government;
 ``(ii) the purpose of the purchase;
 ``(iii) the type of equipment;
 ``(iv) the cost of the equipment; and
 ``(v) the administrative costs under subsection 
 (b); and
 ``(C) other information the Secretary determines is 
 necessary.
 ``(3) The Secretary shall update the information included on the 
internet website required under paragraph (1) on a quarterly basis.''.

SEC. 1098. REPORT ON PURCHASE AND USE BY DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE OF 
 LOCATION DATA GENERATED BY AMERICANS' PHONES AND THEIR 
 INTERNET METADATA.

 (a) Report Required.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees and make available to the public on an 
internet website of the Department of Defense a report that--
 (1) identifies each covered entity that is currently, or 
 during the five year period ending on the date of the enactment 
 of this Act was, without a court order--
 (A) obtaining in exchange for anything of value any 
 covered records; and
 (B) intentionally retaining or intentionally using 
 such covered records; and
 (2) for each covered entity identified pursuant to 
 paragraph (1), identifies--
 (A) each category of covered record the covered 
 entity, without a court order, is obtaining or 
 obtained, in exchange for anything of value;
 (B) whether the covered entity intentionally 
 retained or is intentionally retaining each category of 
 covered records pursuant to subparagraph (A);
 (C) whether the covered entity intentionally uses 
 or used each category of covered records identified 
 pursuant to subparagraph (A); and
 (D) whether such obtaining, retention, and use 
 ceased before the date of the enactment of this Act or 
 is ongoing.
 (b) Form.--The report submitted under subsection (a) shall be 
submitted in unclassified form.
 (c) Determination of Parties to a Communication.--In determining 
under this section whether a party to a communication is likely to be 
located inside or outside the United States, the Secretary shall 
consider the Internet Protocol (IP) address used by the party to the 
communication, but may also consider other information known to the 
Secretary.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered entities'' means the Defense 
 Agencies, Department of Defense activities, and components of 
 the Department that--
 (A) are under the authority, direction, and control 
 of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and 
 Security; or
 (B) over which the Under Secretary exercises 
 planning, policy, funding, or strategic oversight 
 authority.
 (2) The term ``covered records'' includes the following:
 (A) Location data generated by phones that are 
 likely to be located in the United States.
 (B) Domestic phone call records.
 (C) International phone call records.
 (D) Domestic text message records.
 (E) International text message records.
 (F) Domestic netflow records.
 (G) International netflow records.
 (H) Domestic Domain Name System records.
 (I) International Domain Name System records.
 (J) Other types of domestic internet metadata.
 (K) Other types of international internet metadata.
 (3) The term ``domestic'' means a telephone or an internet 
 communication in which all parties to the communication are 
 likely to be located in the United States.
 (4)(A) The term ``international'' means a telephone or an 
 internet communication in which one or more parties to the 
 communication are likely to be located in the United States and 
 one or more parties to the communication are likely to be 
 located outside the United States.
 (B) The term ``international'' does not include a telephone 
 or an internet communication in which all parties to the 
 communication are likely to be located outside the United 
 States.
 (5) The term ``obtain in exchange for anything of value'' 
 means to obtain by purchasing, to receive in connection with 
 services being provided for consideration, or to otherwise 
 obtain in exchange for consideration, including an access fee, 
 service fee, maintenance fee, or licensing fee.
 (6)(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the term 
 ``retain'' means the storage of a covered record.
 (B) The term ``retain'' does not include the temporary 
 storage of a covered record that will be, but has not yet been, 
 subjected to a process in which the covered record, which is 
 part of a larger compilation containing records that are not 
 covered records, are identified and deleted.
 (7)(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the term 
 ``use'', with respect to a covered record, includes analyzing, 
 processing, or sharing the covered record.
 (B) The term ``use'' does not include subjecting the 
 covered record to a process in which the covered record, which 
 is part of a larger compilation containing records that are not 
 covered records, are identified and deleted.

SEC. 1099. NATIONAL TABLETOP EXERCISE.

 (a) Requirement.--Not later than 365 days of enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary of Defense shall conduct a tabletop exercise designed to 
test the resiliency of the United States across all aspects of national 
power in the event of an invasion of a covered defense partner. The 
Secretary may conduct subsequent similar exercises on a biennial basis.
 (b) Planning and Preparation.--A tabletop exercise under this 
section shall be prepared by Department of Defense personnel.
 (c) Private Sector.--In accordance with applicable laws and 
regulations regarding the protection of national security information, 
the Secretary may invite non-Government individuals or entities to 
participate in a tabletop exercise under this section.
 (d) International Partners.--The Secretary may invite allies and 
partners of the United States to participate in a tabletop exercise 
under this section.
 (e) Observers.--The Secretary may invite representatives from the 
executive and legislative branches of the Federal Government to observe 
a tabletop exercise under this section.
 (f) Consultation Requirement.--The Secretary shall plan and execute 
a tabletop exercise under this section in consultation with the heads 
of the Federal departments and agencies who participate in the 
exercise, as determined by the Secretary.
 (g) Elements.--A tabletop exercise under this section shall be 
designed to evaluate the following elements:
 (1) The Federal Government response across all elements of 
 national power to an invasion of a covered defense partner.
 (2) The ability of the United States covered Armed Forces, 
 alongside allied and partner militaries, to defeat an invasion 
 of a covered defense partner.
 (3) The resilience of domestic critical infrastructure and 
 logistical chokepoints that may inhibit the mobility of the 
 United States covered Armed Forces in responding to an invasion 
 of a covered defense partner.
 (4) The ability of the United States to coordinate an 
 effective international public and private sector response.
 (h) Briefing.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date on 
 which at tabletop exercise is conducted under this section, the 
 Secretary shall provide to the appropriate congressional 
 committees a briefing on the exercise.
 (2) Contents.--A briefing under paragraph (1) shall 
 include--
 (A) an assessment of the decision-making, 
 capability, and response gaps observed in the tabletop 
 exercise;
 (B) recommendations to improve the response of the 
 United States across all elements of national power in 
 the case of an invasion of a covered defense partner;
 (C) recommendations to improve the domestic 
 resiliency and vulnerability of critical infrastructure 
 of the United States in the case of an invasion of a 
 covered defense partner; and
 (D) appropriate strategies to address the 
 recommendations identified in subparagraphs (B) and 
 (C).
 (i) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the Committee on Armed Services and the 
 Committee on Oversight and Reform of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Armed Services and the 
 Committee on Homeland Security and Government Affairs 
 of the Senate.
 (2) The term ``covered Armed Force'' means--
 (A) The Army.
 (B) The Navy.
 (C) The Marine Corps.
 (D) The Air Force.
 (E) The Space Force.
 (3) The term ``covered defense partner'' means a country 
 that is--
 (A) identified as a partner in the document 
 entitled ``Department of Defense Indo-Pacific Strategy 
 Report'' issued on June 1, 2019; and
 (B) located within 100 miles of the coast of a 
 strategic competitor.
 (4) The term ``tabletop exercise'' means an activity--
 (A) in which key personnel assigned high-level 
 roles and responsibilities are gathered to deliberate 
 various simulated emergency or rapid response 
 situations; and
 (B) that is designed to be used to assess the 
 adequacy of plans, policies, procedures, training, 
 resources, and relationships or agreements that guide 
 prevention of, response to, and recovery from a defined 
 event.

SEC. 1099A. GREENHOUSE GAS MITIGATION ACTIONS AND RESULTS DASHBOARD.

 The Secretary of Defense shall establish a dashboard on an 
appropriate website of the Department of Defense and make publicly 
available on such dashboard relevant information on investments in non-
GHG technologies, numbers of demonstrations completed, and information 
on links to commercialization in the civilian sector. Such dashboard 
shall be similar to the dashboard on the Department of Defense's 
internal Advana Dashboard.

SEC. 1099B. ADMINISTRATION OF RISK-BASED SURVEYS TO CERTAIN EDUCATIONAL 
 INSTITUTIONS.

 (a) Development Required.--The Secretary of Defense, acting though 
the Voluntary Education Institutional Compliance Program of the 
Department of Defense, shall develop a risk-based survey for oversight 
of covered educational institutions.
 (b) Scope.--
 (1) In general.--The scope of the risk-based survey 
 developed under subsection (a) shall be determined by the 
 Secretary.
 (2) Specific elements.--At a minimum the scope determined 
 under paragraph (1) shall include the following:
 (A) Rapid increase or decrease in enrollment.
 (B) Rapid increase in tuition and fees.
 (C) Complaints tracked and published from students 
 pursuing programs of education, based on severity or 
 volume of the complaints.
 (D) Student completion rates.
 (E) Indicators of financial stability.
 (F) Review of the advertising and recruiting 
 practices of the educational institution, including 
 those by third-party contractors of the educational 
 institution.
 (G) Matters for which the Federal Government or a 
 State Government brings an action in a court of 
 competent jurisdiction against an educational 
 institution, including matters in cases in which the 
 Federal Government or the State comes to a settled 
 agreement on such matters outside of the court.
 (c) Action or Event.--
 (1) Suspension.--If, pursuant to a risk-based survey under 
 this section. the Secretary determines that an educational 
 institution has experienced an action or event described in 
 paragraph (2), the Secretary may suspend the participation of 
 the institution in Department of Defense programs for a period 
 of two-year, or such other period as the Secretary determines 
 appropriate.
 (2) Action or event described.--An action or event 
 described in this paragraph is any of the following:
 (A) The receipt by an educational institution of 
 payments under the heightened cash monitoring level 2 
 payment method pursuant to section 487(c)(1)(B) of the 
 Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1094).
 (B) Punitive action taken by the Attorney General, 
 the Federal Trade Commission, or any other Federal 
 department or agency for misconduct or misleading 
 marketing practices that would violate the standards 
 defined by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
 (C) Punitive action taken by a State against an 
 educational institution.
 (D) The loss, or risk of loss, by an educational 
 institution of an accreditation from an accrediting 
 agency or association, including notice of probation, 
 suspension, an order to show cause relating to the 
 educational institution's academic policies and 
 practices or to its financial stability, or revocation 
 of accreditation.
 (E) The placement of an educational institution on 
 provisional certification status by the Secretary of 
 Education.
 (d) Database.--The Secretary shall establish a searchable database 
or use an existing system, as the Secretary considers appropriate, to 
serve as a central repository for information required for or collected 
during site visits for the risk-based survey developed under subsection 
(a), so as to improve future oversight of educational institutions.
 (e) Covered Educational Institution.--In this section, the term 
``covered educational institution'' means an educational institution 
selected by the Secretary based on quantitative, publicly available 
metrics indicating risk designed to separate low-risk and high-risk 
institutions, to focus on high-risk institutions.

SEC. 1099C. BRIEFING ON GUAM AND NORTHERN MARIANA ISLANDS MILITARY 
 CONSTRUCTION COSTS.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Defense shall provide to the congressional 
defense committees a briefing on Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands 
on the future military construction requirements based on emerging 
threats in the region, ongoing relocations of members of the Armed 
Forces, and the total amount of funds obligated or expended from 
amounts appropriated or otherwise made available and for implementing 
the Record of Decision for the relocation of Marine Corps. Such 
briefing shall include--
 (1) the projected funding for military construction through 
 fiscal year 2030;
 (2) the projected sustainment costs associated with 
 military infrastructure through fiscal year 2030; and
 (3) military infrastructure requirements through fiscal 
 year 2030 exceeding the current funding restriction.

SEC. 1099D. RESOURCES TO IMPLEMENT DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE POLICY ON 
 CIVILIAN HARM IN CONNECTION WITH UNITED STATES MILITARY 
 OPERATIONS.

 (a) Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to facilitate 
fulfillment of the requirements in section 936 of the John S. McCain 
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 
115-232; 10 U.S.C. 134 note).
 (b) Personnel.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall do the following:
 (1) Assign within each of the United States Central 
 Command, the United States Africa Command, the United States 
 Special Operations Command, the United States European Command, 
 the United States Southern Command, the United States Indo-
 Pacific Command, and the United States Northern Command not 
 fewer than two personnel who shall have primary responsibility 
 for the following in connection with military operations 
 undertaken by such command:
 (A) Providing guidance and oversight relating to 
 prevention of and response to harm to civilians, 
 promotion of observance of human rights, and the 
 protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure, 
 including ensuring implementation of the policy of the 
 Department of Defense on harm to civilians resulting 
 from United States military operations.
 (B) Overseeing civilian harm prevention, 
 mitigation, and response functions on behalf of the 
 commander of such command.
 (C) Receiving reports of harm to civilians and 
 conducting assessments and investigations relating to 
 such harm.
 (D) Analyzing incidents and trends with respect to 
 harm to civilians, identifying lessons learned, and 
 ensuring that lessons learned are incorporated into 
 updated command guidance and practices.
 (E) Offering condolences and amends for harm to 
 civilians, including ex gratia payments.
 (F) Ensuring the integration of activities relating 
 to civilian harm prevention, mitigation, and response, 
 the protection of civilians, and promotion of 
 observance of human rights in security cooperation 
 activities.
 (G) Working with the Center for Excellence 
 established under section 184 of title 10, United 
 States Code, as added by section 1085.
 (H) Consulting with non-governmental organizations 
 on civilian harm and human rights matters.
 (2) Assign within the Office of the Under Secretary of 
 Defense for Policy not fewer than two personnel who shall have 
 primary responsibility for implementing and overseeing 
 implementation by the components of the Department of Defense 
 of Department policy on harm to civilians resulting from United 
 States military operations.
 (3) Assign within the Joint Staff not fewer than two 
 personnel who shall have primary responsibility for the 
 following:
 (A) Overseeing implementation by the components of 
 the Department of Defense of Department policy on harm 
 to civilians resulting from United States military 
 operations.
 (B) Developing and sharing in the implementation of 
 such policy.
 (C) Communicating operational guidance on such 
 policy.
 (c) Training, Software, and Other Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--In each of fiscal years 2023 through 2025, 
 the Secretary of Defense and each Secretary of a military 
 department may obligate and expend, from amounts specified in 
 paragraph (2), not more than $5,000,000 for the following:
 (A) Training related to civilian harm prevention, 
 mitigation, and response.
 (B) Information technology equipment, support and 
 maintenance, and data storage, in order to implement 
 the policy of the Department relating to harms to 
 civilians resulting from United States military 
 operations as required by section 936 of the John S. 
 McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
 Year 2019.
 (2) Funds.--The funds for a fiscal year specified in this 
 subparagraph are funds as follows:
 (A) In the case of the Secretary of Defense, 
 amounts authorized to be appropriated for such fiscal 
 year for operation and maintenance, Defense-wide.
 (B) In the case of a Secretary of a military 
 department, amounts authorized to be appropriated for 
 such fiscal year for operation and maintenance for the 
 components of the Armed Forces under the jurisdiction 
 of such Secretary.

SEC. 1099E. AVAILABILITY OF MODULAR SMALL ARMS RANGE FOR ARMY RESERVE 
 IN PUERTO RICO.

 The Secretary of Army shall ensure that a modular small arms range 
is made available for the Army Reserve in Puerto Rico.

SEC. 1099F. INDEPENDENT EPIDEMIOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF HEALTH EFFECTS FROM 
 EXPOSURE TO DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE ACTIVITIES IN VIEQUES.

 (a) Agreement.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense shall seek to 
 enter into an agreement with the National Academies of 
 Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine for the National Academies 
 of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine to perform the services 
 covered by this section.
 (2) Timing.--The Secretary shall seek to enter into the 
 agreement described in paragraph (1) not later than 60 days 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Studies.--
 (1) In general.--Under an agreement between the Secretary 
 and the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
 Medicine under this section, the National Academies of 
 Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine shall carry out 
 epidemiological studies of the short-term, long-term, primary, 
 and secondary health effects caused or sufficiently correlated 
 to exposure to chemicals and radioactive materials from 
 activities of the Department of Defense in the communities of 
 concern, including any recommendations. In carrying out such 
 studies, the National Academies may incorporate the research 
 generated pursuant to funding opportunity number EPA-G2019-ORD-
 A1.
 (2) Elements.--The epidemiological studies carried out 
 under paragraph (1) and the recommendations developed under 
 such paragraph shall include the following:
 (A) A list of known contaminants and their 
 locations that have been left by the Department of 
 Defense in the communities of concern.
 (B) For each contaminant under subparagraph (A), an 
 epidemiological study that--
 (i) estimates the disease burden of current 
 and past residents of Vieques, Puerto Rico, 
 from such contaminants;
 (ii) incorporates historical estimates of 
 residents' groundwater exposure to contaminants 
 of concern that--
 (I) predate the completion of the 
 water-supply pipeline in 1978;
 (II) include exposure to 
 groundwater from Atlantic Weapons Fleet 
 Weapons Training Area ``Area of Concern 
 E'' and any other exposures that the 
 National Academies determine necessary;
 (III) consider differences between 
 the aquifers of Vieques; and
 (IV) consider the differences 
 between public and private wells, and 
 possible exposures from commercial or 
 agricultural uses; and
 (iii) includes estimates of current 
 residents' exposure to chemicals and radiation 
 which may affect the groundwater, food, air, or 
 soil, that--
 (I) include current residents' 
 groundwater exposure in the event of 
 the water-supply pipeline being 
 temporarily lost; and
 (II) is based on the actual 
 practices of residents in Vieques 
 during times of duress, for example the 
 use of wells for fresh water following 
 Hurricane Maria.
 (C) An identification of Military Munitions 
 Response Program sites that have not fully investigated 
 whether contaminants identified at other sites are 
 present or the degree of contamination present.
 (D) The production of separate, peer-reviewed 
 quality research into adverse health outcomes, 
 including cancer, from exposure to drinking water 
 contaminated with methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE).
 (E) Any other factors the National Academies 
 determine necessary.
 (c) Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than two years after the date of 
 the execution of an agreement under subsection (a), the 
 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 
 shall--
 (A) submit to the appropriate congressional 
 committees a report on the findings of the National 
 Academies under subsection (b); and
 (B) make available to the public on a publicly 
 accessible website a version of the report that is 
 suitable for public viewing.
 (2) Form.--The report submitted under paragraph (1)(A) 
 shall be submitted in unclassified form.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the congressional defense committees; and
 (B) the Committee on Natural Resources of the House 
 of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and 
 Natural Resources of the Senate.
 (2) The term ``communities of concern'' means Naval Station 
 Roosevelt Roads and the former Atlantic Fleet Weapons Training 
 Area.

SEC. 1099G. PARTICIPATION IN FEDERAL TRANSPORTATION INCENTIVE PROGRAM.

 The Secretary of Navy shall coordinate with the Secretary of 
Transportation and public shipyards to increase participation in the 
Federal Transportation Incentive Program by--
 (1) identifying current challenges in the Program 
 structure; and
 (2) implementing modifications that would reduce 
 impediments to use and provide incentives for increased use by 
 Federal employees.

SEC. 1099H. REPORT ON INITIATIVES OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE TO SOURCE 
 LOCALLY AND REGIONALLY PRODUCED FOODS FOR INSTALLATIONS 
 OF THE DEPARTMENT.

 (a) In General.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States 
shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report 
detailing--
 (1) current procurement practices of the Department of 
 Defense regarding food for consumption or distribution on 
 installations of the Department;
 (2) efforts by the Department of Defense to establish and 
 strengthen ``farm to base'' initiatives to source locally and 
 regionally produced foods, including seafood, for consumption 
 or distribution at installations of the Department;
 (3) efforts by the Department to collaborate with relevant 
 Federal agencies, including the Department of Veterans Affairs, 
 the Department of Agriculture, and the Department of Commerce, 
 to procure locally and regionally produced foods;
 (4) opportunities where procurement of locally and 
 regionally produced foods would be beneficial to members of the 
 Armed Forces, their families, military readiness by improving 
 health outcomes, and farmers near installations of the 
 Department;
 (5) barriers currently preventing the Department from 
 increasing procurement of locally and regionally produced foods 
 or preventing producers from partnering with nearby 
 installations of the Department; and
 (6) recommendations for how the Department can improve 
 procurement practices to increase offerings of locally and 
 regionally produced foods.
 (b) Appropriate Committees of Congress Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate committees of Congress'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on 
 Commerce, Science, and Transportation, and the Committee on 
 Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate; and
 (2) the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on 
 Natural Resources, and the Committee on Agriculture of the 
 House of Representatives.

SEC. 1099I. LIMITATIONS ON SALE AND USE OF PORTABLE HEATING DEVICES ON 
 MILITARY INSTALLATIONS.

 (a) Prohibition on Sale of Unsafe Portable Heating Devices at 
Commissary Stores and MWR Retail Facilities.--The Secretary of Defense 
shall ensure that the following types of portable heating devices are 
not sold at a commissary store or MWR retail facility:
 (1) Portable heating devices that do not comply with 
 applicable voluntary consumer product safety standards.
 (2) Portable heating devices that do not have an automatic 
 shutoff function.
 (b) Education for Families Living in Military Housing.--The 
commander of a military installation shall ensure that members of the 
Armed Forces assigned to that installation and living in military 
family housing, including military family housing acquired or 
constructed pursuant to subchapter IV of chapter 169 of title 10, 
United States Code, are provided with the recommendations of the 
Consumer Product Safety Commission for operating portable heating 
devices safely.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``MWR retail facility'' has the meaning given 
 that term in section 1063 of title 10, United States Code.
 (2) The term ``portable heating device'' means an electric 
 heater that--
 (A) is intended to stand unsupported 
 (freestanding);
 (B) can be moved from place to place within 
 conditioned areas in a structure;
 (C) is connected to a nominal 120 VAC electric 
 supply through a cord and plug;
 (D) transfers heat by radiation, convection, or 
 both (either natural or forced); and
 (E) is intended for residential use.

SEC. 1099J. TRAINING AND INFORMATION FOR FIRST RESPONDERS REGARDING AID 
 FOR VICTIMS OF TRAUMA-RELATED INJURIES.

 The Secretary of Defense shall ensure that the Department of 
Defense shares best practices with, and offers training to, State and 
local first responders regarding how to most effectively aid victims 
who experience trauma-related injuries.

SEC. 1099K. PUBLIC AVAILABILITY OF COST OF CERTAIN MILITARY OPERATIONS 
 TO EACH UNITED STATES TAXPAYER.

 Section 1090 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2017 (Public Law 114-328) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(a) Publication of Information.--'' 
 before ``The Secretary of Defense'';
 (2) by striking ``of each of the wars in Afghanistan, Iraq, 
 and Syria.'' and inserting ``of any overseas contingency 
 operation conducted by the United States Armed Forces on or 
 after September 18, 2001.''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subsections:
 ``(b) Display of Information.--The information required to be 
posted under subsection (a) shall--
 ``(1) be posted directly on the website of the Department 
 of Defense, in an accessible and clear format;
 ``(2) include corresponding documentation as links or 
 attachments; and
 ``(3) include, for each overseas contingency operation--
 ``(A) both the total cost to each taxpayer, and the 
 cost to each taxpayer for each fiscal year, of 
 conducting the overseas contingency operation;
 ``(B) a list of countries where the overseas 
 contingency operation has taken place.
 ``(c) Updates.--The Secretary shall ensure that all the information 
required to be posted under subsection (a) is updated by not later than 
90 days after the last day of each fiscal year.
 ``(d) Contingency Operation Defined.--In this section, the term 
`contingency operation' has the meaning given such term in section 
101(a)(13) of title 10, United States Code.''.

SEC. 1099L. REPORT ON DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE PLAN TO ACHIEVE STRATEGIC 
 OVERMATCH IN THE INFORMATION ENVIRONMENT.

 (a) In General.--Not later than April 1, 2023, the Secretary of 
Defense shall submit to the Committee on Armed Services of the House of 
Representatives a report on the following:
 (1) A plan, developed in cooperation with relevant Federal 
 agencies, for the Department of Defense to achieve strategic 
 overmatch in the information environment, including--
 (A) modifications and updates to existing policy or 
 guidance;
 (B) a description of impacts to future budget 
 requests and funding priorities;
 (C) updates to personnel policies to ensure the 
 recruitment, promotion, retention, and compensation 
 incentives for individuals with the necessary skills in 
 the information environment; and
 (D) a description of improvements to the 
 collection, prioritization, and analysis of open source 
 intelligence to better inform the understanding of 
 competitors and adversaries to the Department of 
 Defense in the information environment.
 (2) A description of any initiatives, identified in 
 cooperation with relevant Federal agencies, that the Secretary 
 of Defense and such Federal agencies may undertake to assist 
 and incorporate allies and partner countries of the United 
 States into efforts to achieve strategic overmatch in the 
 information environment.
 (3) A description of other actions, including funding 
 modifications, policy changes, or congressional action, are 
 necessary to further enable widespread and sustained 
 information environment operations of the Department of Defense 
 relevant Federal agencies.
 (4) Any other matters the Secretary of Defense determines 
 appropriate.
 (b) Information Environment Defined.--In this section, the term 
``information environment'' has the meaning given in the publication of 
the Department of Defense titled ``Joint Concept for Operating in the 
Information Environment (JCOIE)'' dated July 25, 2018.

 TITLE XI--CIVILIAN PERSONNEL MATTERS

SEC. 1101. ONE-YEAR EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY TO WAIVE ANNUAL LIMITATION 
 ON PREMIUM PAY AND AGGREGATE LIMITATION ON PAY FOR 
 FEDERAL CIVILIAN EMPLOYEES WORKING OVERSEAS.

 Subsection (a) of section 1101 of the Duncan Hunter National 
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2009 (Public Law 110-417; 122 
Stat. 4615), as most recently amended by section 1112 of the National 
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81), is 
further amended by striking ``through 2022'' and inserting ``through 
2023''.

SEC. 1102. ONE-YEAR EXTENSION OF TEMPORARY AUTHORITY TO GRANT 
 ALLOWANCES, BENEFITS, AND GRATUITIES TO CIVILIAN 
 PERSONNEL ON OFFICIAL DUTY IN A COMBAT ZONE.

 Paragraph (2) of section 1603(a) of the Emergency Supplemental 
Appropriations Act for Defense, the Global War on Terror, and Hurricane 
Recovery, 2006 (Public Law 109-234; 120 Stat. 443), as added by section 
1102 of the Duncan Hunter National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2009 (Public Law 110-417; 122 Stat. 4616) and as most recently 
amended by section 1114 of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81), is further amended by striking 
``2023'' and inserting ``2024''.

SEC. 1103. STANDARDIZED CREDENTIALS FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS OF THE 
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE.

 (a) Standardized Credentials Required.--Not later than 180 days 
after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense 
shall--
 (1) develop a standardized identification credential for 
 Defense law enforcement officers;
 (2) issue such credential to each such officer at no cost 
 to such officer; and
 (3) ensure that any Department of Defense common access 
 card issued to such an officer clearly identifies the officer 
 as a Defense law enforcement officer.
 (b) Defense Law Enforcement Officer Defined.--In this section, the 
term ``Defense law enforcement officer'' means a member of the Armed 
Forces or civilian employee of the Department of Defense who--
 (1) is authorized by law to engage in or supervise the 
 prevention, detection, investigation, or prosecution of, or the 
 incarceration of any person for, any violation of law;
 (2) has statutory powers of arrest or apprehension under 
 section 807(b) of title 10, United States Code (article 7(b) of 
 the Uniform Code of Military Justice); and
 (3) is authorized by the Department to carry a firearm.

SEC. 1104. TEMPORARY EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY TO PROVIDE SECURITY FOR 
 FORMER DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE OFFICIALS.

 During the period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act 
and ending on January 1, 2024, subsection (b) of section 714 of title 
10, United States Code, shall be applied--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(A), by substituting ``a serious and 
 credible threat'' for ``an imminent and credible threat'';
 (2) in paragraph (2)(B), by substituting ``three years'' 
 for ``two years''; and
 (3) in paragraph (6)(A), by substituting--
 (A) ``congressional leadership and the 
 congressional defense committees'' for ``the 
 congressional defense committees''; and
 (B) by substituting ``the justification for such 
 determination, scope of the protection, and the 
 anticipated cost and duration of such protection'' for 
 ``the justification for such determination''.

SEC. 1105. INCREASE IN POSITIONS ELIGIBLE FOR ENHANCED PAY AUTHORITY 
 FOR CERTAIN RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY POSITIONS IN SCIENCE 
 AND TECHNOLOGY REINVENTION LABORATORIES.

 (a) In General.--Section 4094(e)(2) of title 10, United States 
Code, is amended by striking ``five'' and inserting ``ten''.
 (b) Application.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take 
effect immediately after section 851(a).

SEC. 1106. GAO REPORT ON FEDERAL EMPLOYEE PAID LEAVE ACT.

 (a) In General.--Not later than January 1, 2024, the Comptroller 
General shall submit, to the Committee on Armed Services and the 
Committee on Oversight and Reform of the House of Representatives, a 
report on the implementation of the Federal Employee Paid Leave Act 
(subtitle A of title LXXVI of division F of Public Law 116-92), the 
Paid Parental Leave Technical Corrections Act of 2020 (section 1103 of 
Public Law 116-283, and the amendments made by such Acts.
 (b) Contents.--The report under subsection (a) shall review, 
assess, and provide recommendations, as appropriate, on the following:
 (1) Any data collected or used by the Office of Personnel 
 Management on the use of paid parental leave provided by such 
 Acts and the amendments made by such Acts.
 (2) Office of Personnel Management and Federal agencies' 
 efforts to make employees aware of paid parental leave under 
 such Acts and the amendments made by such Acts, address any 
 obstacles to the use of paid parental leave, and monitor the 
 impact of such Acts and the amendments made by such Acts on 
 hiring, recruitment, and retention of employees.

SEC. 1107. INFLATION BONUS PAY FOR CERTAIN DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 CIVILIAN EMPLOYEES.

 (a) General Schedule and Other Employees.--
 (1) Bonus.--On the first day of the first pay period 
 beginning on or after January 1, 2023, and on the first day of 
 each of the months of February through December in calendar 
 year 2023, the Secretary of Defense shall pay a bonus to each 
 civilian employee of the Department of Defense who--
 (A) is under the General Schedule and has an annual 
 rate of basic pay equal to $45,000 or less; or
 (B) is within the civil service (as that term is 
 defined in section 2101 of title 5, United States 
 Code), is not under the General Schedule or the Federal 
 Wage System, and has an annual rate of basic pay equal 
 to $45,000 or less.
 (2) Amount.--The monthly bonus paid under paragraph (1) to 
 an employee shall be in an amount determined by the Secretary, 
 based on prevailing economic conditions that adversely affect 
 civilian employees, but in no case shall be less than 2.4 
 percent of the annual rate of basic pay in effect for such 
 employee on the first day of such pay period.
 (b) Federal Wage System Employees.--
 (1) Bonus.--On the first day that the wage survey 
 adjustment for fiscal year 2023 takes effect in October of that 
 fiscal year, and on and the first day of each of the months of 
 November through September of such fiscal year, the Secretary 
 of Defense shall pay a bonus to each civilian employee of the 
 Department of Defense who--
 (A) is a prevailing rate employee under the Federal 
 Wage System; and
 (B) has an annual rate of basic pay equal to 
 $45,000 or less.
 (2) Amount.--The monthly bonus paid under paragraph (1) to 
 an employee shall be in an amount determined by the Secretary, 
 based on prevailing economic conditions that adversely affect 
 civilian employees, but in no case shall be less than 2.4 
 percent of the annual rate of basic pay in effect for such 
 employee on the first day that such adjustment takes effect.
 (c) Limitations.--A bonus under subsection (a) or (b)--
 (1) may not be paid after December 1, 2023, or September 1, 
 2023, respectively; and
 (2) shall not be considered to be basic pay of an employee 
 for any purpose.

SEC. 1108. FLEXIBLE WORKPLACE PROGRAMS.

 Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary of Defense shall ensure that each Secretary of a military 
department modifies any guidance relating to flexible workplace 
programs to ensure that maximum practicable flexibility is allowed to 
permit employees to perform all or a portion of the duties of such 
employees--
 (1) at a telecommuting center established pursuant to 
 statute; or
 (2) through the use of flexible workplace services 
 agreements.

SEC. 1109. GAO STUDY ON FEDERAL WAGE SYSTEM PARITY WITH LOCAL 
 PREVAILING WAGE RATE.

 (a) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall 
review the parity between the Federal Wage System and the prevailing 
wage rate for wage grade workers who maintain or repair, or help 
support those who maintain or repair U.S. Navy ships or submarines 
and--
 (1) are employed at the four U.S. Navy public shipyards;
 (2) are employed at domestic U.S. naval bases with 
 facilities to maintain or repair U.S. Navy ships or submarines 
 and are in vicinity of competitive private defense industry; or
 (3) are employed at domestic U.S. naval bases with 
 facilities to maintain or repair U.S. Navy ships or submarines 
 and are located within close commuting distance from a high-
 income area, such that wage grade jobs must compete with other 
 means of employment for workers of equivalent skillsets and 
 academic achievement.
 (b) Other Requirements.--Such study shall also review--
 (1) the Government-wide administration of the Federal Wage 
 System including the regulations, policies, and processes for 
 establishing or modifying geographic boundaries of local wage 
 areas;
 (2) the process of developing and administering the local 
 wage surveys and setting wage schedules for all Federal Wage 
 System workers including those discussed in subsection (a);
 (3) the use of Federal contractors to perform work skills 
 and occupational duties comparable to Federal Wage System 
 employees at the four U.S. Navy public shipyards and domestic 
 U.S. naval bases with facilities to maintain or repair U.S. 
 Navy ships or submarines;
 (4) the legal framework of the Federal Wage System and 
 Department of Defense and Office of Personnel Management 
 policies as compared to the General Schedule system, including 
 differences in the local wage areas for workers, such as 
 occupational coverage, geographic coverage, pay ranges, pay 
 increase limits, and pay adjustment cycles; and
 (5) provide recommendations to Congress, as applicable, 
 based on the findings.
 (c) Briefing.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Comptroller General shall provide a briefing to the 
Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of Representatives 
on preliminary findings of such review.
 (d) Report.--The Comptroller General shall submit to the committees 
identified in subsection (c) a report containing the final results of 
such review on a date agreed to at the time of the briefing.

SEC. 1110. TEMPORARY AUTHORITY TO APPOINT RETIRED MEMBERS OF THE ARMED 
 FORCES TO MILITARY HEALTH SYSTEM POSITIONS.

 Section 1108 of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283) is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``subsection (b)'' and 
 inserting ``subsection (b) or (c)'';
 (2) in the heading for subsection (b), by striking 
 ``Positions'' and inserting ``Defense Industrial Base Facility 
 Positions'';
 (3) by redesignating subsections (c), (d), and (e) as 
 subsections (d), (e), and (f), respectively;
 (4) by inserting after subsection (b) the following:
 ``(c) Military Health System Positions.--The positions in the 
Department described in this subsection are medical or health 
profession positions in the civil service within the military health 
system.''; and
 (5) by amending subsection (f) (as redesignated by 
 paragraph (3) of this section) to read as follows:
 ``(f) Definitions.--In this section--
 ``(1) the term `civil service' has the meaning given that 
 term in section 2101 of title 5, United States Code;
 ``(2) the term `medical or health profession positions' 
 means any position listed under any of paragraphs (1), (2), or 
 (3) of section 7401 of title 38, United States Code; and
 ``(3) the terms `member' and `Secretary concerned' have the 
 meaning given those terms in section 101 of title 37, United 
 States Code.''.

SEC. 1111. PURCHASE OF RETIRED HANDGUNS BY FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT 
 OFFICERS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Administrator of General Services shall establish a 
program under which a Federal law enforcement officer may purchase a 
retired handgun from the Federal agency that issued the handgun to such 
officer.
 (b) Limitations.--A Federal law enforcement officer may purchase a 
retired handgun under subsection (a) if--
 (1) the purchase is made during the 6-month period 
 beginning on the date the handgun was so retired;
 (2) with respect to such purchase, the officer has passed a 
 background check within 30 days of purchase under the national 
 instant criminal background check system established under the 
 Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act; and
 (3) with respect to such purchase, the officer is in good 
 standing with the Federal agency that employs such officer.
 (c) Cost.--A handgun purchased under this section shall be sold at 
the fair market value for such handgun taking into account the age and 
condition of the handgun.
 (d) Sense of Congress on Use of Funds.--It is the sense of Congress 
that any amounts received by the Government from the sale of a handgun 
under this section should be transferred and used to fund evidence-
based gun violence prevention or gun safety education and training 
programs.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section--
 (1) the term ``Federal law enforcement officer'' has the 
 meaning given that term in section 115(c)(1) of title 18, 
 United States Code;
 (2) the term ``handgun'' has the meaning given that term in 
 section 921(a) of title 18, United States Code; and
 (3) the term ``retired handgun'' means any handgun that has 
 been declared surplus by the applicable agency.

SEC. 1112. NATIONAL DIGITAL RESERVE CORPS.

 (a) In General.--Subpart I of part III of title 5, United States 
Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new chapter:

 ``CHAPTER 104--NATIONAL DIGITAL RESERVE CORPS

``Sec. 10401. Definitions.
``Sec. 10402. Establishment.
``Sec. 10403. Organization.
``Sec. 10404. Assignments.
``Sec. 10405. Reservist continuing education.
``Sec. 10406. Congressional reports.

``SEC. 10401. DEFINITIONS.

 ``In this chapter:
 ``(1) Active reservist.--The term `active reservist' means 
 a reservist holding a position to which such reservist has been 
 appointed under section 10403(c)(2).
 ``(2) Administrator.--The term `Administrator' means the 
 Administrator of the General Services Administration.
 ``(3) Covered executive agency.--The term `covered 
 Executive agency' means an Executive agency as defined in 
 section 105, except that such term includes the United States 
 Postal Service, the Postal Regulatory Commission, and the 
 Executive Office of the President.
 ``(4) Program.--The term `Program' means the program 
 established under section 10402(a).
 ``(5) Reservist.--The term `reservist' means an individual 
 who is a member of the National Digital Reserve Corps.

``SEC. 10402. ESTABLISHMENT.

 ``(a) Establishment.--There is established in the General Services 
Administration a program to establish, manage, and assign a reserve of 
individuals with relevant skills and credentials, to be know as the 
`National Digital Reserve Corps', to help address the digital and 
cybersecurity needs of covered Executive agencies.
 ``(b) Implementation.--
 ``(1) Guidance.--Not later than six months after the date 
 of the enactment of this section, the Administrator shall issue 
 guidance for the National Digital Reserve Corps, which shall 
 include procedures for coordinating with covered Executive 
 agencies to--
 ``(A) identify digital and cybersecurity needs 
 which may be addressed by the National Digital Reserve 
 Corps; and
 ``(B) assign active reservists to address such 
 needs.
 ``(2) Recruitment and initial assignments.--Not later than 
 one year after the date of the enactment of this section, the 
 Administrator shall begin recruiting reservists and assigning 
 active reservists under the Program.

``SEC. 10403. ORGANIZATION.

 ``(a) Administration.--
 ``(1) In general.--The National Digital Reserve Corps shall 
 be administered by the Administrator.
 ``(2) Responsibilities.--In carrying out the Program, the 
 Administrator shall--
 ``(A) establish standards for serving as a 
 reservist, including educational attainment, 
 professional qualifications, and background checks;
 ``(B) ensure the standards established under 
 subparagraph (A) are met;
 ``(C) recruit individuals to the National Digital 
 Reserve Corps;
 ``(D) activate and deactivate reservists as 
 necessary;
 ``(E) coordinate with covered Executive agencies 
 to--
 ``(i) determine the digital and 
 cybersecurity needs which reservists shall be 
 assigned to address;
 ``(ii) ensure reservists have access, 
 resources, and equipment required to address 
 digital and cybersecurity needs which such 
 reservists are assigned to address; and
 ``(iii) analyze potential assignments for 
 reservists to determine outcomes, develop 
 anticipated assignment timelines, and identify 
 covered Executive agency partners;
 ``(F) ensure reservists acquire and maintain 
 appropriate security clearances; and
 ``(G) determine what additional resources, if any, 
 are required to successfully implement the Program.
 ``(b) National Digital Reserve Corps Participation.--
 ``(1) Service obligation agreement.--
 ``(A) In general.--An individual may become a 
 reservist only if such individual enters into a written 
 agreement with the Administrator to become a reservist.
 ``(B) Contents.--The agreement under subparagraph 
 (A) shall--
 ``(i) require the individual seeking to 
 become a reservist to serve as a reservist for 
 a three-year period, during which such 
 individual shall serve not less then 30 days 
 per year as an active reservist; and
 ``(ii) set forth all other the rights and 
 obligations of the individual and the General 
 Services Administration.
 ``(2) Compensation.--The Administrator shall determine the 
 appropriate compensation for service as a reservists, except 
 that the annual pay for such service shall not exceed $10,000.
 ``(3) Employment protections.--The Secretary of Labor shall 
 prescribe such regulations as necessary to ensure the 
 reemployment, continuation of benefits, and non-discrimination 
 in reemployment of active reservists, provided that such 
 regulations shall include, at a minimum, those rights and 
 obligations set forth under chapter 43 of title 38.
 ``(4) Penalties.--
 ``(A) In general.--A reservist that fails to accept 
 an appointment under subsection (c)(2) or fails to 
 carry out the duties assigned to reservist under such 
 an appointment shall, after notice and an opportunity 
 to be heard--
 ``(i) cease to be a reservist; and
 ``(ii) be fined an amount equal to the sum 
 of--
 ``(I) an amount equal to the 
 amounts, if any, paid under section 
 10405 with respect to such reservist, 
 and
 ``(II) the difference between the 
 amount of compensation such reservist 
 would have received if the reservist 
 completed the entire term of service as 
 a reservist agreed to in the agreement 
 described in paragraph (1) and the 
 amount of compensation such reservist 
 has received under such agreement.
 ``(B) Exception.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply 
 with respect to a failure of a reservist to accept an 
 appointment under subsection (c)(2) or to carry out the 
 duties assigned to the reservist under such an 
 appointment if--
 ``(i) the failure was due to the death or 
 disability of such reservist; or
 ``(ii) the Administrator determines that 
 subparagraph (A) should not apply with respect 
 to the failure.
 ``(c) Hiring Authority.--
 ``(1) Corps leadership.--The Administrator may appoint, 
 without regard to the provisions of subchapter I of chapter 33 
 (other than sections 3303 and 3328) of this title, qualified 
 candidates to positions in the competitive service in the 
 General Service Administration for which the primary duties are 
 related to the management or administration of the National 
 Digital Reserve Corps, as determined by the Administrator.
 ``(2) Corps reservists.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Administrator may appoint, 
 without regard to the provisions of subchapter I of 
 chapter 33 (other than sections 3303 and 3328), 
 qualified reservists to temporary positions in the 
 competitive service for the purpose of assigning such 
 reservists under section 10404 and to otherwise carry 
 out the National Digital Reserve Corps.
 ``(B) Appointment limits.--
 ``(i) In general.--The Administrator may 
 not appoint an individual under this paragraph 
 if, during the 365-day period ending on the 
 date of such appointment, such individual has 
 been an officer or employee of the executive or 
 legislative branch of the United States 
 Government, of any independent agency of the 
 United States, or of the District of Columbia 
 for not less than 130 days.
 ``(ii) Automatic appointment termination.--
 The appointment of an individual under this 
 paragraph shall terminate upon such individual 
 being employed as an officer or employee of the 
 executive or legislative branch of the United 
 States Government, of any independent agency of 
 the United States, or of the District of 
 Columbia for 130 days during the previous 365 
 days.
 ``(C) Employee status.--An individual appointed 
 under this paragraph shall be considered a special 
 Government employee (as such term is defined in section 
 202(a) of title 18).
 ``(D) Additional employees.--Individuals appointed 
 under this paragraph shall be in addition to any 
 employees of the General Services Administration whose 
 duties relate to the digital or cybersecurity needs of 
 the General Services Administration.

``SEC. 10404. ASSIGNMENTS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Administrator may assign active reservists 
to address the digital and cybersecurity needs of covered Executive 
agencies, including cybersecurity services, digital education and 
training, data triage, acquisition assistance, guidance on digital 
projects, development of technical solutions, and bridging public needs 
and private sector capabilities.
 ``(b) Assignment-specific Access, Resources, Supplies, or 
Equipment.--The head of a covered Executive agency shall, to the extent 
practicable, provide each active reservist assigned to address a 
digital or cybersecurity need of such covered Executive agency under 
subsection (a) with any specialized access, resources, supplies, or 
equipment required to address such digital or cybersecurity need.
 ``(c) Duration.--An assignment of an individual under subsection 
(a) shall terminate on the earlier of--
 ``(1) the date determined by the Administrator;
 ``(2) the date on which the Administrator receives 
 notification of the decision of the head of the covered 
 Executive agency, the digital or cybersecurity needs of which 
 such individual is assigned to address under subsection (a), 
 that such assignment should terminate; or
 ``(3) the date on which the assigned individual ceases to 
 be an active reservist.

``SEC. 10405. RESERVIST CONTINUING EDUCATION.

 ``(a) In General.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, 
the Administrator may pay for reservists to acquire training and 
receive continuing education, including attending conferences and 
seminars and obtaining certifications, that will enable reservists to 
more effectively meet the digital and cybersecurity needs of covered 
Executive agencies.
 ``(b) Application.--The Administrator shall establish a process for 
reservists to apply for the payment of reasonable expenses related to 
the training or continuing education described in subsection (a).
 ``(c) Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this section, and annually thereafter, the Administrator 
shall submit to Congress a report on the expenditures under this 
subsection.

``SEC. 10406. CONGRESSIONAL REPORTS.

 ``Not later than two years after the date of the enactment of this 
section, and annually thereafter, the Administrator shall submit to 
Congress a report on the Program, including--
 ``(1) the number of reservists;
 ``(2) a list of covered Executive agencies that have 
 submitted requests for support from the National Digital 
 Reserve Corps;
 ``(3) the nature and status of such requests; and
 ``(4) with respect to each such request to which active 
 reservists have been assigned and for which work by the 
 National Digital Reserve Corps has concluded, an evaluation of 
 such work and the results of such work by--
 ``(A) the covered Executive agency that submitted 
 the request; and
 ``(B) the reservists assigned to such request.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters for part III of 
title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item 
related to chapter 103 the following new item:

``104. National Digital Reserve Corps....................... 10403''.
 (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated $30,000,000, to remain available until fiscal year 2023, 
to carry out the program established under section 10402(a) of title 5, 
United States Code, as added by this section.

 Subtitle B--PLUM Act of 2022

SEC. 1121. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Periodically Listing Updates 
to Management Act of 2022'' or the ``PLUM Act of 2022''.

SEC. 1122. ESTABLISHMENT OF PUBLIC WEBSITE ON GOVERNMENT POLICY AND 
 SUPPORTING POSITIONS.

 (a) Establishment.--
 (1) In general.--Subchapter I of chapter 33 of title 5, 
 United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the 
 following:
``Sec. 3330f. Government policy and supporting position data
 ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Agency.--The term `agency' means--
 ``(A) any Executive agency, the United States 
 Postal Service, and the Postal Regulatory Commission; 
 and
 ``(B) the Executive Office of the President and any 
 component within that Office (including any successor 
 component), including--
 ``(i) the Council of Economic Advisors;
 ``(ii) the Council on Environmental 
 Quality;
 ``(iii) the National Security Council;
 ``(iv) the Office of the Vice President;
 ``(v) the Office of Policy Development;
 ``(vi) the Office of Administration;
 ``(vii) the Office of Management and 
 Budget;
 ``(viii) the Office of the United States 
 Trade Representative;
 ``(ix) the Office of Science and Technology 
 Policy;
 ``(x) the Office of National Drug Control 
 Policy; and
 ``(xi) the White House Office, including 
 the White House Office of Presidential 
 Personnel.
 ``(2) Appointee.--The term `appointee'--
 ``(A) means an individual serving in a policy and 
 supporting position; and
 ``(B) includes an individual serving in such a 
 position temporarily in an acting capacity in 
 accordance with--
 ``(i) sections 3345 through 3349d (commonly 
 referred to as the `Federal Vacancies Reform 
 Act of 1998');
 ``(ii) any other statutory provision 
 described in section 3347(a)(1); or
 ``(iii) a Presidential appointment 
 described in section 3347(a)(2).
 ``(3) Covered website.--The term `covered website' means 
 the website established and maintained by the Director under 
 subsection (b).
 ``(4) Director.--The term `Director' means the Director of 
 the Office of Personnel Management.
 ``(5) Policy and supporting position.--The term `policy and 
 supporting position'--
 ``(A) means any position at an agency, as 
 determined by the Director, that, but for this section 
 and section 2(b)(3) of the PLUM Act of 2022, would be 
 included in the publication entitled `United States 
 Government Policy and Supporting Positions' (commonly 
 referred to as the `Plum Book'); and
 ``(B) may include--
 ``(i) a position on any level of the 
 Executive Schedule under subchapter II of 
 chapter 53, or another position with an 
 equivalent rate of pay;
 ``(ii) a general position (as defined in 
 section 3132(a)(9)) in the Senior Executive 
 service;
 ``(iii) a position in the Senior Foreign 
 Service;
 ``(iv) a position of a confidential or 
 policy-determining character under schedule C 
 of subpart C of part 213 of title 5, Code of 
 Federal Regulations, or any successor 
 regulation; and
 ``(v) any other position classified at or 
 above level GS-14 of the General Schedule (or 
 equivalent) that is excepted from the 
 competitive service by law because of the 
 confidential or policy-determining nature of 
 the position duties.
 ``(b) Establishment of Website.--Not later than 1 year after the 
date of enactment of the PLUM Act of 2022, the Director shall 
establish, and thereafter the Director shall maintain, a public website 
containing the following information for the President in office on the 
date of establishment and for each subsequent President:
 ``(1) Each policy and supporting position in the Federal 
 Government, including any such position that is vacant.
 ``(2) The name of each individual who--
 ``(A) is serving in a position described in 
 paragraph (1); or
 ``(B) previously served in a position described in 
 such paragraph under the applicable President.
 ``(3) Information on--
 ``(A) any Government-wide or agency-wide limitation 
 on the total number of positions in the Senior 
 Executive Service under section 3133 or 3134 or the 
 total number of positions under schedule C of subpart C 
 of part 213 of title 5, Code of Federal Regulations; 
 and
 ``(B) the total number of individuals occupying 
 such positions.
 ``(c) Contents.--With respect to any policy and supporting position 
listed on the covered website, the Director shall include--
 ``(1) the agency, and agency component, (including the 
 agency and bureau code used by the Office of Management and 
 Budget) in which the position is located;
 ``(2) the name of the position;
 ``(3) the name of the individual occupying the position (if 
 any);
 ``(4) the geographic location of the position, including 
 the city, State or province, and country;
 ``(5) the pay system under which the position is paid;
 ``(6) the level, grade, or rate of pay;
 ``(7) the term or duration of the appointment (if any);
 ``(8) the expiration date, in the case of a time-limited 
 appointment;
 ``(9) a unique identifier for each appointee;
 ``(10) whether the position is vacant; and
 ``(11) for any position that is vacant--
 ``(A) for a position for which appointment is 
 required to be made by the President, by and with the 
 advice and consent of the Senate, the name of the 
 acting official; and
 ``(B) for other positions, the name of the official 
 performing the duties of the vacant position.
 ``(d) Current Data.--For each agency, the Director shall indicate 
in the information on the covered website the date that the agency last 
updated the data.
 ``(e) Format.--The Director shall make the data on the covered 
website available to the public at no cost over the internet in a 
searchable, sortable, downloadable, and machine-readable format so that 
the data qualifies as an open Government data asset, as defined in 
section 3502 of title 44.
 ``(f) Authority of Director.--
 ``(1) Information required.--Each agency shall provide to 
 the Director any information that the Director determines 
 necessary to establish and maintain the covered website, 
 including the information uploaded under paragraph (4).
 ``(2) Requirements for agencies.--Not later than 1 year 
 after the date of enactment of the PLUM Act of 2022, the 
 Director shall issue instructions to agencies with specific 
 requirements for the provision or uploading of information 
 required under paragraph (1), including--
 ``(A) specific data standards that an agency shall 
 follow to ensure that the information is complete, 
 accurate, and reliable;
 ``(B) data quality assurance methods; and
 ``(C) the timeframe during which an agency shall 
 provide or upload the information, including the 
 timeframe described under paragraph (4).
 ``(3) Public accountability.--The Director shall identify 
 on the covered website any agency that has failed to provide--
 ``(A) the information required by the Director;
 ``(B) complete, accurate, and reliable information; 
 or
 ``(C) the information during the timeframe 
 specified by the Director.
 ``(4) Annual updates.--
 ``(A) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the 
 date on which the covered website is established, and 
 not less than once during each year thereafter, the 
 head of each agency shall upload to the covered website 
 updated information (if any) on--
 ``(i) the policy and supporting positions 
 in the agency;
 ``(ii) the appointees occupying such 
 positions in the agency; and
 ``(iii) the former appointees who served in 
 such positions in the agency under the 
 President then in office.
 ``(B) Supplement not supplant.--Information 
 provided under subparagraph (A) shall supplement, not 
 supplant, previously provided information under that 
 subparagraph.
 ``(5) OPM help desk.--The Director shall establish a 
 central help desk, to be operated by not more than 1 full-time 
 employee, to assist any agency with implementing this section.
 ``(6) Coordination.--The Director may designate 1 or more 
 agencies to participate in the development, establishment, 
 operation, and support of the covered website. With respect to 
 any such designation, the Director may specify the scope of the 
 responsibilities of the agency so designated.
 ``(7) Data standards and timing.--The Director shall make 
 available on the covered website information regarding data 
 collection standards, quality assurance methods, and time 
 frames for reporting data to the Director.
 ``(8) Regulations.--The Director may prescribe regulations 
 necessary for the administration of this section.
 ``(g) Responsibility of Agencies.--
 ``(1) Provision of information.--Each agency shall comply 
 with the instructions and guidance issued by the Director to 
 carry out this section, and, upon request of the Director, 
 shall provide appropriate assistance to the Director to ensure 
 the successful operation of the covered website in the manner 
 and within the timeframe specified by the Director under 
 subsection (f)(2).
 ``(2) Ensuring completeness, accuracy, and reliability.--
 With respect to any submission of information described in 
 paragraph (1), the head of an agency shall include--
 ``(A) an explanation of how the agency ensured the 
 information is complete, accurate, and reliable; and
 ``(B) a certification that the information is 
 complete, accurate, and reliable.
 ``(h) Information Verification.--
 ``(1) Confirmation.--
 ``(A) In general.--On the date that is 90 days 
 after the date on which the covered website is 
 established, the Director, in coordination with the 
 White House Office of Presidential Personnel, shall 
 confirm that the information on the covered website is 
 complete, accurate, reliable, and up-to-date.
 ``(B) Certification.--On the date on which the 
 Director makes a confirmation under subparagraph (A), 
 the Director shall publish on the covered website a 
 certification that the confirmation has been made.
 ``(2) Authority of director.--In carrying out paragraph 
 (1), the Director may--
 ``(A) request additional information from an 
 agency; and
 ``(B) use any additional information provided to 
 the Director or the White House Office of Presidential 
 Personnel for the purposes of verification.
 ``(3) Public comment.--The Director shall establish a 
 process under which members of the public may provide feedback 
 regarding the accuracy of the information on the covered 
 website.
 ``(i) Data Archiving.--
 ``(1) In general.--As soon as practicable after a 
 transitional inauguration day (as defined in section 3349a), 
 the Director, in consultation with the Archivist of the United 
 States, shall archive the data that was compiled on the covered 
 website for the preceding presidential administration.
 ``(2) Public availability.--The Director shall make the 
 data described in paragraph (1) publicly available over the 
 internet--
 ``(A) on, or through a link on, the covered 
 website;
 ``(B) at no cost; and
 ``(C) in a searchable, sortable, downloadable, and 
 machine-readable format.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for 
 subchapter I of chapter 33 of title 5, United States Code, is 
 amended by adding at the end the following:

``3330f. Government policy and supporting position data.''.
 (b) Other Matters.--
 (1) Definitions.--In this subsection, the terms ``agency'', 
 ``covered website'', ``Director'', and ``policy and supporting 
 position'' have the meanings given those terms in section 3330f 
 of title 5, United States Code, as added by subsection (a).
 (2) GAO review and report.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 date on which the Director establishes the covered website, the 
 Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct a review 
 of, and issue a briefing or report on, the implementation of 
 this subtitle and the amendments made by this subtitle, which 
 shall include--
 (A) the quality of data required to be collected 
 and whether the data is complete, accurate, timely, and 
 reliable;
 (B) any challenges experienced by agencies in 
 implementing this subtitle and the amendments made by 
 this subtitle; and
 (C) any suggestions or modifications to enhance 
 compliance with this subtitle and the amendments made 
 by this subtitle, including best practices for agencies 
 to follow.
 (3) Sunset of plum book.--Beginning on January 1, 2026--
 (A) the covered website shall serve as the public 
 directory for policy and supporting positions in the 
 Government; and
 (B) the publication entitled ``United States 
 Government Policy and Supporting Positions'', commonly 
 referred to as the ``Plum Book'', shall no longer be 
 issued or published.
 (4) Funding.--
 (A) In general.--No additional amounts are 
 authorized to be appropriated to carry out this 
 subtitle or the amendments made by this subtitle.
 (B) Other funding.--The Director shall carry out 
 this subtitle and the amendments made by this subtitle 
 using amounts otherwise available to the Director.

 TITLE XII--MATTERS RELATING TO FOREIGN NATIONS

 Subtitle A--Assistance and Training

SEC. 1201. MODIFICATIONS TO ANNUAL REPORTS ON SECURITY COOPERATION.

 (a) Defense Institution Capacity Building.--Section 332(b)(2) of 
title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by striking ``quarter'' each place it appears; and
 (2) by striking ``Each fiscal year'' and inserting ``Not 
 later than February 1 of each year''.
 (b) Annual Report on Security Cooperation Activities.--Section 386 
of title 10, United States Code, is amended to read as follows:
``Sec. 386. Annual report
 ``(a) Annual Report Required.--Not later than March 31 of each 
year, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the appropriate 
congressional committees a report that sets forth, on a country-by-
country basis, an overview of security cooperation activities carried 
out by the Department of Defense during the fiscal year preceding the 
fiscal year in which such report is submitted, pursuant to one or more 
of the authorities listed in subsection (b).
 ``(b) Elements of Report.--Each report required under subsection 
(a) shall include, with respect to each country and for the entirety of 
the period covered by such report, the following:
 ``(1) A narrative summary that provides a--
 ``(A) brief overview of the primary security 
 cooperation objectives for the activities encompassed 
 by the report;
 ``(B) a description of how such activities advance 
 the theater security cooperation strategy of the 
 relevant geographic combatant command; and
 ``(C) a description of efforts to prevent civilian 
 harm and human rights violations.
 ``(2) A table that includes an aggregated amount with 
 respect to each of the following:
 ``(A) With respect to amounts made available for 
 section 332(a) of this title, the Department of Defense 
 cost to provide any Department personnel as advisors to 
 a ministry of defense.
 ``(B) With respect to amounts made available for 
 section 332(b) of this title, the Department of Defense 
 incremental execution costs to conduct activities under 
 such section.
 ``(C) With respect to section 333 of this title, 
 the value of all programs for which notice is required 
 by such section.
 ``(D) With respect to amounts made available for 
 section 341 of this title, the Department of Defense 
 manpower and travel costs to conduct bi-lateral state 
 partnership program engagements with the partner 
 country.
 ``(E) With respect to amounts made available for 
 section 342 of this title, the Department of Defense-
 funded, foreign-partner travel costs to attend a 
 regional center activity that began during the period 
 of the report.
 ``(F) With respect to amounts made available for 
 section 345 of this title, the estimated Department of 
 Defense execution cost to complete all training that 
 began during the period of the report.
 ``(G) With respect to amounts made available for 
 section 2561 of this title, the planned execution cost 
 of completing humanitarian assistance activities for 
 the partner country that were approved for the period 
 of the report.
 ``(3) A table that includes aggregated totals for each of 
 the following:
 ``(A) Pursuant to section 311 of this title, the 
 number of personnel from a partner country assigned to 
 a Department of Defense organization.
 ``(B) Pursuant to section 332(a) of this title, the 
 number of Department of Defense personnel assigned as 
 advisors to a ministry of defense.
 ``(C) Pursuant to section 332(b) of this title, the 
 number of activities conducted by the Department of 
 Defense.
 ``(D) The number of new programs carried out during 
 the period of the report that required notice under 
 section 333 of this title.
 ``(E) With respect to section 341 of this title, 
 the number of Department of Defense bilateral state 
 partnership program engagements with the partner 
 country that began during the period of the report.
 ``(F) With respect to section 342 of this title, 
 the number of partner country officials who 
 participated in regional center activity that began 
 during the period of the report.
 ``(G) Pursuant to the authorities under sections 
 343, 345, 348, 349, 350 and 352 of this title, the 
 total number of partner country personnel who began 
 training during the period of the report.
 ``(H) Pursuant to section 347 of this title, the 
 number of cadets from the partner country that were 
 enrolled in the Service Academies during the period of 
 the report.
 ``(I) Pursuant to amounts made available to carry 
 out section 2561 of this title, the number of new 
 humanitarian assistance projects funded through the 
 Overseas Humanitarian Disaster and Civic Aid account 
 that were approved during the period of the required 
 report.
 ``(4) A table that includes the following:
 ``(A) For each person from the partner country 
 assigned to a Department of Defense organization 
 pursuant to section 311 of this title--
 ``(i) whether the person is a member of the 
 armed forces or a civilian;
 ``(ii) the rank of the person (if 
 applicable); and
 ``(iii) the component of the Department of 
 Defense and location to which such person is 
 assigned.
 ``(B) With respect to each civilian employee of the 
 Department of Defense or member of the armed forces 
 that was assigned, pursuant to section 332(a) of this 
 title, as an advisor to a ministry of defense during 
 the period of the report, a description of the object 
 of the Department of Defense for such support and the 
 name of the ministry or regional organization to which 
 the employee or member was assigned.
 ``(C) With respect to each activity commenced under 
 section 332(b) of this title during the period of the 
 report--
 ``(i) the name of the supported ministry or 
 regional organization;
 ``(ii) the component of the Department of 
 Defense that conducted the activity;
 ``(iii) the duration of the activity; and
 ``(iv) a description of the objective of 
 the activity.
 ``(D) For each program that required notice to 
 Congress under section 333 of this title during the 
 period of the report--
 ``(i) the units of the national security 
 forces of the foreign country to which 
 assistance was provided;
 ``(ii) the type of operational capability 
 assisted;
 ``(iii) a description of the nature of the 
 assistance being provided; and
 ``(iv) the estimated cost included in the 
 notice provided for such assistance.
 ``(E) With respect to each activity commenced under 
 section 341 of this title during the period of the 
 report--
 ``(i) a description of the activity;
 ``(ii) the duration of the activity;
 ``(iii) the number of participating members 
 of the National Guard; and
 ``(iv) the number of participating 
 personnel of the foreign country.
 ``(F) With respect to each activity of a Regional 
 Center for Security Studies commenced under section 342 
 of this title during the period of the report--
 ``(i) a description of the activity;
 ``(ii) the name of the Regional Center that 
 sponsored the activity;
 ``(iii) the location and duration of the 
 training; and
 ``(iv) the number of officials from the 
 foreign country who participated in the 
 activity.
 ``(G) With respect to each training event that 
 commenced under section 343, 345, 348, 349, 350, or 352 
 of this title during the period of the report--
 ``(i) a description of the training;
 ``(ii) the location and duration of the 
 training; and
 ``(iii) the number of personnel of the 
 foreign country trained.
 ``(H) With respect to each new project approved 
 under section 2561 of this title during the period of 
 the report and funded through the Overseas Humanitarian 
 Disaster and Civic Aid account--
 ``(i) the title of the project;
 ``(ii) a description of the assistance to 
 be provided; and
 ``(iii) the anticipated cost to provide 
 such assistance.''.

SEC. 1202. MODIFICATION TO AUTHORITY TO PROVIDE SUPPORT FOR CONDUCT OF 
 OPERATIONS.

 Notwithstanding subsection (g)(1) of section 331 of title 10, 
United States Code, the aggregate value of all logistic support, 
supplies, and services provided under paragraphs (1), (4), and (5) of 
subsection (c) of such section 331 in each of fiscal years 2023 and 
2024 may not exceed $950,000,000.

SEC. 1203. EXTENSION AND MODIFICATION OF AUTHORITY FOR REIMBURSEMENT OF 
 CERTAIN COALITION NATIONS FOR SUPPORT PROVIDED TO UNITED 
 STATES MILITARY OPERATIONS.

 Section 1233 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2008 (Public Law 110-181; 122 Stat. 393) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``for the period 
 beginning on October 1, 2021, and ending on December 31, 2022'' 
 and inserting ``for the period beginning on October 1, 2022, 
 and ending on December 31, 2023''; and
 (2) in subsection (d)--
 (A) by striking ``during the period beginning on 
 October 1, 2021, and ending on December 31, 2022'' and 
 inserting ``during the period beginning on October 1, 
 2022, and ending on December 31, 2023''; and
 (B) by striking ``$60,000,000'' and inserting 
 ``$30,000,000''.

SEC. 1204. MODIFICATION TO AUTHORITY TO BUILD CAPACITY OF FOREIGN 
 SECURITY FORCES.

 Subsection (a) of section 333 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``or other counter-
 illicit trafficking operations'' before the period at the end; 
 and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(10) Operations or activities that maintain or enhance 
 the climate resilience of military or security infrastructure 
 supporting security cooperation programs under this section.''.

SEC. 1205. PUBLIC REPORT ON MILITARY CAPABILITIES OF CHINA, IRAN, NORTH 
 KOREA, AND RUSSIA.

 (a) Public Report on Military Capabilities of Covered Countries.--
Chapter 23 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting 
after section 486 the following new section:
``Sec. 487. Public report on military capabilities of covered countries
 ``(a) Annual Report.--Not later than January 30 of each year 
through 2027, the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the 
Director of National Intelligence, shall make publicly available on the 
internet website of the Department of Defense a report on the military 
capabilities of each covered country.
 ``(b) Matters Included.--Each report under subsection (a) shall 
include, with respect to each covered country--
 ``(1) an assessment of the grand strategy, security 
 strategy, and military strategy, including the goals and trends 
 of such strategies;
 ``(2) an estimate of the funds spent annually on developing 
 conventional forces, unconventional forces, and nuclear and 
 missile forces;
 ``(3) an assessment of the size and capabilities of the 
 conventional forces;
 ``(4) an assessment of the size and capability of the 
 unconventional forces and related activities;
 ``(5) with respect to the forces described in subsection 
 (d)(3)(B), an assessment of the types and amount of support, 
 including--
 ``(A) lethal and non-lethal supplies; and
 ``(B) training provided; and
 ``(6) an assessment of the capabilities of the nuclear and 
 missile forces and related activities, including--
 ``(A) the nuclear weapon capabilities;
 ``(B) the ballistic missile forces; and
 ``(C) the development of the nuclear and missile 
 forces since the preceding year.
 ``(c) Form.--Each report under subsection (a) shall be made 
available in unclassified form, consistent with the protection of 
intelligence sources and methods.
 ``(d) Nonduplication of Efforts.--The Secretary of Defense may use 
or add to any existing reports completed by the Secretary of Defense or 
Director of National Intelligence to respond to the reporting 
requirement under subsection (a).
 ``(e) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `conventional forces' means, with respect to 
 a covered country, military forces designed to conduct 
 operations in sea, air, space, cyberspace, the electromagnetic 
 spectrum, or land, other than unconventional forces, ballistic 
 forces, and cruise missile forces.
 ``(2) The term `covered country' means each of the 
 following:
 ``(A) China.
 ``(B) Iran.
 ``(C) North Korea.
 ``(D) Russia.
 ``(3) The term `unconventional forces', with respect to a 
 covered country--
 ``(A) means forces that carry out missions 
 typically associated with special operations forces; 
 and
 ``(B) includes any organization that--
 ``(i) has been designated by the Secretary 
 of State as a foreign terrorist organization 
 under section 219 of the Immigration and 
 Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1189); or
 ``(ii) has been assessed by the Secretary 
 of Defense as being willing to act under the 
 control or at the direction of such covered 
 country.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents for chapter 23 of 
title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item 
related to section 486 the following item:

``487. Public report on military capabilities of covered countries.''.

SEC. 1206. SECURITY COOPERATION PROGRAMS WITH FOREIGN PARTNERS TO 
 ADVANCE WOMEN, PEACE, AND SECURITY.

 (a) In General.--Subchapter V of chapter 16 of title 10, United 
States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section:
``Sec. 353. Women, peace, and security programs
 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense, with the concurrence 
of the Secretary of State, may conduct or support security cooperation 
programs and activities involving the national military or national-
level security forces of a foreign country or other covered personnel 
to advise, train, and educate such forces or such other covered 
personnel with respect to--
 ``(1) the recruitment, employment, development, retention, 
 promotion, and meaningful participation in decision making of 
 women and underrepresented groups;
 ``(2) sexual harassment, sexual assault, domestic abuse, 
 and other forms of sexual and gender-based violence that 
 disproportionately impact women and underrepresented groups;
 ``(3) the integration of gender analysis into security 
 sector policy, planning, exercises, and training;
 ``(4) the requirements of women and underrepresented 
 groups, including providing appropriate gender sensitive 
 equipment and facilities;
 ``(5) the development of educational curriculum on women, 
 peace, and security within professional military education 
 programming and other security forces training;
 ``(6) the establishment, training, and development of 
 gender advisory workforces within women, peace, and security 
 programs; and
 ``(7) the implementation of activities described in this 
 subsection.
 ``(b) Payment of Expenses for Advancement of Objectives.--The 
Secretary of Defense may pay for the travel, transportation, and 
subsistence expenses of national military and national-level security 
forces of a foreign country or other covered personnel that the 
Secretary considers necessary for the advancement of the objectives of 
this section.
 ``(c) Other Covered Personnel Defined.--In this section, the term 
`other covered personnel' means personnel of--
 ``(1) the ministry of defense, or a governmental entity 
 with a similar function, of a foreign country;
 ``(2) a regional organization with a security mission;
 ``(3) personnel of a friendly foreign government other than 
 personnel of national security forces; or
 ``(4) personnel of a non-governmental organization.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
subchapter V of chapter 16 of title 10, United States Code, is amended 
by adding at the end the following new item:

``353. Women, peace, and security programs.''.
 (c) Women, Peace, and Security Curricula for Pre-commissioning 
Education Programs and Joint Professional Military Education.--
 (1) Integration of women, peace, and security curricula.--
 The Secretary of Defense shall develop a plan to incorporate 
 women, peace, and security studies as a component of the core 
 curricula of pre-commissioning education programs and joint 
 professional military education programs to further 
 implementation of the Women, Peace, and Security Act of 2017 
 (Public Law 115-68; 22 U.S.C. 2151 note), including an analysis 
 of the resources needed to develop a standardized women, peace, 
 and security curriculum.
 (2) Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to 
 the appropriate congressional committees a report detailing the 
 plan developed under paragraph (1).
 (3) Briefing.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall brief 
 the appropriate congressional committees on the report under 
 paragraph (2) detailing the plan developed under paragraph (1).
 (4) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) The term ``appropriate congressional 
 committees'' means--
 (i) the Committee on Armed Services and the 
 Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (ii) the Committee on Armed Services and 
 the Committee on Foreign Relations of the 
 Senate.
 (B) The term ``joint professional military 
 education program'' means a program or course of 
 instruction established pursuant to a provision of 
 chapter 107 of title 10, United States Code.
 (C) The term ``pre-commissioning education 
 program'' means a program or course of instruction 
 established for--
 (i) the United States Military Academy;
 (ii) the United States Naval Academy; or
 (iii) the United States Air Force Academy.
 (d) Plan for Development and Management of Gender Advisor 
Workforce.--
 (1) Plan required.--The Secretary of Defense shall develop 
 and implement a plan to standardize the role and duties of the 
 gender advisor workforce of the Department of Defense 
 responsible for supporting the implementation of the Women, 
 Peace, and Security Act of 2017 (Public Law 115-68; 22 U.S.C. 
 2151 note).
 (2) Elements.--The plan required by paragraph (1) shall 
 consist of such elements relating to the development and 
 management of the gender advisor workforce, including an 
 assessment of--
 (A) the funds, resources, and authorities needed to 
 establish and develop the gender advisor role into a 
 full-time, billeted, and resourced position across 
 organizations within the Department of Defense, 
 including the military departments, Armed Forces, the 
 combatant commands, and defense agencies and field 
 activities;
 (B) the actions the Secretary will take to develop 
 and standardize position descriptions of the gender 
 advisor workforce, including gender advisors and gender 
 focal points, across organizations within the 
 Department;
 (C) the Department's existing training programs for 
 gender advisors and gender focal points, including the 
 creation and funding of a credentialing program for 
 gender advisors to foster the development of a 
 professionalized cadre of gender advisors.
 (D) a self-assessment of the Department's progress 
 in implementing a fully trained cadre of gender 
 advisors appropriately placed within the Department and 
 a plan to address any gaps or deficiencies; and
 (E) the actions the Secretary will carry out for 
 incorporating the total amount of expenditures and 
 proposed appropriations necessary to support the 
 program, projects, and activities of the gender advisor 
 workforce into future years defense program submissions 
 to Congress.
 (3) Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to 
 the appropriate congressional committees a report detailing the 
 Secretary's progress in implementing the plan required by 
 paragraph (1).
 (4) Definitions.--In this subsection--
 (A) the term ``appropriate congressional 
 committees'' means--
 (i) the Committee on Armed Services and the 
 Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (ii) the Committee on Armed Services and 
 the Committee on Foreign Relations of the 
 Senate; and
 (B) the term ``gender advisor workforce'' means all 
 gender advisors and gender focal points across the 
 Department of Defense.

SEC. 1207. STRATEGY FOR SECURITY COOPERATION.

 (a) Strategy Required.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in coordination with 
the Secretary of State, shall submit to the appropriate congressional 
committees a strategy to improve security partner cooperation, increase 
the safety of United States personnel in partner countries, and 
increase the safety of the personnel of such countries, by working to 
improve partner military operations. Such strategy shall seek to 
advance accurate targeting and avoid unintentionally targeting 
civilians or life-sustaining civilian infrastructure, which has the 
potential to put United States and partner country personnel in life-
threatening danger by radicalizing local populations, and shall include 
improvements to the ability of partner countries with respect to--
 (1) intelligence collection, evaluation, and dissemination, 
 including by improving the evaluation of hostile intent and 
 discernment between hostile intent and hostile action; and
 (2) the evaluation and accuracy of determining correct 
 targets by increasing understanding of civilian populations, 
 population centers, and local civilian infrastructure such as 
 water systems infrastructure, food infrastructure, and 
 education and health care infrastructure.
 (b) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Foreign Relations of the Senate.

SEC. 1208. GENERAL THADDEUS KOSCIUSZKO EXCHANGE PROGRAM.

 (a) Authority.--The Commander of United States Army Special 
Operations Command shall seek to carry out a training program pursuant 
to section 322 of title 10, United States Code, between special 
operations forces under the jurisdiction of the Commander and special 
operations forces of the Polish Army. Such program shall be known as 
the ``General Thaddeus Kosciuszko Memorial Exchange Program for Polish-
American Defense Cooperation''.
 (b) Purposes.--The purposes of the program include the following:
 (1) To create an enduring training cooperation program to 
 enhance the national security and defensive capabilities of the 
 United States and Poland.
 (2) To enable both countries to effectively respond to 
 emerging threats and future challenges in Eastern Europe and 
 around the globe.
 (3) To increase the interoperability, combined readiness, 
 joint planning capabilities, and shared situational awareness 
 between special operations forces described in subsection (a).
 (4) To provide a program for the exchange of such special 
 operations forces that will increase readiness and capacity to 
 counter adversarial operations, including--
 (A) enhancing and increasing the capability to 
 counter irregular and asymmetrical warfare;
 (B) enhancing and increasing the capability to 
 respond to, and conduct, information operations;
 (C) enhancing and increasing the capability to 
 counter land and air assaults, including the capacity 
 to conduct urban warfare; and
 (D) any other relevant training that the Secretary 
 of Defense determines relevant, including training at 
 military training centers and professional military 
 education institutions of the Department of Defense.
 (5) To encourage the deepening and number of training 
 programs among NATO allies and partners to strengthen joint 
 resiliency, readiness, and deterrence capabilities, to 
 facilitate peace in the transatlantic region.
 (c) Eligibility.--Officers and enlisted members of such special 
operations forces may participate in the program under this section.
 (d) Progress Report.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Commander shall submit to the Committees on 
Armed Services of the Senate and House of Representatives a report 
regarding progress of the Commander in carrying out the training 
program.

SEC. 1209. ASSESSMENT, MONITORING, AND EVALUATION OF PROGRAMS AND 
 ACTIVITIES.

 Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the Committee on Armed 
Services of the House of Representatives a report on the processes that 
the Department of Defense uses to assess, monitor, and evaluate 
programs and activities under section 127e of title 10, United States 
Code, and section 1202 of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2018 (Public Law 115-91; 131 Stat. 1639). The report shall 
include--
 (1) an evaluation of the efficiency and effectiveness of 
 such programs and activities in achieving desired outcomes;
 (2) identification of lessons learned and best practices in 
 carrying out such programs and activities; and
 (3) an explanation of the extent to which such lessons are 
 used to improve future programs and activities carried out 
 under such authorities of the Department of Defense.

SEC. 1209A. REPORT ON CHIEF OF MISSION CONCURRENCE.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, with the concurrence 
of the Secretary of State, shall submit to the appropriate 
congressional committees a report evaluating the processes by which 
chiefs of mission provide concurrence to the exercise of the authority 
pursuant to section 127e of title 10, United States Code, and section 
1202 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018.
 (b) Matters to Be Included.--The report required by subsection (a) 
shall include--
 (1) the most significant impediments to each relevant chief 
 of mission's ability to inform and consult in a timely manner 
 with relevant individuals at relevant missions or bureaus of 
 the Department of State;
 (2) the lessons learned from such consultations;
 (3) procedures and agreements between departments that 
 enable Secretary of State to take such steps as may be 
 necessary to ensure that such relevant individuals have the 
 security clearances necessary and access to relevant 
 compartmented and special programs to so consult in a timely 
 manner with respect to such concurrence; and
 (4) the lessons learned from such procedures and agreements 
 and required improvements so identified.
 (c) Form.--The report required by section (a) may be provided in 
classified form.
 (d) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Foreign Relations of the Senate.

SEC. 1209B. REPEAL OF LIMITATION ON COSTS COVERED UNDER HUMANITARIAN 
 DEMINING ASSISTANCE.

 Subsection (c)(3) of section 407 of title 10, United States Code, 
is repealed.

SEC. 1209C. MODIFICATION TO FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM TO ADD TRAINING RELATING 
 TO URBAN WARFARE.

 Section 345 of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)(1), by adding at the end the 
 following sentence: ``In addition to the areas of combating 
 terrorism and irregular warfare, the program should focus 
 training on urban warfare.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end of subsection (d) the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(6) A discussion of how the training from the previous 
 year incorporated lessons learned from ongoing conflicts.''.

 Subtitle B--Matters Relating to Afghanistan and Pakistan

SEC. 1211. EXTENSION AND MODIFICATION OF THE AFGHAN SPECIAL IMMIGRANT 
 VISA PROGRAM.

 Section 602(b)(3)(F) of the Afghan Allies Protection Act of 2009 (8 
U.S.C. 1101 note) is amended--
 (1) in the heading, by striking ``2022'' and inserting 
 ``2023''; and
 (2) in clause (ii), by striking ``2023'' and inserting 
 ``2024''.

SEC. 1212. ADDITIONAL MATTERS FOR INCLUSION IN REPORTS ON OVERSIGHT IN 
 AFGHANISTAN.

 Section 1069(a) of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 135 Stat. 1912) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (9) through (16) as 
 paragraphs (12) through (19), respectively;
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (8) the following new 
 paragraphs:
 ``(9) An assessment of the status of--
 ``(A) defense intelligence assets dedicated to 
 Afghanistan; and
 ``(B) the ability of the United States to detect 
 emerging threats emanating from Afghanistan against the 
 United States and former coalition partners.
 ``(10) An assessment of local or indigenous 
 counterterrorism partners of the Department of Defense.
 ``(11) An assessment of risks to the mission and risks to 
 United States personnel involved in over-the-horizon 
 counterterrorism options.''; and
 (3) in paragraph (16), as so redesignated, by striking 
 ``Afganistan'' and inserting ``Afghanistan''.

SEC. 1213. PROHIBITION ON TRANSPORTING CURRENCY TO THE TALIBAN AND THE 
 ISLAMIC EMIRATE OF AFGHANISTAN.

 None of the amounts authorized to be appropriated by this Act or 
otherwise made available to the Department of Defense may be made 
available for the operation of any aircraft of the Department of 
Defense to transport currency or other items of value to the Taliban, 
the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, or any subsidiary, agent, or 
instrumentality of either the Taliban or the Islamic Emirate of 
Afghanistan.

 Subtitle C--Matters Relating to Syria, Iraq, and Iran

SEC. 1221. EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY TO PROVIDE ASSISTANCE TO VETTED 
 SYRIAN GROUPS AND INDIVIDUALS.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (a) of section 1209 of the Carl Levin 
and Howard P. ``Buck'' McKeon National Defense Authorization Act of 
Fiscal Year 2015 (Public Law 113-291; 128 Stat. 3451) is amended by 
striking ``December 31, 2022'' and inserting ``December 31, 2023''.
 (b) Extension of Waiver Authority.--Subsection (l)(3)(D) of such 
section is amended by striking ``December 31, 2022'' and inserting 
``December 31, 2023''.

SEC. 1222. EXTENSION AND MODIFICATION OF AUTHORITY TO PROVIDE 
 ASSISTANCE TO COUNTER THE ISLAMIC STATE OF IRAQ AND 
 SYRIA.

 (a) In General.--Subsection (a) of section 1236 of the Carl Levin 
and Howard P. ``Buck'' McKeon National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2015 (Public Law 113-291; 128 Stat. 3558) is amended by 
striking ``December 31, 2022'' and inserting ``December 31, 2023''.
 (b) Funding.--Subsection (g) of such section is amended--
 (1) by striking ``fiscal year 2022'' and inserting ``fiscal 
 year 2023''; and
 (2) by striking ``$322,500,000'' and inserting 
 ``$358,015,000''.
 (c) Extension of Waiver Authority.--Subsection (o)(5) of such 
section is amended by striking ``December 31, 2022'' and inserting 
``December 31, 2023''.
 (d) Limitation on Availability of Funds.--Of the amount of funds 
made available for fiscal year 2022 (and available for obligation as of 
the date of the enactment of this Act) and fiscal year 2023 to carry 
out section 1236 of the Carl Levin and Howard P. ``Buck'' McKeon 
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2015 (Public Law 
113-291; 128 Stat. 3558), not more than 50 percent may be obligated or 
expended until the date on which the Secretary of Defense submits to 
the appropriate congressional committees the report required by section 
1223(f) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 
(Public Law 117-81).

SEC. 1223. EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY TO SUPPORT OPERATIONS AND ACTIVITIES 
 OF THE OFFICE OF SECURITY COOPERATION IN IRAQ.

 (a) Source of Funds.--Subsection (d) of section 1215 of the 
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2012 (10 U.S.C. 113 
note) is amended by striking ``fiscal year 2022'' and inserting 
``fiscal year 2023''.
 (b) Limitation on Availability of Funds.--Of the funds authorized 
to be appropriated by this Act or otherwise made available for fiscal 
year 2023 for the Office of the Secretary of the Army, the Office of 
the Secretary of the Navy, and the Office of the Secretary of the Air 
Force for travel expenses, not more than 65 percent may be obligated or 
expended until the date on which a staffing plan for the Office of 
Security Cooperation in Iraq is completed.

SEC. 1224. EXTENSION AND MODIFICATION OF REPORT ON THE MILITARY 
 CAPABILITIES OF IRAN AND RELATED ACTIVITIES.

 Subsection (a) of section 1227 of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 135 Stat. 
1972) is amended--
 (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1)--
 (A) by inserting ``and annually thereafter for 1 
 year'' after ``enactment of this Act''; and
 (B) by inserting ``, consistent with the protection 
 of intelligence sources and methods,'' after ``Director 
 of National Intelligence''; and
 (2) in paragraph (1)(D), by inserting ``Hamas, Palestinian 
 Islamic Jihad, Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine,'' 
 after ``Lebanese Hezbollah,''.

SEC. 1225. PROHIBITION ON TRANSFERS TO IRAN.

 None of the amounts authorized to be appropriated by this Act or 
otherwise made available to the Department of Defense may be made 
available to transfer or facilitate a transfer of pallets of currency, 
currency, or other items of value to the Government of Iran, any 
subsidiary of such Government, or any agent or instrumentality of Iran.

SEC. 1226. REPORT ON ASSISTING IRANIAN DISSIDENTS AND PEOPLE ACCESS 
 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOOLS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State, in coordination with the 
Secretary of the Treasury and the heads of other relevant Federal 
agencies, shall submit to Committee on Foreign Affairs and the 
Committee on Financial Services of the House of Representatives and the 
Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on Banking of the 
Senate a report that includes the matters described in subsection (b).
 (b) Matters Described.--The matters described in this subsection 
are the following:
 (1) An assessment of the Iranian Government's ability to 
 impose internet shutdowns, censor the internet, and track 
 Iranian dissidents, labor organizers, political activists, or 
 human rights defenders inside Iran through targeted digital 
 surveillance or other digital means.
 (2) A list of technologies, including hardware, software, 
 and services incident to personal communications, including 
 set-top boxes (STB), satellites, and web developer tools, that 
 would encourage the free flow of information to better enable 
 the Iranian people to communicate with each other and the 
 outside world.
 (3) An assessment on whether existing United States policy 
 impedes the ability of Iranians to circumvent the Iranian 
 Government's attempt to securitize access to the internet and 
 block access to the internet at times of civil unrest.
 (4) A review of the legal exemptions that authorize access 
 to information technology and how such exemptions or any 
 accompanying general licenses may be altered to mitigate any 
 hindrances imposed on Iranian dissidents and activists inside 
 Iran.
 (5) An assessment of whether further exemptions or 
 alterations to existing exemptions and general licenses are 
 necessary to support Iranian citizens' access to the internet 
 and to assist their efforts to circumvent internet shutdowns 
 and targeted digital surveillance from the Iranian Government.
 (c) Form.--The report required pursuant to subsection (a) shall be 
submitted in unclassified form but may include a classified annex if 
such annex is provided separately from such unclassified version.
 (d) Definition.--In this section, the term ``targeted digital 
surveillance'' means the use of items or services that enable an 
individual or entity (with or without the knowing authorization of the 
product's owner) to detect, monitor, intercept, collect, exploit, 
preserve, protect, transmit, retain, or otherwise gain access to the 
communications, sensitive or protected information, work product, 
browsing data, research, identifying information, location history, and 
online and offline activities of other individuals, organizations, or 
entities.

SEC. 1227. STATE DEPARTMENT AUTHORIZATION FOR PAVILION AT EXPO 2025 
 OSAKA.

 (a) In General.--Notwithstanding section 204 of the Admiral James 
W. Nance and Meg Donovan Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal 
Years 2000 and 2001 (22 U.S.C. 2452b), there is authorized to be 
appropriated for each of fiscal years 2023 and 2024 funds for a United 
States pavilion at Expo 2025 Osaka, subject to subsections (b) and (c).
 (b) Cost-share Requirement.--Funds made available pursuant to 
subsection (a) to the Department of State for a United States pavilion 
at Expo 2025 Osaka shall be made available on a cost-matching basis, to 
the maximum extent practicable, from sources other than the United 
States Government.
 (c) Notification.--
 (1) In general.--Funds made available pursuant to 
 subsection (a) to the Department of State for a United States 
 pavilion at Expo 2025 Osaka may be obligated only after the 
 appropriate congressional committees are notified not less than 
 15 days prior to such obligation.
 (2) Matters to be included.--Such notification shall 
 include the following:
 (A) A description of the source of such funds, 
 including any funds reprogrammed or transferred by the 
 Department of State to be made available for such 
 pavilion.
 (B) An estimate of the amount of investment such 
 pavilion could bring to the United States.
 (C) A description of the strategy of the Department 
 to identify and obtain such matching funds from sources 
 other than the United States Government, in accordance 
 with subsection (b).
 (D) A certification that each entity receiving 
 amounts for a contract, grant, or other agreement to 
 construct, maintain, or otherwise service such 
 pavilion--
 (i) is not in violation of the labor laws 
 of Japan, the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 
 1977 (Public Law 95-213), and any other 
 applicable anti-corruption laws; and
 (ii) does not employ, or otherwise utilize, 
 a victim of trafficking (as defined in section 
 103 of the Trafficking Victims Protection Act 
 of 2000 (22 U.S.C. 7102)).
 (d) Final Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date on which 
a United States pavilion at Expo 2025 Osaka is opened, the Secretary of 
State shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report 
that includes--
 (1) the number of United States businesses that 
 participated in such pavilion; and
 (2) the dollar amount and source of any matching funds 
 obtained by the Department.
 (e) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the following:
 (1) The Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on 
 Appropriations of the House of Representatives.
 (2) The Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on 
 Appropriations of the Senate.
 (f) Sunset.--This section ceases to be effective on December 31, 
2025.

SEC. 1228. REPORT ON THE U.N. ARMS EMBARGO ON IRAN.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary of 
Defense, shall submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the House 
of Representatives and the Senate, the Committee on Foreign Affairs of 
the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Foreign Relations of 
the Senate a report that includes a detailed description of--
 (1) an assessment of the U.N. arms embargo on Iran on its 
 effectiveness in constraining Iran's ability to supply, sell, 
 or transfer, directly or indirectly, arms or related materiel, 
 including spare parts, when it was in place; and
 (2) the measures that the Departments of State and Defense 
 are taking to constrain Iranian arms proliferation and combat 
 the supply, sale, or transfer of weapons to or from Iran.

SEC. 1229. REPORT ON ISLAMIC REVOLUTIONARY GUARD CORPS-AFFILIATED 
 OPERATIVES ABROAD.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary of 
Defense, shall submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the House 
of Representatives and the Senate, the Committee on Foreign Affairs of 
the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Foreign Relations of 
the Senate a report that includes a detailed description of--
 (1) all Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps-affiliated 
 operatives serving in diplomatic and consular posts abroad; and
 (2) the ways in which the Department of State and the 
 Department of Defense are working with partner nations to 
 inform them of the threat posed by Islamic Revolutionary Guard 
 Corps-affiliated officials serving in diplomatic and consular 
 roles in third party countries.

SEC. 1229A. REPEAL OF AUTHORIZATION FOR USE OF MILITARY FORCE AGAINST 
 IRAQ RESOLUTION OF 2002.

 The Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution 
of 2002 (Public Law 107-243; 116 Stat. 1498; 50 U.S.C. 1541 note) is 
hereby repealed.

SEC. 1229B. INTERAGENCY STRATEGY TO DISRUPT AND DISMANTLE NARCOTICS 
 PRODUCTION AND TRAFFICKING AND AFFILIATED NETWORKS LINKED 
 TO THE REGIME OF BASHAR AL-ASSAD IN SYRIA.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the Captagon trade linked to the regime of Bashar al-
 Assad in Syria is a transnational security threat; and
 (2) the United States should develop and implement an 
 interagency strategy to deny, degrade, and dismantle Assad-
 linked narcotics production and trafficking networks.
 (b) Report and Strategy Required.--Not later than 180 days after 
the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, the 
Secretary of State, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Administrator of 
the Drug Enforcement Administration, the Director of National 
Intelligence, and the heads of other appropriate Federal agencies shall 
provide to the appropriate congressional committees a written strategy 
to disrupt and dismantle narcotics production and trafficking and 
affiliated networks linked to the regime of Bashar al-Assad in Syria. 
Such strategy shall include each of the following:
 (1) A strategy to target, disrupt, and degrade networks 
 that directly or indirectly support the narcotics 
 infrastructure of the Assad regime, particularly through 
 diplomatic and intelligence support to law enforcement 
 investigations and to build counter-narcotics capacity to 
 partner countries through assistance and training to law 
 enforcement services in countries, other than Syria, that are 
 receiving or transiting large quantities of Captagon.
 (2) Information relating to the use of statutory 
 authorities, including the Caesar Syria Civilian Protection Act 
 of 2019 (22 U.S.C. 8791 note), the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin 
 Designation Act (popularly referred to as the ``Kingpin Act''), 
 section 489 of the Foreign Assistance Act (relating to the 
 international narcotics control strategy report), and 
 associated actions to target individuals and entities directly 
 or indirectly associated with the narcotics infrastructure of 
 the Assad regime.
 (3) Information relating to the use of global diplomatic 
 engagements associated with the economic pressure campaign 
 against the Assad regime to target its narcotics 
 infrastructure.
 (4) A strategy for leveraging multilateral institutions and 
 cooperation with international partners to disrupt the 
 narcotics infrastructure of the Assad regime.
 (5) A strategy for mobilizing a public communications 
 campaign to increase awareness of the extent of the connection 
 of the Assad regime to illicit narcotics trade.
 (6) A description of the countries receiving or transiting 
 large shipments of Captagon, and an assessment of the counter-
 narcotics capacity of such countries to interdict or disrupt 
 the smuggling of Captagon, including an assessment of current 
 United States assistance and training programs to build such 
 capacity in such countries.
 (c) Form of Report.--The report required under subsection (b) shall 
be submitted in an unclassified form, but may contain a classified 
annex.
 (d) Appropriate Congressional Committees.--In this section, the 
term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on the 
 Judiciary, the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Committee on 
 Financial Services, the Committee on Appropriations, and the 
 Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on the 
 Judiciary, the Committee on Foreign Relations, the Committee on 
 Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, the Committee on 
 Appropriations, and the Select Committee on Intelligence of the 
 Senate.

 Subtitle D--Matters Relating to Russia

SEC. 1231. EXTENSION OF LIMITATION ON MILITARY COOPERATION BETWEEN THE 
 UNITED STATES AND RUSSIA.

 Section 1232(a) of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2017 (Public Law 114-328; 130 Stat. 2488), is amended by 
striking ``2021, or 2022'' and inserting ``2021, 2022, or 2023''.

SEC. 1232. MODIFICATION AND EXTENSION OF UKRAINE SECURITY ASSISTANCE 
 INITIATIVE.

 (a) Authority to Provide Assistance.--Subsection (a) of section 
1250 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 
(Public Law 114-92; 129 Stat. 1068) is amended by inserting ``salaries 
and stipends, and sustainment'' after ``supplies and services,''.
 (b) Availability of Funds.--Subsection (c) of such section is 
amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``funds available for 
 fiscal year 2022 pursuant to subsection (f)(7)'' and inserting 
 ``funds available for fiscal year 2023 pursuant to subsection 
 (f)(8)'';
 (2) in paragraph (3), by striking ``fiscal year 2022'' and 
 inserting ``fiscal year 2023'';
 (3) in paragraph (5), by striking ``Of the funds available 
 for fiscal year 2022 pursuant to subsection (f)(7)'' and 
 inserting ``Of the funds available for fiscal year 2023 
 pursuant to subsection (f)(8)''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(6) Waiver of certification requirement.--The Secretary 
 of Defense, with the concurrence of the Secretary of the State, 
 may waive the certification requirement in paragraph (2) if the 
 Secretary submits to the congressional defense committees, the 
 Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate, and the Committee 
 on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives a written 
 certification, not later than 5 days of exercising the waiver, 
 that doing so is in the national interest of the United States 
 due to exigent circumstances caused by the Russian invasion of 
 Ukraine.''.
 (c) United States Inventory and Other Sources.--Subsection (d) of 
such section is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``, and to recover or 
 dispose of such weapons or other defense articles, or to make 
 available such weapons or articles to ally and partner 
 governments to replenish comparable stocks which ally or 
 partner governments have provided to the Government of 
 Ukraine,'' after ``and defense services''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Congressional notification.--Not later than 10 days 
 before providing replenishment to an ally or partner government 
 pursuant to paragraph (1), the Secretary of Defense shall 
 transmit to the congressional defense committees, the Committee 
 on Foreign Relations of the Senate, and the Committee on 
 Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives a notification 
 containing the following:
 ``(A) An identification of the recipient foreign 
 country.
 ``(B) A detailed description of the articles to be 
 provided, including the amount, dollar value, origin, 
 and capabilities associated with the articles.
 ``(C) A detailed description of the articles 
 provided to Ukraine to be replenished, including the 
 amount, dollar value, origin, and capabilities 
 associated with the articles.
 ``(D) The impact on United States stocks and 
 readiness of transferring the articles.
 ``(E) An assessment of any security, intellectual 
 property, or end use monitoring issues associated with 
 transferring the articles.
 ``(F) A description, including relevant dollar 
 value amounts, of the articles provided to Ukraine by 
 the recipient country which are being replenished.
 ``(G) A certification that the transfer of the 
 articles in the national security interest of the 
 United States, and a justification for that 
 determination.''.
 (d) Funding.--Subsection (f) of such section is amended by adding 
at the end the following:
 ``(8) For fiscal year 2023, $1,000,000,000.''.
 (e) Termination of Authority.--Subsection (h) of such section is 
amended by striking ``December 31, 2023'' and inserting ``December 31, 
2024''.
 (f) Waiver of Certification Requirement.--Such section is amended--
 (1) by redesignating the second subsection (g) as 
 subsection (i); and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(j) Expedited Notification Requirement.--Not later than 15 days 
before providing assistance or support under subsection (a), or as far 
in advance as is practicable if the Secretary of Defense determines, on 
a case-by-case basis, that extraordinary circumstances exist that 
impact the national security of the United States, the Secretary shall 
transmit to the congressional defense committees, the Committee on 
Foreign Relations of the Senate, and the Committee on Foreign Affairs 
of the House of Representatives a notification containing a detailed 
description of the assistance or support to be provided, including--
 ``(1) the objectives of such assistance or support;
 ``(2) the budget for such assistance or support; and
 ``(3) the expected or estimated timeline for delivery of 
 such assistance or support.''.

SEC. 1233. PROHIBITION ON AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS RELATING TO SOVEREIGNTY 
 OF RUSSIA OVER CRIMEA.

 (a) Prohibition.--None of the funds authorized to be appropriated 
by this Act or otherwise made available for fiscal year 2023 for the 
Department of Defense may be obligated or expended to implement any 
activity that recognizes the sovereignty of Russia over Crimea.
 (b) Waiver.--The Secretary of Defense, with the concurrence of the 
Secretary of State, may waive the restriction on the obligation or 
expenditure of funds required by subsection (a) if the Secretary of 
Defense--
 (1) determines that to do so is in the national security 
 interest of the United States; and
 (2) submits a notification of the waiver, at the time the 
 waiver is invoked, to the Committee on Armed Services and the 
 Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives 
 and the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Foreign Relations of the Senate.

SEC. 1234. ASSESSMENT OF RUSSIAN STRATEGY IN UKRAINE.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
appropriate congressional committees an assessment of the strategic, 
operational, and organizational strengths and weaknesses of the Russian 
Federation's military strategy for the invasion and occupation of 
Ukraine, including an assessment of efforts and sources of leverage 
that could be used to exploit the weaknesses in that strategy as part 
of the effort to provide assistance to Ukraine.
 (b) Matters to Be Included.--The assessment of Russia's military 
strategy required by subsection (a) shall include at a minimum a 
description of the following:
 (1) Strategic strengths and weaknesses.
 (2) Operational strengths and weaknesses.
 (3) Organizational and logistical strengths and weaknesses.
 (4) Strengths and weaknesses related to Russian employment 
 of Russia's Federal Security Service (FSB), national guard, and 
 reserve units.
 (c) Appropriate Congressional Committees.--In this section, the 
term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the congressional defense committees;
 (2) the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence and the 
 Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives; 
 and
 (3) the Select Committee on Intelligence and the Committee 
 on Foreign Relations of the Senate.
 (d) Modification to Annual Report on Military and Security 
Developments Involving the Russian Federation.--Section 1234 of the 
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (134 Stat. 
3936) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)--
 (A) by redesignating paragraph (24) as paragraph 
 (26); and
 (B) by inserting after paragraph (23) the 
 following:
 ``(24) The impacts of United States sanctions on 
 improvements to the Russian military and its proxies, including 
 an assessment of the impacts of the maintenance or revocation 
 of such sanctions.
 ``(25) A detailed description of--
 ``(A) how Russian private military companies are 
 being utilized to advance the political, economic, and 
 military interests of the Russian Federation;
 ``(B) the direct or indirect threats Russian 
 private military companies present to United States 
 security interests;
 ``(C) how sanctions that are currently in place to 
 impede or deter Russian private military companies from 
 continuing their malign activities have impacted the 
 Russian private military companies' behavior; and
 ``(D) all foreign persons engaged significantly 
 with Russian private military companies.''; and
 (2) in subsection (e)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``, the 
 Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence,'' after 
 ``the Committee on Armed Services''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``, the Select 
 Committee on Intelligence,'' after ``the Committee on 
 Armed Services''.
 (e) Report on Lessons Learned From War.--Not later than 1 year 
after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, 
in coordination with the Secretary of each military department, shall 
submit to the appropriate congressional committees an assessment of 
lessons learned by the respective military departments from the 
conflict following the Russian invasion of Ukraine that includes the 
following:
 (1) Lessons learned from intelligence-sharing activities 
 conducted between the United States, NATO, the European Union, 
 and Ukraine throughout the conflict.
 (2) Observed tactics and techniques of information-related 
 capabilities and the integration of information-related 
 capabilities in supporting Ukraine objectives.
 (3) Analysis of the capabilities, tactics, and techniques 
 implemented throughout the conflict following the Russian 
 invasion of Ukraine, from each military department, with a 
 focus on the Army, Navy, and Air Force.
 (4) Analysis of all collected information to identify 
 recurring strengths and weaknesses in United States and NATO 
 tactics, training, and equipment.
 (5) Recommendations to address any corrective actions.
 (f) Form; Publication.--The report required by subsection (e) shall 
be submitted in unclassified form but may include a classified annex. 
The unclassified portion of such report shall be published on a 
publicly accessible website of the Department of Defense.
 (g) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the United States could greatly benefit from on-the-
 ground combat observations of the conflict following the 
 Russian invasion of Ukraine to learn lessons about modern 
 warfare between near-peer adversaries, and successful and 
 unsuccessful aspects of both sides' tactics, operations, and 
 strategy;
 (2) expert projections of how this conflict was likely to 
 unfold were inaccurate, suggesting the United States has many 
 lessons to learn from this conflict;
 (3) the Department of Defense should, when feasible, 
 organize Combat Observation Teams, who should be given 
 battlefield access as non-combatants, with specialized skill 
 sets to collect information, including by conducting first-
 person interviews, or other conflict-specific assessments and 
 observations;
 (4) such collection and observations should occur after the 
 conflict has largely subsided, and the physical, political, and 
 escalatory risk of sending an American combat observer team is 
 sufficiently low;
 (5) such teams should consist of talented senior officers 
 and non-commissioned officers with appropriate experience and 
 specialties for their task;
 (6) Combat Observation Teams should be encouraged to 
 interview Ukrainian military members, and civilians, conduct 
 site surveys, and work with the United States embassy and other 
 allied countries as appropriate; and
 (7) the time is ripe for an infusion of lessons from 
 Ukraine, and observations could ensure the United States is 
 prepared for the future of modern warfare and conflict.

SEC. 1235. REPORT ON EFFORTS BY THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION TO EXPAND ITS 
 PRESENCE AND INFLUENCE IN LATIN AMERICA AND THE 
 CARIBBEAN.

 (a) Report.--Not later than June 30, 2023, the Secretary of State, 
in coordination with the Secretary of Defense and the Director of 
National Intelligence and in consultation with the heads of other 
appropriate Federal departments and agencies, as necessary, shall 
submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report that 
identifies efforts by the Government of the Russian Federation to 
expand its presence and influence in Latin America and the Caribbean 
through diplomatic, military, intelligence, and other means, and 
describes the implications of such efforts on the national defense and 
security interests of the United States.
 (b) Elements.--The report required by subsection (a) shall include 
the following:
 (1) An identification of--
 (A) the countries of Latin America and the 
 Caribbean with which the Government of the Russian 
 Federation maintains especially close diplomatic, 
 military, and intelligence relationships;
 (B) the number and content of strategic partnership 
 agreements or similar agreements, including any non-
 public, secret, or informal agreements, that the 
 Government of the Russian Federation has established 
 with countries and regional organizations of Latin 
 America and the Caribbean;
 (C) the countries of Latin America and the 
 Caribbean to which the Government of the Russian 
 Federation provides foreign assistance or disaster 
 relief (including access to COVID-19 vaccines), 
 including a description of the amount and purpose of, 
 and any conditions attached to, such assistance;
 (D) recent visits by senior officials of the 
 Government of the Russian Federation, including its 
 state-owned or state-directed enterprises, to Latin 
 America and the Caribbean, and visits by senior 
 officials from Latin America and the Caribbean to the 
 Russian Federation; and
 (E) the existence of any defense exchanges, 
 military or police education or training, and exercises 
 between any military or police organization of the 
 Government of the Russian Federation and military, 
 police, or security-oriented organizations of countries 
 of Latin America and the Caribbean, including port 
 visits by the Russian Navy.
 (2) A detailed description of--
 (A) the impact Russia's war in Ukraine has or may 
 have on its diplomatic, military, and intelligence 
 activities in Latin America and the Caribbean;
 (B) the relationship between the Government of the 
 Russian Federation and the Governments of Venezuela, 
 Cuba, Nicaragua, and Bolivia;
 (C) attempts by the Government of the Russian 
 Federation to develop relations with the Governments of 
 Brazil and Argentina, two countries whose leaders met 
 with Russian President Vladimir Putin in Moscow shortly 
 before the invasion of Ukraine;
 (D) military installations, assets, and activities 
 of the Government of the Russian Federation in Latin 
 America and the Caribbean that currently exist or are 
 planned for the future, including the size, location, 
 and purpose of any deployed Russian Federation Armed 
 Forces or security contractors associated with the 
 Russian Federation;
 (E) the purpose of and operations emanating from 
 the Russian Federation's operations center in Managua, 
 Nicaragua;
 (F) the Russian Federation's subversion of United 
 States sanctions on Venezuela's oil sector;
 (G) the Russian Federation's involvement in the 
 border dispute between Venezuela and Guyana;
 (H) sales or transfers of defense articles and 
 services by the Russian Federation to countries of 
 Latin America and the Caribbean;
 (I) any other form of military or security 
 cooperation or assistance between the Government of the 
 Russian Federation or its associated paramilitary 
 organizations, and paramilitary organizations and 
 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean;
 (J) the nature, extent, and purpose of the 
 Government of the Russian Federation's intelligence 
 activities in Latin America and the Caribbean;
 (K) the role of the Government of the Russian 
 Federation in transnational crime in Latin America and 
 the Caribbean, including drug trafficking, money 
 laundering, and organized crime;
 (L) the methods by which the Government of the 
 Russian Federation expands its influence through 
 support to transnational criminal organizations in 
 Latin America and the Caribbean; and
 (M) efforts by the Government of the Russian 
 Federation to build its media presence through 
 government-directed disinformation, misinformation, or 
 information warfare campaigns in Latin America and the 
 Caribbean, including attempts to influence electoral 
 outcomes, realize military objectives, or destabilize 
 governments.
 (3) An assessment of--
 (A) the specific objectives that the Government of 
 the Russian Federation seeks to achieve by expanding 
 its presence and influence in Latin America and the 
 Caribbean, including any objectives articulated in 
 official documents or statements;
 (B) the degree to which the Government of the 
 Russian Federation uses its presence and influence in 
 Latin America and the Caribbean to encourage, pressure, 
 or coerce governments in the region to support its 
 defense and national security goals, including policy 
 positions taken by the Government of the Russian 
 Federation at international institutions;
 (C) how the Russian Federation uses multilateral 
 organizations, in particular the Community of Latin 
 American and Caribbean States (CELAC), a regional 
 organization that excludes the United States, to expand 
 its presence and influence in Latin America and the 
 Caribbean; and
 (D) the specific actions and activities undertaken 
 by the Government of the Russian Federation in Latin 
 America and the Caribbean that present the greatest 
 threats or challenges to the United States' defense and 
 national security interests in the region.
 (4) Any other matters the Secretary of State determines is 
 appropriate.
 (c) Form.--The report required by subsection (a) shall be submitted 
in unclassified form without any designation relating to dissemination 
control, but may include a classified annex. The report and its 
classified annex shall be prepared consistent with the protection of 
intelligence sources and methods.
 (d) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the congressional defense committees; and
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Select 
 Committee on Intelligence of the Senate and the Committee on 
 Foreign Affairs and the Permanent Select Committee on 
 Intelligence of the House of Representatives.

SEC. 1236. EXPANSION OF COOPERATION AND TRAINING WITH UKRAINE.

 (a) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated $100,000,000 to build the capacity of foreign security 
forces pursuant to relevant authorities under title 10, United States 
Code. Amounts so authorized shall be made available to provide 
assistance to Ukrainian military pilots and associated persons for the 
following purposes:
 (1) Training and familiarity building with United States 
 fixed-wing aircraft and other air platforms as appropriate for 
 air-to-air and air-to-ground combat.
 (2) Training on the use of munitions sets determined 
 appropriate by the Secretary of Defense.
 (3) Establishing a rapport between the Armed Forces of the 
 United States and the armed forces of Ukraine to build 
 partnerships for the future.
 (4) Enhancement of capabilities for aerial combat 
 operations.
 (5) Focusing on the ability of Ukraine to teach current and 
 future pilots on fixed-wing aircraft and other air platforms in 
 Ukraine and elsewhere, especially during the ongoing Russian 
 invasion of Ukraine.
 (6) Fostering a better understanding of the air platforms, 
 tactics, and techniques of the United States and other member 
 countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
 (b) Notice to Congress.--Not later than 15 days before providing 
assistance or support using amounts made available pursuant to the 
authorization under subsection (a), the Secretary of Defense shall 
submit to the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate and the 
Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives a 
notification containing the following elements:
 (1) A detailed description of the assistance or support to 
 be provided, including--
 (A) the objectives of such assistance or support.
 (B) the budget for such assistance or support; and
 (C) the expected or estimated timeline for delivery 
 of such assistance or support.
 (2) A description of such other matters as the Secretary 
 considers appropriate.
 (c) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 301 for operation and maintenance, Air Force, Flying Hour 
Program, Line 080, as specified in the corresponding funding table in 
section 4301, is hereby reduced by $100,000,000.

SEC. 1237. STATEMENT OF POLICY.

 It is the policy of the United States that the NATO-Russia Founding 
Act, signed May 27, 1997, in Paris, does not constrain the deployment 
of United States or NATO forces in any way.

SEC. 1238. REPORT ON DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE PLAN FOR RESPONDING TO 
 RUSSIA'S INVASION OF UKRAINE.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, and every 6 months thereafter, the Secretary of 
Defense, in consultation with the heads of other relevant Federal 
agencies, shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report 
outlining in detail the Department of Defense plan for responding to 
Russia's invasion of Ukraine, initiated on February 24, 2022.
 (b) Matters to Be Included.--The report required by subsection (a) 
shall include--
 (1) military assistance provided to Ukraine by the 
 Department of Defense and the programs, operations, and 
 contracts to be carried out under the plan described in 
 subsection (a); and
 (2) both the short-term (the next 6 months) and long-term 
 (the next 12 months) strategic outlook or plan with respect to 
 such programs, operations, and contracts.

SEC. 1239. PROHIBITION ON RUSSIAN PARTICIPATION IN THE G7.

 (a) Statement of Policy.--It is the policy of the United States to 
exclude the Russian Federation from the Group of Seven or reconstitute 
a Group of Eight that includes the Russian Federation.
 (b) Limitation.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no 
Federal funds are authorized to be appropriated or otherwise made 
available to take any action to support or facilitate--
 (1) the participation of the Russian Federation in a Group 
 of Seven proceeding; or
 (2) the reconstitution of a Group of Eight that includes 
 the Russian Federation.

SEC. 1240. CONDEMNING DETENTION AND INDICTMENT OF RUSSIAN OPPOSITION 
 LEADER VLADIMIR VLADIMIROVICH KARA-MURZA.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) Vladimir Vladimirovich Kara-Murza (referred to in this 
 section as ``Mr. Kara-Murza'') has tirelessly worked for 
 decades to advance the cause of freedom, democracy, and human 
 rights for the people of the Russian Federation.
 (2) In retaliation for his advocacy, two attempts have been 
 made on Mr. Kara-Murza's life, as--
 (A) on May 26, 2015, Mr. Kara-Murza fell ill with 
 symptoms indicative of poisoning and was hospitalized; 
 and
 (B) on February 2, 2017, he fell ill with similar 
 symptoms and was placed in a medically induced coma.
 (3) Independent investigations conducted by Bellingcat, the 
 Insider, and Der Spiegel found that the same unit of the 
 Federal Security Service of the Russian Federation responsible 
 for poisoning Mr. Kara-Murza was responsible for poisoning 
 Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny and activists Timur 
 Kuashev, Ruslan Magomedragimov, and Nikita Isayev.
 (4) On February 24, 2022, Vladimir Putin launched another 
 unprovoked, unjustified, and illegal invasion into Ukraine in 
 contravention of the obligations freely undertaken by the 
 Russian Federation to respect the territorial integrity of 
 Ukraine under the Budapest Memorandum of 1994, the Minsk 
 protocols of 2014 and 2015, and international law.
 (5) On March 5, 2022, Vladimir Putin signed a law 
 criminalizing the distribution of truthful statements about the 
 invasion of Ukraine by the Russian Federation and mandating up 
 to 15 years in prison for such offenses.
 (6) Since February 24, 2022, Mr. Kara-Murza has used his 
 voice and platform to join more than 15,000 citizens of the 
 Russian Federation in peacefully protesting the war against 
 Ukraine and millions more who silently oppose the war.
 (7) On April 11, 2022, five police officers arrested Mr. 
 Kara-Murza in front of his home and denied his right to an 
 attorney, and the next day Mr. Kara-Murza was sentenced to 15 
 days in prison for disobeying a police order.
 (8) On April 22, 2022, the Investigative Committee of the 
 Russian Federation charged Mr. Kara-Murza with violations under 
 the law signed on March 5, 2022, for his fact-based statements 
 condemning the invasion of Ukraine by the Russian Federation.
 (9) Mr. Kara-Murza was then placed into pretrial detention 
 and ordered to be held until at least June 12, 2022.
 (10) If convicted of those charges, Mr. Kara-Murza faces 
 detention in a penitentiary system that human rights 
 nongovernmental organizations have criticized for widespread 
 torture, ill-treatment, and suspicious deaths of prisoners.
 (b) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that Congress--
 (1) condemns the unjust detention and indicting of Russian 
 opposition leader Vladimir Vladimirovich Kara-Murza, who has 
 courageously stood up to oppression in the Russian Federation;
 (2) expresses solidarity with Vladimir Vladimirovich Kara-
 Murza, his family, and all individuals in the Russian 
 Federation imprisoned for exercising their fundamental freedoms 
 of speech, assembly, and belief;
 (3) urges the United States Government and other allied 
 governments to work to secure the immediate release of Vladimir 
 Vladimirovich Kara-Murza, Alexei Navalny, and other citizens of 
 the Russian Federation imprisoned for opposing the regime of 
 Vladimir Putin and the war against Ukraine; and
 (4) calls on the President to increase support provided by 
 the United States Government for those advocating for democracy 
 and independent media in the Russian Federation, which Vladimir 
 Vladimirovich Kara-Murza has worked to advance.

SEC. 1241. TASK FORCE TO TRACK SECURITY ASSISTANCE TO UKRAINE.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the President shall submit to the congressional 
defense committees a report on best practices for creating a Task Force 
or Working Group to determine how to track and monitor United States 
defense articles and defense services made available to Ukraine. Such 
report shall also identify gaps or needs for greater research 
investment in developing predictive modeling that can forecast the 
movement of weapons, to be used for weapons tracking in Ukraine and in 
future conflicts where the United States provides security assistance.
 (b) Implementation.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
submission of the report required by subsection (a), the best practices 
and recommendations identified in such report shall be implemented.
 (c) Update.--The President shall provide to the congressional 
defense committees quarterly updates on the progress of implementation 
in accordance with subsection (b).

SEC. 1242. REPORT ON RISK OF NUCLEAR WAR IN UKRAINE.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense Department shall provide 
Congress with a risk assessment on the likelihood of the use of a 
nuclear weapon as a result of the Russian invasion of Ukraine and 
whether and by how much this risk increases the longer that the war 
continues.
 (b) Form.--The report required by subsection (a) shall be submitted 
in unclassified form but may include a classified annex.

SEC. 1243. REPORT ON DISTRIBUTION AND USE OF WEAPONS IN UKRAINE.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense shall submit a report to 
Congress describing--
 (1) the distribution and use of United States weaponry 
 provided to the Ukrainian military including compliance with 
 United States law, including those prohibiting such weaponry 
 from being provided to extremist groups; and
 (2) any efforts underway to prevent the illicit 
 distribution or use of such weapons and the effectiveness of 
 any such efforts.
 (b) Form.--The report required by subsection (a) shall be submitted 
in unclassified form but may include a classified annex.

SEC. 1244. REPORT FROM COUNCIL OF THE INSPECTORS GENERAL ON UKRAINE.

 Not later than September 1, 2024, the Chairperson of the Council of 
the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees, the Committee on Foreign Affairs of 
the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Foreign Relations of 
the Senate a report on the oversight infrastructure established with 
respect to United States assistance to Ukraine, that also includes the 
following:
 (1) the structure the Federal Government is currently using 
 or plans to adopt (including the specific agencies charged) to 
 oversee the expenditure of assistance to Ukraine;
 (2) whether that oversight structure is best suited to 
 conduct such oversight;
 (3) whether there are any gaps in oversight over the 
 expenditure of funds for assistance to Ukraine;
 (4) whether the agencies identified pursuant to paragraph 
 (1) are positioned to be able to accurately oversee and track 
 United States assistance to Ukraine over the long term; and
 (5) the lessons learned from the manner in which oversight 
 over expenditures of assistance to Ukraine has been conducted.

 Subtitle E--Matters Relating to Europe and NATO

SEC. 1261. SENSE OF CONGRESS ON UNITED STATES DEFENSE POSTURE IN EUROPE 
 FOLLOWING THE FURTHER INVASION OF UKRAINE.

 It is the sense of Congress as follows:
 (1) The further invasion of Ukraine presents a sea change 
 to the security environment in Europe that requires a long-term 
 shift in the force posture of the United States and its allies, 
 in order to ensure the maintenance of collective deterrence. As 
 General Milley, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, recently noted, 
 ``We are witness to the greatest threat to peace and security 
 of Europe and perhaps the world in my 42 years of service in 
 uniform. The Russian invasion of Ukraine is threatening to 
 undermine not only European peace and stability but global 
 peace and stability. * * * We are at a pivot point in the 
 geostrategic history of Europe and perhaps the globe.''.
 (2) Adjustments to force posture in Europe must be 
 commensurate to this challenge. Alongside allied investments, 
 it is necessary for the United States to alter its force 
 posture to establish additional permanently stationed and 
 continuous rotational forces along Europe's eastern flank. 
 Given the current conditions, it would be untenable for the 
 United States to seek to revert to United States force levels 
 and positioning present in Europe before Russia's further 
 invasion of Ukraine, to rely solely on allied forces for 
 further force posture enhancements, or adopt a path to 
 transition away from investments in Europe through the European 
 Deterrence Initiative (EDI), except for exceptional cases.
 (3) As General Tod Wolters, Commander of U.S. European 
 Command, has stated, investments made through EDI since 2014 
 have proved essential to the United States ability to respond 
 to the Ukraine crisis, deploying units in 5 days that would 
 have taken as long as 21 days. General Wolters further stated, 
 ``To take an Armored Brigade Combat Team and launch it from the 
 continental United States, and put it on European turf, and 
 have the tanks that comprise that Brigade Combat Team to shoot, 
 move, and communicate and fire on range in one week is an 
 amazing accomplishment. And that was facilitated by those Army 
 Prepositioned Stocks and it was practiced in previous exercises 
 which are part of the EDI fund. I would just say that when we 
 demonstrated to the European community, and to the NATO 
 community, and to the world how well we can shoot, move, and 
 communicate and transition a large force from CONUS to Europe 
 at that pace, it's something that demonstrates the great value 
 of EDI.''.
 (4) Past decisions made by the Department of Defense and 
 Congress about prepositioned stocks, mobility, and funding for 
 EDI led directly to this ability to quickly reinforce the area 
 of operations in this crisis, and EDI investments will be 
 crucial for adaptation to the new European security 
 environment. The Department of Defense should continue to 
 strongly support EDI investments with a focus on adapting 
 deterrence to the new security environment and incorporating 
 lessons learned from the conflict in Ukraine, and it should not 
 seek a path to EDI's sunset.
 (5) The United States recognizes that strong alliances and 
 partnerships are crucial to the maintenance of United States 
 national and global security. The NATO alliance has grown more 
 robust and more united in response to Russia's aggression in 
 Ukraine. Members of NATO have announced substantial changes in 
 their defense commitments, adopting measures to meet and exceed 
 their Wales Pledge commitments to spend 2 percent of Gross 
 Domestic Product on defense and increasing commitments to NATO 
 battle group and air policing missions, while sending vital 
 defense assistance to Ukraine. Congress commends such members 
 of NATO for their adoption and sustainment of these efforts. 
 Such commitments are vital to the long-term effort required to 
 maintain deterrence in the European theater. The United States 
 should continue to work with allies on complementary 
 investments to establish in Europe a mature, fully integrated 
 deterrence platform capable of responding to the expanded 
 threat of Russian aggression and supporting NATO allies' 
 ongoing efforts to collectively resist direct and hybrid 
 threats to shared values, interests, and ideals.
 (6) The United States should also redouble efforts to 
 assist NATO allies, particularly on Europe's eastern periphery, 
 in modernizing and integrating their defense capabilities 
 taking into account lessons from Russia's war in Ukraine, 
 including efforts to provide artillery, MLRS, MANPADS, air 
 defenses, and other capabilities.
 (7) As it reinforces deterrence, the United States should 
 recognize the acute risks now facing allies on Russia's 
 periphery and pursue national security investments and 
 strategies commensurate to the challenge, including additional 
 EDI programs, in the Black Sea, the Baltics, the Arctic, and 
 Central Europe, in order to maintain the credibility of the 
 ``sacred obligation under Article 5 of the North Atlantic 
 Treaty to defend every inch of NATO territory.''.
 (8) Likewise, the United States should keep in mind the 
 particularly significant challenges posed to non-NATO European 
 partners and seek security strategies to continue cooperation 
 and support their sovereign rights, while also pursuing 
 security policies that support stability in areas of 
 substantial malign effort such as the Western Balkans.
 (9) The United States continues to recognize the importance 
 of the long-term Baltic Security Initiative assistance plan 
 that the Department of Defense is carrying out under section 
 333 of title 10, United States Code, and the crucial role that 
 such investments play in deterring Russian aggression in that 
 region.

SEC. 1262. SENSE OF CONGRESS ON NATO MEMBERSHIP FOR FINLAND AND SWEDEN.

 It is the sense of Congress that the United States strongly 
supports membership for Finland and Sweden in the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO).

SEC. 1263. MATTERS RELATING TO CLIMATE CHANGE AT NATO.

 The President shall direct the United States Permanent 
Representative to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) to--
 (1) advocate for adequate resources towards understanding 
 and communicating the threat posed by climate change to allied 
 civil security (specifically for the climate action and 
 resilience agendas);
 (2) support the establishment of a NATO Center of 
 Excellence for Climate and Security;
 (3) advocate for an in-depth critical assessment of NATO's 
 vulnerability to the impacts of climate change, building upon 
 the Secretary General's 2022 climate change and security impact 
 assessment, that evaluates and analyzes NATO's resilience in 
 responding to the threat climate change will pose on migration, 
 food insecurity, and housing insecurity; and
 (4) communicate the core security challenge posed by 
 climate change as articulated in NATO's strategic concept.

SEC. 1264. BALTIC REASSURANCE ACT.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) The Russian Federation seeks to diminish the North 
 Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and recreate its sphere of 
 influence in Europe using coercion, intimidation, and outright 
 aggression.
 (2) Deterring the Russian Federation from such aggression 
 is vital for transatlantic security.
 (3) The illegal occupation of Crimea by the Russian 
 Federation and its continued engagement of destabilizing and 
 subversive activities against independent and free states is of 
 increasing concern.
 (4) The Russian Federation also continues to disregard 
 treaties, international laws and rights to freedom of 
 navigation, territorial integrity, and sovereign international 
 borders.
 (5) The Russian Federation's continued occupation of 
 Georgian and Ukrainian territories and the sustained military 
 buildup in the Russian Federation's Western Military District 
 and Kaliningrad has threatened continental peace and stability.
 (6) The Baltic countries of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania 
 are particularly vulnerable to an increasingly aggressive and 
 subversive Russian Federation.
 (7) In a declaration to celebrate 100 years of independence 
 of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania issued on April 3, 2018, the 
 Trump Administration reaffirmed United States commitments to 
 these Baltic countries to ``improve military readiness and 
 capabilities through sustained security assistance'' and 
 ``explore new ideas and opportunities, including air defense, 
 bilaterally and in NATO, to enhance deterrence across the 
 region''.
 (8) These highly valued NATO allies of the United States 
 have repeatedly demonstrated their commitment to advancing 
 mutual interests as well as those of the NATO alliance.
 (9) The Baltic countries also continue to participate in 
 United States-led exercises to further promote coordination, 
 cooperation, and interoperability among allies and partner 
 countries, and continue to demonstrate their reliability and 
 commitment to provide for their own defense.
 (10) Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia each hosts a respected 
 NATO Center of Excellence that provides expertise to educate 
 and promote NATO allies and partners in areas of vital interest 
 to the alliance.
 (11) United States support and commitment to allies across 
 Europe has been a lynchpin for peace and security on the 
 continent for over 70 years.
 (b) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress as follows:
 (1) The United States is committed to the security of the 
 Baltic countries and should strengthen cooperation and support 
 capacity-building initiatives aimed at improving the defense 
 and security of such countries.
 (2) The United States should lead a multilateral effort to 
 develop a strategy to deepen joint capabilities with Lithuania, 
 Latvia, Estonia, NATO allies, and other regional partners, to 
 deter against aggression from the Russian Federation in the 
 Baltic region, specifically in areas that would strengthen 
 interoperability, joint capabilities, and military readiness 
 necessary for Baltic countries to strengthen their national 
 resilience.
 (3) The United States should explore the feasibility of 
 providing long range, mobile air defense systems in the Baltic 
 region, including through leveraging cost-sharing mechanisms 
 and multilateral deployment with NATO allies to reduce 
 financial burdens on host countries.
 (c) Defense Assessment.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall, in 
 consultation with appropriate counterparts of Lithuania, 
 Latvia, Estonia, North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) 
 allies, and other regional partners, conduct a comprehensive, 
 multilateral assessment of the military requirements of such 
 countries to deter and resist aggression by the Russian 
 Federation that--
 (A) provides an assessment of past and current 
 initiatives to improve the efficiency, effectiveness, 
 readiness, and interoperability of Lithuania, Latvia, 
 and Estonia's national defense capabilities; and
 (B) assesses the manner in which to meet those 
 objectives, including future resource requirements and 
 recommendations, by undertaking activities in the 
 following areas:
 (i) Activities to increase the rotational 
 and forward presence, improve the capabilities, 
 and enhance the posture and response readiness 
 of the United States or forces of NATO in the 
 Baltic region.
 (ii) Activities to improve air defense 
 systems, including modern air-surveillance 
 capabilities.
 (iii) Activities to improve counter-
 unmanned aerial system capabilities.
 (iv) Activities to improve command and 
 control capabilities through increasing 
 communications, technology, and intelligence 
 capacity and coordination, including secure and 
 hardened communications.
 (v) Activities to improve intelligence, 
 surveillance, and reconnaissance capabilities.
 (vi) Activities to enhance maritime domain 
 awareness.
 (vii) Activities to improve military and 
 defense infrastructure, logistics, and access, 
 particularly transport of military supplies and 
 equipment.
 (viii) Investments to ammunition stocks and 
 storage.
 (ix) Activities and training to enhance 
 cyber security and electronic warfare 
 capabilities.
 (x) Bilateral and multilateral training and 
 exercises.
 (xi) New and existing cost-sharing 
 mechanisms with United States and NATO allies 
 to reduce financial burden.
 (2) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to 
 the congressional defense committees a report that includes 
 each of the following:
 (A) A report on the findings of the assessment 
 conducted pursuant to subsection (a).
 (B) A list of any recommendations resulting from 
 such assessment.
 (C) An assessment of the resource requirements to 
 achieve the objectives described in subsection (a)(1) 
 with respect to the national defense capability of 
 Baltic countries, including potential investments by 
 host countries.
 (D) A plan for the United States to use appropriate 
 security cooperation authorities or other authorities 
 to--
 (i) facilitate relevant recommendations 
 included in the list described in paragraph 
 (2);
 (ii) expand joint training between the 
 Armed Forces and the military of Lithuania, 
 Latvia, or Estonia, including with the 
 participation of other NATO allies; and
 (iii) support United States foreign 
 military sales and other equipment transfers to 
 Baltic countries especially for the activities 
 described in subparagraphs (A) through (I) of 
 subsection (a)(2).
 (d) Congressional Defense Committees Defined.--For purposes of this 
section, the term ``congressional defense committees'' includes--
 (1) the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate.

SEC. 1265. REPORT ON EFFORTS OF NATO TO COUNTER MISINFORMATION AND 
 DISINFORMATION.

 (a) In General.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State, in consultation with the 
Secretary of Defense, shall submit to the congressional committees 
specified in subsection (b) a report on efforts of the North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization (NATO) and NATO member states to counter 
misinformation and disinformation.
 (b) Congressional Committees Specified.--The congressional 
committees specified in this subsection are the Committee on Armed 
Services and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
Representatives and the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee 
on Foreign Relations of the Senate.
 (c) Elements.--The report required by subsection (a) shall--
 (1) assess--
 (A) vulnerabilities of NATO member states and NATO 
 to misinformation and disinformation and describe 
 efforts to counter such activities;
 (B) the capacity and efforts of NATO member states 
 and NATO to counter misinformation and disinformation, 
 including United States cooperation with other NATO 
 members states; and
 (C) misinformation and disinformation campaigns 
 carried out by authoritarian states, particularly 
 Russia and China; and
 (2) include recommendations to counter misinformation and 
 disinformation.

SEC. 1266. IMPROVEMENTS TO THE NATO STRATEGIC COMMUNICATIONS CENTER OF 
 EXCELLENCE.

 (a) Prioritization.--The Secretary of Defense shall seek to 
prioritize funding through NATO's common budget to--
 (1) enhance the capability, cooperation, and information 
 sharing among NATO, NATO member countries, and partners, with 
 respect to strategic communications and information operations; 
 and
 (2) facilitate education, research and development, lessons 
 learned, and consultation in strategic communications and 
 information operations.
 (b) Certification.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall certify to the 
appropriate congressional committees that the Secretary has assigned 
executive agent responsibility for the Center to an appropriate 
organization within the Department of Defense, and detail the steps 
being under taken to strengthen the role of Center in fostering 
strategic communications and information operations within NATO.
 (c) Report Required.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in coordination with 
the Secretary of State, shall submit to the appropriate congressional 
committees a report outlining--
 (1) the recommendations of the Secretary with respect to 
 improving strategic communications within NATO; and
 (2) the recommendations of the Secretary with respect to 
 strengthening the role of the Center in fostering strategic 
 communications and information operations within NATO.
 (d) Briefings Required.--The Secretary of Defense shall brief the 
appropriate congressional committees on a biannual basis on--
 (1) the efforts of the Department of Defense to strengthen 
 the role of the Center in fostering strategic communications 
 and information operations within NATO;
 (2) how the Department of Defense is working with the NATO 
 Strategic Communications Center of Excellence and the 
 interagency to improve NATO's ability to counter and mitigate 
 disinformation, active measures, propaganda, and denial and 
 deception activities of Russia and China; and
 (3) how the Department of Defense is developing ways to 
 improve strategic communications within NATO, including by 
 enhancing the capacity of and coordination with the NATO 
 Strategic Communications Center of Excellence.
 (e) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the following:
 (1) The Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives.
 (2) The Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Foreign Relations of the Senate.

SEC. 1267. SENSE OF CONGRESS ON ENHANCING STRATEGIC PARTNERSHIP, 
 DEFENSE AND SECURITY COOPERATION WITH GEORGIA.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) Georgia is a valued friend and strategic partner of the 
 United States and a NATO aspirant that has consistently sought 
 to advance shared values and mutual interests to include 
 deploying alongside United States forces in Iraq and 
 Afghanistan.
 (2) Over the past 30 years of partnership, the United 
 States has contributed to strengthening Georgia's progress on 
 the path of European and Euro-Atlantic integration.
 (3) Security in the Black Sea region is a matter of 
 strategic importance for the United States, especially amid 
 Russia's unprovoked and unjustified war on Ukraine. Enhancing 
 Georgia's self-defense and whole-of-government resistance and 
 resilience capacity is critical for Euro-Atlantic security, the 
 United States's national security objectives and strategic 
 interests in the Black Sea region.
 (4) Georgia is a significant economic, energy transit, and 
 international trade hub. Georgia is an integral part of the 
 East-West corridor that is vital to European energy security 
 and diversification of strategic supply-chain routes for the 
 United States and Europe.
 (5) Continuous illegal occupation of two Georgian regions 
 by Russia, its accelerated attempts of de-facto annexation of 
 both regions and hybrid warfare tactics including political 
 interference, cyber-attacks, and disinformation and propaganda 
 campaigns pose immediate challenges to the national security of 
 Georgia and the security of Europe.
 (b) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the United 
States should--
 (1) reaffirm support and take steps to enhance and deepen 
 the steadfast strategic partnership in all priority areas of 
 the 2009 United States--Georgia Charter on Strategic 
 Partnership and in line with the 2016 Memorandum of 
 Understanding on Deepening the Defense and Security Partnership 
 between the United States and Georgia;
 (2) continue firm support to Georgia's sovereignty and 
 territorial integrity within its internationally recognized 
 borders;
 (3) intensify efforts towards de-occupation of Georgia's 
 territories and peaceful resolution of Russia-Georgia conflict, 
 including through consolidation of decisive international 
 action to ensure full and unconditional fulfilment by the 
 Russian Federation of its international obligations, inter alia 
 implementation of the EU-mediated 12 August 2008 Ceasefire 
 Agreement;
 (4) continue strong support and meaningful participation in 
 the Geneva International Discussions for ensuring 
 implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement by the Russian 
 Federation and achieving lasting peace and security in Georgia;
 (5) continue working to strengthen press freedom, 
 democratic institutions, and the rule of law in Georgia in 
 order to help secure its path of Euro-Atlantic integration and 
 aspirant NATO and EU membership;
 (6) prioritize and deepen defense and security cooperation 
 with Georgia, including the full implementation and potential 
 acceleration of the Georgia Defense and Deterrence Enhancement 
 Initiative, increased military financing of Georgia's equipment 
 modernization plans to enhance Georgia's deterrence, 
 territorial defense, whole-of-government resistance and 
 resilience capacity, and to foster readiness and NATO 
 interoperability;
 (7) support existing and new cooperation formats to bolster 
 cooperation among NATO, Georgia and Black Sea regional partners 
 to enhance Black Sea security especially in the changed 
 security environment including increasing the frequency, scale 
 and scope of exercises such as NATO Article 5 exercises and 
 assistance to Georgia's Defense Forces modernization efforts;
 (8) enhance assistance to Georgia in the cyber domain 
 through training, education, and technical assistance to enable 
 Georgia to prevent, mitigate and respond to cyber threats; and
 (9) continue support and assistance to Georgia in 
 countering Russian disinformation and propaganda campaigns 
 intended to undermine the sovereignty of Georgia, credibility 
 of its democratic institutions and European and Euro-Atlantic 
 integration.

SEC. 1268. REPORT ON IMPROVED DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS AND DEFENSE 
 RELATIONSHIP WITH ALBANIA.

 (a) Appropriate Congressional Committees.--In this section, the 
term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on 
 Armed Services of the Senate; and
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on 
 Armed Services of the House of Representatives.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, jointly with the 
Secretary of State, shall submit to the appropriate congressional 
committees an assessment of the viability of military infrastructure in 
Durres, Albania, and Vlore, Albania, as locations for cooperative 
security activities, including NATO activities and exercises that 
advance NATO and shared security objectives and enhance 
interoperability. The report shall also include a description of--
 (1) opportunities for the United States to support training 
 for Albania's military forces;
 (2) the current status of such training activities with 
 Albania, including the level of progress toward 
 interoperability, absorption of assistance, ability to sustain 
 equipment provided, and other relevant factors that enhance 
 Albania's ability to contribute to NATO objectives and maritime 
 security; and
 (3) a cost estimate for any potential U.S. investments and 
 activities.

SEC. 1269. RESTRICTION OF ENTITIES FROM USING FEDERAL FUNDS FROM 
 ENGAGING, ENTERING INTO, AND AWARDING PUBLIC WORKS 
 CONTRACTS.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 33 of title 40, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 3320. Restriction of entities from using Federal funds to 
 engage, enter into, and award public works contracts
 ``(a) In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 
Federal funds may not be provided to any covered entity for any covered 
public works project.
 ``(b) Requirements.--Any entity receiving funds for any covered 
public works project shall be free from any obligations, influences, or 
connections to any covered entity.
 ``(c) Exception.--This section shall only apply to projects that 
are located in the United States.
 ``(d) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Covered entity.--The term `covered entity' means any 
 entity that--
 ``(A) is headquartered in China;
 ``(B) is owned, directed, controlled, financed, or 
 influenced directly or indirectly by the Government of 
 the People's Republic of China, the CCP, or the Chinese 
 military, including any entity for which the Government 
 of the People's Republic of China, the CCP, or the 
 Chinese military have the ability, through ownership of 
 a majority or a dominant minority of the total 
 outstanding voting interest in an entity, board 
 representation, proxy voting, a special share, 
 contractual arrangements, formal or informal 
 arrangements to act in concert, or other means, to 
 determine, direct, or decide for an entity in an 
 important manner; or
 ``(C) is a parent, subsidiary, or affiliate of any 
 entity described in subparagraph (B).
 ``(2) Covered public works project.--The term `covered 
 public works project' means any project of the construction, 
 repair, renovation, or maintenance of public buildings, 
 structures, sewers, water works, roads, bridges, docks, 
 underpasses and viaducts, as well as any other improvement to 
 be constructed, repaired or renovated or maintained on public 
 property to be paid, in whole or in part, with public funds or 
 with financing to be retired with public funds in the form of 
 lease payments or otherwise.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 33 of title 40, 
United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:

``3320. Restriction of entities from using Federal funds to engage, 
 enter into, and award public works 
 contracts.''.
 (c) Non-Federal Public Works.--Chapter 35 of title 40, United 
States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 3506. Restriction of States and local governments from using 
 Federal funds to engage, enter into, and award public 
 works contracts
 ``(a) In General.--A State or local government receiving Federal 
funds may not provide such funds to any covered entity for any covered 
public works project.
 ``(b) Requirements.--A State or local government shall verify that 
any entity receiving funds for any covered public works project is free 
from any obligations, influences, or connections to any covered entity.
 ``(c) Exception.--This section shall only apply to projects that 
are located in a State.
 ``(d) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Covered entity.--The term `covered entity' means any 
 entity that--
 ``(A) is headquartered in China;
 ``(B) is owned, directed, controlled, financed, or 
 influenced directly or indirectly by the Government of 
 the People's Republic of China, the CCP, or the Chinese 
 military, including any entity for which the Government 
 of the People's Republic of China, the CCP, or the 
 Chinese military have the ability, through ownership of 
 a majority or a dominant minority of the total 
 outstanding voting interest in an entity, board 
 representation, proxy voting, a special share, 
 contractual arrangements, formal or informal 
 arrangements to act in concert, or other means, to 
 determine, direct, or decide for an entity in an 
 important manner; or
 ``(C) is a parent, subsidiary, or affiliate of any 
 entity described in subparagraph (B).
 ``(2) Covered public works project.--The term `covered 
 public works project' means any project of the construction, 
 repair, renovation, or maintenance of public buildings, 
 structures, sewers, water works, roads, bridges, docks, 
 underpasses and viaducts, as well as any other improvement to 
 be constructed, repaired or renovated or maintained on public 
 property to be paid, in whole or in part, with public funds or 
 with financing to be retired with public funds in the form of 
 lease payments or otherwise.''.
 (d) Clerical Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 35 of title 40, 
United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:

``3506. Restriction of States and local governments from using Federal 
 funds to engage, enter into, and award 
 public works contracts.''.
 (e) Updating Regulations.--The Federal Acquisition Regulation and 
the Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation shall be revised to 
implement the provisions of this Act.
 (f) Rule of Applicability.--The amendments made by this section 
shall take effect, and shall apply to projects beginning on or after, 
180 days after the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 1270. MODIFICATION TO UNITED STATES MEMBERSHIP IN 
 INTERPARLIAMENTARY GROUP.

 Section 1316(b) of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 135 Stat. 2001) is amended to read 
as follows:
 ``(b) Membership.--The Cyprus, Greece, Israel, and the United 
States 3+1 Interparliamentary Group shall include a group, to be known 
as the `United States group', that consists of--
 ``(1) not more than 6 United States Senators, who shall be 
 appointed jointly by the majority leader and the minority 
 leader of the Senate; and
 ``(2) not more than 6 Members of the United States House of 
 Representatives, who shall be appointed jointly by the Speaker 
 and minority leader of the House of Representatives.''.

SEC. 1271. LIMITATION ON TRANSFER OF F-16 AIRCRAFT.

 The President may not sell or authorize a license for the export of 
new F-16 aircraft or F-16 upgrade technology or modernization kits 
pursuant to any authority provided by the Arms Export Control Act (22 
U.S.C. 2751 et seq.) to the Government of Turkey, or to any agency or 
instrumentality of Turkey unless the President provides to the 
Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate, the Committee on Foreign 
Affairs of the House of Representatives, and the congressional defense 
committees a certification--
 (1) that such transfer is in the national interest of the 
 United States; and
 (2) that includes a detailed description of concrete steps 
 taken to ensure that such F-16s are not used by Turkey for 
 repeated unauthorized territorial overflights of Greece.

 TITLE XIII--OTHER MATTERS RELATING TO FOREIGN NATIONS

 Subtitle A--Matters Relating to the Indo-Pacific Region

SEC. 1301. MODIFICATION TO ANNUAL REPORT ON MILITARY AND SECURITY 
 DEVELOPMENTS INVOLVING THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA.

 Section 1202(b) of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2000 (10 U.S.C. 113 note) is amended as follows:
 (1) In paragraph (5)--
 (A) in subparagraph (B)--
 (i) by striking ``A summary'' and inserting 
 ``a summary''; and
 (ii) by striking ``; and'' at the end and 
 inserting a semicolon;
 (B) in subparagraph (C), by striking the period at 
 the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(D) the doctrine, capabilities, organization, and 
 operational employment of the People's Liberation Army 
 special operations forces.''.
 (2) In paragraph (8), by adding at the end the following 
 new subparagraph:
 ``(F) Special operations capabilities.''.
 (3) By redesignating paragraph (14) as paragraph (15).
 (4) By inserting after paragraph (13) the following:
 ``(14) An analysis of the activities of the People's 
 Republic of China in the Pacific Islands region.''.

SEC. 1302. SENSE OF CONGRESS ON SOUTH KOREA.

 It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) South Korea continues to be a critical ally of the 
 United States;
 (2) the presence of United States Armed Forces in South 
 Korea serves as a strong deterrent against North Korean 
 military aggression and as a critical support platform for 
 national security engagements in the Indo-Pacific region;
 (3) the presence of approximately 28,500 members of the 
 United States Armed Forces deployed to South Korea serves not 
 only as a stabilizing force to the Korean peninsula but also as 
 a reassurance to all our allies in the region; and
 (4) the United States should continue to--
 (A) maintain and strengthen its bilateral 
 relationship with South Korea and with other regional 
 allies such as Japan; and
 (B) maintain its existing robust military presence 
 in South Korea to deter aggression against the United 
 States and its allies and partners.

SEC. 1303. SENSE OF CONGRESS ON TAIWAN DEFENSE RELATIONS.

 It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the Taiwan Relations Act (Public Law 96-8; 22 U.S.C. et 
 seq.) and the Six Assurances provided by the United States to 
 Taiwan in July 1982 are the foundation for United States-Taiwan 
 relations;
 (2) as set forth in the Taiwan Relations Act, the United 
 States decision to establish diplomatic relations with the 
 People's Republic of China rests upon the expectation that the 
 future of Taiwan will be determined by peaceful means, and that 
 any effort to determine the future of Taiwan by other than 
 peaceful means, including boycotts and embargoes, is of grave 
 concern to the United States;
 (3) the increasingly coercive and aggressive behavior of 
 the People's Republic of China toward Taiwan is contrary to the 
 expectation of the peaceful resolution of the future of Taiwan;
 (4) as set forth in the Taiwan Relations Act, the capacity 
 to resist any resort to force or other forms of coercion that 
 would jeopardize the security, or the social or economic 
 system, of the people on Taiwan should be maintained;
 (5) the United States should continue to support the 
 development of capable, ready, and modern defense forces 
 necessary for Taiwan to maintain a sufficient self-defense 
 capability, including by--
 (A) supporting acquisition by Taiwan of defense 
 articles and services through foreign military sales, 
 direct commercial sales, and industrial cooperation, 
 with an emphasis on capabilities that support the 
 asymmetric defense strategy of Taiwan, including anti- 
 ship, coastal defense, anti-armor, air defense, 
 undersea warfare, advanced command, control, 
 communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, 
 and reconnaissance, and resilient command and control 
 capabilities;
 (B) ensuring timely review of and response to 
 requests of Taiwan for defense articles and services;
 (C) conducting practical training and military 
 exercises with Taiwan that enable Taiwan to maintain a 
 sufficient self- defense capability, as described in 
 the Taiwan Relations Act;
 (D) exchanges between defense officials and 
 officers of the United States and Taiwan at the 
 strategic, policy, and functional levels, consistent 
 with the Taiwan Travel Act (Public Law 115-135; 132 
 Stat. 341), especially for the purposes of--
 (i) enhancing cooperation on defense 
 planning;
 (ii) improving the interoperability of the 
 military forces of the United States and 
 Taiwan; and
 (iii) improving the reserve force of 
 Taiwan;
 (E) identifying improvements in Taiwan's ability to 
 use asymmetric military capabilities to enhance its 
 defensive capabilities, as described in the Taiwan 
 Relations Act; and
 (F) expanding cooperation in humanitarian 
 assistance and disaster relief; and
 (6) the United States should be committed to the defense of 
 a free and open society in the face of aggressive efforts by 
 the Government of the People's Republic of China to curtail or 
 influence the free exercise of rights and democratic franchise.

SEC. 1304. SENSE OF CONGRESS AND REPORT ON UNITED STATES SECURITY 
 COOPERATION WITH INDIA.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the United 
States--
 (1) should build upon the 2016 designation of India as a 
 Major Defense Partner of the United States by seeking to 
 improve interoperability and actively looking for opportunities 
 for joint military exercises; and
 (2) should strengthen security cooperation with India in 
 the Indian Ocean by--
 (A) conducting high-end exercises and increasing 
 joint training exercises;
 (B) expanding the geographic scope of joint 
 military activities between relevant United States 
 commands and the Indian military in the Western Indian 
 Ocean; and
 (C) expanding military training programs and 
 exercises, including humanitarian assistance and 
 disaster relief exercises.
 (b) Report Required.--Not later than March 1, 2023, the Under 
Secretary of Defense for Policy, in coordination with the Commander of 
United States Indo-Pacific Command and the Director of the Defense 
Security Cooperation Agency, shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees, the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
Representatives, and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate a 
report regarding--
 (1) opportunities for deeper defense cooperation with 
 India;
 (2) the defense relationship between the Russian Federation 
 and India;
 (3) the defense relationship between the People's Republic 
 of China and India; and
 (4) the defense relationship between the United States, 
 Australia, Japan, and India.

SEC. 1305. MODIFICATION TO REPORT ON RESOURCING UNITED STATES DEFENSE 
 REQUIREMENTS FOR THE INDO-PACIFIC REGION AND REPORT ON 
 ENHANCING DEFENSE COOPERATION WITH ALLIES AND PARTNERS IN 
 THE INDO-PACIFIC.

 (a) In General.--Section 1251 of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry 
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 
116-283) is amended in subsection (d)(1)(B) by amending clause (v) to 
read as follows:
 ``(v) An assessment of security cooperation 
 authorities, activities, or resources required 
 to achieve such objectives.''.
 (b) Report Required.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Commander of United States Indo-Pacific 
Command shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a 
report on the feasibility and advisability of enhancing defense 
cooperation with allies and partners in the Indo-Pacific region that 
includes the following:
 (1) A description of relevant cooperation between key 
 allies and leading partners in the Indo-Pacific region and the 
 United States during the preceding calendar year, including 
 mutual visits, exercises, training, and equipment 
 opportunities.
 (2) An evaluation of the feasibility of enhancing 
 cooperation between key allies and leading partners in the 
 Indo-Pacific region on a range of activities, including--
 (A) interoperability and coordination;
 (B) disaster and emergency response;
 (C) enhancing maritime domain awareness and 
 maritime security;
 (D) cyber defense and communications security;
 (E) military medical cooperation;
 (F) virtual combined exercises and training 
 activities;
 (G) advancing programs for United States military 
 advisors to assist in training the active and reserve 
 components of key allies and leading partners in the 
 Indo-Pacific region; and
 (H) expanding the activities of the National Guard 
 in the Indo-Pacific region.
 (3) Any other matters the Commander of United States Indo-
 Pacific Command considers appropriate.
 (c) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the congressional defense committees;
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (3) the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate.

SEC. 1306. REPORT ON SUPPORT AND SUSTAINMENT FOR CRITICAL CAPABILITIES 
 IN THE AREA OF RESPONSIBILITY OF THE UNITED STATES INDO-
 PACIFIC COMMAND NECESSARY TO MEET OPERATIONAL 
 REQUIREMENTS IN CERTAIN CONFLICTS WITH STRATEGIC 
 COMPETITORS.

 (a) Report Required.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than one year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Commander of the United States 
 Indo-Pacific Command, in consultation with the Commander of the 
 United States Transportation Command, the Director of the 
 Defense Logistics Agency, and other Federal officials that the 
 Commander of United States Indo-Pacific Command determines to 
 be appropriate, shall submit to the appropriate congressional 
 committees a report that describes the support and sustainment 
 for critical capabilities in the area of responsibility of the 
 United States Indo-Pacific Command that are necessary to meet 
 operational requirements in a conflict with a strategic 
 competitor of a duration that exceeds 6 months.
 (2) Matters to be included.--The report required by 
 paragraph (1) shall include the following:
 (A) An assessment of the posture and capabilities 
 of the current strategic force laydown of the United 
 States Indo-Pacific Command, including capabilities 
 such as--
 (i) command, control, communications, 
 computers, cyber, intelligence, surveillance, 
 and reconnaissance (commonly referred to as 
 ``C5ISR'') assets;
 (ii) surface, subsurface, land, air, and 
 space disposition and capabilities;
 (iii) strategic long-range precision fires, 
 missile defense, and anti-air capabilities;
 (iv) force protection of assets and 
 critical infrastructure;
 (v) logistics and sustainment capabilities, 
 including positioning, quantity, and 
 distribution of fuels; and
 (vi) munitions required to meet operational 
 requirements.
 (B) A detailed assessment of any gaps in the 
 required capabilities described in subparagraph (A) 
 relative to the requirements of the United States Indo-
 Pacific Command in both steady state and in such a 
 conflict with a strategic competitor, including gaps in 
 any capabilities described in the report required by 
 section 1251(d) of the National Defense Authorization 
 Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283).
 (C) An assessment of measures required to mitigate 
 the gaps described in subparagraph (B) before December 
 31, 2025. The assessment shall include associated costs 
 with enhancing United States, allied, and partner 
 military posture, basing, and sustainment 
 infrastructure in the area of responsibility of the 
 United States Indo-Pacific Command to best meet the 
 operational requirements described in subparagraph (A), 
 including in States, territories, and possessions of 
 the United States and regional allies and partners.
 (b) Form.--The report required by subsection (a) shall be submitted 
in unclassified form, but may include a classified annex.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section--
 (1) the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the congressional defense committees; and
 (B) the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House 
 of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign 
 Relations of the Senate; and
 (2) the term ``strategic competitor'' means a country 
 labeled as a strategic competitor in the ``Summary of the 2018 
 National Defense Strategy of the United States of America: 
 Sharpening the American Military's Competitive Edge'', issued 
 by the Department of Defense pursuant to section 113 of title 
 10, United States Code.

SEC. 1307. MODIFICATION TO PACIFIC DETERRENCE INITIATIVE.

 Section 1251(d) of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283; 134 Stat. 
3951) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3); and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following:
 ``(2) Subsequent report.--Not later than 15 days after the 
 submission of the report required by paragraph (1) for fiscal 
 year 2024, the Commander of the United States Indo-Pacific 
 Command shall submit to the congressional defense committees a 
 subsequent report containing a comparison of the specific cost 
 estimates required by items (aa) through (ff) of paragraph 
 (1)(B)(vi)(II) to the funding provided in the budget of the 
 President (submitted to Congress pursuant to section 1105 of 
 title 31, United States Code) for such items for such fiscal 
 year.''.

SEC. 1308. SEIZE THE INITIATIVE.

 (a) In General.--There shall be established in the Department of 
Defense an initiative, to be known as the ``Seize The Initiative Fund'' 
(referred to in this section as the ``Fund''), for the use of the 
Commander of United States Indo-Pacific Command to increase the ability 
of covered Armed Forces to respond to contingencies in the Indo-
Pacific.
 (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated $1,000,000,000 for the Department of Defense for fiscal 
year 2023 for the allowable uses described in subsection (c).
 (c) Allowable Uses.--The funds authorized to be appropriated by 
this section shall be used by the Commander of United States Indo-
Pacific Command, in consultation with the Secretary of Defense and the 
Secretaries of the military departments, for the following purposes:
 (1) Activities to increase the presence of covered Armed 
 Forces west of the international dateline in the United States 
 Indo-Pacific Command area of responsibility.
 (2) Activities to improve infrastructure to enhance the 
 responsiveness of covered Armed Forces west of the 
 international dateline in the United States Indo-Pacific 
 Command area of responsibility.
 (3) Activities to enhance prepositioning in the United 
 States Indo-Pacific Command area of responsibility of equipment 
 of covered Armed Forces.
 (4) Activities to enhance contingency response in the 
 United States Indo-Pacific Command area of responsibility.
 (d) Initial Plan Required.--The Commander of United States Indo-
Pacific Command shall, within 180 days of the enactment of this act, 
provide the congressional defense committees with a plan to use funds 
authorized pursuant to this section. Such plan, to the extent 
practicable, shall be consistent with other plans required to be 
produced by the Commander of United States Indo-Pacific Command, 
including under section 1242 of the National Defense Authorization Act 
for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 135 Stat. 1978).
 (e) Covered Armed Forces.--In this section, the term ``covered 
Armed Force'' means the following forces of the United States:
 (1) The Army.
 (2) The Navy.
 (3) The Marine Corps.
 (4) The Air Force.
 (5) The Space Force.

SEC. 1309. MODIFICATION TO CHINA MILITARY POWER REPORT.

 Section 1202(b)(7)(B) of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2000 (10 U.S.C. 113 note) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating clauses (ii) and (iii) as clauses 
 (iii) and (iv), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after clause (i) the following:
 ``(ii) the Middle East and North Africa, 
 especially with respect to Iran and China's 
 relationship with Iranian proxies such as 
 Hezbollah in Lebanon, the Houthis (``Ansar 
 Allah'') in Yemen, the Assad regime in Syria, 
 and Iranian-backed militias in Iraq;''.

SEC. 1310. MODIFICATIONS TO PUBLIC REPORTING OF CHINESE MILITARY 
 COMPANIES OPERATING IN THE UNITED STATES.

 (a) In General.--Section 1260H(c) of the William M. (Mac) 
Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (10 
U.S.C. 113 note) is amended by adding at the end the following 
sentence: ``The Secretary of Defense shall also consider information 
related to a Chinese military company operating directly or indirectly 
in the United States or any of its territories and possessions that is 
provided jointly by the chairperson and ranking member of each of the 
congressional defense committees in making such determinations.''.
 (b) Determination Prompted by Joint Submission of Information.--
Section 1260H of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (10 U.S.C. 113 note) is 
amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (d) as subsection (e); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (c) (as amended) the 
 following:
 ``(d) Determination Required.--Not later than 30 days after 
receiving information described in the second sentence of subsection 
(c) with respect to an entity, the Secretary of Defense shall--
 ``(1) determine if that entity meets the criteria for 
 inclusion on the list required under subsection (b); and
 ``(2) submit an unclassified report, without any 
 designation relating to dissemination control, to the 
 chairperson and ranking member of the committee that provided 
 the information with respect to such determination, including 
 whether the Secretary intends to list such entity publicly.''.

SEC. 1311. REPORTING ON INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION DOMICILED IN 
 THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA THAT PROVIDE SUPPORT TO 
 THE PEOPLE'S LIBERATION ARMY.

 (a) Determination.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense, in consultation 
 with the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, shall 
 identify each entity that is an institution of higher education 
 domiciled in the People's Republic of China that provides 
 support to the People's Liberation Army.
 (2) Factors.--In making a determination under paragraph (1) 
 with respect to an entity, the Secretary shall consider the 
 following factors:
 (A) Involvement in the implementation of the 
 military-civil fusion strategy of China.
 (B) Participation in the defense industrial base of 
 China.
 (C) Affiliation with the Chinese State 
 Administration for Science, Technology, and Industry 
 for the National Defense.
 (D) Funding received from any organization 
 subordinate to the Central Military Commission of the 
 Chinese Communist Party.
 (E) Relationship with any security, defense, 
 police, or within the Government of China or the 
 Chinese Communist Party.
 (F) Any other factor the Secretary determines is 
 appropriate.
 (b) Report.--
 (1) Annual report.--Not later than September 30, 2023, and 
 annually thereafter for 5 years, the Secretary shall submit to 
 the appropriate congressional committees a list of each entity 
 identified pursuant to subsection (a) in classified and 
 unclassified forms, and shall include in such submission, as 
 applicable, an explanation of any entities deleted from such 
 list with respect to a prior list.
 (2) Concurrent publication.--Concurrent with the submission 
 of each list described in paragraph (1), the Secretary shall 
 publish the unclassified portion of such list in the Federal 
 Register.
 (3) Ongoing revisions.--The Secretary, in consultation with 
 the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, shall make 
 additions or deletions to the most recent list submitted under 
 paragraph (1) on an ongoing basis based on the latest 
 information available.
 (4) Appropriate congressional committees defined.--In this 
 subsection, the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the Committee on Armed Services and the Select 
 Committee on Intelligence of the Senate; and
 (B) the Committee on Armed Services and the 
 Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House 
 of Representatives.
 (c) People's Liberation Army Defined.--In this section, the term 
``People's Liberation Army'' means the land, naval, and air military 
services, the People's Armed Police, the Strategic Support Force, the 
Rocket Force, and any other related security element within the 
Government of China or the Chinese Communist Party that the Secretary 
determines is appropriate.

SEC. 1312. SENSE OF CONGRESS ON INVITING TAIWAN TO THE RIM OF THE 
 PACIFIC EXERCISE.

 It is the sense of Congress that the naval forces of Taiwan should 
be invited to participate in the Rim of the Pacific exercise conducted 
in 2024.

SEC. 1313. JOINT EXERCISES WITH TAIWAN.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) joint military exercises with Taiwan are an important 
 component of improving military readiness and joint operability 
 of both countries;
 (2) the Commander of United States Indo-Pacific Command, 
 and other commands in the United States Indo-Pacific Command 
 area of responsibility, already possess the legal authority to 
 carry out such exercises; and
 (3) the United States should better use existing 
 authorities to improve the readiness and joint operability of 
 United States and Taiwanese forces.
 (b) Authority Recognized.--The Commander of United States Indo-
Pacific Command is authorized to carry out military exercises with 
Taiwan that--
 (1) include multiple warfare domains and make extensive use 
 of military common operations network used by United States, 
 allied, and Taiwanese forces;
 (2) to the maximum extent practical, incorporate the 
 cooperation of 2 or more combatant and subordinate unified 
 commands; and
 (3) present a complex military problem and include a force 
 presentation of a strategic competitor.

SEC. 1314. TAIWAN DEFENSE COOPERATION.

 (a) Study.--Not later than April 1, 2023, the Secretary of Defense, 
in consultation with the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the heads of such 
other agencies as the Secretary determines appropriate, shall complete 
a study on the feasibility of additional Department of Defense 
resources necessary to facilitate increased military cooperation 
between the United States and Taiwan.
 (b) Elements.--The study required by subsection (a) shall assess 
the following:
 (1) A description of the military cooperation handled by 
 the Department of Defense between the United States and Taiwan 
 during the preceding calendar year, including arm sales, mutual 
 visits, exercises, and training.
 (2) The additional manpower required to facilitate the arms 
 sales process to Taiwan and other matters as specified in 
 subsection (a).
 (3) The overall cost and anticipated efficiency of such 
 additional resources.
 (4) Such other matters as may be determined relevant by the 
 Secretary.
 (c) Briefing.--Not later than April 1, 2023, the Secretary shall 
provide to the Committees on Armed Services of the House of 
Representatives and the Senate a briefing on the findings of the study 
under subsection (a), including with respect to each element specified 
in subsection (b).

SEC. 1315. MODIFICATION OF PROHIBITION ON PARTICIPATION OF THE PEOPLE'S 
 REPUBLIC OF CHINA IN RIM OF THE PACIFIC (RIMPAC) NAVAL 
 EXERCISES TO INCLUDE CESSATION OF GENOCIDE BY CHINA.

 Section 1259(a)(1) of the John S. McCain National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (10 U.S.C. 321 note) is 
amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in subparagraph (C), by striking the period at the end 
 and inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(D) ceased committing ongoing genocide in China, 
 as determined by the Secretary of State on January 19, 
 2021, recognized and apologized for committing such 
 genocide, and engaged in a credible justice and 
 accountability process for all victims of such 
 genocide.''.

SEC. 1316. ADDITION TO NEXT ANNUAL REPORT ON MILITARY AND SECURITY 
 DEVELOPMENTS INVOLVING CHINA.

 The Secretary of Defense shall include, in the next report 
submitted on or before March 1, 2023, to fulfill the requirements under 
section 1202 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
2000 (10 U.S.C. 113 note), a robust analysis of developments in both 
the Space Systems Department and the Network Systems Department of the 
Strategic Support Force of China.

SEC. 1317. SENSE OF CONGRESS ON ENHANCING NATO EFFORTS TO COUNTER 
 MISINFORMATION AND DISINFORMATION.

 It is the sense of Congress that the United States should--
 (1) prioritize efforts to enhance the North Atlantic Treaty 
 Organization' (NATO's) capacity to counter misinformation and 
 disinformation;
 (2) support an increase in NATO's human, financial, and 
 technological resources and capacity dedicated to understand, 
 respond to, and fight threats in the information space; and
 (3) support building technological resilience to 
 misinformation and disinformation.

SEC. 1318. SENSE OF CONGRESS RELATING TO THE NATO PARLIAMENTARY 
 ASSEMBLY.

 It is the sense of Congress that the United States should--
 (1) proactively engage with the North Atlantic Treaty 
 Organization (NATO) Parliamentary Assembly (PA) and its member 
 delegations;
 (2) communicate with and educate the public on the benefits 
 and importance of NATO and NATO PA; and
 (3) support increased inter-democracy and inter-
 parliamentary cooperation on countering misinformation and 
 disinformation.

SEC. 1319. REPORT ON INDO-PACIFIC REGION.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than one year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Assistant Secretary of State for 
 the Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, in coordination 
 with the Assistant Secretary of State for the Bureau of South 
 and Central Asian Affairs, and Assistant Administrator for the 
 Bureau for Asia of the United States Agency for International 
 Development (USAID), shall submit to the congressional foreign 
 affairs committees a report that contains a 2-year strategy 
 assessing the resources and activities required to achieve the 
 policy objectives described in subsection (c).
 (2) Submission and update.--The report and strategy 
 required by this subsection shall--
 (A) be submitted at the same time as the submission 
 of the budget of the President (submitted to Congress 
 pursuant to section 1105 of title 31, United States 
 Code) for fiscal year 2024; and
 (B) be updated and submitted at the same time as 
 the submission of the budget of the President 
 (submitted to Congress pursuant to section 1105 of 
 title 31, United States Code) for fiscal years 2026, 
 2028, and 2030.
 (b) Criteria.--The report and strategy required in subsection (a) 
shall be developed in accordance with the following criteria:
 (1) It shall reflect the objective, autonomous, and 
 independent assessment of the activities, resources, and costs 
 required to achieve objectives detailed in subsection (c) by 
 the principals, the subordinate and parallel offices providing 
 input into the assessment.
 (2) It shall cover a period of five fiscal years, beginning 
 with the fiscal year following the fiscal year in which the 
 report is submitted.
 (3) It shall incorporate input from U.S. Ambassadors in the 
 Indo-Pacific region provided explicitly for the required 
 report.
 (4) It may include information gathered through 
 consultation with program offices and subject matter experts in 
 relevant functional bureaus, as deemed necessary by the 
 principals.
 (5) It shall not be subject to fiscal guidance or global 
 strategic tradeoffs associated with the annual President's 
 budget request.
 (c) Policy Objectives.--The report and strategy required in 
subsection (a) shall assess the activities and resources required to 
achieve the following policy objectives:
 (1) Implement the Interim National Security Strategic 
 Guidance, or the most recent National Security Strategy, with 
 respect to the Indo-Pacific region.
 (2) Implement the 2022 Indo-Pacific Strategy, or successor 
 documents, that set forth the U.S. Government strategy toward 
 the Indo-Pacific region.
 (3) Implement the State-USAID Joint Strategic Plan with 
 respect to the Indo-Pacific region.
 (4) Enhance meaningful diplomatic and economic relations 
 with allies and partners in the Indo-Pacific and demonstrate an 
 enduring U.S. commitment to the region.
 (5) Secure and advance U.S. national interests in the Indo-
 Pacific, including through countering the malign influence of 
 the Government of the People's Republic of China.
 (d) Matters To Be Included.--The report and strategy required under 
subsection (a) shall include the following:
 (1) A description of the Bureaus' bilateral and 
 multilateral goals for the period covered in the report that 
 the principals deem necessary to accomplish the objectives 
 outlined in subsection (c), disaggregated by country and forum.
 (2) A timeline with annual benchmarks for achieving the 
 objectives described in subsection (c).
 (3) An assessment of the sufficiency of U.S. diplomatic 
 personnel and facilities currently available in the Indo-
 Pacific region to achieve the objectives outlined in subsection 
 (c), through consultation with U.S. embassies in the region. 
 The assessment shall include:
 (A) A list, in priority order, of locations in the 
 Indo-Pacific region that require additional diplomatic 
 personnel or facilities.
 (B) A description of locations where the United 
 States may be able to collocate diplomatic personnel at 
 allied or partner embassies and consulates.
 (C) A discussion of embassies or consulates where 
 diplomatic staff could be reduced within the Indo-
 Pacific region, where appropriate.
 (D) A detailed description of the fiscal and 
 personnel resources required to fill gaps identified.
 (4) A detailed plan to expand U.S. diplomatic engagement 
 and foreign assistance presence in the Pacific Island nations 
 within the next five years, including a description of ``quick 
 impact'' programs that can be developed and implemented within 
 the first fiscal year of the period covered in the report.
 (5) A discussion of the resources needed to enhance U.S. 
 strategic messaging and spotlight coercive PRC behavior.
 (6) A detailed description of the resources and policy 
 tools needed to expand the United States ability to offer high-
 quality infrastructure projects in strategically significant 
 parts of the Indo-Pacific region, with a particular focus on 
 expanding investments in Southeast Asia and the Pacific 
 Islands.
 (7) A gap assessment of security assistance by country, and 
 of the resources needed to fill those gaps.
 (8) A description of the resources and policy tools needed 
 to facilitate continued private sector investment in partner 
 countries in the Indo-Pacific.
 (9) A discussion of any additional bilateral or regional 
 assistance resources needed to achieve the objectives outlined 
 in subsection (c), as deemed necessary by the principals.
 (e) Form.--The report required under subsection (a) shall be 
submitted in an unclassified form, but may include a classified annex.
 (f) Availability.--Not later than February 1 each year, the 
Assistant Secretary for East Asian and Pacific Affairs shall make the 
report and strategy available to the Secretary of State, the 
Administrator of the USAID, the Deputy Secretary of State, the Deputy 
Secretary of State for Management and Resources, the Deputy 
Administrator for Policy and Programming, the Deputy Administrator for 
Management and Resources, the Under Secretary of State for Political 
Affairs, the Director of the Office of Foreign Assistance at the 
Department of State, the Director of the Bureau of Foreign Assistance 
at the USAID, and the Director of Policy Planning.
 (g) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Indo-pacific region.--The term ``Indo-Pacific region'' 
 means the countries under the jurisdiction of the Bureau for 
 East Asian and Pacific Affairs, as well as the countries of 
 Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri 
 Lanka.
 (2) Foreign affairs committees.--The term ``foreign affairs 
 committees'' means the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the 
 House of Representatives; the Committee on Foreign Relations of 
 the Senate; the Subcommittee on State, Foreign Operations, 
 Related Programs of the Committee on Appropriations of the 
 House of Representatives; and the Subcommittee on State, 
 Foreign Operations, and Related Programs of the Committee on 
 Appropriations of the Senate.
 (3) Principals.--The term ``principals'' means the 
 Assistant Secretary of State for the Bureau of East Asian and 
 Pacific Affairs, the Assistant Secretary of State for the 
 Bureau of South and Central Asian Affairs, and the Assistant 
 Administrator for the Bureau for Asia of the United States 
 Agency for International Development.

SEC. 1320. SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING THE STATUS OF CHINA.

 It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the People's Republic of China is a fully 
 industrialized nation and no longer a developing nation; and
 (2) any international agreement that provides or accords 
 China a favorable status or treatment as a ``developing 
 nation'' should be updated to reflect the status of China.

SEC. 1321. REPORT ON PROVIDING ACCESS TO UNCENSORED MEDIA IN CHINA.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of State shall provide to Congress a classified 
report on what is needed to provide access to free and uncensored media 
in the Chinese market.

 Subtitle B--Other Matters Relating to Foreign Nations

SEC. 1331. SUPPORT OF SPECIAL OPERATIONS FOR IRREGULAR WARFARE.

 (a) Codification.--
 (1) In general.--Chapter 3 of title 10, United States Code, 
 is amended by inserting after section 127c a new section 127d 
 consisting of--
 (A) a heading as follows:
``Sec. 127d. Support of special operations for irregular warfare''; and
 (B) a text consisting of the text of subsections 
 (a) through (i) of section 1202 of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 (Public Law 115-
 91; 131 Stat. 1639).
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the 
 beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the 
 item relating to section 127c the following new item:

``127d. Support of special operations for irregular warfare.''.
 (b) Modification of Dollar Amount.--Section 127d of title 10, 
United States Code, as so amended, is further amended in subsection (a) 
by striking ``$15,000,000'' and inserting ``$25,000,000''.
 (c) Conforming Repeal.--Section 1202 of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 is repealed.

SEC. 1332. PERMANENT EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY FOR CERTAIN PAYMENTS TO 
 REDRESS INJURY AND LOSS.

 Section 1213(a) of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2020 (Public Law 116-92; 10 U.S.C. 2731 note) is amended by 
striking ``During'' and all that follows through ``December 31, 2023, 
not'' and inserting ``Not''.

SEC. 1333. EXTENSION OF UNITED STATES-ISRAEL COOPERATION TO COUNTER 
 UNMANNED AERIAL SYSTEMS.

 Section 1278(f) of the National Defense Authorization Act, 2020 
(Public Law 116-92; 133 Stat. 1702; 22 U.S.C. 8606 note) is amended by 
striking ``December 31, 2024'' and inserting ``December 31, 2026''.

SEC. 1334. MODIFICATION AND EXTENSION OF UNITED STATES-ISRAEL 
 COOPERATION TO COUNTER UNMANNED AERIAL SYSTEMS.

 (a) Authority to Establish Capabilities to Counter Unmanned Aerial 
Systems.--Subsection (a)(1) of section 1278 of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020 (Public Law 116-92; 133 Stat. 
1702; 22 U.S.C. 8606 note) is amended in the first sentence by 
inserting after ``to establish capabilities for countering unmanned 
aerial systems'' the following ``, including directed energy 
capabilities,''.
 (b) Support in Connection With the Program.--Subsection (b) of such 
section is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (3)(B), by inserting at the end before the 
 period the following: ``, including directed energy 
 capabilities''; and
 (2) in paragraph (4), by striking ``$25,000,000'' and 
 inserting ``$40,000,000''.
 (c) Sunset.--Subsection (f) of such section is amended by striking 
``December 31, 2024'' and inserting ``December 31, 2026''.

SEC. 1335. MODIFICATION TO INITIATIVE TO SUPPORT PROTECTION OF NATIONAL 
 SECURITY ACADEMIC RESEARCHERS FROM UNDUE INFLUENCE AND 
 OTHER SECURITY THREATS.

 (a) In General.--Clause (iii) of section 1286(c)(8)(A) of the John 
S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (10 
U.S.C. 2358 note; Public Law 115-232) is amended--
 (1) in subclause (I), by striking ``or'' at the end; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(III) to provide documented 
 support to a defense or an intelligence 
 agency of the applicable country; or''.
 (b) Prohibition on Funds.--
 (1) In general.--None of the funds authorized to be 
 appropriated by this Act or otherwise made available for fiscal 
 year 2023 or any subsequent fiscal year for the Department of 
 Defense for research, development, test, and evaluation may be 
 provided to an entity that maintains a contract between the 
 entity and a Chinese or Russian academic institution identified 
 on the list developed under section 1286(c)(8)(A) of the John 
 S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
 2019 by reason of meeting the requirements of clause (ii) or 
 (iii) (as amended by subsection (a)) of such section.
 (2) Waiver.--The Secretary of Defense may waive the 
 prohibition on funds under this subsection with respect to an 
 entity if the Secretary determines that such a waiver is 
 appropriate.

SEC. 1336. ANNUAL REPORT ON ROLE OF ANTISEMITISIM IN VIOLENT EXTREMIST 
 MOVEMENTS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the 
Secretary of State and the Office of the Special Envoy To Monitor and 
Combat Antisemitism, shall submit to the appropriate congressional 
committees an annual report on--
 (1) the rise in global antisemitism;
 (2) the role of antisemitism in violent extremist 
 movements;
 (3) the threat of global antisemitism to the United States 
 Armed Forces; and
 (4) the threat of global antisemitism to United States 
 national security and interests.
 (b) Form; Publication.--The report required by subsection (a) shall 
be submitted in unclassified form, but may contain a classified annex. 
The unclassified portion of such report shall be published on a 
publicly available website of the Department of Defense.
 (c) Appropriate Congressional Committees.--In this section, the 
term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Foreign Affairs, of the House of Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Foreign Relations of the Senate.

SEC. 1337. USE OF UNITED STATES-ORIGIN DEFENSE ARTICLES IN YEMEN.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of State, in consultation with the 
Secretary of Defense, shall develop specific guidance for investigating 
any indications that United States-origin defense articles have been 
used in Yemen by the Saudi-led coalition in substantial violation of 
relevant agreements with countries participating in the coalition, 
including for unauthorized purposes.
 (b) Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State shall submit 
 to the appropriate congressional committees a report on--
 (A) the guidance developed pursuant to subsection 
 (a); and
 (B) all current information on each of the 
 certification elements required by section 1290 of the 
 John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for 
 Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115-232).
 (2) Form.--The report required by this subsection shall be 
 submitted in unclassified form, but may include a classified 
 annex if necessary.
 (3) Appropriate congressional committees defined.--In this 
 subsection, the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the 
 Committee on Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the 
 Committee on Armed Services of the Senate.

SEC. 1338. SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING ISRAEL.

 It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) since 1948, Israel has been one of the strongest 
 friends and allies of the United States;
 (2) Israel is a stable, democratic country in a region 
 often marred by turmoil;
 (3) it is essential to the strategic interest of the United 
 States to continue to offer security assistance and related 
 support to Israel; and
 (4) such assistance and support is especially vital as 
 Israel confronts a number of potential challenges at the 
 present time, including continuing threats from Iran.

SEC. 1339. SENSE OF CONGRESS AND BRIEFING ON MULTINATIONAL FORCE AND 
 OBSERVERS.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the Multinational Force and Observers has helped 
 strengthen stability and kept the peace in Sinai Peninsula; and
 (2) the United States should continue to maintain its 
 strong support for the Multinational Force and Observers.
 (b) Briefing.--Not later than 60 days before the implementation of 
any plan to move a Multinational Force and Observer site, the Secretary 
of Defense shall brief the Committee on Armed Services and the 
Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives and the 
Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on Foreign Relations of 
the Senate on the resulting impact of such plan existing security 
arrangements between Israel and Egypt.

SEC. 1340. COMPREHENSIVE STRATEGY TO COUNTER GRAY ZONE OPERATIONS AND 
 OTHER HYBRID WARFARE METHODS.

 (a) In General.--The President shall develop and submit to the 
appropriate congressional committees a comprehensive strategy to 
counter gray zone operations and other hybrid warfare methods of 
foreign adversaries and competitors and develop pro-active efforts to 
put forth United States interests to counter such operations and 
methods.
 (b) Matters to Be Included.--The strategy required by subsection 
(a) shall include--
 (1) an identification of United States interests described 
 in such subsection; and
 (2) a description of the means to achieve such interests.
 (c) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) congressional defense committees; and
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the 
 Senate.

SEC. 1341. STUDY ON DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE SUPPORT FOR STABILIZATION 
 ACTIVITIES IN NATIONAL SECURITY INTEREST OF THE UNITED 
 STATES.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense shall conduct a study on 
the use and implementation of the authority of section 1210A of the 
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020 (Public Law 
116-92; 133 Stat. 1626), relating to Department of Defense support for 
stabilization activities in national security interest of the United 
States.
 (b) Matters to Be Included.--The study required by subsection (a) 
shall include the following:
 (1) A review of the use and implementation of the authority 
 of section 1210A of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
 Fiscal Year 2020.
 (2) An identification of the number of requests for support 
 made by the Department of State, the United States Agency for 
 International Development, and other Federal agencies pursuant 
 to such authority and number of such requests granted by the 
 Department of Defense.
 (3) An identification of the total amount of support 
 provided by the Department of Defense pursuant to such requests 
 so granted.
 (c) Report.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense shall submit to 
 the appropriate congressional committees a report that contains 
 the results of the study required by subsection (a).
 (2) Appropriate congressional committees defined.--In this 
 subsection, the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) congressional defense committees; and
 (B) the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House 
 of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign 
 Relations of the Senate.

SEC. 1342. REPORT ON AMERICAN INSTITUTE IN TAIWAN EFFORTS TO COMBAT 
 CERTAIN DISINFORMATION AND PROPAGANDA.

 (a) Report.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary 
of Defense (as appropriate), shall submit a report to the appropriate 
Congressional Committees--
 (1) on the efforts of the American Institute in Taiwan to 
 combat disinformation or propaganda perpetuated by the Chinese 
 Communist Party and People's Republic of China in regards to--
 (A) United States commitment to Taiwan's self-
 defense, pursuant to the Taiwan Relations Act;
 (B) United States Foreign Military Sales to Taiwan; 
 and
 (C) United States economic cooperation with Taiwan; 
 and
 (2) that contains--
 (A) an assessment of the effectiveness of the 
 efforts of the American Institute in Taiwan in 
 combating disinformation or propaganda perpetuated by 
 the Chinese Communist Party and People's Republic of 
 China; and
 (B) recommendations on how to better combat such 
 disinformation or propaganda.
 (b) Form.--The report required by subsection (a) shall be submitted 
in unclassified form but may include a classified annex.
 (c) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section 
the term, ``appropriate Congressional Committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Foreign Relations of the Senate; and
 (2) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives.

SEC. 1343. REPORT ON AZERBAIJAN.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the Secretary of 
State, shall submit to Congress a report on the following:
 (1) United States parts and technology discovered in 
 Turkish Bayraktar unmanned aerial vehicles deployed by 
 Azerbaijan against Nagorno Karabakh between September 27, 2020 
 and November 9, 2020, including an assessment of any potential 
 violations of United States arms export laws, sanctions 
 policies, or other provisions of United States law related to 
 the discovery of such parts and technology.
 (2) Azerbaijan's use of white phosphorous, cluster bombs 
 and other prohibited munitions deployed by Azerbaijan against 
 Nagorno Karabakh between September 27, 2020, and November 9, 
 2020, including an assessment of any potential violations of 
 United States or international law related to the use of these 
 munitions.
 (3) Turkey's and Azerbaijan's recruitment of foreign 
 terrorist fighters to participate in Azerbaijan's offensive 
 military operations against Nagorno Karabakh between September 
 27, 2020, and November 9, 2020, including an assessment of any 
 related potential violations of United States law, the 
 International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, 
 Financing and Training of Mercenaries, or other international 
 or multilateral treaties.

SEC. 1344. DEFENSE AND DIPLOMATIC STRATEGY FOR LIBYA.

 (a) Report Required.--Not later than 240 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act and annually thereafter through 2027, the 
Secretary of State, in concurrence with the Secretary of Defense, shall 
submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report that 
contains a description of the United States defense and diplomatic 
strategy for Libya.
 (b) Elements.--The report required by subsection (a) shall include 
the following elements:
 (1) An explanation of the defense and diplomatic strategy 
 for Libya, including a description of the ends, ways, and means 
 inherent to the strategy, the role of the Armed Forces in 
 supporting the strategy, and its integration with the U.S. 
 Strategy to Prevent Conflict and Promote Stability.
 (2) An explanation of how the existing authorities and 
 available resources of the Department of Defense and the 
 Department of State are being utilized to support the strategy.
 (3) A detailed description of Libyan and external security 
 actors and an assessment of how those actors advance or 
 undermine stability in Libya and United States strategic 
 interests in Libya, including United States interests in a 
 political settlement to the conflict in Libya.
 (4) A detailed description of the military activities of 
 external actors in Libya, including assessments and detailed 
 analysis of situations in which those activities--
 (A) have undermined progress towards stabilization 
 of Libya, including the United Nations-led 
 negotiations;
 (B) involve United States-origin equipment and 
 violate contractual conditions of acceptable use of 
 such equipment; or
 (C) violate or seek to violate the United Nations 
 arms embargo on Libya imposed pursuant to United 
 Nations Security Council Resolution 1970 (2011).
 (5) An update on assessments relating to reopening the 
 United States Embassy in Libya, including any existing or 
 potential barriers to implementation, financial cost estimates, 
 security considerations, and possible timelines.
 (6) An identification and assessment of the root causes of 
 migration through Libya into Europe, including--
 (A) the extent to which such migratory trends 
 correlate to increased instances of human trafficking 
 and slavery, including actors attributed to such 
 behavior;
 (B) an analysis of Libyan Government and 
 international efforts to reduce migration and prevent 
 human trafficking, slavery, and abuse of migrants' 
 human rights in Libya; and
 (C) United States policy options to reduce flows of 
 migrants to and through Libya and to support the humane 
 treatment of migrants and their lawful departure from 
 Libya in cooperation with Libyan authorities, United 
 Nations entities, and partner governments.
 (7) A plan for any potential stabilization operations 
 support for Libya, as a designated priority country under the 
 Global Fragility Act of 2019 (22 U.S.C. 9804), including--
 (A) A detailed description of the stability and 
 threat environment in Libya and related stabilization 
 objectives, including the desired end-state for the 
 United States.
 (B) Any potential limitations to existing resources 
 of either Department affecting the ability to support 
 stabilization operations in Libya.
 (C) A detailed analysis of whether barriers exist 
 to the use of authorities pursuant to section 1210A of 
 the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
 2020 (133 Stat. 1626) to support United States 
 stabilization efforts in Libya, and any congressional 
 or departmental action that could reduce such barriers.
 (D) An identification of interagency deployments in 
 Libya, including the rationale for such deployments and 
 plans for future interagency deployments.
 (8) Any other matters the Secretary of Defense considers 
 appropriate.
 (c) Form.--The report required by subsection (a) shall be submitted 
in unclassified form, but may include a classified annex.
 (d) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on 
 Foreign Relations, and the Committee on Appropriations of the 
 Senate; and
 (2) the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on 
 Foreign Affairs, and the Committee on Appropriations of the 
 House of Representatives.

SEC. 1345. REPEAL OF RESTRICTION ON FUNDING FOR THE PREPARATORY 
 COMMISSION FOR THE COMPREHENSIVE NUCLEAR-TEST-BAN TREATY 
 ORGANIZATION.

 Section 1279E of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2018 (22 U.S.C. 287 note) is repealed.

SEC. 1346. SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING THE BOYCOTT OF CERTAIN COMPANIES 
 THAT CONTINUE TO OPERATE IN RUSSIA AND PROVIDE FINANCIAL 
 BENEFITS TO THE PUTIN REGIME.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) On February 24, 2022, the Government of Russia, led by 
 Vladimir Putin, invaded the sovereign country of Ukraine under 
 the direction of the President of the Russian Federation 
 Vladimir Putin.
 (2) On March 6, 2022, Secretary of State Antony Blinken 
 stated that the United States has seen credible reports of 
 Russia engaging in ``deliberate attacks on civilians, which 
 would constitute a war crime''.
 (3) On March 16, 2022, Ukrainian President Zelenskyy urged 
 ``All American companies must leave Russia * * * leave their 
 market immediately, because it is flooded with [Ukrainian] 
 blood''.
 (4) In the same speech, President Zelenskyy called on 
 Congress to lead by pressuring companies ``who finance the 
 Russian military machine'' and conduct ``business in Russia'' 
 and to ``make sure that the Russians do not receive a single 
 penny that they use to destroy people in Ukraine''.
 (5) Jeffrey Sonnenfeld of the Yale School of Management has 
 compiled a list of some 1,000 companies which have withdrawn 
 permanently or temporarily from Russia.
 (6) By refusing to reduce, cease, or withdraw operations in 
 Russia, these companies which have not withdrawn permanently or 
 temporarily from Russia contribute to undermining the sanctions 
 imposed by the United States and its allies that are intended 
 to deter further Russian aggression.
 (7) A number of United States and multinational companies 
 that do business in Russia do not provide life-saving or 
 health-related goods and services to the Russian people and 
 contribute to Putin's ability to wage war in Ukraine and 
 continue to commit war crimes by providing revenue for the 
 Russian Government.
 (b) Sense of Congress.--Congress--
 (1) supports and encourages Americans who choose to 
 exercise their free speech rights by boycotting companies that 
 do not provide life-saving or health-related goods and services 
 to the Russian people yet continue to operate in Russia;
 (2) condemns companies that continue to operate in Russia 
 and provide financial benefits to the Putin regime that enable 
 his ability to continue waging war in Ukraine; and
 (3) commends companies that have already suspended 
 operations in or withdrawn from markets in Russia in response 
 to the Putin regime's unlawful invasion of Ukraine.

SEC. 1347. REPORT ON ARMS TRAFFICKING IN HAITI.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State, in consultation with the 
Secretary of Commerce and the Attorney General, shall submit to the 
appropriate congressional committees a report on arms trafficking in 
Haiti.
 (b) Matters to Be Included.--The report shall include the 
following:
 (1) The number and category of United States-origin weapons 
 in Haiti, including those in possession of the Haitian National 
 Police or other state authorities and diverted outside of their 
 control and the number of United States-origin weapons believed 
 to be illegally trafficked from the United States since 1991.
 (2) The major routes by which illegal arms are trafficked 
 into Haiti.
 (3) The major Haitian seaports, airports, and other border 
 crossings where illegal arms are trafficked.
 (4) An accounting of the ways individuals evade law 
 enforcement and customs officials.
 (5) A description of networks among Haitian government 
 officials, Haitian customs officials, and gangs and others 
 illegally involved in arms trafficking.
 (6) Whether any end-use agreements between the United 
 States and Haiti in the issuance of United States-origin 
 weapons have been violated.
 (c) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on 
 Foreign Affairs, and the Committee on the Judiciary of the 
 House of Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on 
 Foreign Relations, and the Committee on the Judiciary of the 
 Senate.

SEC. 1348. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE OFFICE OF CITY AND STATE DIPLOMACY.

 Section 1 of the State Department Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 
U.S.C. 2651a) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating the second subsection (h) (relating to 
 the Office of Sanctions Coordination) as subsection (k); and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(l) Office of City and State Diplomacy.--
 ``(1) In general.--There shall be established within the 
 Department of State an Office of City and State Diplomacy (in 
 this subsection referred to as the `Office'). The Department 
 may use a similar name at its discretion and upon notification 
 to Congress.
 ``(2) Head of office.--The head of the Office shall be the 
 Ambassador-at-Large for City and State Diplomacy (in this 
 subsection referred to as the `Ambassador') or other 
 appropriate senior official. The head of the Office shall--
 ``(A) be appointed by the President, by and with 
 the advice and consent of the Senate; and
 ``(B) report directly to the Secretary, or such 
 other senior official as the Secretary determines 
 appropriate and upon notification to Congress.
 ``(3) Duties.--
 ``(A) Principal duty.--The principal duty of the 
 head of the Office shall be the overall coordination 
 (including policy oversight of resources) of Federal 
 support for subnational engagements by State and 
 municipal governments with foreign governments. The 
 head of the Office shall be the principal adviser to 
 the Secretary of State on subnational engagements and 
 the principal official on such matters within the 
 senior management of the Department of State.
 ``(B) Additional duties.--The additional duties of 
 the head of the Office shall include the following:
 ``(i) Coordinating overall United States 
 policy and programs in support of subnational 
 engagements by State and municipal governments 
 with foreign governments, including with 
 respect to the following:
 ``(I) Coordinating resources across 
 the Department of State and throughout 
 the Federal Government in support of 
 such engagements.
 ``(II) Identifying policy, program, 
 and funding discrepancies among 
 relevant Federal agencies regarding 
 such coordination.
 ``(III) Identifying gaps in Federal 
 support for such engagements and 
 developing corresponding policy or 
 programmatic changes to address such 
 gaps.
 ``(ii) Identifying areas of alignment 
 between United States foreign policy and State 
 and municipal goals.
 ``(iii) Improving communication with the 
 American public, including, potentially, 
 communication that demonstrate the breadth of 
 international engagement by subnational actors 
 and the impact of diplomacy across the United 
 States.
 ``(iv) Providing advisory support to 
 subnational engagements, including by assisting 
 State and municipal governments regarding--
 ``(I) developing and implementing 
 global engagement and public diplomacy 
 strategies;
 ``(II) implementing programs to 
 cooperate with foreign governments on 
 policy priorities or managing shared 
 resources; and
 ``(III) understanding the 
 implications of foreign policy 
 developments or policy changes through 
 regular and extraordinary briefings.
 ``(v) Facilitating linkages and networks 
 among State and municipal governments, and 
 between State and municipal governments and 
 their foreign counterparts, including by 
 tracking subnational engagements and leveraging 
 State and municipal expertise.
 ``(vi) Supporting the work of Department of 
 State detailees assigned to State and municipal 
 governments pursuant to this subsection.
 ``(vii) Under the direction of the 
 Secretary, negotiating agreements and memoranda 
 of understanding with foreign governments 
 related to subnational engagements and 
 priorities.
 ``(viii) Supporting United States economic 
 interests through subnational engagements, in 
 consultation and coordination with the 
 Department of Commerce, the Department of the 
 Treasury, and the Office of the United States 
 Trade Representative.
 ``(ix) Coordinating subnational engagements 
 with the associations of subnational elected 
 leaders, including the United States Conference 
 of Mayors, National Governors Association, 
 National League of Cities, National Association 
 of Counties, Council of State Governments, 
 National Conference of State Legislators, and 
 State International Development Organizations.
 ``(4) Coordination.--With respect to matters involving 
 trade promotion and inward investment facilitation, the Office 
 shall coordinate with and support the International Trade 
 Administration of the Department of Commerce as the lead 
 Federal agency for trade promotion and facilitation of business 
 investment in the United States.
 ``(5) Detailees.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary of State, with 
 respect to employees of the Department of State, is 
 authorized to detail a member of the civil service or 
 Foreign Service to State and municipal governments on a 
 reimbursable or nonreimbursable basis. Such details 
 shall be for a period not to exceed two years, and 
 shall be without interruption or loss of status or 
 privilege.
 ``(B) Responsibilities.--Detailees under 
 subparagraph (A) should carry out the following:
 ``(i) Supporting the mission and objectives 
 of the host subnational government office.
 ``(ii) Advising State and municipal 
 government officials regarding questions of 
 global affairs, foreign policy, cooperative 
 agreements, and public diplomacy.
 ``(iii) Coordinating activities relating to 
 State and municipal government subnational 
 engagements with the Department of State, 
 including the Office, Department leadership, 
 and regional and functional bureaus of the 
 Department, as appropriate.
 ``(iv) Engaging Federal agencies regarding 
 security, public health, trade promotion, and 
 other programs executed at the State or 
 municipal government level.
 ``(v) Any other duties requested by State 
 and municipal governments and approved by the 
 Office.
 ``(C) Additional personnel support for subnational 
 engagement.--For the purposes of this subsection, the 
 Secretary of State--
 ``(i) is authorized to employ individuals 
 by contract;
 ``(ii) is encouraged to make use of the re-
 hired annuitants authority under section 3323 
 of title 5, United States Code, particularly 
 for annuitants who are already residing across 
 the United States who may have the skills and 
 experience to support subnational governments; 
 and
 ``(iii) is encouraged to make use of 
 authorities under the Intergovernmental 
 Personnel Act of 1970 (42 U.S.C. 4701 et seq.) 
 to temporarily assign State and local 
 government officials to the Department of State 
 or overseas missions to increase their 
 international experience and add their 
 perspectives on United States priorities to the 
 Department.
 ``(6) Report and briefing.--
 ``(A) Report.--Not later than one year after the 
 date of the enactment of this subsection, the head of 
 the Office shall submit to the Committee on Foreign 
 Affairs and the Committee on Appropriations of the 
 House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign 
 Relations and the Committee on Appropriations of the 
 Senate a report that includes information relating to 
 the following:
 ``(i) The staffing plan (including 
 permanent and temporary staff) for the Office 
 and a justification for the location of the 
 Office within the Department of State's 
 organizational structure.
 ``(ii) The funding level provided to the 
 Office for the Office, together with a 
 justification relating to such level.
 ``(iii) The rank and title granted to the 
 head of the Office, together with a 
 justification relating to such decision and an 
 analysis of whether the rank and title of 
 Ambassador-at-Large is required to fulfill the 
 duties of the Office.
 ``(iv) A strategic plan for the Office, 
 including relating to--
 ``(I) leveraging subnational 
 engagement to improve United States 
 foreign policy effectiveness;
 ``(II) enhancing the awareness, 
 understanding, and involvement of 
 United States citizens in the foreign 
 policy process; and
 ``(III) better engaging with 
 foreign subnational governments to 
 strengthen diplomacy.
 ``(v) Any other matters as determined 
 relevant by the head of the Office.
 ``(B) Briefings.--Not later than 30 days after the 
 submission of the report required under subparagraph 
 (A) and annually thereafter, the head of the Office 
 shall brief the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the 
 Committee on Appropriations of the House of 
 Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations 
 and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate on 
 the work of the Office and any changes made to the 
 organizational structure or funding of the Office.
 ``(7) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this subsection may 
 be construed as precluding--
 ``(A) the Office from being elevated to a bureau 
 within the Department of State; or
 ``(B) the head of the Office from being elevated to 
 an Assistant Secretary, if such an Assistant Secretary 
 position does not increase the number of Assistant 
 Secretary positions at the Department above the number 
 authorized under subsection (c)(1).
 ``(8) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Municipal.--The term `municipal' means, with 
 respect to the government of a municipality in the 
 United States, a municipality with a population of not 
 fewer than 100,000 people.
 ``(B) State.--The term `State' means the 50 States, 
 the District of Columbia, and any territory or 
 possession of the United States.
 ``(C) Subnational engagement.--The term 
 `subnational engagement' means formal meetings or 
 events between elected officials of State or municipal 
 governments and their foreign counterparts.''.

SEC. 1349. TRANSFER OF EXCESS OLIVER HAZARD PERRY CLASS GUIDED MISSILE 
 FRIGATES TO EGYPT.

 (a) In General.--The President is authorized to transfer to the 
Government of Egypt the OLIVER HAZARD PERRY class guided missile 
frigates ex-USS CARR (FFG-52) and ex-USS ELROD (FFG-55) on a grant 
basis under section 516 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 
U.S.C. 2321j) on or after the date on which the President submits to 
the appropriate congressional committees a certification described in 
subsection (b).
 (b) Certification.--The certification described in this subsection 
is a certification of the President of the following:
 (1) The President has received reliable assurances that the 
 Government of Egypt and any Egyptian state-owned enterprises--
 (A) are not knowingly engaged in any activity 
 subject to sanctions under the Countering America's 
 Adversaries Through Sanctions Act, including an 
 activity related to Russian Su-35 warplanes or other 
 advanced military technologies; and
 (B) will not knowingly engage in activity subject 
 to sanctions under the Countering America's Adversaries 
 Through Sanctions Act in the future.
 (2) The Egyptian crews participating in training related to 
 and involved in the operation of the vessels transferred under 
 this section are subject to the requirements of section 620M of 
 the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2378d), section 
 362 of title 10, United States Code, and other relevant human 
 rights vetting to ensure United States-funded assistance 
 related to the transfer of the vessels under this section are 
 not provided to Egyptian security forces that have committee 
 gross violations of internationally recognized human rights or 
 other documented human rights abuses.
 (3) The Government of Egypt is no longer unlawfully or 
 wrongfully detaining United States nationals or lawful 
 permanent residents, based on criteria which may include--
 (A) the detained individual has presented credible 
 information of factual innocence to United States 
 officials;
 (B) information exists that the individual is 
 detained solely or substantially because he or she is a 
 citizen or national of the United States;
 (C) information exists that the individual is being 
 detained in violation of internationally protected 
 rights and freedoms, such as freedom of expression, 
 association, assembly, and religion;
 (D) the individual is being detained in violation 
 of the laws of the detaining country;
 (E) independent nongovernmental organizations or 
 journalists have raised legitimate questions about the 
 innocence of the detained individual;
 (F) the United States embassy in the country where 
 the individual is detained has received credible 
 reports that the detention is a pretext;
 (G) police reports show evidence of the lack of a 
 credible investigation;
 (H) the individual is detained in a country where 
 the Department of State has determined in its annual 
 human rights reports that the judicial system is not 
 independent or impartial, is susceptible to corruption, 
 or is incapable of rendering just verdicts;
 (I) the individual is detained in inhumane 
 conditions; and
 (J) the international right to due process of law 
 has been sufficiently impaired so as to render the 
 detention arbitrary.
 (c) Violations.--The President may not transfer a vessel under this 
section unless the Government of Egypt agrees that if any of the 
conditions described in subsection (b) are violated after the transfer 
of the vessel, the Government of Egypt will re-transfer the vessel to 
the United States at the sole cost to the Government of Egypt, without 
using United States funds, including United States foreign military 
assistance funds.
 (d) Grants Not Counted in Annual Total of Transferred Excess 
Defense Articles.--The value of a vessel transferred to the Government 
of Egypt under this section shall not be counted against the aggregate 
value of excess defense articles transferred in any fiscal year under 
section 516 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2321j).
 (e) Costs of Transfers.--Any expense incurred by the United States 
in connection with the transfer of a vessel under this section shall be 
charged to the Government of Egypt notwithstanding section 516(e) of 
the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2321j(e)).
 (f) Repair and Refurbishment in United States Shipyards.--To the 
maximum extent practicable, the President shall require, as a condition 
of the transfer of a vessel under this section, that the Government of 
Egypt have such repair or refurbishment of the vessel as is needed, 
before the vessel joins the naval forces of Egypt, performed at a 
shipyard located in the United States, including a United States Navy 
shipyard.
 (g) Expiration of Authority.--The authority to transfer a vessel 
under this section shall expire at the end of the three-year period 
beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (h) Required Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 60 days before the transfer 
 of a vessel under this section, the President shall submit to 
 the appropriate congressional committees a report describing 
 the following:
 (A) The specific operational activities and 
 objectives intended for the vessel upon receipt by the 
 Government of Egypt.
 (B) A detailed description of how the transfer of 
 the vessel will help to alleviate United States mission 
 requirements in the Bab el Mandeb and the Red Sea.
 (C) A detailed description of how the transfer of 
 the vessel will complement Combined Maritime Forces 
 (CMF) mission goals and activities, including those of 
 Combined Task Forces 150, 151, 152, and 153.
 (D) A detailed description of incidents of 
 arbitrary detention, violence, and state-sanctioned 
 harassment in the past 5 years by the Government of 
 Egypt against United States citizens, individuals in 
 the United States, and their family members who are not 
 United States citizens, in both Egypt and in the United 
 States, and a determination of whether such incidents 
 constitute a pattern of acts of intimidation or 
 harassment.
 (E) A description of policy efforts to ensure that 
 United States security assistance programs with Egypt 
 are formulated in a manner that will ``avoid 
 identification of the United States, through such 
 programs, with governments which deny to their people 
 internationally recognized human rights and fundamental 
 freedoms'' in accordance with section 502B of the 
 Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2304).
 (2) Form.--The report required by this subsection shall be 
 provided in unclassified form, but may include a separate 
 classified annex.
 (i) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on 
 Armed Services of the House of Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on 
 Armed Services of the Senate.

SEC. 1350. SENSE OF CONGRESS ON AZERBAIJAN'S ILLEGAL DETENTION OF 
 ARMENIAN PRISONERS OF WAR.

 It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) Azerbaijan must immediately and unconditionally return 
 all Armenian prisoners of war and captured civilians; and
 (2) the Biden Administration should engage at all levels 
 with Azerbaijani authorities, including through the 
 Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Minsk 
 Group process, to make clear the importance of adhering to 
 their obligations, under the November 9 statement and 
 international law, to immediately release all prisoners of war 
 and captured civilians.

SEC. 1351. UNITED STATES-INDIA DEFENSE PARTNERSHIP.

 (a) Strong United States-India Defense Partnership.--It is the 
sense of Congress that--
 (1) a strong United States-India defense partnership, 
 rooted in shared democratic values, is critical in order to 
 advance United States interests in the Indo-Pacific region; and
 (2) this partnership between the world's oldest and largest 
 democracies is critical and must continue to be strengthened in 
 response to increasing threats in the Indo-Pacific regions, 
 sending an unequivocal signal that sovereignty and 
 international law must be respected.
 (b) United States-India Initiative on Critical and Emerging 
Technologies (iCET).--The Congress finds that the United States-India 
Initiative on Critical and Emerging Technologies (iCET) is a welcome 
and essential step to developing closer partnerships between 
governments, academia, and industry in the United States and India to 
address the latest advances in artificial intelligence, quantum 
computing, biotechnology, aerospace, and semiconductor manufacturing. 
Such collaborations between engineers and computer scientists are vital 
to help ensure that the United States and India, as well as other 
democracies around the world, foster innovation and facilitate 
technological advances which continue to far outpace Russian and 
Chinese technology.
 (c) Border Threats From China and Reliance on Russian-built 
Weapons.--Congress recognizes that--
 (1) India faces immediate and serious regional border 
 threats from China, with continued military aggression by the 
 Government of China along the India-China border,
 (2) India relies on Russian-built weapons for its national 
 defense, and
 (3) the United States should take additional steps to 
 encourage India to accelerate India's transition off Russian-
 built weapons and defense systems while strongly supporting 
 India's immediate defense needs.
 (d) Waiver of CAATSA Sanctions in Best Interests of United States 
and the United States-India Defense Partnership.--While India faces 
immediate needs to maintain its heavily Russian-built weapons systems, 
a waiver to sanctions under the Countering America's Adversaries 
Through Sanctions Act during this transition period is in the best 
interests of the United States and the United States-India defense 
partnership to deter aggressors in light of Russia and China's close 
partnership.

SEC. 1352. BRIEFING ON DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE PROGRAM TO PROTECT UNITED 
 STATES STUDENTS AGAINST FOREIGN AGENTS.

 Not later than 240 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Defense shall provide a briefing to the 
congressional defense committees on the program described in section 
1277 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 
(Public Law 115-91), including an assessment on whether the program is 
beneficial to students interning, working part time, or in a program 
that will result in employment post-graduation with Department of 
Defense components and contractors.

SEC. 1353. REPORT ON EFFORTS TO COMBAT BOKO HARAM IN NIGERIA AND THE 
 LAKE CHAD BASIN.

 (a) Statement of Congress.--Congress--
 (1) strongly condemns the ongoing violence and the 
 systematic gross human rights violations against the people of 
 Nigeria and the Lake Chad Basin carried out by Boko Haram;
 (2) expresses its support for the people of Nigeria and the 
 Lake Chad Basin who wish to live in a peaceful, economically 
 prosperous, and democratic region; and
 (3) calls on the President to support Nigerian, Lake Chad 
 Basin, and international community efforts to ensure 
 accountability for crimes against humanity committed by Boko 
 Haram against the people of Nigeria and the Lake Chad Basin, 
 particularly the young girls kidnapped from Chibok and other 
 internally displaced persons affected by the actions of Boko 
 Haram.
 (b) Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State, in 
 consultation with the Secretary of Defense and the Attorney 
 General, shall submit to the congressional defense committees, 
 the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on the 
 Judiciary of the House of Representatives, and the Committee on 
 Foreign Relations and the Committee on the Judiciary of the 
 Senate a report on efforts to combat Boko Haram in Nigeria and 
 the Lake Chad Basin.
 (2) Elements.--The report required under paragraph (1) 
 shall include the following elements:
 (A) A description of initiatives undertaken by the 
 Department of State and the Department of Defense to 
 assist the Government of Nigeria and countries in the 
 Lake Chad Basin to combat Boko Haram.
 (B) A description of United States activities to 
 enhance the capacity of Nigeria and countries in the 
 Lake Chad Basin to investigate and prosecute human 
 rights violations perpetrated against the people of 
 Nigeria and the Lake Chad Basin by Boko Haram, al-Qaeda 
 affiliates, and other terrorist organizations, in order 
 to promote respect for rule of law in Nigeria and the 
 Lake Chad Basin.

SEC. 1354. CHIEF OF MISSION CONCURRENCE.

 The Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the Secretary of 
State, shall submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the House of 
Representatives and the Senate, the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the 
House of Representatives, and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the 
Senate a report outlining the process by which chief of mission 
concurrence is obtained for Department of Defense clandestine 
activities under section 127(f) of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 1355. GAO STUDY ON DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE SUPPORT FOR OTHER 
 DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES OF THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT 
 THAT ADVANCE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE SECURITY COOPERATION 
 OBJECTIVES.

 (a) In General.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall 
conduct a study on the use and implementation of the authority of 
section 385 of title 10, United States Code, relating to Department of 
Defense support for other departments and agencies of the United States 
Government that advance Department of Defense security cooperation 
objectives.
 (b) Matters to Be Included.--The study required by subsection (a) 
shall include the following:
 (1) A review of the use and implementation of the authority 
 of section 385 of title 10, United States Code, and 
 congressional intent of such authority.
 (2) An identification of the number of times such authority 
 has been used.
 (3) An identification of the challenges associated with the 
 use of such authority.
 (4) A description of reasons for lack of the use of such 
 authority, if any.
 (5) An identification of potential legislative actions for 
 Congress to address with respect to such authority.
 (6) An identification of potential executive actions for 
 the Department of Defense to address with respect to such 
 authority.
 (c) Report.--
 (1) In general.--The Comptroller General shall submit to 
 the appropriate congressional committees a report that contains 
 the results of the study required by subsection (a).
 (2) Appropriate congressional committees defined.--In this 
 subsection, the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) congressional defense committees; and
 (B) the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House 
 of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign 
 Relations of the Senate.

SEC. 1356. FEASIBILITY STUDY AND REPORT RELATING TO SOMALILAND.

 (a) Feasibility Study.--The Secretary of State, in consultation 
with the Secretary of Defense, shall conduct a feasibility study that--
 (1) includes consultation with Somaliland security organs;
 (2) determines opportunities for collaboration in the 
 pursuit of United States national security interests in the 
 Horn of Africa, the Gulf of Aden, and the broader Indo-Pacific 
 region;
 (3) identifies the practicability of improving the 
 professionalization and capacity of Somaliland security sector 
 actors; and
 (4) identifies the most effective way to conduct and carry 
 out programs, transactions, and other relations in the City of 
 Hargeisa on behalf of the United States Government.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State, in consultation with the 
Secretary of Defense and the heads of other relevant Federal 
departments and agencies, shall submit a classified report to the 
appropriate congressional committees that contains the results of the 
feasibility study required under subsection (a), including an 
assessment of the extent to which--
 (1) opportunities exist for the United States to support 
 the training of Somaliland's security sector actors with a 
 specific focus on counterterrorism and border and maritime 
 security;
 (2) Somaliland's security forces were implicated, if any, 
 in gross violations of human rights during the 3-year period 
 immediately preceding the date of the enactment of this Act;
 (3) the United States has provided or discussed with 
 officials of Somaliland the provision of training to security 
 forces, including--
 (A) where such training has occurred;
 (B) the extent to which Somaliland security forces 
 have demonstrated the ability to absorb previous 
 training; and
 (C) the ability of Somaliland security forces to 
 maintain and appropriately utilize such training, as 
 applicable;
 (4) a United States diplomatic and security engagement 
 partnership with Somaliland would have a strategic impact, 
 including by protecting the United States and allied maritime 
 interests in the Bab-el-Mandeb Strait and at Somaliland's Port 
 of Berbera;
 (5) Somaliland could--
 (A) serve as a maritime gateway in East Africa for 
 the United States and its allies; and
 (B) counter Iran's presence in the Gulf of Aden and 
 China's growing regional military presence;
 (6) a United States security and defense partnership 
 could--
 (A) bolster cooperation between Somaliland and 
 Taiwan;
 (B) stabilize this semi-autonomous region of 
 Somalia further as a democratic counterweight to anti-
 democratic forces in the greater Horn of Africa region; 
 and
 (C) impact the capacity of the United States to 
 achieve policy objectives in Somalia, particularly to 
 degrade and ultimately defeat the terrorist threat 
 posed by Al-Shabaab, the Islamic State in Somalia (the 
 Somalia-based Islamic State affiliate), and other 
 terrorist groups operating in Somalia; and
 (7) the extent to which an improved relationship with 
 Somaliland could--
 (A) support United States policy focused on the Red 
 Sea corridor, the Indo-Pacific region, and the Horn of 
 Africa;
 (B) improve cooperation on counterterrorism and 
 intelligence sharing;
 (C) enable cooperation on counter-trafficking, 
 including the trafficking of humans, wildlife, weapons, 
 and illicit goods; and
 (D) support trade and development, including how 
 Somaliland could benefit from Prosper Africa and other 
 regional trade initiatives.
 (c) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In subsection 
(b), the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on 
 Armed Services of the House of Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on 
 Armed Services of the Senate.

SEC. 1357. REPEAL OF JOINT RESOLUTION TO PROMOTE PEACE AND STABILITY IN 
 THE MIDDLE EAST.

 Effective on the date that is 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the joint resolution entitled ``A joint 
resolution to promote peace and stability in the Middle East'' (Public 
Law 85-7; 22 U.S.C. 1961 et seq.) is hereby repealed.

SEC. 1358. SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING THE INCLUSION OF SUNSET 
 PROVISIONS IN AUTHORIZATIONS FOR USE OF MILITARY FORCE.

 (a) Findings.--Congress makes the following findings:
 (1) Article 1, Section 8, of the Constitution provides 
 Congress with the sole authority to ``declare war''.
 (2) Legal experts who have served in both Democratic and 
 Republic administrations recommend the inclusion of a sunset 
 clause or reauthorization requirement in authorizations for use 
 of military force to ensure that Congress fulfills its 
 constitutional duty to debate and vote on whether to send 
 United States servicemembers into war.
 (3) Sunset provisions have been included in 29 percent of 
 prior authorizations for use of military force and declarations 
 of war.
 (b) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the inclusion of a sunset provision or reauthorization 
 requirement in authorizations for use of military force is 
 critical to ensuring Congress's exercise of its constitutional 
 duty to declare war; and
 (2) any joint resolution enacted to authorize the 
 introduction of United States forces into hostilities or into 
 situations where there is a serious risk of hostilities should 
 include a sunset provision setting forth a date certain for the 
 termination of the authorization for the use of such forces 
 absent the enactment of a subsequent specific statutory 
 authorization for such use of the United States forces.

SEC. 1359. REPORT ON MEXICO.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the President shall submit to the appropriate 
congressional committees a report that includes the following:
 (1) A description of past and current bilateral security 
 cooperation with Mexico, including through Northcom, the 
 Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of Justice 
 (including the Drug Enforcement Administration), including over 
 the preceding 10 years.
 (2) A description of the benefits of partnerships with 
 Mexican security forces in enforcing judicial process for 
 violent crimes and cartels along the southern border.
 (3) A description of increasing cartel control over Mexican 
 territory and its impacts on national security.
 (4) A description of deteriorating role of electoral and 
 democratic institutions, including human rights violations, and 
 its impacts on national security.
 (b) Form.--The report required by subsection (a) shall be submitted 
in unclassified form, but may include a classified annex. The 
unclassified portion of such report shall be published on a publicly 
available website of the Federal government.
 (c) Appropriate Congressional Committees.--In this section, the 
term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the congressional defense committees;
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Select 
 Committee on Intelligence of the Senate; and
 (3) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Permanent 
 Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of 
 Representatives.

SEC. 1360. UNPAID PERUVIAN AGRARIAN REFORM BONDS.

 To ensure the retirement security of over 5,000,000 United States 
pensioners across the Nation, Congress urges the Secretary of State to 
take action concerning unpaid Peruvian agrarian reform bonds by 
encouraging the Peruvian Government to negotiate in good faith with 
United States pension funds and bondholders regarding payment of the 
agrarian reform bonds.

SEC. 1361. REPORT ON CHINESE SUPPORT TO RUSSIA WITH RESPECT TO ITS 
 UNPROVOKED INVASION OF AND FULL-SCALE WAR AGAINST 
 UKRAINE.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act and every 90 days thereafter, the Secretary of 
State, in consultation with the Secretary of Commerce and the Director 
of National Intelligence as appropriate, shall submit to the 
appropriate congressional committees a report on whether and how the 
People's Republic of China, including the Government of the People's 
Republic of China, the Chinese Communist Party, any Chinese state-owned 
enterprise, and any other Chinese entity, has provided support to the 
Russian Federation with respect to its unprovoked invasion of and full-
scale war against Ukraine.
 (b) Matters To Be Included.--The report required by subsection (a) 
shall include a discussion of the People's Republic of China support to 
the Russian Federation with respect to--
 (1) helping the Government of Russia or Russian entities 
 evade or circumvent United States sanctions or multilateral 
 sanctions and export controls;
 (2) deliberately inhibiting onsite United States Government 
 export control end-use checks, including interviews and 
 investigations, in China;
 (3) providing Russia with any technology, including 
 semiconductors classified as EAR99, that supports Russian 
 intelligence or military capabilities;
 (4) establishing economic or financial arrangements that 
 will have the effect of alleviating the impact of United States 
 sanctions or multilateral sanctions;
 (5) furthering Russia's disinformation and propaganda 
 efforts;
 (6) coordinating to hinder the response of multilateral 
 organizations, including the United Nations, to provide 
 assistance to the people or Government of Ukraine, to condemn 
 Russia's war, to hold Russia accountable for the invasion and 
 its prosecution of the war, or to hold those complicit 
 accountable; and
 (7) providing any material, technical, or logistical 
 support, including to Russian military or intelligence agencies 
 and state-owned or state-linked enterprises.
 (c) Form.--
 (1) In general.--The report required by subsection (a) 
 shall be submitted in unclassified form and published on the 
 Department of State's publicly available website.
 (2) Exception.--If the Secretary, in consultation with the 
 Director of National Intelligence, certifies to the appropriate 
 congressional committees that the Secretary is unable to 
 include an element required under paragraphs (1) through (7) of 
 subsection (b) in an unclassified manner, the Secretary shall 
 provide in unclassified form an affirmative or negative 
 determination for each element required under subsections 
 (b)(1)-(7) whether the People's Republic of China is supporting 
 the Russian Federation in that manner and concurrently provide 
 the discussion of that element to the committees at the lowest 
 possible classification level, consistent with the protection 
 of sources and methods.
 (d) Sunset.--The requirement to submit the report required by 
subsection (a) shall terminate on the earlier of--
 (1) the date on which the Secretary of State determines the 
 conflict in Ukraine has ended; or
 (2) the date that is 2 years after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.
 (e) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the congressional defense committees;
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Permanent 
 Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (3) the Committee on Foreign Relations, the Committee on 
 Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, and the Select Committee 
 on Intelligence of the Senate.

 TITLE XIV--OTHER AUTHORIZATIONS

 Subtitle A--Military Programs

SEC. 1401. WORKING CAPITAL FUNDS.

 Funds are hereby authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 2023 
for the use of the Armed Forces and other activities and agencies of 
the Department of Defense for providing capital for working capital and 
revolving funds, as specified in the funding table in section 4501.

SEC. 1402. CHEMICAL AGENTS AND MUNITIONS DESTRUCTION, DEFENSE.

 (a) Authorization of Appropriations.--Funds are hereby authorized 
to be appropriated for the Department of Defense for fiscal year 2023 
for expenses, not otherwise provided for, for Chemical Agents and 
Munitions Destruction, Defense, as specified in the funding table in 
section 4501.
 (b) Use.--Amounts authorized to be appropriated under subsection 
(a) are authorized for--
 (1) the destruction of lethal chemical agents and munitions 
 in accordance with section 1412 of the Department of Defense 
 Authorization Act, 1986 (50 U.S.C. 1521); and
 (2) the destruction of chemical warfare materiel of the 
 United States that is not covered by section 1412 of such Act.

SEC. 1403. DRUG INTERDICTION AND COUNTER-DRUG ACTIVITIES, DEFENSE-WIDE.

 Funds are hereby authorized to be appropriated for the Department 
of Defense for fiscal year 2023 for expenses, not otherwise provided 
for, for Drug Interdiction and Counter-Drug Activities, Defense-wide, 
as specified in the funding table in section 4501.

SEC. 1404. DEFENSE INSPECTOR GENERAL.

 Funds are hereby authorized to be appropriated for the Department 
of Defense for fiscal year 2023 for expenses, not otherwise provided 
for, for the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of 
Defense, as specified in the funding table in section 4501.

SEC. 1405. DEFENSE HEALTH PROGRAM.

 Funds are hereby authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 2023 
for the Defense Health Program for use of the Armed Forces and other 
activities and agencies of the Department of Defense for providing for 
the health of eligible beneficiaries, as specified in the funding table 
in section 4501.

 Subtitle B--Other Matters

SEC. 1411. AUTHORITY FOR TRANSFER OF FUNDS TO JOINT DEPARTMENT OF 
 DEFENSE-DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS MEDICAL FACILITY 
 DEMONSTRATION FUND FOR CAPTAIN JAMES A. LOVELL HEALTH 
 CARE CENTER, ILLINOIS.

 (a) Authority for Transfer of Funds.--Of the funds authorized to be 
appropriated for section 1405 and available for the Defense Health 
Program for operation and maintenance, $168,000,000 may be transferred 
by the Secretary of Defense to the Joint Department of Defense-
Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Facility Demonstration Fund 
established by subsection (a)(1) of section 1704 of the National 
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010 (Public Law 111-84; 123 
Stat. 2571). For purposes of subsection (a)(2) of such section 1704, 
any funds so transferred shall be treated as amounts authorized and 
appropriated specifically for the purpose of such a transfer.
 (b) Use of Transferred Funds.--For the purposes of subsection (b) 
of such section 1704, facility operations for which funds transferred 
under subsection (a) may be used are operations of the Captain James A. 
Lovell Federal Health Care Center, consisting of the North Chicago 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, the Navy Ambulatory Care Center, and 
supporting facilities designated as a combined Federal medical facility 
under an operational agreement covered by section 706 of the Duncan 
Hunter National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2009 (Public 
Law 110-417; 122 Stat. 4500).

SEC. 1412. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR ARMED FORCES RETIREMENT 
 HOME.

 There is hereby authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 2023 
from the Armed Forces Retirement Home Trust Fund the sum of 
$152,360,000 of which--
 (1) $75,360,000 is for operation, maintenance, construction 
 and renovation; and
 (2) $77,000,000 is for major construction.

SEC. 1413. STUDY AND PILOT PROGRAM ON SEMICONDUCTORS AND THE NATIONAL 
 DEFENSE STOCKPILE.

 (a) Study Required.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than one year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall--
 (A) conduct a study on the strategic materials 
 required by the Department of Defense to execute the 
 operational plans of the Department in a conflict with 
 a strategic competitor lasting not less than six 
 months; and
 (B) submit to the congressional defense committees 
 a report on such study.
 (2) Elements.--The report required under paragraph (1) 
 shall include the following:
 (A) A description of the specific number and type 
 of semiconductors for key systems and munitions, 
 delineated by technical specifications, performance 
 requirements, and end-use applications, that the 
 Department of Defense requires to execute and sustain 
 the operational plans of the Department during a 
 conflict with a strategic competitor in the Indo-
 Pacific for not less than six months.
 (B) A description of any supply chain 
 vulnerabilities or choke points, including from sole 
 sources of supply or geographic proximity to strategic 
 competitors, involving the critical minerals and 
 strategic raw materials (including chemicals) required 
 to produce the semiconductors described in subparagraph 
 (A).
 (C) A description of any supply chain 
 vulnerabilities or choke points, including from sole 
 sources, geographic proximity to strategic competitors, 
 or legacy technology, involving the manufacturing 
 equipment required for each step in the manufacturing 
 process from the raw materials described in 
 subparagraph (B) to the finished and operational 
 semiconductor chip described in subparagraph (A), and 
 an identification of potential secure sources of supply 
 or manufacturing involving the United States, allied, 
 or partner nations.
 (D) An analysis of the ability of the Department of 
 Defense and private industry, as appropriate, to 
 procure the semiconductors described in subparagraph 
 (A) and mitigate the vulnerabilities identified in 
 subparagraphs (B) and (C), during a conflict with a 
 strategic competitor in the Indo-Pacific lasting not 
 less than six months, along with associated 
 recommendations, any additional necessary authorities 
 to carry out such recommendations, and the cost of each 
 recommendation.
 (E) A feasibility assessment, expected cost, and 
 recommendations for acquiring strategic materials for 
 the National Defense Stockpile.
 (F) A description of options to finance the cost of 
 the recommendations described in subparagraph (D).
 (G) The anticipated annual cost, through fiscal 
 year 2028, of a pilot program to acquire for the 
 National Defense Stockpile the highest priority 
 strategic materials.
 (b) Pilot Program.--
 (1) Establishment.--Upon the submission of the report under 
 subsection (a), the Secretary of Defense shall carry out a 
 pilot program to, subject to the availability of 
 appropriations, acquire for the National Defense Stockpile the 
 highest priority strategic materials identified in such report.
 (2) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the establishment 
 of the pilot program described in this subsection, and annually 
 thereafter until the date described in paragraph (3), the 
 Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional defense 
 committees a report on the status and effects of the pilot 
 program.
 (3) Termination.--The pilot program established under this 
 subsection shall terminate on September 30, 2028.
 (c) Strategic Materials Defined.--In this section, the term 
``strategic materials'' means--
 (1) semiconductors described in subsection (a)(2)(A);
 (2) critical minerals and strategic raw materials described 
 in subsection (a)(2)(B); and
 (3) manufacturing equipment described in paragraph (2)(C).

SEC. 1414. RESTORING ESSENTIAL ENERGY AND SECURITY HOLDINGS ONSHORE FOR 
 RARE EARTHS.

 (a) Acquisition Authority.--Of the funds authorized to be 
appropriated for the National Defense Stockpile Transaction Fund by 
section 4501, the National Defense Stockpile Manager may use up to 
$253,500,000 for acquisition of the following materials determined to 
be strategic and critical materials required to meet the defense, 
industrial, and essential civilian needs of the United States:
 (1) Neodymium oxide, praseodymium oxide, and neodymium iron 
 boron (NdFeB) magnet block.
 (2) Titanium.
 (3) Energetic materials.
 (4) Iso-molded graphite.
 (5) Grain-oriented electric steel.
 (6) Tire cord steel.
 (7) Cadmium zinc telluride.
 (8) Scandium.
 (b) Compliance With Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling 
Act.--Any acquisition using funds appropriated pursuant to this section 
shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Strategic 
and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act (50 U.S.C. 98 et seq.).
 (c) Disclosures Concerning Rare Earth Elements and Covered Critical 
Minerals by Contractors of Department of Defense.--
 (1) Requirement.--Beginning on the date that is 30 months 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of 
 Defense shall require that any contractor that provides to the 
 Department of Defense a system with a permanent magnet that 
 contains rare earth elements or covered critical minerals to 
 disclose in a classified form, along with delivery of the 
 system, the provenance of the magnet.
 (2) Elements.--A disclosure under paragraph (1) shall 
 include an identification of the country or countries in 
 which--
 (A) any rare earth elements and covered critical 
 minerals used in the magnet were mined;
 (B) such elements and minerals were refined into 
 oxides;
 (C) such elements and minerals were made into 
 metals and alloys; and
 (D) the magnet was sintered or bonded and 
 magnetized.
 (3) Implementation of supply chain tracking system.--If a 
 contractor cannot make the disclosure required by paragraph (1) 
 with respect to a system described in that paragraph, the 
 Secretary shall require the contractor to establish and 
 implement a supply chain tracking system in order to make the 
 disclosure not later than 180 days after providing the system 
 to the Department of Defense.
 (4) Waivers.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary may waive a 
 requirement under paragraph (1) or (3) with respect to 
 a system described in paragraph (1) for a period of not 
 more than 180 days if the Secretary certifies to the 
 appropriate congressional committees that--
 (i) the continued procurement of the system 
 is necessary to meet the demands of a national 
 emergency declared under section 201 of the 
 National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1621); or
 (ii) the contractor cannot currently make 
 the disclosure required by paragraph (1) but is 
 making significant efforts to comply with the 
 requirements of that paragraph.
 (B) Waiver renewals.--The Secretary--
 (i) may renew a waiver under subparagraph 
 (A)(i) as many times as the Secretary considers 
 appropriate; and
 (ii) may not renew a waiver under 
 subparagraph (A)(ii) more than twice.
 (5) Briefing required.--Not later than 30 days after the 
 submission of each report required by subsection (e)(3), the 
 Secretary of Defense shall provide to the appropriate 
 congressional committees a briefing that includes--
 (A) a summary of the disclosures made under this 
 subsection;
 (B) an assessment of the extent of reliance by the 
 United States on foreign countries, and especially 
 countries that are not allies of the United States, for 
 rare earth elements and covered critical minerals;
 (C) a determination with respect to which systems 
 described in paragraph (1) are of the greatest concern 
 for interruptions of supply chains with respect to rare 
 earth elements and covered critical minerals; and
 (D) any suggestions for legislation or funding that 
 would mitigate security gaps in such supply chains.
 (d) Expansion of Restrictions on Procurement of Military and Dual-
use Technologies by Chinese Military Companies.--Section 1211 of the 
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2006 (10 U.S.C. 4651 
note prec.) is amended--
 (1) in the section heading, by striking ``communist chinese 
 military companies'' and inserting ``chinese military 
 companies'';
 (2) in subsection (a), by inserting after ``military 
 company'' the following: ``, any Chinese military company, or 
 any Non-SDN Chinese military-industrial complex company'';
 (3) by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
 ``(b) Goods and Services Covered.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a), and 
 except as provided in paragraph (2), the goods and services 
 described in this subsection are goods and services--
 ``(A) on the munitions list of the International 
 Traffic in Arms Regulations; or
 ``(B) on the Commerce Control List that--
 ``(i) are classified in the 600 series; or
 ``(ii) contain rare earth elements or 
 covered critical minerals.
 ``(2) Exceptions.--Goods and services described in this 
 subsection do not include goods or services procured--
 ``(A) in connection with a visit by a vessel or an 
 aircraft of the United States Armed Forces to the 
 People's Republic of China;
 ``(B) for testing purposes; or
 ``(C) for purposes of gathering intelligence.'';
 (4) in subsection (e)--
 (A) by striking paragraph (3);
 (B) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as 
 paragraphs (3) and (6), respectively;
 (C) by inserting before paragraph (3), as 
 redesignated by subparagraph (B), the following:
 ``(1) The term `Chinese military company' has the meaning 
 given that term by section 1260H(d)(1) of the William M. (Mac) 
 Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
 2021 (Public Law 116-283; 10 U.S.C. 113 note).
 ``(2) The term `Commerce Control List' means the list 
 maintained by the Bureau of Industry and Security and set forth 
 in Supplement No. 1 to part 774 of the Export Administration 
 Regulations.''; and
 (D) by inserting after paragraph (3), as so 
 redesignated, the following:
 ``(4) The term `covered critical mineral' means--
 ``(A) antimony;
 ``(B) beryllium;
 ``(C) cobalt;
 ``(D) graphite;
 ``(E) lithium;
 ``(F) manganese;
 ``(G) nickel;
 ``(H) tantalum;
 ``(I) tungsten; or
 ``(J) vanadium.
 ``(5) The term `Export Administration Regulations' has the 
 meaning given that term in section 1742 of the Export Control 
 Reform Act of 2018 (50 U.S.C. 4801).''; and
 (5) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(7) The term `Non-SDN Chinese military-industrial complex 
 company' means any entity on the Non-SDN Chinese Military-
 Industrial Complex Companies List--
 ``(A) established pursuant to Executive Order 13959 
 (50 U.S.C. 1701 note; relating to addressing the threat 
 from securities investments that finance Communist 
 Chinese military companies), as amended before, on, or 
 after the date of the enactment of the Restoring 
 Essential Energy and Security Holdings Onshore for Rare 
 Earths Act of 2022; and
 ``(B) maintained by the Office of Foreign Assets 
 Control of the Department of the Treasury.
 ``(8) The term `rare earth element' means--
 ``(A) cerium;
 ``(B) dysprosium;
 ``(C) erbium;
 ``(D) europium;
 ``(E) gadolinium;
 ``(F) holmium;
 ``(G) lanthanum;
 ``(H) lutetium;
 ``(I) neodymium;
 ``(J) praseodymium;
 ``(K) promethium;
 ``(L) samarium;
 ``(M) scandium;
 ``(N) terbium;
 ``(O) thulium;
 ``(P) ytterbium; or
 ``(Q) yttrium.''.
 (e) Review of Compliance With Contracting Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than one year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, and periodically thereafter until 
 the termination date specified in paragraph (5), the 
 Comptroller General of the United States shall assess the 
 extent of the efforts of the Department of Defense to comply 
 with the requirements of--
 (A) subsection (c);
 (B) section 1211 of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2006, as amended by 
 subsection (d) of this section; and
 (C) section 4872 of title 10, United States Code.
 (2) Briefing required.--The Comptroller General shall 
 periodically, until the termination date specified in paragraph 
 (5), provide to the appropriate congressional committees a 
 briefing on the results of the assessments conducted under 
 paragraph (1) that includes an assessment of--
 (A) the inclusion by the Department of Defense of 
 necessary contracting clauses in relevant contracts to 
 meet the requirements described in subparagraphs (A), 
 (B), and (C) of paragraph (1); and
 (B) the efforts of the Department of Defense to 
 assess the compliance of contractors with such clauses.
 (3) Report required.--The Comptroller General shall, not 
 less frequently than every 2 years until the termination date 
 specified in paragraph (5), submit to the appropriate 
 congressional committees a report on the results of the 
 assessments conducted under paragraph (1) that includes an 
 assessment of--
 (A) the inclusion by the Department of Defense of 
 necessary contracting clauses in relevant contracts to 
 meet the requirements described in subparagraphs (A), 
 (B), and (C) of paragraph (1); and
 (B) the efforts of the Department of Defense to 
 assess the compliance of contractors with such clauses.
 (4) Referral.--If, in conducting an assessment under 
 paragraph (1), the Comptroller General determines that a 
 contractor has failed to comply with any of the requirements 
 described in subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) of paragraph (1), 
 the relevant Inspectors General, or other enforcement agencies, 
 as appropriate, for further examination and possible 
 enforcement actions.
 (5) Termination.--The requirements of this subsection shall 
 terminate on the date that is 10 years after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.
 (f) Definitions.--In this section, the terms ``covered critical 
minerals'' and ``rare earth element'' have the meanings given to such 
terms in section 1211 of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2006 (10 U.S.C. 4651 note prec.).

SEC. 1415. REPORT ON FEASIBILITY OF INCREASING QUANTITIES OF RARE EARTH 
 PERMANENT MAGNETS IN NATIONAL DEFENSE STOCKPILE.

 (a) Statement of Policy.--It is the policy of the United States to 
build a stockpile of rare earth permanent magnets to meet requirements 
for Department of Defense programs and systems while reducing 
dependence on foreign countries for such magnets.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional 
defense committees a report on the feasibility of increasing the 
quantity of rare earth permanent magnets in the National Defense 
Stockpile to support United States defense requirements.
 (c) Contents.--The report required by subsection (b) shall include 
the following:
 (1) An assessment of the extent to which the existing 
 National Defense Stockpile inventory would guarantee supply of 
 rare earth permanent magnets to major defense acquisition 
 programs included in the future years defense program.
 (2) A description of the assumptions underlying the 
 quantities of rare earth permanent magnet block identified for 
 potential acquisition in the most recent National Defense 
 Stockpile Annual Operations and Planning Report.
 (3) An evaluation of factors that would affect shortfall 
 estimates with respect to rare earth magnet block in the 
 National Defense Stockpile inventory.
 (4) A description of the impact on and requirements for 
 domestic industry stakeholders, including Department of Defense 
 contractors.
 (5) An analysis of challenges related to the domestic 
 manufacturing of rare earth permanent magnets.
 (6) An assessment of the extent to which Department of 
 Defense programs and systems rely on rare earth permanent 
 magnets manufactured by an entity under the jurisdiction of a 
 covered strategic competitor.
 (7) Identification of additional funding, authorities, and 
 policies necessary to advance the policy described in 
 subsection (a).
 (d) Form.--The report required by subsection (b) shall be submitted 
in unclassified form, but may include a classified annex.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``congressional defense committees'' means the 
 Committee on Armed Services of the Senate and the Committee on 
 Armed Services of the House of Representatives.
 (2) The term ``covered strategic competitor'' means a near-
 peer country identified by the Secretary of Defense and 
 National Defense Strategy.

SEC. 1416. STUDY ON STOCKPILING ENERGY STORAGE COMPONENTS.

 Not later than 360 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to 
Congress a study on the viability of establishing a stockpile of the 
materials required to manufacture batteries, battery cells, and other 
energy storage components to meet national security requirements in the 
event of a national emergency (as defined in section 12 of the 
Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act (50 U.S.C. 98h-3)).

 Subtitle C--Homeland Acceleration of Recovering Deposits and Renewing 
 Onshore Critical Keystones

SEC. 1421. AUTHORITY TO ACQUIRE MATERIALS FOR NATIONAL DEFENSE 
 STOCKPILE TO ADDRESS SHORTFALLS.

 (a) Modification of Acquisition Authority.--Section 5 of the 
Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act (50 U.S.C. 98d) is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in the first sentence, by inserting 
 ``under the authority of paragraph (3) or'' 
 after ``Except for acquisitions made''; and
 (ii) in the second sentence, by striking 
 ``for such acquisition'' and inserting ``for 
 any acquisition of materials under this Act'';
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``any such 
 transaction'' and inserting ``any transaction''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) From amounts appropriated after the date of the enactment of 
this paragraph, the National Defense Stockpile Manager may acquire 
materials determined to be strategic and critical under section 3(a) 
without regard to the requirement of the first sentence of paragraph 
(1) if the Stockpile Manager determines there is a shortfall of such 
materials in the stockpile.''; and
 (2) in subsection (c), by striking ``to carry out the 
 purposes for which appropriated for a period of two fiscal 
 years, if so provided in appropriation Acts'' and inserting 
 ``until expended, unless otherwise provided in appropriations 
 Acts''.
 (b) Clarification That Stockpile May Not Be Used for Budgetary 
Purposes.--Section 2(c) of the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock 
Piling Act (50 U.S.C. 98a(c)) is amended by striking ``is not to be 
used'' and inserting ``shall not be used''.
 (c) Annual Briefings.--Section 11 of the Strategic and Critical 
Materials Stock Piling Act (50 U.S.C. 98h-2) is amended by adding at 
the end the following:
 ``(c)(1) Not later than 30 days after submitting a report required 
by subsection (a), the National Defense Stockpile Manager shall brief 
the committees specified in paragraph (2) on the state of the stockpile 
and the acquisitions intended to be made within the next fiscal year.
 ``(2) The committees specified in this paragraph are--
 ``(A) the Committee on Armed Services, the 
 Committee on Foreign Relations, the Committee on Energy 
 and Natural Resources, the Committee on Commerce, 
 Science, and Transportation, and the Select Committee 
 on Intelligence of the Senate; and
 ``(B) the Committee on Armed Services, the 
 Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Committee on Natural 
 Resources, the Committee on Energy and Commerce, and 
 the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the 
 House of Representatives.''.

SEC. 1422. REPORT ON MODIFICATIONS TO THE NATIONAL TECHNOLOGY AND 
 INDUSTRIAL BASE.

 (a) In General.--Not later than December 1, 2023, the Secretary of 
Defense shall submit to the congressional defense committees, the 
Committee on Financial Services of the House of Representatives, the 
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of 
Representatives, the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate, 
and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate 
a report on the benefits and risks of potential legislative proposals 
to increase the availability of strategic and critical materials that 
are, as of the date of the enactment of this Act, sourced primarily 
from the People's Republic of China or the Russian Federation.
 (b) Elements.--The report required by subsection (a) shall include 
an assessment of the following:
 (1) The implications of modifying the term ``domestic 
 source'' for purposes of the Defense Production Act of 1950 (50 
 U.S.C. 4501 et seq.) to ``domestic and allied source'' and 
 including in the definition of such term business concerns in 
 other countries, including, but not limited to, Canada, the 
 United Kingdom, and Australia.
 (2) The benefits of facilitating more effective integration 
 of the national technology and industrial base with the 
 technology and industrial bases of countries that are allies or 
 partners of the United States with respect to technology 
 transfer, socioeconomic procurement requirements, and export 
 controls.
 (c) Form.--The report required by subsection (a) shall be in an 
unclassified form but may contain a classified annex.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) National technology and industrial base.--The term 
 ``national technology and industrial base'' has the meaning 
 given that term in section 4801 of title 10, United States 
 Code.
 (2) Strategic and critical materials.--The term ``strategic 
 and critical materials'' has the meaning given that term in 
 section 12 of the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling 
 Act (50 U.S.C. 98h-3).

 TITLE XV--CYBER AND INFORMATION OPERATIONS MATTERS

 Subtitle A--Cyber Matters

SEC. 1501. IMPROVEMENTS TO PRINCIPAL CYBER ADVISORS.

 (a) Certification Authority for Cyberspace Operations.--Subsection 
(c) of section 932 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2014 (Public Law 113-66; 10 U.S.C. 2224 note) is amended by adding 
at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Budget certification.--Not later than January 31 of 
 the year preceding each fiscal year for which a budget is 
 proposed, the Principal Cyber Advisor shall certify to the 
 Secretary of Defense and the congressional defense committees 
 the adequacy of the portions of that budget regarding 
 cyberspace activities not covered by the review of the Chief 
 Information Officer under section 142(b)(2) of this title.''.
 (b) Codification of Principal Cyber Advisors.--
 (1) Title 10.--Chapter 19 of title 10, United States Code, 
 is amended by inserting after section 392 the following new 
 section (and conforming the table of sections at the beginning 
 of such chapter accordingly):
``Sec. 392a. Principal Cyber Advisors''.
 (2) Principal cyber advisor to secretary of defense.--
 Subsection (c) of section 932 of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2014 (Public Law 113-66; 10 
 U.S.C. 2224 note), as amended by subsection (a), is--
 (A) transferred to section 392a of title 10, United 
 States Code, as added by paragraph (1);
 (B) redesignated as subsection (a); and
 (C) amended in the subsection heading by inserting 
 ``to Secretary of Defense'' after ``Advisor''.
 (3) Deputy cyber advisor.--Section 905 of the National 
 Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020 (Public Law 116-
 92; 10 U.S.C. 391 note) is--
 (A) transferred to chapter 19 of title 10, United 
 States Code, designated as subsection (b) of section 
 392a, as added by paragraph (1), and redesignating each 
 subordinate provision and the margins thereof 
 accordingly; and
 (B) amended--
 (i) by striking ``this subsection'' each 
 place it appears and inserting ``this 
 paragraph''; and
 (ii) by striking ``subsection (a)'' each 
 place it appears and inserting ``paragraph 
 (1)''.
 (4) Principal cyber advisors to secretaries of military 
 departments.--Section 1657 of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020 (Public Law 116-92; 10 
 U.S.C. 391 note) is--
 (A) transferred to chapter 19 of title 10, United 
 States Code, designated as subsection (c) of section 
 392a, as added by paragraph (1), and redesignating each 
 subordinate provision and the margins thereof 
 accordingly; and
 (B) amended--
 (i) by striking ``subparagraph (B)'' and 
 inserting ``clause (ii)'';
 (ii) by striking ``paragraph (1)'' each 
 place it appears and inserting ``subparagraph 
 (A)'';
 (iii) by striking ``paragraph (2)'' each 
 place it appears and inserting ``subparagraph 
 (B)'';
 (iv) by striking ``subsection (a)(1)'' and 
 inserting ``paragraph (1)(A)'';
 (v) by striking ``subsection (a)'' each 
 place it appears and inserting ``paragraph 
 (1)'';
 (vi) by striking ``subsection (b)'' each 
 place it appears and inserting ``paragraph 
 (2)''; and
 (vii) by striking paragraph (6) (as 
 redesignated pursuant to subparagraph (A)).
 (c) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Title 10.--Section 167b(d)(2)(A) of title 10, United 
 States Code, is amended by inserting ``to the Secretary of 
 Defense under section 392a(a) of this title'' after ``Principal 
 Cyber Advisor''.
 (2) FY22 ndaa.--Section 1528(e)(2) of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 10 
 U.S.C. 2224 note) is amended by striking ``section 1657(d) of 
 the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020 
 (Public Law 116-92; 10 U.S.C. 391 note)'' and inserting 
 ``section 392a(c)(4) of title 10, United States Code''.
 (3) FY17 ndaa.--Section 1643(b) of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017 (Public Law 114-328; 10 
 U.S.C. 2224 note) is amended by striking ``The Principal Cyber 
 Advisor, acting through the cross-functional team established 
 by section 932(c)(3) of the National Defense Authorization Act 
 for Fiscal Year 2014 (Public Law 113-66; 10 U.S.C. 2224 note)'' 
 and inserting ``The Principal Cyber Advisor to the Secretary of 
 Defense, acting through the cross-functional team under section 
 392a(a)(3) of title 10, United States Code,''.

SEC. 1502. MODIFICATION OF OFFICE OF PRIMARY RESPONSIBILITY FOR 
 STRATEGIC CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM.

 Paragraph (2) of section 1640(c) of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 (Public Law 115-91; 10 U.S.C. 
2224 note) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(2) Office of primary responsibility.--Not later than 30 
 days after the date of the enactment of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023, the Secretary of 
 Defense shall designate a principal staff assistant from within 
 the Office of the Secretary of Defense whose office shall serve 
 as the office of primary responsibility for the Program, 
 providing policy, direction, and oversight regarding the 
 execution of the responsibilities of the program manager 
 described in paragraph (5).''.

SEC. 1503. ESTABLISHMENT OF CYBER OPERATIONS DESIGNATOR AND RATING FOR 
 THE NAVY.

 (a) Military Career Designator.--
 (1) Officers.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Navy, in 
 coordination with the Chief of Naval Operations, shall 
 establish and use a cyber warfare operations designator for 
 officers and warrant officers, which shall be a separate 
 designator from the cryptologic warfare officer designator.
 (2) Enlisted.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in coordination with the 
 Chief, shall establish and use a cyber warfare rating for 
 enlisted personnel, which shall be a separate rating from the 
 cryptologic technician enlisted rating.
 (b) Prohibition.--
 (1) In general.--Beginning June 1, 2024, the Secretary may 
 not assign a member of the Navy to a billet within the core 
 work roles at teams or components within the cyber mission 
 force if such member--
 (A) has a designator of cryptologic warfare, 
 intelligence, or information professional; or
 (B) has a rating of cryptologic technician, 
 intelligence specialist, or information systems 
 technician.
 (2) Exception.--The prohibition in paragraph (1) shall not 
 apply with respect to a member of the Navy who is assigned to a 
 billet described in such paragraph under orders issued before 
 June 1, 2024.
 (c) Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the Committees on 
Armed Services of the House of Representatives and Senate a report 
certifying whether the following actions have been carried out 
(including detailed explanations):
 (1) The Secretary establishing cyberspace operations as a 
 military discipline that is a community separate from the 
 information warfare community.
 (2) The Chief of Naval Operations identifying who in the 
 Office of the Chief of Naval Operations will serve as the 
 resource manager and who will be responsible for staffing and 
 training with respect to the designator and rating established 
 under subsection (a).
 (3) The Secretary establishing a training pipeline for the 
 designator and rating established under subsection (a) that is 
 aligned with the requirements and standards established by the 
 Commander of the United States Cyber Command.
 (4) The Secretary establishing a funding profile detailing 
 with requisite investments toward the training requirements, 
 requisite courses, and costs associated with the designator and 
 rating established under subsection (a) for the period covered 
 by the most recent future-years defense program submitted to 
 Congress under section 221 of title 10, United States Code.
 (5) The Secretary establishing an inventory of all flag 
 officer positions with direct leadership or executive direction 
 over the designator and rating established under subsection 
 (a), including with respect to--
 (A) the United States Cyber Command;
 (B) the Fleet Cyber Command;
 (C) Joint Forces Headquarters-Cyber, Navy;
 (D) 10th Fleet;
 (E) The Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for 
 Information Warfare and the Director of Naval 
 Intelligence; and
 (F) Naval Information Forces.
 (6) The Secretary establishing an implementation plan, 
 including timelines and procedures, for filling the positions 
 within the cyber mission force for which the Secretary is 
 responsible.
 (7) Any anticipated changes to the end-strength of the Navy 
 by reason of establishing the designator and rating under 
 subsection (a).
 (d) Determination by Cyber Command.--Not later than 60 days after 
the date on which the Secretary submits the report under subsection 
(c), the Commander of United States Cyber Command shall submit to the 
Committees on Armed Services of the House of Representatives and Senate 
a determination with respect to whether the matters contained in the 
report satisfy the requirements of the United States Cyber Command.

SEC. 1504. CYBER THREAT INFORMATION COLLABORATION ENVIRONMENT PROGRAM.

 (a) Program.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, pursuant to the requirements established by the 
Cyber Threat Data Interoperability Council under subsection (c), the 
Secretary of Homeland Security, acting through the Director of the 
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, in consultation with 
the Director of the National Security Agency, shall develop an 
information collaboration environment consisting of a digital 
environment containing technical tools for information analytics and a 
portal through which relevant parties may submit and automate 
information inputs and access the environment to enable interoperable 
data flow that enables Federal and non-Federal entities to identify, 
mitigate, and prevent malicious cyber activity by--
 (1) providing access to appropriate and operationally 
 relevant data from unclassified and classified information 
 about cybersecurity risks and cybersecurity threats, as well as 
 malware forensics and data from network sensor programs or 
 network-monitoring programs, on a platform that enables 
 querying and analysis;
 (2) enabling cross-correlation of data on cybersecurity 
 risks and cybersecurity threats at the speed and scale 
 necessary for rapid detection and identification;
 (3) facilitating a comprehensive understanding of 
 cybersecurity risks and cybersecurity threats; and
 (4) facilitating collaborative analysis between the Federal 
 Government and public and private sector critical 
 infrastructure entities and information sharing and analysis 
 organizations.
 (b) Implementation of Information Collaboration Environment.--
 (1) Evaluation.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security, 
 acting through the Director of the Cybersecurity and 
 Infrastructure Security Agency, in coordination with other 
 departments and agencies of the Federal Government, shall--
 (A) identify existing Federal sources of classified 
 and unclassified information on cybersecurity threats;
 (B) evaluate current programs, applications, or 
 platforms intended to detect, identify, analyze, and 
 monitor cybersecurity risks and cybersecurity threats;
 (C) consult with public and private sector critical 
 infrastructure entities to identify public and private 
 critical infrastructure cyber threat capabilities, 
 needs, and gaps; and
 (D) identify existing tools, capabilities, and 
 systems that may be adapted to achieve the purposes of 
 the information collaboration environment developed 
 pursuant to subsection (a) to maximize return on 
 investment and minimize cost.
 (2) Implementation.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than one year after 
 completing the evaluation required under paragraph (1), 
 the Secretary of Homeland Security, acting through the 
 Director of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure 
 Security Agency, in consultation with the Director of 
 the National Security Agency, shall achieve initial 
 operating capability of the information collaboration 
 environment developed pursuant to subsection (a).
 (B) Requirements.--The information collaboration 
 environment and the technical tools for information 
 analytics under subsection (a) shall--
 (i) operate in a manner consistent with 
 relevant privacy, civil rights, and civil 
 liberties policies and protections, including 
 such policies and protections established 
 pursuant to section 1016 of the Intelligence 
 Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 (6 
 U.S.C. 485);
 (ii) reflect the requirements set forth by 
 the Cyber Threat Data Interoperability Council 
 under subsection (c);
 (iii) enable integration of current 
 applications, platforms, data, and information, 
 including classified information, in a manner 
 that supports the voluntary integration of 
 unclassified and classified information on 
 cybersecurity risks and cybersecurity threats;
 (iv) incorporate tools to manage access to 
 classified and unclassified data, as 
 appropriate, for appropriate individuals who 
 have the security clearance necessary to access 
 the highest level of classified data included 
 in the environment;
 (v) ensure accessibility by Federal 
 entities that the Secretary of Homeland 
 Security, in consultation with the Director of 
 National Intelligence, the Attorney General, 
 the Secretary of Defense, and the Director of 
 the Office of Management and Budget, determines 
 appropriate;
 (vi) allow for access by public and private 
 sector critical infrastructure entities and 
 other private sector partners, at the 
 discretion of the Secretary of Homeland 
 Security and after consulting the appropriate 
 Sector Risk Management Agency;
 (vii) deploy analytic tools across 
 classification levels to leverage all relevant 
 data sets, as appropriate;
 (viii) identify tools and analytical 
 software that can be applied and shared to 
 manipulate, transform, and display data and 
 other identified needs; and
 (ix) anticipate the integration of new 
 technologies and data streams, including data 
 from network sensor programs or network-
 monitoring programs deployed in support of non-
 Federal entities.
 (C) Access controls.--The owner of any data shared 
 in the information collaboration environment shall have 
 the authority to set and maintain access controls for 
 such data and may restrict access to any particular 
 data asset for any purpose, including for the purpose 
 of protecting intelligence sources and methods from 
 unauthorized disclosure in accordance with section 
 102A(i) of the National Security Act (50 U.S.C. 
 3024(i)).
 (3) Annual report requirement on the implementation, 
 execution, and effectiveness of the program.--
 (A) Requirement.--Not later than one year after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act and annually 
 thereafter, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall 
 submit to the National Cyber Director and appropriate 
 congressional committees a report that details--
 (i) Federal Government participation in the 
 information collaboration environment, 
 including the Federal entities participating in 
 the environment and the categories of 
 information shared by Federal entities into the 
 environment;
 (ii) non-Federal entities' participation in 
 the information collaboration environment, 
 including the non-Federal entities 
 participating in the environment and the 
 categories of information shared by non-Federal 
 entities into the environment;
 (iii) the impact of the information 
 collaboration environment on positive security 
 outcomes for the Federal Government and non-
 Federal entities;
 (iv) barriers identified to fully realizing 
 the benefit of the information collaboration 
 environment for both the Federal Government and 
 non-Federal entities;
 (v) additional authorities or resources 
 necessary to successfully execute the 
 information collaboration environment; and
 (vi) identified shortcomings or risks to 
 data security and privacy, and the steps 
 necessary to improve the mitigation of such 
 shortcomings or risks.
 (B) Form.--Each report under subparagraph (A) shall 
 be submitted in unclassified form, but may include a 
 classified annex.
 (4) Collaboration by nsa.--Any actions taken by the 
 Director of the National Security Agency to assist in building 
 or maintaining the information collaboration environment 
 developed pursuant to subsection (a)--
 (A) shall be carried out using amounts authorized 
 to be appropriated to the National Security Agency for 
 the Information Systems Security program; and
 (B) may not be carried out using amounts made 
 available under the National Intelligence Program.
 (c) Cyber Threat Data Interoperability Council.--
 (1) Establishment.--There is established an interagency 
 council, to be known as the ``Cyber Threat Data 
 Interoperability Council'' (in this subsection referred to as 
 the ``council''), chaired by the National Cyber Director, to 
 establish data interoperability requirements for data streams 
 to be accessed in the information collaboration environment.
 (2) Establishment date.--The council shall commence the 
 activities under this subsection by not later than 120 days 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (3) Membership.--
 (A) Principal members.--In addition to the National 
 Cyber Director, the council shall have as its principal 
 members the Secretary of Homeland Security, the 
 Director of National Intelligence, the Attorney 
 General, the Secretary of Defense, and the Director of 
 the Office of Management and Budget.
 (B) Additional federal members.--Based on 
 recommendations submitted by the principal members, the 
 National Cyber Director shall identify and appoint 
 council members from Federal entities that oversee 
 programs that generate, collect, disseminate, or 
 analyze data or information related to cybersecurity 
 risks and cybersecurity threats.
 (C) Advisory members.--The National Cyber Director 
 shall identify and appoint advisory members from non-
 Federal entities that shall advise the council based on 
 recommendations submitted by the principal members.
 (4) Data streams.--The council shall identify, designate, 
 and periodically update programs that shall participate in or 
 be interoperable with the information collaboration 
 environment, which may include--
 (A) network-monitoring and intrusion detection 
 programs;
 (B) cyber threat indicator sharing programs;
 (C) certain network sensor programs or network-
 monitoring programs;
 (D) incident response and cybersecurity technical 
 assistance programs; or
 (E) malware forensics and reverse-engineering 
 programs.
 (5) Data privacy.--
 (A) Requirement.--The council shall establish a 
 committee to establish procedures and data governance 
 structures, as necessary, to protect data shared in the 
 information collaboration environment, comply with 
 Federal regulations and statutes, and respect existing 
 consent agreements with public and private sector 
 critical infrastructure entities that apply to critical 
 infrastructure information.
 (B) Membership.--The committee shall be comprised 
 of--
 (i) the senior official for privacy of the 
 Office of Management and Budget, who shall 
 serve as the chair of the committee; and
 (ii) privacy officers from the Department 
 of Homeland Security, the Department of 
 Defense, the Department of Justice, and the 
 Office of the Director of National 
 Intelligence.
 (6) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this subsection may 
 be construed as changing existing ownership or protection of, 
 or policies and processes for access to, agency data.
 (d) National Security Systems.--Nothing in this section shall apply 
to a national security system, or to cybersecurity threat intelligence 
related to such systems, without the consent of the owner and operator 
of the system.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means 
 the following:
 (A) The Committee on Homeland Security, the 
 Committee on the Judiciary, the Committee on Armed 
 Services, the Committee on Oversight and Reform, and 
 the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the 
 House of Representatives.
 (B) The Committee on Homeland Security and 
 Governmental Affairs, the Committee on the Judiciary, 
 the Committee on Armed Services, and the Select 
 Committee on Intelligence of the Senate.
 (2) The term ``critical infrastructure information'' has 
 the meaning given such term in section 2222 of the Homeland 
 Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 671).
 (3) The term ``cyber threat indicator'' has the meaning 
 given such term in section 102 of the Cybersecurity Act of 2015 
 (6 U.S.C. 1501).
 (4) The term ``cybersecurity threat'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 102 of the Cybersecurity Act of 2015 (6 
 U.S.C. 1501).
 (5) The term ``data asset'' has the meaning given such term 
 in section 3502 of title 44, United States Code.
 (6) The term ``environment'' means the information 
 collaboration environment established under subsection (a).
 (7) The term ``information sharing and analysis 
 organization'' has the meaning given such term in section 2222 
 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 671).
 (8) The term ``intelligence community'' has the meaning 
 given such term in section 3(4) of the National Security Act of 
 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3003(4)).
 (9) The term ``national security system'' has the meaning 
 given such term in section 3552 of title 44, United States 
 Code.
 (10) The term ``non-Federal entity'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 102 of the Cybersecurity Act of 2015 (6 
 U.S.C. 1501).
 (11) The term ``Sector Risk Management Agency'' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 2201 of the Homeland 
 Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 651).

SEC. 1505. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE ENTERPRISE-WIDE PROCUREMENT OF CYBER 
 DATA PRODUCTS AND SERVICES.

 Section 1521 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 10 U.S.C. 2224 note) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(5), by inserting ``, including the 
 use of artificial intelligence-based endpoint security that 
 prevents cyber attacks and does not require constant internet 
 connectivity to function,'' after ``services''; and
 (2) in subsection (b), by inserting ``, including by 
 enhancing the security of the software supply chain of the 
 Department'' after ``best interests of the Department''.

SEC. 1506. CYBERSECURITY OF MILITARY STANDARDS FOR DATA.

 (a) In General.--No later than 270 days after enactment of this 
act, the principal staff assistant designated with primary 
responsibility for the Strategic Cybersecurity Program of the 
Department of Defense pursuant to paragraph (2) of section 1640(c) of 
the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 (Public Law 
115-91; 10 U.S.C. 2224 note), as amended by section 1502 of this Act, 
shall conduct a comprehensive review of Military Standard 1553 (in this 
section referred to as ``MIL-STD-1553''). At the discretion of the 
Secretary of Defense, the review required under this subsection may 
include reviews of additional serial data standards beyond MIL-STD-
1553.
 (b) Elements.--The review required under subsection (a) shall 
include the following elements:
 (1) An identification of programs and weapon systems 
 currently employing MIL-STD-1553 and other serial data 
 standards, as appropriate, across the Department of Defense, 
 the military departments, and components, with notations for 
 any programs previously assessed by the Strategic Cybersecurity 
 Program.
 (2) An evaluation of, and inventory for, the 
 vulnerabilities to MIL-STD-1553 and other serial data 
 standards, as appropriate.
 (3) An inventory of potential commercial- and Government-
 sourced mitigations and solutions, either in use or available 
 to program offices.
 (4) An assessment of potential changes to address 
 identified vulnerabilities to MIL-STD-1553 and other serial 
 data standards, as appropriate.
 (c) Determination.--Based on the findings of the review required 
under subsection (a), the Secretary of Defense shall determine whether 
to revise or update MIL-STD-1553 and other serial data standards, as 
appropriate.
 (d) Guidance.--Subsequent to the completion of the review required 
under subsection (a), the head of the Strategic Cybersecurity Program 
shall issue guidance across the Department for program managers 
involved in procuring weapon systems that use MIL-STD-1553 and other 
serial data standards, as appropriate. The guidance shall include 
information related to the potential threats to MIL-STD-1553, available 
mitigations and solutions, and technical resources for program managers 
to use in addressing issues with MIL-STD-1553 and other data serial 
standards, as appropriate.
 (e) Compliance Certification.--Subject to the findings for the 
review required under subsection (a), the senior official identified 
pursuant to section 1647(j) of the National Defense Authorization Act 
for Fiscal Year 2016 (Public Law 114-92) for a military department and 
the service acquisition executive (as such term is defined in section 
101(10) of title 10, United States Code) shall, if applicable, issue a 
certification that mitigations identified by the Strategic 
Cybersecurity Program for assessed weapons systems have been applied 
and corrected. Not later than one year after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, such senior official and the service acquisition executive 
shall submit to the congressional defense committees such assessment.
 (f) Test and Evaluation.--The Director of Operational Test and 
Evaluation may include evaluations of MIL-STD-1553 and other serial 
data standards, as appropriate, in reports required to be provided to 
the congressional defense committees pursuant to law.
 (g) Report.--Not later than 45 days after completion of the review 
required under subsection (a), the head of the Strategic Cybersecurity 
Program shall submit to the congressional defense committees--
 (1) a report on the review required under subsection (a); 
 and
 (2) a copy of the guidance required under subsection (d).

 Subtitle B--Information Operations

SEC. 1511. MILITARY OPERATIONS IN INFORMATION ENVIRONMENT: AUTHORITY 
 AND NOTIFICATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 19 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended by inserting after section 397 the following new section (and 
conforming the table of contents at the beginning of such chapter 
accordingly):
``Sec. 398. Military operations in information environment: authority 
 and notification requirements
 ``(d) Notification Requirements.--(1) The Secretary of Defense 
shall promptly submit to the appropriate congressional committees 
notice in writing of any clandestine military operation in the 
information environment conducted under this title no later than 48 
hours following such operation.
 ``(2)(A) The Secretary shall establish and submit to the 
appropriate congressional committees procedures for complying with the 
requirements of paragraph (1). The Secretary shall promptly notify the 
appropriate congressional committees in writing of any changes to such 
procedures at least 14 days prior to the adoption of any such changes.
 ``(B) The appropriate congressional committees shall ensure that 
committee procedures designed to protect from unauthorized disclosure 
classified information relating to national security of the United 
States are sufficient to protect the information that is submitted to 
the committees pursuant to this section.
 ``(C) In the event of an unauthorized disclosure of a clandestine 
military operation in the information environment covered by this 
section, the Secretary shall ensure, to the maximum extent practicable, 
that the appropriate congressional committees are notified immediately 
of the clandestine military operation in the information environment 
concerned. The notification under this paragraph may be verbal or 
written, but in the event of a verbal notification a written 
notification shall be provided by not later than 48 hours after the 
provision of the verbal notification.
 ``(e) Prohibition.--No clandestine military operation in the 
information environment may be conducted which is intended to influence 
United States political processes, public opinion, policies, or 
media.''.
 (b) Transfer.--Section 1631 of the National Defense Authorization 
Act for Fiscal Year 2020 (Public Law 116-92; 133 Stat. 1741) is amended 
as follows:
 (1) Subsections (b), (c), and (d) are--
 (A) transferred to section 398 of title 10, United 
 States Code, as added by subsection (a) of this 
 section;
 (B) inserted before subsection (b) of such section 
 398; and
 (C) redesignated as subsections (a), (b), and (c), 
 respectively.
 (2) Subsection (e) is--
 (A) transferred to such section 398;
 (B) inserted after subsection (e) of such section; 
 and
 (C) redesignated as subsection (f).
 (3) Subsection (i) is--
 (A) transferred to such section 398;
 (B) inserted after subsection (f) of such section; 
 and
 (C) redesignated as subsection (g).
 (c) Quarterly Briefings.--Subsection (c) of section 398 of title 
10, United States Code, as added by subsection (a) of this section and 
designated by subsection (b), is amended by striking ``congressional 
defense committees'' and inserting ``appropriate congressional 
committees''.
 (d) Definitions.--Subsection (g) of section 398 of title 10, United 
States Code, as added by subsection (a) of this section and designated 
by subsection (b), is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``in the information 
 environment'' before ``, or associated''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) The term `appropriate congressional committees' 
 means--
 ``(A) the congressional defense committees;
 ``(B) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the 
 Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House 
 of Representatives; and
 ``(C) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the 
 Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate.''.

SEC. 1512. LIMITATION ON AVAILABILITY OF CERTAIN FUNDS UNTIL SUBMISSION 
 OF JOINT LEXICON FOR TERMS RELATED TO INFORMATION 
 OPERATIONS.

 Of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this Act or otherwise 
made available for fiscal year 2023 for operation and maintenance, 
Defense-wide, and available for the Office of the Secretary of Defense 
for the travel of persons, not more than 75 percent may be obligated or 
expended until the date on which the Secretary submits to the 
Committees on Armed Services of the House of Representatives and the 
Senate the joint lexicon for terms related to information operations 
required by section 1631(g)(1)(D) of the National Defense Authorization 
Act for Fiscal Year 2020 (Public Law 116-92; 10 U.S.C. 397 note).

SEC. 1513. JOINT INFORMATION OPERATIONS COURSE.

 (a) Joint Information Operations Course.--The Secretary of Defense 
shall provide to members of the Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, 
and Space Force a course to prepare the members to plan and conduct 
information operations in a joint environment pursuant to title 10, 
United States Code. Such course shall include--
 (1) standardized qualifications and procedures to enable 
 the joint and synchronized employment of information-related 
 capabilities in the information environment;
 (2) joint methods to implement information operations in a 
 battlefield environment under any ground force chain of 
 command; and
 (3) a curriculum covering applicable assets, core 
 information operations concepts, integration of effects with a 
 specific focus on information-related effects, operational 
 methodology, multi-dimensional targeting space, other 
 information-related capabilities defined by governing policy, 
 instruction, publications, and doctrine, and any other topics 
 or areas determined necessary by the Secretary.
 (b) Semiannual Reports.--On a semiannual basis through January 1, 
2028, the Secretary shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a report on the course provided under subsection (a). Each 
report shall include, with respect to the period covered by the 
report--
 (1) the number of members described in subsection (a) who 
 attended the course; and
 (2) an assessment of the value of the course in--
 (A) conducting joint operations in the information 
 environment; and
 (B) the synchronized employment of information-
 related capabilities in the information environment.

SEC. 1514. CONSISTENCY IN DELEGATION OF CERTAIN AUTHORITIES RELATING TO 
 INFORMATION OPERATIONS.

 Except as otherwise provided specifically by law, if any roles or 
responsibilities relating to information operations are assigned 
pursuant to a provision of law or by the direction of the Secretary of 
Defense to the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, the Under 
Secretary shall ensure that such roles or responsibilities are assigned 
or otherwise delegated to the same position within the Office of the 
Under Secretary of Defense of Policy.

SEC. 1515. ASSESSMENT AND OPTIMIZATION OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 INFORMATION OPERATIONS WITHIN THE CYBER DOMAIN.

 (a) Assessment and Plan.--Not later than 90 days after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, the Principal Information Operations Advisor 
and the Principal Cyber Advisor to the Secretary of Defense, in 
coordination with the Commander of the United States Cyber Command, 
shall complete both an assessment and an optimization plan for 
integrating all information and influence operations within cyberspace 
across the Department of Defense.
 (b) Elements.--The assessment under subsection (a) shall include 
the following:
 (1) An inventory of the components of the Department of 
 Defense conducting information and influence operations within 
 cyberspace.
 (2) An examination of sufficiency of resources allocated 
 for information and influence operations within cyberspace.
 (3) An evaluation of the command and control, oversight, 
 and management of matters related to information and influence 
 operations within cyberspace across the Office of the Secretary 
 of Defense and the Joint Staff.
 (4) Any other matters determined relevant by the Principal 
 Information Operations Advisor and the Principal Cyber Advisor 
 to the Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the Commander 
 of the United States Cyber Command.
 (c) Optimization Plan.--The optimization plan under subsection (a) 
shall include the following:
 (1) Actions that the Department will implement to integrate 
 all Department information and influence operations within 
 cyberspace in a manner that ensures the proper level of 
 visibility, unity of effort, synchronization, and 
 deconfliction.
 (2) Coordination procedures within the Department to ensure 
 that coordination with the Commander of the United States Cyber 
 Command takes place with regard to unity of effort, 
 synchronization, deconfliction of information and influence 
 operations within cyberspace.
 (3) An evaluation of potential organizational changes 
 required to optimize information and influence operations 
 within cyberspace.
 (4) Any other matters determined relevant by the Principal 
 Information Operations Advisor and the Principal Cyber Advisor 
 to the Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the Commander 
 of the United States Cyber Command.
 (d) Briefings.--Not later than 30 days after completing the 
assessment and optimization plan under subsection (a), the Principal 
Information Operations Advisor and the Principal Cyber Advisor to the 
Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the Commander of the United 
States Cyber Command, shall provide to the congressional defense 
committees a briefing on the assessment and plan.
 (e) Implementation.--Not later than 180 days after the date on 
which the briefing is provided under subsection (d), the Secretary of 
Defense shall implement the optimization plan under subsection (a).

SEC. 1516. REQUIREMENT TO NOTIFY CHIEF OF MISSION OF MILITARY OPERATION 
 IN THE INFORMATION ENVIRONMENT.

 Section 398 of title 10, United States Code, as added and amended 
by section 1511, is further amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (g) as subsection (h); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (f) the following new 
 subsection (g):
 ``(g) Requirement to Notify Chief of Mission.--The Secretary may 
not authorize a military operation in the information environment under 
this title intended to cause an effect in a country unless the 
Secretary fully informs the chief of mission for that country under 
section 207 of the Foreign Service Act of 1980 (22 U.S.C. 3927) of the 
planned operation.''.

 Subtitle C--Reports and Other Matters

SEC. 1531. ANNUAL REPORTS ON SUPPORT BY MILITARY DEPARTMENTS FOR 
 CYBERSPACE OPERATIONS.

 Chapter 19 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting 
after section 391 the following new section (and conforming the table 
of sections at the beginning of such chapter accordingly):
``Sec. 391a. Annual reports on support by military departments for 
 cyberspace operations
 ``(a) Reports.--Not later than 15 days after the date on which the 
Secretary of Defense submits to Congress the defense budget materials 
(as defined in section 239 of this title) for fiscal year 2024 and each 
fiscal year thereafter, the Commander of the United States Cyber 
Command shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report 
containing the following:
 ``(1) An evaluation of whether each military department is 
 meeting the requirements established by the Commander and 
 validated by the Office of the Secretary of Defense.
 ``(2) For each military department evaluated under 
 paragraph (1)--
 ``(A) a certification that the military department 
 is meeting such requirements; or
 ``(B) a detailed explanation regarding how the 
 military department is not meeting such requirements.
 ``(b) Elements of Evaluation.--Each evaluation under subsection 
(a)(1) shall include, with respect to the military department being 
evaluated, the following:
 ``(1) The adequacy of the policies, procedures, and 
 execution of manning, training, and equipping personnel for 
 employment within the cyber mission force.
 ``(2) The adequacy of the policies and procedures relating 
 to the assignment and assignment length of members of the Army, 
 Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, or Space Force to the cyber 
 mission force.
 ``(3) The adequacy of the investment toward cyber-peculiar 
 science and technology advancements, with an emphasis on 
 capability development for the cyber mission force.
 ``(4) The sufficiency of the policies, procedures, and 
 investments toward the military occupational specialty, 
 designator, rating, or Air Force specialty code responsible for 
 cyberspace operations.
 ``(5) In coordination with the Principal Cyber Advisor to 
 the Secretary of Defense, an evaluation of the use by the 
 military department of the shared lexicon of the Department of 
 Defense specific to cyberspace activities.
 ``(6) The readiness of the members contributing to the 
 cyber mission force and the cyberspace operations forces.
 ``(7) Any other element determined relevant by the 
 Commander.''.

SEC. 1532. INDEPENDENT REVIEW OF POSTURE AND STAFFING LEVELS OF OFFICE 
 OF THE CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall seek to enter 
into an agreement with an appropriate non-Department of Defense entity 
for the conduct of a comprehensive review of the posture and staffing 
levels of the Office of the Chief Information Officer, as of the date 
of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Matters for Consideration.--An agreement under subsection (a) 
shall specify that the review conducted under the agreement shall 
include the evaluation of each of the following:
 (1) Any limitations or constraints of the Office of the 
 Chief Information Officer in the carrying out the entirety of 
 the responsibilities specified in section 142(b) of title 10, 
 United States Code, based on the staffing levels of the Office 
 as of the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) The composition of civilian, military, and contractor 
 personnel assigned to the Office of the Chief Information 
 Officer, as of such date, including the occupational series and 
 military occupational specialties of such personnel, relative 
 to the responsibilities specified in such section.
 (3) The organizational construct of the Office of the Chief 
 Information Officer, as of such date.
 (c) Recommendations.--An agreement under subsection (a) shall 
specify that the review conducted under the agreement shall include 
recommendations for the Chief Information Officer and the congressional 
defense committees, including recommendations derived from the matters 
for consideration specified under subsection (b).
 (d) Submittal to Congress.--Not later than 30 days after the date 
of the completion of the review required under subsection (a), the 
Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a copy of the review.

SEC. 1533. COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF CYBER EXCEPTED SERVICE.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Chief Information Officer of the Department 
of Defense, in coordination with the Chief Digital and Artificial 
Intelligence Officer and the Principal Cyber Advisor of the Department 
and in consultation with the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel 
and Readiness, shall conduct a comprehensive review of the Cyber 
Excepted Service established pursuant to section 1599f of title 10, 
United States Code.
 (b) Elements.--The review required under subsection (a) shall 
include a consideration of each of the following elements:
 (1) The potential and structural limitations of the Cyber 
 Excepted Service, including impediments to mobility or 
 advancement by civilian employees currently in billets coded 
 for Cyber Excepted Service.
 (2) Matters related to pay disparity and hindrances in 
 compensation relative to the skill sets and value of such 
 civilian employees in the private sector.
 (3) Criteria for eligibility of potential Department of 
 Defense components and entities for participation in the Cyber 
 Excepted Service.
 (4) The eligibility for participation in the Cyber Excepted 
 Service of civilian employees who are assigned to the Office of 
 the Chief Digital and Artificial Intelligence Officer.
 (c) Recommendations.--The review required under subsection (a) 
shall include recommendations for the Secretary of Defense and the 
congressional defense committees with respect to the improvement of the 
Cyber Excepted Service, including recommendations derived from the 
consideration of the elements specified in subsection (b).
 (d) Submittal to Congress.--Not later than 30 days after the 
completion of the review required under subsection (a), the Chief 
Information Officer shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a copy of the review.

SEC. 1534. STANDARDIZATION OF AUTHORITY TO OPERATE APPLICATIONS IN THE 
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE.

 (a) Policy.--
 (1) Requirement.--Not later than 270 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Chief Information Officer of the 
 Department of Defense shall establish a policy with criteria 
 for the reciprocity of authority to operate for software and 
 hardware between all networks of the Department of Defense.
 (2) Contents.--The policy under paragraph (1) shall contain 
 the following:
 (A) Procedures for requesting an authority to 
 operate that applies to all networks of the Department.
 (B) Guidance on when authorizing officials should 
 grant an information technology platform that has 
 already received an authority to operate on another 
 network of the Federal Government a reciprocal 
 authority to operate on a network of the Department of 
 Defense.
 (C) A standardized format for documentation to 
 support the evaluation of a request for an authority to 
 operate.
 (b) Single Platform.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Chief Information Officer shall implement a 
single software tool or platform for the submission and review of 
requests for an authority to operate applications. The tool or platform 
shall--
 (1) be used by all authorizing officials of the Department 
 for the receipt, review, and adjudication of all such requests; 
 and
 (2) authorize persons who submit such requests to see the 
 progress of the request at all steps in the review process.
 (c) Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Chief Information Officer shall submit to 
the congressional defense committees a report on the following:
 (1) The operational status of the software tool or platform 
 implemented under subsection (b).
 (2) A list of all networks and authorizing officials of the 
 Department that are using the software tool or platform.
 (3) A list of all networks and authorizing officials of the 
 Department that are not using the software tool or platform.
 (d) Authority to Operate Defined.--In this section, the term 
``authority to operate'' means the official management decision given 
by a senior organizational official to authorize operation of an 
information system and accept the risk to organizational operations.

SEC. 1535. ESTABLISHMENT OF HACKING FOR NATIONAL SECURITY AND PUBLIC 
 SERVICE INNOVATION PROGRAM.

 (a) Support Authorized.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense shall establish a 
 Hacking for National Security and Public Service Innovation 
 Program (in this section referred to as the ``H4NSPSI 
 program'') within the National Security Innovation Network (in 
 this section referred to as the ``NSIN'').
 (2) Coordinating authority.--The NSIN shall serve as the 
 coordinating authority for the H4NSPSI program and activities 
 under such program.
 (3) Elements.--H4NSPSI program activities shall include the 
 following:
 (A) Source problems at scale for the agencies 
 associated with the programs specified in subsection 
 (e).
 (B) Recruit universities located in the United 
 States or in partner or allied nations to work on the 
 problems described in subparagraph (A).
 (C) Train universities described in subparagraph 
 (B) on the methodology of Hacking for Defense.
 (D) Support the universities described in 
 subparagraph (B) with content, curriculum, and other 
 support to develop solutions to the problems described 
 in subparagraph (A).
 (E) Support the United States Government adoption 
 of solutions developed through the programs specified 
 in subsection (e).
 (F) Support the development and acquisition of 
 talent within the agencies associated with the programs 
 specified in subsection (e).
 (4) Objectives.--The H4NSPSI program may include the 
 following objectives:
 (A) Increase funding for successful innovation 
 efforts that bridge the gap between innovative 
 organizations and the United States military.
 (B) Increase funding for established drivers of 
 national security innovation within the Department of 
 Defense and other Federal agencies, including the 
 programs specified in subsection (e).
 (C) Improve the ability of the Department of 
 Defense to maintain technological advantage over 
 competitors by leveraging private sector innovation at 
 scale.
 (D) Through the use of existing authorities--
 (i) strengthen United States national 
 security innovation efforts and activities; and
 (ii) create additional opportunities for 
 collaboration and shared experience between the 
 Department of Defense, other Federal agencies, 
 the private sector, and academia through the 
 expansion of existing programs, partnerships, 
 and activities, including those specified in 
 subsection (e).
 (E) Grow and sustain the innovation edge of the 
 United States by building and strengthening the 
 national security innovation base through collaboration 
 between the private sector, academia, the Department of 
 Defense, the Armed Forces, and other Federal agencies.
 (F) Invest in the future of national security 
 innovation by inspiring a new generation to public 
 service, supporting the diversity of the United States 
 national security innovation workforce, and modernizing 
 government decision-making processes.
 (G) Expand the United States science and technology 
 workforce by investing in STEM education and exposing 
 the national security workforce to cutting-edge, 
 innovative problem validation and solution development 
 practices.
 (H) Develop best practices for the conduct of such 
 activities and programs.
 (I) Identify experimental learning opportunities 
 for activity and program participants to interact with 
 operational forces and better understand national 
 security challenges.
 (J) Participate in exchanges and partnerships with 
 Department of Defense science and technology 
 activities, as well as the science and technology 
 activities of other Federal agencies.
 (b) Consultation.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Secretary of 
Defense may consult with the heads of such Federal agencies, 
universities, and public and private entities engaged in the 
development of advanced technologies, as well as in the validation of 
problems and adoption of solutions in response to national security 
challenges, as the Secretary of Defense determines to be appropriate.
 (c) Authorities.--The Secretary of Defense may develop and maintain 
metrics to assess national security and public service innovation 
programs and activities to ensure standards for programs supported 
under subsection (a) are consistent and being met.
 (d) Participation by Federal Employees and Members of the Armed 
Forces.--The Secretary of Defense shall encourage Federal employees and 
members of the Armed Forces through the service secretaries and service 
chiefs and their counterparts in agencies associated with the programs 
specified in subsection (e) to participate in the H4NSPSI program in 
order to gain exposure to modern innovation and entrepreneurial 
methodologies.
 (e) Coordination.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary of 
Defense shall consider coordinating and partnering with activities and 
organizations involved in the following:
 (1) Hacking for Defense.
 (2) Hacking for Homeland Security.
 (3) Hacking for Diplomacy.
 (4) Hacking for Space.
 (5) Hacking for Manufacturing.

SEC. 1536. TAILORED CYBERSPACE OPERATIONS ORGANIZATIONS.

 Section 1723 of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283; 10 U.S.C. 
394 note) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsections:
 ``(e) Update to Congress.--Not later than July 1, 2023, the 
secretaries of the military services and the Assistant Secretary of 
Defense for Special Operations and Irregular Warfare shall brief the 
congressional defense committees on activities taken during the period 
following the date of the briefing under subsection (d), including an 
examination of establishing Tailored Cyberspace Operations 
Organizations and utilization of the authority provided pursuant to 
subsection (c).
 ``(f) Air Force Actions.--Not later than July 1, 2023, the 
Secretary of the Air Force shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a review of the activities of the Navy Cyber Warfare 
Development Group, including with respect to the authorities of the 
Group. The review shall include the following:
 ``(1) An assessment of whether such authorities shall be 
 conferred to the 90th Cyberspace Operations Squadron of the 
 United States Air Force.
 ``(2) A consideration of whether the 90th Cyberspace 
 Operations Squadron should be designated a controlled tour, as 
 defined by the Secretary.''.

SEC. 1537. CYBER OPERATIONS-PECULIAR AWARDS.

 Chapter 57 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting 
after section 1124 the following new section:
``Sec. 1124a. Cyber operations-peculiar awards
 ``(a) Authority.--The Secretary of Defense and the Secretaries of 
the military departments may authorize the payment of a cash award to, 
and incur necessary expense for the honorary recognition of, a member 
of the covered armed forces whose novel actions, invention, or 
technical achievement enables or ensures operational outcomes in or 
through cyberspace against threats to national security.
 ``(b) Actions During Service.--An award under this section may be 
paid notwithstanding the member's death, separation, or retirement from 
the covered armed forces. However, the novel action, invention, or 
technical achievement forming the basis for the award must have been 
made while the member was on active duty or in an active reserve status 
and not otherwise eligible for an award under chapter 45 of title 5.
 ``(c) Payment.--Awards to, and expenses for the honorary 
recognition of, members of the covered armed forces under this section 
may be paid from--
 ``(1) the funds or appropriations available to the activity 
 primarily benefiting from the novel action, invention, or 
 technical achievement; or
 ``(2) the several funds or appropriations of the various 
 activities benefiting from the novel action, invention, or 
 technical achievement.
 ``(d) Amounts.--The total amount of the award, or awards, made 
under this section for a novel action, invention, or technical 
achievement may not exceed $2,500, regardless of the number of persons 
who may be entitled to share therein.
 ``(e) Regulations.--Awards under this section shall be made under 
regulations to be prescribed by the Secretary of Defense or by the 
Secretaries of the military departments.
 ``(f) Covered Armed Forces Defined.--In this section, the term 
`covered armed forces' means the Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, 
and Space Force.''.

SEC. 1538. MANNING REVIEW OF SPACE FORCE CYBER SQUADRONS.

 (a) Requirement.--Not later than 195 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Air Force, in coordination 
with the Chief of Space Operations, shall submit to the congressional 
defense committees a review of the manning required to fully staff the 
current and planned cyber squadrons of the Space Force.
 (b) Matters Included.--
 (1) Elements.--The review under subsection (a) shall 
 include considerations of the following:
 (A) The specific sourcing of existing billets of 
 the Space Force optimally postured for transfer to 
 cyber squadrons.
 (B) The administrative processes required to shift 
 billets and existing funding to cyber squadrons.
 (C) The responsibilities and functions performed by 
 military personnel and civilian personnel.
 (D) The cumulative benefit for the Space Force of 
 transferring billets to cyber squadrons.
 (2) Roadmap.--The review under subsection (a) shall include 
 a transition roadmap that outlines a comprehensive transition 
 for the transfer of billets described in paragraph (1) by not 
 later than September 30, 2024.

SEC. 1539. REVIEW OF DEFINITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH CYBERSPACE OPERATIONS 
 FORCES.

 Not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Defense, acting through the Principal Cyber 
Advisor of the Department of Defense and the Principal Cyber Advisors 
of the military departments, shall review and update the memorandum of 
the Secretary of Defense dated December 12, 2019, concerning the 
definition of the term ``Department of Defense Cyberspace Operations 
Forces (DoD COF)''. The review shall include--
 (1) a comprehensive assessment of units and components of 
 the Department of Defense conducting defensive cyberspace 
 operations which are not currently included in such definition; 
 and
 (2) a revised definition for such term that includes such 
 units and components within the Cyberspace Operations Forces.

 TITLE XVI--SPACE ACTIVITIES, STRATEGIC PROGRAMS, AND INTELLIGENCE 
 MATTERS

 Subtitle A--Space Activities

SEC. 1601. REQUIREMENTS FOR PROTECTION OF SATELLITES.

 Chapter 135 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
inserting after section 2275 the following new section (and conforming 
the table of sections at the beginning of such chapter accordingly):
``Sec. 2275a. Requirements for protection of satellites
 ``(a) Establishment of Requirements.--Before a major satellite 
acquisition program achieves Milestone A approval, or equivalent, the 
Chief of Staff of the Space Force, in consultation with the Commander 
of the United States Space Command, shall establish requirements for 
the defense and resilience of the satellites under that program against 
the capabilities of adversaries to target, degrade, or destroy the 
satellites.
 ``(b) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `major satellite acquisition program' has 
 the meaning given that term in section 2275 of this title.
 ``(2) The term `Milestone A approval' has the meaning given 
 that term in section 4251 of this title 10.''.

SEC. 1602. STRATEGY ON PROTECTION OF SATELLITES.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) Both Russia and China have demonstrated the capability 
 to target, degrade, and destroy satellites on orbit, whether 
 through kinetic or nonkinetic means.
 (2) As recently as November 15, 2021, Russia demonstrated a 
 direct ascent antisatellite weapon.
 (3) Also in 2021, China successfully ``grappled'' a 
 satellite and dragged the satellite out of its orbit to another 
 location in space, a capability that could be used on any other 
 object in space, including satellites of the Department of 
 Defense.
 (b) Strategy.--
 (1) Requirement.--Not later than 90 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in 
 coordination with the Director of National Intelligence, shall 
 make publicly available a strategy containing the actions that 
 will be taken to defend and protect on-orbit satellites of the 
 Department of Defense and the intelligence community from the 
 capabilities of adversaries to target, degrade, or destroy 
 satellites.
 (2) Forms.--The Secretary shall--
 (A) make the strategy under paragraph (1) publicly 
 available in unclassified form; and
 (B) submit to the appropriate congressional 
 committees an annex, which may be submitted in 
 classified form, containing supporting documents to the 
 strategy.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the congressional defense committees; and
 (B) the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence 
 of the House of Representatives and the Select 
 Committee on Intelligence of the Senate.
 (2) The term ``intelligence community'' has the meaning 
 given that term in section 3(4) of the National Security Act of 
 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3003(4)).

SEC. 1603. NATIONAL SECURITY SPACE LAUNCH PROGRAM.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the acquisition approach for phase three of the 
 National Security Space Launch program should account for 
 changes in the launch industry and planned architectures of the 
 Space Force;
 (2) the supply of launches for phase three may be impacted 
 by increases in commercial space launch demand;
 (3) the Secretary of the Air Force should explore new and 
 innovative acquisition approaches to leverage launch 
 competition within the commercial market; and
 (4) in developing the acquisition strategy for phase three, 
 the Secretary should--
 (A) consider the scope of phase three manifest 
 requirements in comparison to the Orbital Services 
 Program and other potential contract vehicles for 
 launches;
 (B) ensure the continued assured access to space;
 (C) emphasize free, fair, and open competition;
 (D) capitalize on competition across the commercial 
 launch industry;
 (E) examine all possible options for awarding 
 contracts for launches during the period covered by the 
 phase, including, block-buys, indefinite delivery, 
 indefinite quantity, or a hybrid approach;
 (F) consider tailorable mission assurance options 
 informed by previous launch vehicle performance 
 metrics;
 (G) include options for adding launch providers, 
 launch systems, or both, during the execution of phase 
 three to address manifest changes beyond the planned 
 national security space unique launches at the time of 
 initial award;
 (H) maintain understanding of the commercial launch 
 industry and launch capacity needed to fulfill the 
 requirements of the National Security Space Launch 
 program; and
 (I) allow for rapid development and on-orbit 
 deployment of enabling and transformational 
 technologies required to address emerging requirements, 
 including with respect to--
 (i) delivery of in-space transportation, 
 logistics, and on-orbit servicing capabilities 
 to enhance the persistence, sensitivity, and 
 resiliency of national security space missions 
 in a contested space environment;
 (ii) proliferated low-Earth orbit 
 constellation deployment;
 (iii) routine access to extended orbits 
 beyond geostationary orbits, including cislunar 
 orbits;
 (iv) payload fairings that exceed current 
 launch requirements;
 (v) increased responsiveness for heavy lift 
 capability;
 (vi) the ability to transfer orbits, 
 including point-to-point orbital transfers;
 (vii) capacity and capability to execute 
 secondary deployments;
 (viii) high-performance upper stages;
 (ix) vertical integration; and
 (x) other new missions that are outside the 
 parameters of the nine design reference 
 missions that exist as of the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.
 (b) Quarterly Briefings.--On a quarterly basis until the date on 
which the Secretary of the Air Force awards a phase three contract, the 
Commander of the Space Systems Command shall provide to the appropriate 
congressional committees a briefing on the development of the phase 
three acquisition strategy, including how the matters described 
subsection (a) are being considered in such strategy.
 (c) Notification of Results of Mission Assignment Board.--Not later 
than 14 days after the date on which a phase two mission assignment 
board is completed, the Commander of the Space Systems Command shall 
notify the appropriate congressional committees of the launch 
assignment results of the board.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the congressional defense committees with 
 respect to all briefings provided under subsection (b) 
 and notifications made under subsection (c); and
 (B) in addition to the congressional defense 
 committees, the Permanent Select Committee on 
 Intelligence of the House of Representatives and the 
 Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate with 
 respect to--
 (i) briefings required under subsection (b) 
 regarding requirements of the intelligence 
 community being incorporated into phase three 
 planning; and
 (ii) notifications made under subsection 
 (c) regarding an assignment that includes 
 capabilities being launched for the 
 intelligence community.
 (2) The term ``intelligence community'' has the meaning 
 given that term in section 3(4) of the National Security Act of 
 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3003(4)).
 (2) The term ``phase three'' means, with respect to the 
 National Security Space Launch program, launch missions ordered 
 under the program after fiscal year 2024.
 (3) The term ``phase two'' means, with respect to the 
 National Security Space Launch program, launch missions ordered 
 under the program during fiscal years 2020 through 2024.

SEC. 1604. RESPONSIVE SPACE STRATEGY, PRINCIPLES, MODEL ARCHITECTURE, 
 AND IMPLEMENTATION PLANS.

 (a) Strategy, Principles, and Model Architecture.--Not later than 
270 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Chief of 
Space Operations and the Commander of the United States Space Command 
shall jointly develop a responsive space strategy, principles, and a 
model architecture to be implemented across the United States Space 
Command and the Combined Force Space Component Command.
 (b) Elements.--The responsive space strategy, principles, and model 
architecture under subsection (a) shall include, at a minimum, the 
following elements:
 (1) Prioritized policies and procedures.
 (2) Policies specific to launch, buses, payloads, ground 
 infrastructure, and networks.
 (3) Specification of enterprise-wide acquisitions of 
 capabilities conducted pursuant to the policies referred to in 
 paragraph (2).
 (4) Roles, responsibilities, functions, and operational 
 workflows of responsive space architecture and infrastructure 
 personnel--
 (A) of the Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, and 
 Space Force and the combatant commands; and
 (B) the Combined Force Space Component Command.
 (c) Architecture Development and Implementation.--In developing and 
implementing the responsive space strategy, principles, and model 
architecture under subsection (a), the Chief of Space Operations and 
the Commander of the United States Space Command shall coordinate 
with--
 (1) the Space Acquisition Council;
 (2) the Director of the Defense Advanced Research Projects 
 Agency;
 (3) the Chairman of the Joints Chiefs of Staff; and
 (4) any other component of the Department of Defense, as 
 jointly determined by the Chief of Space Operations and the 
 Commander.
 (d) Implementation Plans.--
 (1) In general.--The Chief of Space Operations and the 
 Commander of the United State Space Command shall ensure that, 
 not later than one year after the finalization of the 
 responsive space strategy, principles, and model architecture 
 under subsection (a), each Space Force delta transmits to the 
 Chief and the Commander a draft plan to implement such 
 responsive space strategy, principles, and model architecture 
 with respect to such delta.
 (2) Elements.--Each implementation plan under paragraph (1) 
 shall include, at a minimum, the following with respect to the 
 Space Force delta covered by the plan:
 (A) Specific acquisitions, implementations, 
 instrumentations, and operational workflows to be 
 implemented across responsive space architectures and 
 infrastructures.
 (B) A detailed schedule with target milestones and 
 required expenditures.
 (C) Interim and final metrics, including a phase 
 mitigation plan.
 (D) Identification of additional funding, 
 authorities, organizational changes and policies, as 
 may be required.
 (E) Requested waivers, exceptions to policies of 
 the Department of Defense, and expected delays.
 (e) Implementation Oversight.--The Chief of Space Operations 
shall--
 (1) assess the implementation plans under subsection (d)(1) 
 for--
 (A) adequacy and responsiveness to the responsive 
 space strategy, principles, and model architecture 
 under subsection (a); and
 (B) appropriate use of enterprise-wide 
 acquisitions;
 (2) ensure, at a high level, the interoperability and 
 compatibility of individual implementation plans of the Space 
 Force deltas;
 (3) track the use of waivers and exceptions to policy;
 (4) develop a Responsive Space Scorecard to track and drive 
 implementation of the plans by the Space Force Deltas; and
 (5) leverage the authorities of the Commander of the United 
 States Space Command to begin implementation of such responsive 
 space strategy, principles, and model architecture.
 (f) Initial Briefings.--
 (1) Responsive space strategy, principles, and model 
 architecture.--Not later than 90 days after finalizing the 
 responsive space strategy, principles, and model architecture 
 under subsection (a), the Chief of Space Operations and the 
 Commander of the United States Space Command shall provide to 
 the congressional defense committees a briefing on such 
 responsive space strategy, principles, and model architecture.
 (2) Implementation plans.--Not later than 90 days after the 
 receipt by the Chief of Space Operations of an implementation 
 plan transmitted under to subsection (d)(1), the Chief shall 
 provide to the congressional defense committees a briefing on 
 such implementation plan.
 (g) Annual Briefing.--During each annual briefing provided by the 
Chief of Space Operations to the congressional defense committees on 
the budget occurring during the period beginning February 1, 2023, and 
ending January 1, 2031, the Chief shall provide updates on the 
implementation of the responsive space strategy, principles, and 
architecture under subsection (a).
 (h) Notification Reforms.--Section 9021(c) of title 10, United 
States Code, is amended--
 (1) by striking paragraph (2); and
 (2) by striking ``(1) The Council'' and inserting ``The 
 Council''.

SEC. 1605. RESPONSIVE SPACE DEMONSTRATIONS.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that 
demonstrating the ability of the United States to rapidly respond to 
adversarial threats to the space systems of the United States serves as 
a compelling strategic deterrent to adversaries and informs how 
responsive, resilient, and affordable space and launch capabilities can 
help counter growing adversarial threats on an operationally relevant 
timeline.
 (b) Establishment of Program.--Not later than 180 days after the 
date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in 
consultation with the Chief of Space Operations and the Commander of 
the United States Space Command, shall establish a program to 
demonstrate responsive space capabilities through operational 
exercises, wargames, and table-top exercises.
 (c) Initial Demonstration.--
 (1) Mission.--In carrying out the program under subsection 
 (b), the Secretary shall conduct a rapid reconstitution 
 deterrence demonstration mission to--
 (A) design, develop, and understand the benefit of 
 rapid space reconstitution and space augmentation;
 (B) simulate real-world scenarios through wargames 
 and table-top exercises, including contested 
 environment scenarios, in which threats to the space 
 capabilities of the United States may be offset or 
 mitigated by responsive space capabilities;
 (C) validate the ability to provide an end-to-end 
 responsive space mission with responsive launch, 
 satellite deployment, and data to users within rapid 
 mission call-up timelines; and
 (D) integrate such launches with the joint force 
 under simulated contested conditions through the rapid 
 deployment of launch infrastructure to existing Major 
 Range and Test Facility Bases.
 (2) Report.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the 
 congressional defense committees a report on the mission under 
 paragraph (1), including--
 (A) an assessment of the mission with respect to 
 the operational and strategic benefits to the space-
 related missions of the Department of Defense;
 (B) a proposed organization and management 
 structure of the mission;
 (C) a timeline for implementing the demonstrations 
 under the mission; and
 (D) budget estimates and financial forecast for the 
 demonstrations.

SEC. 1606. ALLIED RESPONSIVE SPACE CAPABILITIES.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) it is in the common interest of the United States and 
 allies and partners of the United States to strive for 
 accessibility and flexibility for delivering assets into space 
 on a responsive timeline;
 (2) the United States should implement joint United States-
 allied space missions that demonstrate rapid, rapid launch, 
 reconstitution and satellite augmentation from locations in the 
 Indo-Pacific, European, and other theaters of operations;
 (3) the United States should leverage allied and partner 
 spaceports to diversify and disaggregate launch sites across 
 the world for a multitude of missions, including national 
 security missions; and
 (4) it is important for the United States to have 
 operational and contracting steps established with allies and 
 partners to ensure readiness and preparedness for responding to 
 or deterring any unknown threats.
 (b) Initiatives.--The Secretary of the Defense and the Secretary of 
State shall jointly--
 (1) ensure that responsive space capabilities of the 
 Department of Defense align with initiatives by Five Eyes 
 countries, member states of the North Atlantic Treaty 
 Organization, and other allies to promote a globally responsive 
 space architecture; and
 (2) designate a single official responsible for 
 coordinating responsive space activities with allied partners.
 (c) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of 
State, in coordination with the Commander of the United States European 
Command, the Commander of the United States Indo-Pacific Command, the 
Commander of the United States Space Command, and the Secretary of 
State, shall jointly submit to the congressional defense committees, 
the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives, and 
the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate a report assessing 
current investments and partnerships by the United States with allies 
of the United States with respect to responsive space efforts. The 
report shall include the following:
 (1) An assessment of the benefits of leveraging allied and 
 partner spaceports for responsive launch.
 (2) A discussion of current and future plans to engage with 
 allies and partners with respect to activities ensuring rapid 
 reconstitution or augmentation of the space capabilities of the 
 United States and allies.
 (3) An assessment of the shared costs and technology 
 between the United States and allies, including leveraging 
 investments from the Pacific Deterrence Initiative and the 
 European Deterrence Initiative.
 (d) Five Eyes Countries Defined.--In this section, the term ``Five 
Eyes countries'' means the following:
 (1) Australia.
 (2) Canada.
 (3) New Zealand.
 (4) The United Kingdom.
 (5) The United States.

SEC. 1607. REPORT ON TACTICALLY RESPONSIVE SPACE CAPABILITIES.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the Space Safari tactically responsive launch-2 mission 
 of the Space Systems Command of the Space Force successfully 
 demonstrated the ability of the Space Force to rapidly 
 integrate, launch, and operate a satellite on orbit on a 
 timeline that would be needed for rapid reconstitution or to 
 respond to real-time hostile activities occurring in the 
 domain;
 (2) the Space Force should continue these efforts, and 
 broaden the program beyond the logistics of launch and 
 operations to also focus on lifecycle concepts of operation, as 
 well as any contractual mechanisms that should be required in 
 future programs to take into account the need for rapid 
 reconstitution and responsiveness;
 (3) the Chief of Space Operations should formalize 
 tactically responsive requirements for all space capabilities 
 carried out under title 10, United States Code; and
 (4) to take into totality the effort required for 
 tactically responsive launch, the Space Force should consider 
 adding a corresponding budget line item for ``Tactically 
 Responsive Space'' to fund areas beyond launch that would 
 contribute to responsive space activities.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which the 
budget of the President for fiscal year 2024 is submitted to Congress 
pursuant to section 1105 of title 31, United States Code, the Chief of 
Space Operations shall submit to the congressional defense committees a 
report on planned tactically responsive space activities pursuant to 
section 1609 of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283; 10 U.S.C. 
2271 note) included during the period covered by the most recent 
future-years defense program submitted under section 221 of title 10, 
United States Code (as of the date of the report), including a detailed 
budget plan for launch activities and all other efforts needed to 
enable tactically responsive space capabilities.

SEC. 1608. SENSE OF CONGRESS ON RANGE OF THE FUTURE AND SUPPORT TO 
 COMMERCIAL SPACE LAUNCH ACTIVITY.

 It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) section 1610 of the National Defense Authorization Act 
 for Fiscal Year 2022 contained a provision requiring the United 
 States Space Force to deliver a report on its Range of the 
 Future initiative;
 (2) based on the details in that report, that the Nation's 
 launch service providers, consistent with decades of national 
 policy, now lead the world in space access, that United States 
 leadership in this strategic capability is critical to national 
 security and economic vitality, and that it is critical to the 
 Nation to continue encouraging and enabling United States space 
 access capabilities to flourish and expand;
 (3) the rapid growth of the commercial launch industry 
 places a growing demand on Department of Defense resources at 
 Federal space launch ranges, and that this demand growth will 
 continue for the foreseeable future;
 (4) the 1960s-era infrastructure of the two Department of 
 Defense launch ranges primarily responsible for meeting its 
 assured access to space mission under section 2273 of title 10, 
 United States Code, and complying with section 2276 of such 
 title, is under increasing strain, and needs to be replaced 
 with a modern, state of the art launch infrastructure that 
 encourages and enables continued growth and leadership in space 
 access;
 (5) maintenance of common use critical infrastructure like 
 roads, culverts, bridges, deluge and water treatment 
 facilities, supply lines, and electrical networks, among 
 others, require immediate attention;
 (6) investments in infrastructure have not kept pace with 
 commercial demand primarily due to existing authorities which 
 limit reimbursement, flexible financial investment facilities, 
 and reinvestment of revenue in spaceport sustainment, 
 modernization, and growth;
 (7) the burgeoning commercial space industry requires a 
 more holistic, responsive process leveraging public and private 
 investment;
 (8) the Department of Defense is constrained to provide 
 services to commercial users only when not needed for public 
 use, yet at the same time must promote commercial space launch 
 capabilities as a critical enabler to national security;
 (9) the United States Space Force has made great use of 
 existing authorities and those provided by other non-Federal 
 entities to leverage other sources of commercial and State 
 investment to keep pace with demand;
 (10) a similar State business development entity would be 
 useful for supporting commercial space launch capability 
 development in California at Vandenberg Space Force Base and 
 other spaceports, and Congress looks forward to assisting the 
 Department of Defense in improving its ability to plan and 
 support commercial innovation while continuing to provide world 
 class launch and test facilities; and
 (11) the Secretary and the Department should engage with 
 all stakeholders, including NASA, other relevant Federal 
 agencies, and the associated congressional authorizing 
 committees of jurisdiction, in any reporting, negotiation, 
 policy, and potential legislative proposals on this matter.

SEC. 1609. REPORT ON HYPERSPECTRAL SATELLITE TECHNOLOGY.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a report on how hyperspectral satellite technology being 
developed and tested by domestic commercial satellite companies may be 
incorporated in the Department of Defense's existing and future 
greenhouse gas reduction efforts.

SEC. 1610. REPORT ON SPACE DEBRIS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 240 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
appropriate congressional committees a report on the risks posed by 
man-made space debris in low-earth orbit, including--
 (1) recommendations with respect to the remediation of such 
 risks; and
 (2) outlines of plans to reduce the incident of such space 
 debris.
 (b) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Science, Space, and Technology of the House of Representatives; 
 and
 (2) the Committee on Armed Services and Committee on 
 Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate.

SEC. 1611. PLAN ON PILOT PROGRAM FOR DEPLOYMENT OF DEDICATED X-BAND 
 SMALL SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS.

 (a) Plans.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for 
 Special Operations and Low-Intensity Conflict and the Assistant 
 Secretary of the Air Force for Space Acquisition and 
 Integration, shall jointly submit to the congressional defense 
 committees a plan for a pilot program for the deployment of 
 dedicated X-band small satellite communications technologies 
 that may support current and future requirements of special 
 operations forces.
 (2) Plan elements.--The plan submitted under paragraph (1) 
 shall include the following:
 (A) A description of authorities that would be used 
 to execute the proposed pilot program.
 (B) A timeline for the implementation and duration 
 of the proposed pilot program.
 (C) An identification of the dedicated X-band small 
 satellite communication technologies required to 
 implement the proposed pilot program.
 (D) The costs, per fiscal year, for the 
 development, deployment, and operations of the proposed 
 pilot program.
 (E) A comprehensive description and assessment of 
 the proposed pilot program.
 (F) Such recommendations for legislative or 
 administrative action the Assistant Secretaries jointly 
 determine appropriate, including the feasibility of--
 (i) extending the term of the proposed 
 pilot program; or
 (ii) expanding the proposed pilot program 
 to other activities of the Department of 
 Defense beyond special operations forces.
 (b) Special Operations Forces Defined.--The term ``special 
operations forces'' means forces described under section 167(j) of 
title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 1612. REPORT ON STRATOSPHERIC BALLOONS, AEROSTATS, OR SATELLITE 
 TECHNOLOGY CAPABLE OF RAPIDLY DELIVERING WIRELESS 
 INTERNET.

 Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary of the Air Force and the Secretary of State, in 
consultation with the Chief of Space Operations, shall provide a report 
to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, House Foreign Affairs 
Committee, Senate Armed Services Committee and House Armed Services 
Committee that identifies opportunities to deploy stratospheric 
balloons, aerostats, or satellite technology capable of rapidly 
delivering wireless internet anywhere on the planet from the 
stratosphere or higher. The report shall identify commercial as well as 
options developed by the Department of Defense. Additionally, the 
report shall provide an assessment of the military utility of such 
opportunities.

 Subtitle B--Defense Intelligence and Intelligence-Related Activities

SEC. 1621. CONGRESSIONAL OVERSIGHT OF CLANDESTINE ACTIVITIES THAT 
 SUPPORT OPERATIONAL PREPARATION OF THE ENVIRONMENT.

 Section 127f of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsections (e) and (f) as subsections 
 (f) and (g), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (d) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(e) Quarterly Briefing.--On a quarterly basis, the Under 
Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security, in coordination 
with the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low 
Intensity Conflict, shall provide to the congressional defense 
committees a briefing outlining the clandestine activities carried out 
pursuant to subsection (a) during the period covered by the briefing, 
including--
 ``(1) an update on such activities carried out in each 
 geographic combatant command and a description of how such 
 activities support the respective theater campaign plan;
 ``(2) an overview of the authorities and legal issues, 
 including limitations, relating to such activities; and
 ``(3) any other matters the Under Secretary considers 
 appropriate.''.

SEC. 1622. EXECUTIVE AGENT FOR EXPLOSIVE ORDNANCE INTELLIGENCE.

 (a) In General.--Subchapter I of chapter 21 of title 10, United 
States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section:
``Sec. 430c. Executive agent for explosive ordnance intelligence
 ``(a) Designation.--The Secretary of Defense shall designate the 
Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency as the executive agent for 
explosive ordnance intelligence.
 ``(b) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `explosive ordnance intelligence' means 
 technical intelligence relating to explosive ordnance (as 
 defined in section 283(d) of this title), including with 
 respect to the processing, production, dissemination, 
 integration, exploitation, evaluation, feedback, and analysis 
 of explosive ordnance using the skills, techniques, principles, 
 and knowledge of explosive ordnance disposal personnel 
 regarding fuzing, firing systems, ordnance disassembly, and 
 development of render safe techniques, procedures and tools, 
 publications, and applied technologies.
 ``(2) The term `executive agent' has the meaning given the 
 term `DoD Executive Agent' in Directive 5101.1.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 
430b the following new item:

``430c. Executive agent for explosive ordnance intelligence.''.
 (c) Date of Designation.--The Secretary of Defense shall make the 
designation under section 430c of title 10, United States Code, as 
added by subsection (a), by not later than 30 days after the date of 
the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 1623. INFORMATION ON COVER AND COVER SUPPORT ACTIVITIES.

 (a) Information.--Not less frequently than quarterly, the Secretary 
of Defense shall provide to the appropriate congressional committees 
information on the cover and cover support activities of the Department 
of Defense, including commercial activities conducted pursuant to 
section 431 of title 10, United States Code.
 (b) Elements.--The Secretary shall ensure that the information 
provided under subsection (a) includes, with respect to the period 
covered by the information, the following:
 (1) A detailed description of each activity, operation, or 
 other initiative for which an element of the Department of 
 Defense has provided cover or engaged in cover support 
 activities, including--
 (A) a description of the specific cover and cover 
 support activities; and
 (B) whether such cover and cover support activities 
 began before or during such period.
 (2) Any other matters the Secretary determines appropriate.
 (c) Form.--The information under subsection (a) may be provided in 
classified form.
 (d) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the congressional defense committees; and
 (2) the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the 
 House of Representatives and the Select Committee on 
 Intelligence of the Senate.

SEC. 1624. FUNDING FOR RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT OF ADVANCED NAVAL 
 NUCLEAR FUEL SYSTEM BASED ON LOW-ENRICHED URANIUM.

 (a) Increase.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated by this 
title for the National Nuclear Security Administration, as specified in 
the corresponding funding table in section 4701, for Defense Nuclear 
Nonproliferation, Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation R&D is hereby 
increased by $20,000,000 for the purpose of LEU Research and 
Development for Naval Pressurized Water Reactors.
 (b) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated by this 
title for the National Nuclear Security Administration, as specified in 
the corresponding funding table in section 4701, for Defense Nuclear 
Nonproliferation is hereby reduced--
 (1) by $10,000,000 for the amount for nuclear smuggling 
 detection and deterrence; and
 (2) by $10,000,000 for the amount for nuclear detonation 
 detection.

 Subtitle C--Nuclear Forces

SEC. 1631. IMPROVEMENTS TO NUCLEAR WEAPONS COUNCIL.

 (a) Meetings.--Subsection (b) of section 179 of title 10, United 
States Code, is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``and (4)'' after 
 ``paragraph (2)''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) At least once annually, the Council shall hold a 
 meeting that includes the Deputy Secretary of Defense, who may 
 serve as chair for that meeting.''.
 (b) Responsibilities.--Subsection (d) of such section is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (10), (11), and (12) as 
 paragraphs (11), (12), and (13), respectively;
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (9) the following new 
 paragraph (10):
 ``(10) With respect to nuclear warheads--
 ``(A) reviewing military requirements, performance 
 requirements, and planned delivery schedules to 
 evaluate whether such requirements and schedules create 
 significant risks to cost, schedules, or other matters 
 regarding production, surveillance, research, and other 
 programs relating to nuclear weapons within the 
 National Nuclear Security Administration; and
 ``(B) if any such risk exists, proposing and 
 analyzing adjustments to such requirements and 
 schedules.''; and
 (3) by striking paragraph (13), as so redesignated, and 
 inserting the following new paragraph (13):
 ``(13) Coordinating risk management efforts between the 
 Department of Defense and the National Nuclear Security 
 Administration relating to the nuclear weapons stockpile, the 
 nuclear security enterprise (as defined in section 4002 of the 
 Atomic Energy Defense Act (50 U.S.C. 2501)), and the delivery 
 platforms for nuclear weapons, including with respect to 
 identifying and analyzing risks and proposing actions to 
 mitigate risks.''.
 (c) Reports Relating to Safety.--Subsection (e) of such section is 
amended by striking ``conducted by the Council'' and inserting ``for 
which the Council has received a briefing''.
 (d) Plans and Budget.--Subsection (f) of such section is amended to 
read as follows:
 ``(f) Review and Assessment of Plans and Budget to Support Nuclear 
Weapons Requirements.--(1) The Council shall annually review the plans 
and budget of the National Nuclear Security Administration and assess 
whether such plans and budget meet the current and projected 
requirements relating to nuclear weapons.
 ``(2) Not later than 30 days after the President submits to 
Congress the budget for a fiscal year under section 1105(a) of title 
31, the Council shall submit to the congressional defense committees a 
report containing the following:
 ``(A) The assessment conducted under paragraph (1) with 
 respect to that budget.
 ``(B) An assessment of--
 ``(i) whether the funding requested for the 
 National Nuclear Security Administration in such 
 budget--
 ``(I) enables the Administrator for Nuclear 
 Security to meet requirements relating to 
 nuclear weapons for such fiscal year; and
 ``(II) is adequate (as determined pursuant 
 to section 4717 of the Atomic Energy Defense 
 Act (50 U.S.C. 2757) to implement the 
 objectives of the Department of Defense with 
 respect to nuclear weapons for that fiscal 
 year; and
 ``(ii) whether the plans and budget reviewed under 
 paragraph (1) will enable the Administrator to meet the 
 requirements to produce war reserve plutonium pits 
 under section 4219(a) of such Act (50 U.S.C. 2538a(a)).
 ``(C) If the assessment under subparagraph (B)(ii) 
 determines that the plans and budget reviewed under paragraph 
 (1) will not enable the Administrator to meet the requirements 
 to produce war reserve plutonium pits under section 4219(a) of 
 the Atomic Energy Defense Act (50 U.S.C. 2538a(a))--
 ``(i) an explanation for why the plans and budget 
 will not enable the Administrator to meet such 
 requirements; and
 ``(ii) proposed alternative plans, budget, or 
 requirements by the Council to meet such requirements.
 ``(3) If a member of the Council does not concur in an assessment 
under paragraph (2), the report under such paragraph shall include a 
written explanation from the non-concurring member describing the 
reasons for the member's non-concurrence.
 ``(4) In this subsection, the term `budget' has the meaning given 
that term in section 231(f) of this title.''.
 (e) Updates on Meetings.--Subsection (g)(1)(A) of such section is 
amended by inserting before the semicolon the following: ``and the 
members who attended each meeting''.
 (f) Conforming Amendment.--Section 4717(b)(2) of the Atomic Energy 
Defense Act (50 U.S.C. 2757(b)(2)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A), by inserting ``and'' after the 
 semicolon; and
 (2) by striking subparagraphs (B) and (C) and inserting the 
 following new subparagraph (B):
 ``(B) submit to the congressional defense 
 committees the information required under section 
 179(f)(2) of title 10, United States Code.''.

SEC. 1632. PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK FOR NUCLEAR FORCES.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 24 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following new section (and conforming 
the table of sections at the beginning of such chapter accordingly):
``Sec. 499c. Portfolio management framework for nuclear forces
 ``(a) Requirement.--Not later than January 1, 2024, the Secretary 
of Defense shall--
 ``(1) implement a portfolio management framework for 
 nuclear forces of the United States that--
 ``(A) specifies the portfolio of nuclear forces 
 covered by the framework;
 ``(B) establishes a portfolio governance structure 
 for such forces that takes advantage of, or is modeled 
 on, an existing portfolio governance structure, such as 
 the Deputy's Management Action Group described in 
 Department of Defense Directive 5105.79;
 ``(C) outlines the approach of the Secretary for 
 identifying and managing risk relating to such forces 
 and prioritizing the efforts among such forces, 
 including how the Secretary will coordinate such 
 identification, management, and prioritization with the 
 Secretary of Energy; and
 ``(D) incorporates the findings and recommendations 
 identified by the Comptroller General of the United 
 States in the report titled `Nuclear Enterprise: DOD 
 and NNSA Could Further Enhance How They Manage Risk and 
 Prioritize Efforts' (GAO-22-104061) and dated January 
 2022; and
 ``(2) complete a comprehensive assessment of the portfolio 
 management capabilities required to identify and manage risk in 
 the portfolio of nuclear forces.
 ``(b) Annual Briefings.--(1) In conjunction with the submission of 
the budget of the President to Congress pursuant to section 1105 of 
title 31 for fiscal year 2025 and each fiscal year thereafter, the 
Secretary shall provide to the congressional defense committees a 
briefing on identifying and managing risk relating to nuclear forces 
and prioritizing the efforts among such forces, including, with respect 
to the period covered by the briefing--
 ``(A) the current and projected operational requirements 
 for nuclear forces that were used for such identification, 
 management, and prioritization;
 ``(B) key areas of risk identified; and
 ``(C) a description of the actions proposed or carried out 
 to mitigate such risk.
 ``(2) The Secretary may provide the briefings under paragraph (1) 
in classified form.
 ``(c) Nuclear Forces Defined.--In this section, the term `nuclear 
forces' includes, at a minimum--
 ``(1) nuclear weapons;
 ``(2) the delivery platforms and systems for nuclear 
 weapons;
 ``(3) nuclear command, control, and communications systems; 
 and
 ``(4) the supporting infrastructure for nuclear weapons, 
 the delivery platforms and systems for nuclear weapons, and 
 nuclear command, control, and communications systems, including 
 related personnel, facilities, construction, operation, and 
 maintenance.''.
 (b) Initial Briefing.--
 (1) Requirement.--Not later than June 1, 2023, the 
 Secretary of Defense shall provide to the congressional defense 
 committees a briefing on the progress of the Secretary to--
 (A) develop the portfolio management framework for 
 nuclear forces under section 499c of title 10, United 
 States Code, as added by subsection (a); and
 (B) complete the assessment described in subsection 
 (a)(2) of such section.
 (2) Form.--The Secretary may provide the briefings under 
 paragraph (1) in classified form.

SEC. 1633. MODIFICATION OF ANNUAL ASSESSMENT OF CYBER RESILIENCE OF 
 NUCLEAR COMMAND AND CONTROL SYSTEM.

 (a) Quarterly Briefings.--Subsection (d) of section 499 of title 
10, United States Code, is amended to read as follows:
 ``(d) Quarterly Briefings.--(1) Not less than once every quarter, 
the Deputy Secretary of Defense and the Vice Chairman of the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff shall jointly provide to the Committees on Armed 
Services of the House of Representatives and the Senate--
 ``(A) a briefing on any intrusion or anomaly in the nuclear 
 command, control, and communications system that was identified 
 during the previous quarter, including--
 ``(i) an assessment of any known, suspected, or 
 potential impacts of such intrusions and anomalies to 
 the mission effectiveness of military capabilities as 
 of the date of the briefing; and
 ``(ii) with respect to cyber intrusions of 
 contractor networks known or suspected to have resulted 
 in the loss or compromise of design information 
 regarding the nuclear command, control, and 
 communications system; or
 ``(B) if no such intrusion or anomaly occurred with respect 
 to the quarter to be covered by that briefing, a notification 
 of such lack of intrusions and anomalies.
 ``(2) In this subsection:
 ``(A) The term `anomaly' means a malicious, suspicious or 
 abnormal cyber incident that potentially threatens the national 
 security or interests of the United States, or that is likely 
 to result in demonstrable harm to the national security of the 
 United States.
 ``(B) The term `intrusion' means an unauthorized and 
 malicious cyber incident that compromises a nuclear command, 
 control, and communications system by breaking the security of 
 such a system or causing it to enter into an insecure state.''.
 (b) Conforming Repeal.--Section 171a of title 10, United States 
Code, is amended--
 (1) by striking subsection (h); and
 (2) by redesignating subsections (i) through (l) as 
 subsections (h) through (k), respectively.

SEC. 1634. NUCLEAR-CAPABLE SEA-LAUNCHED CRUISE MISSILE.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) Several senior military officers, including the 
 Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the 
 Commander of United States Strategic Command, have offered 
 their support for continued research and development of a 
 nuclear-capable sea-launched cruise missile to strengthen 
 nuclear deterrence.
 (2) Deploying a nuclear-capable sea-launched cruise missile 
 on naval vessels would ``not come without a cost'', as was 
 testified by Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Mike Gilday. 
 Admiral Gilday described the challenges associated with 
 training, sustainability, reliability, and readiness that would 
 be associated with adding a nuclear mission and went on to say 
 that he was ``not convinced yet that we need to make a 
 $31,000,000,000 investment in that particular system to close 
 that particular gap''. Instead, he recommended keeping ``a 
 small amount of money'' for research and development of the 
 nuclear-capable sea-launched cruise missile as the Department 
 of Defense seeks to better understand the implications of 
 living with two nuclear-armed peer competitors.
 (b) Reports.--
 (1) Deterrence.--Not later than 270 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Defense shall 
 submit to the congressional defense committees a report that 
 describes the approach by the Department of Defense for 
 deterring theater nuclear employment by Russia and China, 
 including--
 (A) an assessment of the current and future theater 
 nuclear capabilities and doctrine of Russia and China;
 (B) an explanation of the strategy and capabilities 
 of the United States for deterring theater nuclear 
 employment; and
 (C) a comparative assessment of options for 
 strengthening deterrence of theater nuclear employment, 
 including pursuit of the nuclear-capable sea-launched 
 cruise missile and other potential changes to the 
 nuclear and conventional posture and capabilities of 
 the United States.
 (2) Cost.--Not later than 270 days after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Navy shall submit 
 to the congressional defense committees a report that describes 
 the full cost of developing, producing, fielding, and 
 maintaining nuclear-capable sea-launched cruise missiles 
 through at least 2050, including--
 (A) the costs associated with research and 
 development and production of the missile;
 (B) the costs associated with modifications to port 
 infrastructure;
 (C) the costs associated with nuclear 
 certification, personnel training, and operations; and
 (D) any other incremental costs compared to 
 sustaining and operating nonnuclear naval vessels.
 (3) Operational limitations.--Not later than 270 days after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the 
 Navy shall submit to the congressional defense committees a 
 report that describes any operational limitations and trade-
 offs that would be associated with deploying nuclear-capable 
 sea-launched cruise missiles on naval vessels, including--
 (A) the effect of allocating missile or torpedo 
 tubes from conventional munitions to nuclear munitions;
 (B) operational constraints and trade-offs 
 associated with reserving or limiting naval vessels on 
 account of nuclear mission requirements;
 (C) trade-offs in posture and capabilities that the 
 Navy would likely face if the Navy had to allocate more 
 resources to a nuclear-capable missiles; and
 (D) any other issues identified by the Secretary.
 (4) Development.--Not later than 270 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Administrator for Nuclear 
 Security shall submit to the congressional defense committees a 
 report that describes the cost and timeline of developing and 
 producing a warhead for a nuclear-capable sea-launched cruise 
 missile, including--
 (A) the cost of developing, producing, and 
 sustaining the warhead;
 (B) the timeline for the design, production, and 
 fielding of the warhead; and
 (C) an assessment of how the pursuit of the warhead 
 would affect other planned warhead activities of the 
 National Nuclear Security Administration, including 
 whether there would be risk to the cost and schedule of 
 other warhead programs of the Administration if the 
 Administrator added a nuclear-capable sea-launched 
 cruise missile warhead to the portfolio of such 
 programs.
 (5) Preferred course of action.--To inform the reports 
 under this subsection, not later than 30 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall 
 submit to the congressional defense committees a report 
 identifying one or more preferred courses of action from among 
 the actions identified in the analysis of alternatives for a 
 nuclear-capable sea-launched cruise missile.
 (c) Limitation.--
 (1) In general.--None of the funds authorized to be 
 appropriated by this Act or otherwise made available for fiscal 
 year 2023 for the Department of Defense or the National Nuclear 
 Security Administration may be obligated or expended for a 
 purpose specified in paragraph (2) until--
 (A) each of the reports under subsection (b), an 
 unclassified version of the 2022 Nuclear Posture 
 Review, and a detailed, unclassified summary of the 
 analysis of alternatives regarding the nuclear-capable 
 sea-launched cruise missile, have been submitted to the 
 congressional defense committees; and
 (B) the Secretary of Defense, in coordination with 
 the Administrator for Nuclear Security, certifies to 
 the congressional defense committees that the 
 development and deployment of a nuclear-capable sea-
 launched cruise missile is required to meet a valid 
 military requirement and would not create significant 
 risk to conventional or nuclear deterrence by 
 constraining conventional military operations or 
 trading-off with the pursuit of other conventional or 
 nuclear military capabilities.
 (2) Funds specified.--The purposes specified in this 
 paragraph are the following:
 (A) With respect to the Department of Defense, 
 system development and demonstration of a nuclear-
 capable sea-launched cruise missile.
 (B) With respect to the National Nuclear Security 
 Administration, development engineering for a modified, 
 altered, or new warhead for a sea-launched cruise 
 missile.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``development engineering'' means activities 
 under phase 3 of the joint nuclear weapons life cycle (as 
 defined in section 4220 of the Atomic Energy Defense Act (50 
 U.S.C. 2538b) or phase 6.3 of a nuclear weapons life extension 
 program.
 (2) The term ``system development and demonstration'' means 
 the activities occurring in the phase after a program achieves 
 Milestone B approval (as defined in section 4172 of title 10, 
 United States Code).

SEC. 1635. LIMITATION ON AVAILABILITY OF CERTAIN FUNDS UNTIL SUBMISSION 
 OF INFORMATION RELATING TO PROPOSED BUDGET FOR NUCLEAR-
 ARMED SEA-LAUNCHED CRUISE MISSILE.

 In addition to the limitation under section 1640 of the National 
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 135 
Stat. 2092), of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this Act or 
otherwise made available for fiscal year 2023 for the Office of the 
Secretary of the Navy for travel by the Secretary of the Navy, not more 
than 50 percent may be obligated or expended until the Secretary 
submits to the congressional defense committees all written 
communications from or to personnel of the Department of the Navy 
regarding the proposed budget amount or limitation for the nuclear-
armed sea-launched cruise missile contained in the defense budget 
materials (as defined by section 231(f) of title 10, United States 
Code) relating to the Navy for fiscal year 2023.

SEC. 1636. PROHIBITION ON REDUCTION OF THE INTERCONTINENTAL BALLISTIC 
 MISSILES OF THE UNITED STATES.

 (a) Prohibition.--Except as provided in subsection (b), none of the 
funds authorized to be appropriated by this Act or otherwise made 
available for fiscal year 2023 for the Department of Defense may be 
obligated or expended for the following, and the Department may not 
otherwise take any action to do the following:
 (1) Reduce, or prepare to reduce, the responsiveness or 
 alert level of the intercontinental ballistic missiles of the 
 United States.
 (2) Reduce, or prepare to reduce, the quantity of deployed 
 intercontinental ballistic missiles of the United States to a 
 number less than 400.
 (b) Exception.--The prohibition in subsection (a) shall not apply 
to any of the following activities:
 (1) The maintenance or sustainment of intercontinental 
 ballistic missiles.
 (2) Ensuring the safety, security, or reliability of 
 intercontinental ballistic missiles.
 (3) Facilitating the transition from the Minuteman III 
 intercontinental ballistic missile to the Sentinel 
 intercontinental ballistic missile (previously referred to as 
 the ``ground-based strategic deterrent weapon'').

 Subtitle D--Missile Defense Programs

SEC. 1641. REPEAL OF REQUIREMENT TO TRANSITION BALLISTIC MISSILE 
 DEFENSE PROGRAMS TO THE MILITARY DEPARTMENTS.

 Section 1676 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2018 (Public Law 115-91; 10 U.S.C. 4205 note) is amended by 
striking subsection (b).

SEC. 1642. FIRE CONTROL ARCHITECTURES.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the new missile track and warning architecture in the 
 budget request of the President for fiscal year 2023 makes a 
 needed and significant shift to a more resilient and robust 
 capability that will be necessary to address future threats in 
 the domain;
 (2) the tranche 1 and 2 capabilities of the Space 
 Development Agency are critical to such new architecture and 
 should continue to be funded appropriately to deliver missile 
 track and warning capability from low-Earth orbit in the mid-
 2020s timeframe;
 (3) section 1645 of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry 
 National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public 
 Law 116-283; 134 Stat. 4062) directs the Director of the 
 Missile Defense Agency to develop a sensor payload to be 
 integrated into architecture of the Space Development Agency or 
 Space Force to provide fire control quality data that would 
 enable the interception of both ballistic and hypersonic 
 threats;
 (4) as the Space Warfighting Analysis Center of the Space 
 Force reviews candidate architectures for fire control quality 
 data, the Center should take into account the investment made 
 to date and capability being developed by the hypersonic and 
 ballistic tracking space sensor program for integration into 
 the future architecture; and
 (5) the Center should also consider current or planned 
 programs of the intelligence community that could be integrated 
 to increase the ability to contribute to fire control 
 architectures of the Department of Defense.
 (b) Fire Control Quality Data Requirement.--In carrying out the 
analysis of candidate fire control architectures, the Secretary of the 
Air Force shall ensure that the Director of the Space Warfighting 
Analysis Center of the Space Force, at a minimum, maintains the 
requirements needed for the missile defense command and control, battle 
management, and communications system to pass the needed quality data 
within the timelines needed for current and planned interceptor systems 
to support engagements of ballistic and hypersonic threats as described 
in section 1645 of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283; 134 Stat. 
4062).
 (c) Briefing.--Not later than 14 days after the date on which the 
Director of the Space Warfighting Analysis Center concludes the 
analysis of candidate fire control architectures, the Director shall 
provide to the Committees on Armed Services of the House of 
Representatives and the Senate a briefing on the results of the 
analysis, including the findings of the Director and the architecture 
recommended by the Director for a future fire control architecture to 
support engagement of ballistic and hypersonic threats.

SEC. 1643. LIMITATION ON AVAILABILITY OF CERTAIN FUNDS UNTIL REQUIRED 
 ACQUISITION AUTHORITY DESIGNATION RELATING TO CAPABILITY 
 TO DEFEND THE HOMELAND FROM CRUISE MISSILES.

 (a) Finding.--Congress finds that the Secretary of Defense has yet 
to designate a military department or Defense Agency with acquisition 
authority with respect to the capability to defend the homeland from 
cruise missiles in accordance with section 1684(e) of the National 
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017 (Public Law 114-328; 10 
U.S.C. 4205 note).
 (b) Limitation.--Of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this 
Act or otherwise made available for fiscal year 2023 for the Department 
of Defense for travel by the Deputy Secretary of Defense, not more than 
90 percent may be obligated or expended until the Secretary of Defense 
designates a military department or Defense Agency with acquisition 
authority with respect to the capability to defend the homeland from 
cruise missiles.
 (c) Defense Agency Defined.--In this section, the term ``Defense 
Agency'' has the meaning given that term in section 101(a)(11) of title 
10, United States Code.

SEC. 1644. LIMITATION ON AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS UNTIL SUBMISSION OF 
 REPORT ON LAYERED DEFENSE FOR THE HOMELAND.

 Of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this Act or otherwise 
made available for fiscal year 2023 for the Office of the Secretary of 
Defense for operating the Office of Space Policy, not more than 75 
percent may be obligated or expended until the Secretary of Defense 
submits to the congressional defense committees the report described in 
House Report 117-118 under the heading ``Layered Defense for the 
Homeland''.

SEC. 1645. MIDDLE EAST INTEGRATED AIR AND MISSILE DEFENSE.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the 
Secretary of State and the Director of National Intelligence, shall 
seek to cooperate with allies and partners of the United States in the 
area of responsibility of the United States Central Command to improve 
integrated air and missile defense capability to protect the people, 
infrastructure, and territory of such allies and partners from cruise 
and ballistic missiles, manned and unmanned aerial systems, and rocket 
attacks from Iran. The Secretary shall seek to cooperate with countries 
that have the ability to contribute to, adopt, and maintain an 
integrated air and missile defense capability, and a commitment to 
countering air and missile threats to bring security to the region.
 (b) Strategy.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, consistent with the protection of 
 intelligence sources and methods, the Secretary shall submit to 
 the appropriate congressional committees a strategy on 
 increasing cooperation with allies and partners in the area of 
 responsibility of the United States Central Command to 
 implement an integrated air and missile defense architecture to 
 protect the people, infrastructure, and territory of such 
 allies and partners from cruise and ballistic missiles, manned 
 and unmanned aerial systems, and rocket attacks from Iran.
 (2) Contents.--The strategy submitted under paragraph (1) 
 shall include the following for countries the Secretary 
 determines meets the characteristics of subsection (a):
 (A) An assessment of the threat of ballistic and 
 cruise missiles, manned and unnamed aerial systems, and 
 rocket attacks from Iran.
 (B) A description of current efforts to coordinate 
 indicators and warnings from such attacks with allies 
 and partners in the region.
 (C) An analysis of United States allied and partner 
 systems currently in the region to defend against air 
 and missile attacks.
 (D) An explanation of how an integrated regional 
 air and missile defense architecture would improve 
 collective security in the Central Command area of 
 responsibility, similar to that of the European 
 Command.
 (E) A description of efforts to engage specified 
 foreign partners in establishing such an architecture.
 (F) An identification of any challenges in 
 establishing an integrated air and missile defense 
 architecture with specified foreign partners, including 
 assessments of the capacity of specified foreign 
 partners to--
 (i) rapidly share and respond to 
 intelligence on ballistic and cruise missiles, 
 manned and unmanned aerial systems, and rocket 
 attacks from Iran, and their ability to develop 
 such capacity independent of direct United 
 States support and oversight;
 (ii) independently operate key technical 
 components of such an architecture, including 
 satellite sensors, ground- or sea-based radars, 
 and interceptors; and
 (iii) operate command and control centers 
 directing the operation of such an 
 architecture.
 (G) An assessment of the overall cost to the United 
 States for providing support for the establishment and 
 sustainment of such an architecture over 5 and 10-year 
 periods.
 (H) A description of relevant coordination with the 
 Secretary of State and the ways in which such an 
 architecture advances United States regional diplomatic 
 goals and objectives.
 (I) Such other matters as the Secretary considers 
 relevant.
 (3) Protection of sensitive information.--Any activity 
 carried out under paragraph (1) shall be conducted in a manner 
 that appropriately protects sensitive information and the 
 national security interests of the United States.
 (4) Format.--The strategy submitted under paragraph (1) 
 shall be submitted in unclassified form, but may include a 
 classified annex.
 (c) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the following:
 (1) The congressional defense committees.
 (2) The Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Permanent 
 Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (3) The Committee on Foreign Relations and the Select 
 Committee on Intelligence of the Senate.

SEC. 1646. STRATEGY TO USE ASYMMETRIC CAPABILITIES TO DEFEAT HYPERSONIC 
 MISSILE THREATS.

 (a) Requirement.--Not later than March 1, 2023, the Secretary of 
Defense, acting through the Director of the Missile Defense Agency, 
shall submit to the congressional defense committees a comprehensive 
layered strategy to use asymmetric capabilities to defeat hypersonic 
missile threats.
 (b) Elements.--The strategy under subsection (a) shall--
 (1) address all asymmetric capabilities of the United 
 States, including with respect to--
 (A) directed energy, as described in section 1664 
 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
 Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 10 U.S.C. 205 note) and 
 including short-pulse laser technology;
 (B) microwave systems;
 (C) cyber capabilities; and
 (D) any other capabilities determined appropriate 
 by the Secretary and Director; and
 (2) identify the funding required to implement the strategy 
 during the period covered by the future-years defense program 
 submitted to Congress under section 221 of title 10, United 
 States Code, in 2023.

SEC. 1647. REPORT ON INTEGRATED AIR AND MISSILE DEFENSE SENSOR OF 
 UNITED STATES INDO-PACIFIC COMMAND.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the budget 
of the President for fiscal year 2023 submitted to Congress pursuant to 
section 1105 of title 31, United States Code--
 (1) includes funding to develop and procure an integrated 
 air and missile defense architecture to defend Guam that 
 includes multiple mobile components located across Guam, 
 however, a full assessment of the manning and infrastructure 
 needed to support those components, including items such as 
 power, water, and availability of personnel housing, was not 
 included in the overall determination of feasibility; and
 (2) did not include funding for the continued development 
 of the discrimination radar for homeland defense planned to be 
 located in Hawaii because of an ongoing reevaluation of the 
 missile defense posture and sensor architecture in the area of 
 responsibility of the United States Indo-Pacific Command.
 (b) Report.--
 (1) Requirement.--Not later than 90 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall 
 submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the 
 findings of the review conducted by the Secretary of the 
 integrated air and missile defense sensor architecture of the 
 United States Indo-Pacific Command.
 (2) Investments.--The report under paragraph (1) shall 
 identify the investments that should be made to increase the 
 detection of non-ballistic threats and improve the 
 discrimination of ballistic missile threats, particularly with 
 regard to Hawaii.
 (3) Form.--The report under paragraph (1) shall be 
 submitted in unclassified form, and may include a classified 
 annex.
 (c) Review of Integrated Air and Missile Defense Architecture to 
Defend Guam.--
 (1) Requirement.--Not later than 60 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall seek 
 to enter into a contract with a federally funded research and 
 development center to conduct an independent assessment of the 
 integrated air and missile defense architecture to defend Guam.
 (2) Elements.--The assessment under paragraph (1) shall 
 include an analysis of each of the following:
 (A) The proposed architecture capability to address 
 non-ballistic and ballistic missile threats to Guam, 
 including the sensor, command and control, and 
 interceptor systems being proposed.
 (B) The development and integration risk of the 
 proposed architecture.
 (C) The manning required to operate the proposed 
 architecture, including the availability of housing and 
 infrastructure on Guam to support the needed manning 
 levels.
 (3) Submission.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the 
 congressional defense committees the assessment under paragraph 
 (1), without change.

SEC. 1648. RISK REDUCTION IN PROCUREMENT OF GUAM MISSILE DEFENSE 
 SYSTEM.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the defense of Guam and the Armed Forces that operate 
 there is of key strategic significance and is one of the top 
 priorities for United States Indo-Pacific Command and the 
 United States;
 (2) the most severe adversary threat to Guam consists of 
 long-range hypersonic and cruise missiles launched from a 
 variety of air, land, and sea-based platforms;
 (3) the current plan of the Missile Defense Agency using a 
 mixed architecture which, when applied to the launcher systems, 
 relies on numerous road-mobile transport erector launchers for 
 launching, and is an unproven and high-risk plan; and
 (4) the existing vertical launch system, which can 
 accommodate the standard missile-3 and the standard missile-6, 
 is a more capable and tested system and provides reasonable 
 risk reduction to the short-term missile defense of Guam, and 
 in the long term provides much needed capacity increase.
 (b) Authority for Procurement.--Except as provided by subsection 
(c), not later than December 31, 2023, the Secretary of Defense, acting 
through the Director of the Missile Defense Agency, shall rapidly 
procure and field up to three vertical launching systems that can 
accommodate planned interceptors operated by the Navy as of the date of 
the enactment of this Act.
 (c) Waiver.--The Secretary may waive the requirement under 
subsection (b) if--
 (1) the Secretary determines that the waiver is in the best 
 interest of the national security of the United States;
 (2) the Secretary submits to the congressional defense 
 committees a notification of such waiver, including a 
 justification; and
 (3) a period of 120 days has elapsed following the date of 
 such notification.

SEC. 1649. PLAN ON DELIVERING SHARED EARLY WARNING SYSTEM DATA TO 
 CERTAIN ALLIES AND PARTNERS OF THE UNITED STATES.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) The Shared Early Warning System currently provides 
 accurate and timely ballistic missile warning information 
 generated by space-based infrared sensors to the United States 
 and select foreign countries.
 (2) As has been demonstrated in Russia's unlawful invasion 
 of and war in Ukraine, missile warning data provided to allies 
 and partners of the United States could allow for critical 
 warning to prevent widespread civilian casualties.
 (3) The rapid technical fielding of Shared Early Warning 
 System capabilities should be prioritized in future bilateral 
 defense negotiations with allies and partners of the United 
 States.
 (b) Plan.--The Secretary of Defense, with the concurrence of the 
Secretary of State and the Director of National Intelligence, shall 
develop a technical fielding plan to deliver information under the 
Shared Early Warning System regarding a current or imminent missile 
threat to allies and partners of the United States that, as of the date 
of the plan, do not receive such information.
 (c) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
appropriate congressional committees a report on how rapid technical 
fielding of the Shared Early Warning System could be provided to allies 
and partners of the United States that--
 (1) are not member states of the North Atlantic Treaty 
 Organization; and
 (2) are under current or imminent hostile aggression and 
 threat of missile attack.
 (d) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the following:
 (1) The congressional defense committees.
 (2) The Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Permanent 
 Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (3) The Committee on Foreign Relations and the Select 
 Committee on Intelligence of the Senate.

SEC. 1650. REPORTS ON GROUND-BASED INTERCEPTORS.

 Not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
and on a quarterly basis thereafter until the date on which the next 
generation interceptor achieves initial operating capability, the 
Director of the Missile Defense Agency, with the concurrence of the 
Commander of the United States Northern Command, shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report that includes the following:
 (1) An identification of the number of ground-based 
 interceptors operationally available to the Commander.
 (2) If such number is different from the report previously 
 submitted under this section, the reasons for such difference.
 (3) Any anticipated changes to such number during the 
 period covered by the report.

SEC. 1651. REPORT ON MISSILE DEFENSE INTERCEPTOR SITE IN CONTIGUOUS 
 UNITED STATES.

 (a) Requirement.--Not later than March 31, 2023, the Secretary of 
Defense, acting through the Director of the Missile Defense Agency, 
shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report 
containing--
 (1) an updated assessment of the requirement for a missile 
 defense interceptor site in the contiguous United States; and
 (2) a funding profile, by year, of the total costs for the 
 development and construction of such site, considering the 
 designation of Fort Drum, New York, as the conditionally 
 designated preferred site.
 (b) Funding.--Of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this 
Act or otherwise made available for fiscal year 2023 for the Missile 
Defense Agency for unspecified military construction planning and 
design, not more than $5,000,000 may be obligated or expended for 
activities associated with a missile defense interceptor site in the 
contiguous United States described in subsection (a).

SEC. 1652. REPORT ON GUN LAUNCHED INTERCEPTOR TECHNOLOGIES.

 Not later than March 31, 2023, the Secretary of Defense, acting 
through the Commanding General of the Army Space and Missile Defense 
Command, shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report 
containing--
 (1) an assessment of the need for gun launched interceptor 
 technologies; and
 (2) a funding profile, by year, of the total cost of 
 integrating and testing such technologies that are under 
 development.

SEC. 1653. REPORT ON RADIATION HARDENED, THERMALLY INSENSITIVE 
 TELESCOPES FOR SM-3 INTERCEPTOR.

 Not later than March 31, 2023, the Secretary of Defense, acting 
through the Director of the Missile Defense Agency, shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report containing--
 (1) an assessment of the requirement to develop radiation 
 hardened, thermally insensitive sensors for missile defense; 
 and
 (2) a funding profile, by year, of the total cost of 
 integrating and testing such sensors that are under 
 development.

 Subtitle E--Other Matters

SEC. 1661. COOPERATIVE THREAT REDUCTION FUNDS.

 (a) Funding Allocation.--Of the $341,598,000 authorized to be 
appropriated to the Department of Defense for fiscal year 2023 in 
section 301 and made available by the funding table in division D for 
the Department of Defense Cooperative Threat Reduction Program 
established under section 1321 of the Department of Defense Cooperative 
Threat Reduction Act (50 U.S.C. 3711), the following amounts may be 
obligated for the purposes specified:
 (1) For strategic offensive arms elimination, $6,859,000.
 (2) For chemical security and elimination, $14,998,000.
 (3) For global nuclear security, $18,088,000.
 (4) For biological threat reduction, $225,000,000.
 (5) For proliferation prevention, $45,890,000.
 (6) For activities designated as Other Assessments/
 Administration Costs, $30,763,000.
 (b) Specification of Cooperative Threat Reduction Funds.--Funds 
appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in section 
301 and made available by the funding table in division D for the 
Department of Defense Cooperative Threat Reduction Program shall be 
available for obligation for fiscal years 2023, 2024, and 2025.

SEC. 1662. STUDY OF WEAPONS PROGRAMS THAT ALLOW THE ARMED FORCES TO 
 ADDRESS HARD AND DEEPLY BURIED TARGETS.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the ability of the United States to hold at risk hard 
 and deeply buried targets now and in the future is critical; 
 and
 (2) while the Department of Defense is undertaking a study 
 of nuclear and nonnuclear options to hold at risk this growing 
 target set, Congress is concerned about the progress of this 
 study.
 (b) Study.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the 
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Commander of the United 
States Strategic Command, and in consultation with the Administrator 
for Nuclear Security, shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a study on options to hold at risk hard and deeply buried 
targets.
 (c) Elements.--The study under subsection (b) shall include the 
following:
 (1) An analysis of the current and emerging hard and deeply 
 buried target mission set and associated military requirements, 
 including--
 (A) the number and locations of the targets; and
 (B) the associated military requirements for the 
 United States Strategic Command, including the 
 importance of threatening the targets to meeting the 
 objectives of the United States.
 (2) A study of weapons programs that allow the Armed Forces 
 to address hard and deeply buried targets, including--
 (A) any nuclear or nonnuclear weapon and delivery 
 system the Secretary determines appropriate, including 
 the cost, timeline for fielding, and likely 
 effectiveness of any capability under consideration; 
 and
 (B) an assessment of a service life extension 
 program of the B83 nuclear gravity bomb as one of the 
 options.
 (3) A proposed strategy for fielding capabilities and 
 making other adjustments to the strategy and plans of the 
 United States to account for the growing hard and deeply buried 
 target set, including a five-year funding profile for the 
 preferred alternative weapon and the secondary alternative 
 weapon studied under paragraph (2).
 (d) Briefing.--Upon completion of the study under subsection (b), 
the Secretary shall provide the Committees on Armed Services of the 
House of Representatives and the Senate a briefing on the findings and 
recommendations of the study.

SEC. 1663. UNIDENTIFIED AERIAL PHENOMENA REPORTING PROCEDURES.

 (a) Authorization for Reporting.--Notwithstanding the terms of any 
written or oral nondisclosure agreement, order, or other 
instrumentality or means, that could be interpreted as a legal 
constraint on reporting by a witness of an unidentified aerial 
phenomena, reporting in accordance with the system established under 
subsection (b) is hereby authorized and shall be deemed to comply with 
any regulation or order issued under the authority of Executive Order 
13526 (50 U.S.C. 3161 note; relating to classified national security 
information) or chapter 18 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 
2271 et seq.).
 (b) System for Reporting.--
 (1) Establishment.--The head of the Office, on behalf of 
 the Secretary of Defense and the Director of National 
 Intelligence, shall establish a secure system for receiving 
 reports of--
 (A) any event relating to unidentified aerial 
 phenomena; and
 (B) any Government or Government contractor 
 activity or program related to unidentified aerial 
 phenomena.
 (2) Protection of systems, programs, and activity.--The 
 system established pursuant to paragraph (1) shall serve as a 
 mechanism to prevent unauthorized public reporting or 
 compromise of properly classified military and intelligence 
 systems, programs, and related activity, including all 
 categories and levels of special access and compartmented 
 access programs, current, historical, and future.
 (3) Administration.--The system established pursuant to 
 paragraph (1) shall be administered by designated and widely 
 known, easily accessible, and appropriately cleared Department 
 of Defense and intelligence community employees or contractors 
 assigned to the Unidentified Aerial Phenomena Task Force or the 
 Office.
 (4) Sharing of information.--The system established under 
 paragraph (1) shall provide for the immediate sharing with 
 Office personnel and supporting analysts and scientists of 
 information previously prohibited from reporting under any 
 nondisclosure written or oral agreement, order, or other 
 instrumentality or means, except in cases where the cleared 
 Government personnel administering such system conclude that 
 the preponderance of information available regarding the 
 reporting indicates that the observed object and associated 
 events and activities likely relate to a special access program 
 or compartmented access program that, as of the date of the 
 reporting, has been explicitly and clearly reported to the 
 congressional defense committees and congressional intelligence 
 committees, and is documented as meeting those criteria.
 (5) Initial report and publication.--Not later than 180 
 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the head of 
 the Office, on behalf of the Secretary and the Director, 
 shall--
 (A) submit to the congressional intelligence 
 committees, the congressional defense committees, and 
 congressional leadership a report detailing the system 
 established under paragraph (1); and
 (B) make available to the public on a website of 
 the Department of Defense information about such 
 system, including clear public guidance for accessing 
 and using such system and providing feedback about the 
 expected timeline to process a report.
 (6) Annual reports.--Section 1683 of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (50 U.S.C. 3373) is 
 amended--
 (A) in subsection (h)--
 (i) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``and 
 congressional leadership'' after ``appropriate 
 congressional committees''; and
 (ii) in paragraph (2), by adding at the end 
 the following new subparagraph:
 ``(Q) A summary of the reports received using the 
 system established under title XVI of the National 
 Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023.''; and
 (B) in subsection (l)--
 (i) by redesignating paragraphs (2) through 
 (5) as paragraphs (3) through (6), 
 respectively; and
 (ii) by inserting after paragraph (1) the 
 following new paragraph (2):
 ``(2) The term `congressional leadership' means--
 ``(A) the majority leader of the Senate;
 ``(B) the minority leader of the Senate;
 ``(C) the Speaker of the House of Representatives; 
 and
 ``(D) the minority leader of the House of 
 Representatives.''.
 (c) Records of Nondisclosure Agreements.--
 (1) Identification of nondisclosure agreements.--The 
 Secretary of Defense, the Director of National Intelligence, 
 the Secretary of Homeland Security, the heads of such other 
 departments and agencies of the Federal Government that have 
 supported investigations of the types of events covered by 
 subparagraph (A) of subsection (b)(1) and activities and 
 programs described subparagraph (B) of such subsection, and 
 contractors of the Federal Government supporting such 
 activities and programs shall conduct comprehensive searches of 
 all records relating to nondisclosure orders or agreements or 
 other obligations relating to the types of events described in 
 subsection (a) and provide copies of all relevant documents to 
 the Office.
 (2) Submittal to congress.--The head of the Office shall--
 (A) make the records compiled under paragraph (1) 
 accessible to the congressional intelligence 
 committees, the congressional defense committees, and 
 congressional leadership; and
 (B) not later than September 30, 2023, and at least 
 once each fiscal year thereafter through fiscal year 
 2026, provide to such committees and congressional 
 leadership briefings and reports on such records.
 (d) Protection From Liability and Private Right of Action.--
 (1) Protection from liability.--It shall not be a violation 
 of section 798 of title 18, United States Code, or any other 
 provision of law, and no cause of action shall lie or be 
 maintained in any court or other tribunal against any person, 
 for reporting any information through, and in compliance with, 
 the system established pursuant to subsection (b)(1).
 (2) Prohibition on reprisals.--An employee of a Federal 
 agency and an employee of a contractor for the Federal 
 Government who has authority to take, direct others to take, 
 recommend, or approve any personnel action, shall not, with 
 respect to such authority, take or fail to take, or threaten to 
 take or fail to take, a personnel action, including the 
 revocation or suspension of security clearances, with respect 
 to any individual as a reprisal for any reporting as described 
 in paragraph (1).
 (3) Private right of action.--In a case in which an 
 employee described in paragraph (2) takes a personnel action 
 against an individual in violation of such paragraph, the 
 individual may bring a private civil action for all appropriate 
 remedies, including injunctive relief and compensatory and 
 punitive damages, against the Government or other employer who 
 took the personnel action, in the United States Court of 
 Federal Claims.
 (e) Review by Inspectors General.--Not later than one year after 
the date of the enactment of this Act, the Inspector General of the 
Department of Defense and the Inspector General of the Intelligence 
Community shall each--
 (1) conduct an assessment of the compliance with the 
 requirements of this section and the operation and efficacy of 
 the system established under subsection (b); and
 (2) submit to the congressional intelligence committees, 
 the congressional defense committees, and congressional 
 leadership a report on their respective findings with respect 
 to the assessments they conducted under paragraph (1).
 (f) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``congressional intelligence committees'' has 
 the meaning given such term in section 3 of the National 
 Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3003).
 (2) The term ``congressional leadership'' means--
 (A) the majority leader of the Senate;
 (B) the minority leader of the Senate;
 (C) the Speaker of the House of Representatives; 
 and
 (D) the minority leader of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (3) The term ``intelligence community'' has the meaning 
 given such term in section 3 of the National Security Act of 
 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3003).
 (4) The term ``Office'' means the office established under 
 section 1683(a) of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
 Fiscal Year 2022 (50 U.S.C. 3373(a)).
 (5) The term ``personnel action'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 1104(a) of the National Security Act of 
 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3234(a)).
 (6) The term ``unidentified aerial phenomena'' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 1683(l) of the National 
 Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (50 U.S.C. 
 3373(l)).

 TITLE XVII--MUNITIONS REPLENISHMENT AND FUTURE PROCUREMENT

SEC. 1701. MODIFICATION TO SPECIAL DEFENSE ACQUISITION FUND.

 Section 114(c)(1) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
striking ``$2,500,000,000'' and inserting ``$3,500,000,000''.

SEC. 1702. DEVELOPMENT OF TECHNOLOGIES WITH RESPECT TO CRITICAL, 
 PREFERRED, AND PRECISION-GUIDED CONVENTIONAL MUNITIONS.

 (a) In General.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, the 
Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering and the Under 
Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment, in coordination 
with the Secretaries of the Army, Navy, and Air Force and the heads of 
the Defense Agencies, shall develop and invest in the following with 
respect to critical, preferred, and precision-guided conventional 
munitions:
 (1) Technologies to--
 (A) reduce the costs of such munitions;
 (B) increase the reliability and lethality of such 
 munitions; and
 (C) simplify the manufacturing processes for such 
 munitions.
 (2) Technologies related to the diversification of the 
 supply chains relevant to the production of such munitions.
 (3) The development of novel methods to more easily and 
 affordably manufacture such munitions, including the capability 
 of rapid production scaling to meet required demand.
 (b) Types of Technologies.--The types of technologies developed 
under subsection (a) shall include--
 (1) the additive manufacturing of components, including 
 energetics;
 (2) expeditionary manufacturing;
 (3) simplified supply chains, including, where possible, 
 the use of open source, commercial, and commercial-derived 
 technologies, including microelectronics; and
 (4) such other technologies as the Under Secretaries 
 determine appropriate.
 (c) Report.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Under Secretaries shall jointly submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report on the plan to carry out this 
section.

SEC. 1703. SENSE OF CONGRESS AND QUARTERLY BRIEFINGS ON REPLENISHMENT 
 AND REVITALIZATION OF STOCKS OF TACTICAL MISSILES 
 PROVIDED TO UKRAINE.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the delivery of anti-tank and air defense missiles and 
 munitions to Ukraine by the United States and numerous allies 
 and partners around the world has had a crucial impact on the 
 ability of Ukraine to resist Russia's illegal invasion;
 (2) the war in Ukraine has demonstrated the utility of 
 these weapons in contemporary military conditions;
 (3) it is vital to continue providing Ukraine with such 
 assistance, as needed, in an appropriately rapid and sustained 
 manner;
 (4) the ability of the Department of Defense to support 
 replenishment of these stocks is a matter of major importance 
 for--
 (A) the provision of additional support, as needed, 
 to Ukraine;
 (B) the defense needs of the United States; and
 (C) the defense needs of allies and partners that 
 have provided, or are considering providing, their own 
 stocks to assist Ukraine.
 (5) in response to the March 18, 2022, letter sent by the 
 Chairman and Ranking Member of the Committee on Armed Services 
 of the House of Representatives, the Department of Defense 
 responded effectively with efforts to buy down strategic risk 
 and accelerate production of air defense munitions;
 (6) the effort to replace existing stocks while 
 prioritizing the rapid development of a low-cost, exportable 
 evolution of a short-range air defense system should proceed as 
 quickly and efficiently as possible;
 (7) the Department of Defense should continue to develop 
 and pursue this strategy while providing full transparency into 
 its efforts to buy down strategic risk and engaging in 
 substantial dialogue regarding the path forward;
 (8) the Department of Defense should use its authorities to 
 work with allies and partners in a focused and sustained manner 
 to advance the replenishment of munitions stocks for allies and 
 partners that have provided, or are contemplating providing, 
 such equipment to Ukraine, in order to ensure they are capable 
 of meeting ongoing alliance and partnership deterrence and 
 security needs.
 (b) Quarterly Briefings.--The Secretary of Defense shall provide to 
Congress quarterly briefings, in accordance with subsection (c), on the 
progress of the Department of Defense toward replenishing and 
sustaining the production capacity and stocks of covered systems that 
have been delivered to Ukraine as part of the effort to--
 (1) support Ukraine's resistance against Russian 
 aggression; and
 (2) buy down strategic risks.
 (c) Elements of Briefings.--
 (1) Briefings on us stocks.--The Secretary of Defense shall 
 provide to the congressional defense committees quarterly 
 briefings that include each of the following:
 (A) A timeline and budgetary estimate for 
 developing and procuring replacement stocks of covered 
 systems for the United States.
 (B) An analysis of the amount of funding provided 
 to defense contractors to procure replacement stocks of 
 covered systems for the United States.
 (C) An identification of any opportunities to allow 
 vendors to compete for agreements to produce next-
 generation short-range tactical missiles, launchers, 
 fire controls, and any other supporting equipment.
 (D) An analysis of risks within the industrial base 
 that provides support for covered systems, and detailed 
 options to mitigate those risks.
 (E) A discussion of options to maximize competition 
 among providers of covered systems and components 
 thereof, and an identification of any gaps in legal 
 authority to pursue and achieve the objectives of 
 maximizing competition and replenishing and sustaining 
 the production capacity of covered systems.
 (F) An update on the use of the authorities of the 
 Department of Defense to replenish and sustain the 
 production capacity and stocks of covered systems 
 referred to in subsection (b).
 (2) Briefings on stocks of allies and partners.--The 
 Secretary of Defense shall provide to the congressional defense 
 committees, the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives, and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the 
 Senate quarterly briefings that include each of the following:
 (A) A timeline and budgetary estimate for 
 developing and procuring replacement stocks of covered 
 systems for allies and partners of the United States.
 (B) An update on the efforts of the Department to 
 work with allies and partners of the United States to 
 advance the replenishment of munitions stocks for such 
 allies and partners that have provided, or are 
 contemplating providing, such stocks to Ukraine.
 (d) Covered System.--In this section, the term ``covered system'' 
means any short-range tactical missile (including any SHORAD or anti-
tank missile), loitering munition, drone, or ammunition.
 (e) Termination.--The requirement to provide quarterly briefings 
under this section shall terminate on December 31, 2026.

SEC. 1704. ASSESSMENT OF ACQUISITION OBJECTIVES FOR PATRIOT AIR AND 
 MISSILE DEFENSE BATTALIONS.

 (a) Findings; Sense of Congress.--
 (1) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (A) The unlawful Russian invasion of and war in 
 Ukraine has highlighted the importance of lower tier 
 air and missile defense capabilities in the European 
 Area of Command.
 (B) The emergency supplemental appropriations 
 request by the President for the situation in Ukraine 
 for fiscal year 2022 included funding for a 16th 
 Patriot air and missile defense system battalion, which 
 increases the long standing inventory requirement by 
 one battalion.
 (2) Sense of congress.--It is the sense of Congress that 
 given the evolving cruise- and ballistic-missile threat from 
 rogue nations and near-peer adversaries, particularly in 
 regional scenarios, the Secretary of the Army should reassess 
 the current battalion and interceptor acquisition objectives 
 for the Patriot air and missile defense system to determine if 
 16 battalions and 3,376 Patriot advanced capability-3 missile 
 segment enhancement missiles are still valid.
 (b) Assessment.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Army shall assess and 
validate the battalion and interceptor acquisition objectives, as of 
the date of the enactment of this Act, for the Patriot air and missile 
defense system and Patriot advanced capability-3 missile segment 
enhancement missiles.
 (c) Report.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which the 
Secretary completes the assessment under subsection (b), the Secretary 
shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report on the 
assessment, including whether the acquisition objectives described in 
such subsection are valid or should be modified.
 (d) Authority.--Subject to the availability of appropriations for 
such purpose, the Secretary of the Army may procure up to four 
additional Patriot air and missile defense battalions to achieve a 
total of up to 20 such battalions.

SEC. 1705. FEDERALLY FUNDED RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT CENTER ANALYSIS OF 
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE CAPABILITY AND CAPACITY TO 
 REPLENISH MISSILE AND MUNITION INVENTORIES.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the ongoing war in Ukraine has highlighted the 
 importance of understanding the defense industrial base gaps 
 and limitations of replenishing inventories of critical, 
 preferred, and precision-guided weapon systems; and
 (2) the ability of the Department of Defense to replenish 
 critical munitions in the event of a conflict with a strategic 
 competitor lasting not less than six months is of critical 
 importance to the national security interests of the United 
 States.
 (b) FFRDC Study.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 30 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall seek 
 to enter into an agreement with an appropriate federally funded 
 research and development center for the conduct of a detailed 
 analysis of the capability of the Department of Defense 
 replenish inventory of the weapons described in paragraph (3) 
 to address long-range strike capabilities, including against 
 naval surface and subsurface, as well as land-based forces, air 
 superiority, interdiction, air and missile defense, and hard 
 and deeply buried target mission areas. Such an agreement shall 
 provide that an analysis conducted pursuant to the agreement 
 shall be completed within 180 days.
 (2) Matters for consideration.--An analysis conducted 
 pursuant to an agreement under paragraph (1) shall include a 
 consideration of each of the following with respect to the 
 weapons described in paragraph (3):
 (A) Any gaps in current or near-term production 
 capability through 2025 or capacity due to the loss, 
 impending loss, or obsolescence of manufacturers or 
 suppliers of items, raw materials, or software, along 
 with recommendations to address the highest priority 
 gaps.
 (B) The capability to significantly increase 
 current levels of production beyond steady-state demand 
 requirements, including an assessment of sub-tier 
 supplier capacity, capability, and rates of production.
 (C) The predicted production capability and 
 capacity during the time period beginning in 2025 and 
 ending in 2035, including the capability and any 
 recommendations to significantly increase production 
 during that time period.
 (D) The reliance of the United States on materials 
 and parts that are produced or sourced in foreign 
 countries, particularly in the case of such reliance on 
 a sole-source producer or supplier, an identification 
 of countries of origin of such materials and parts, and 
 associated recommendations to address any priority 
 vulnerabilities.
 (E) The capacity of the organic industrial base, 
 including both Government-operated and contractor-
 operated facilities, to support surge production, and 
 an identification of the weapons that each such 
 facilities is equipped, or could be equipped, to 
 produce.
 (3) Weapons described.--The weapons described in this 
 paragraph are each of the following:
 (A) Evolved sea sparrow missile.
 (B) MK 48 heavyweight torpedo.
 (C) Standard missile variants (SM-6, SM-3 block IB 
 and SM-3 block IIA).
 (D) Patriot guided missiles.
 (E) Terminal high altitude area defense 
 interceptors.
 (F) Guided and ballistic missiles fired from the 
 multiple launch rocket system (MLRS) or the high 
 mobility artillery rocket system (HIMARS).
 (G) Javelin missile.
 (H) Stinger missile.
 (I) Air intercept missile (AIM)-9X-Sidewinder.
 (J) AIM-120D - Advanced medium range air-to-air 
 missile (AMRAAM).
 (K) Air to ground (AGM)-114 - hellfire missile.
 (L) Small diameter bomb II.
 (M) Joint direct attack munition.
 (N) Advanced penetrating bombs.
 (O) Enhanced fragmentation bombs.
 (P) Low collateral damage bombs.
 (Q) Tomahawk land attack missile.
 (R) Maritime strike tomahawk.
 (S) Long range anti-ship missile.
 (T) Naval strike missile.
 (U) Joint air-to-surface standoff missile-extended 
 range.
 (V) Harpoon anti-ship missile.
 (W) Any other weapon that the Secretary of Defense 
 or the federally funded research and development center 
 determine should be included in the analysis.
 (4) Report.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 180 days after 
 entering into an agreement under subsection (a), the 
 Secretary shall submit to the congressional defense 
 committees a report containing the unaltered results of 
 the analysis completed pursuant to the agreement.
 (B) Form.--The report required under subparagraph 
 (A) shall be submitted in unclassified form, but may 
 include a classified annex.

SEC. 1706. OUT-YEAR UNCONSTRAINED TOTAL MUNITIONS REQUIREMENT, OUT-YEAR 
 INVENTORY NUMBERS, AND CRITICAL MUNITIONS RESERVE.

 (a) Annual Reporting Requirements.--Section 222c of title 10, 
United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by striking ``the chief of staff of each armed 
 force (other than the Coast Guard)'' and inserting 
 ``the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and 
 Sustainment'';
 (B) by striking ``such armed force'' and inserting 
 ``each armed force (other than the Coast Guard)''; and
 (C) by inserting ``for each critical munitions 
 program'' after ``the following'';
 (2) by striking subsection (b);
 (3) by redesignating subsections (c) and (d) as subsections 
 (b) and (c), respectively;
 (4) by amending subsection (c), as so redesignated, to read 
 as follows:
 ``(c) Implementation Guidance Used.--A report required to be 
submitted under subsection (a) for a fiscal year shall include a 
description and explanation of the munitions requirements process 
implementation guidance developed by the Under Secretary of Defense for 
Acquisition and Sustainment and used by each armed force for the 
munitions requirements process for such armed force for that fiscal 
year. Such description and explanation shall include each of the 
following:
 ``(1) A list of configurations fielded as of the date of 
 the submittal of the report.
 ``(2) The percentage of the total munitions inventory that 
 is fielded, by configuration.
 ``(3) The average shelf life and age of the munitions in 
 the inventory and the percentage of the munitions in the 
 inventory that will exceed shelf life during the ten-year 
 period following the date of the submittal of the report.
 ``(4) The number of years required to meet the out-year 
 unconstrained total munitions requirement at the rate requested 
 for the fiscal year covered by the report.
 ``(5) The average rate of procurement during the three-year 
 period preceding the date of the submittal of the report, and 
 the number of years required to meet the out-year unconstrained 
 total munitions requirement at such three-year average rate.
 ``(6) The additional amount of funding that would be 
 required, for each fiscal year, to meet the out-year 
 unconstrained total munitions requirement for each munition by 
 the end of the period covered by the most recent future-years 
 defense program submitted to Congress pursuant to section 221 
 of this title.
 ``(7) Such other information as the Under Secretary 
 determines is appropriate.'';
 (5) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new 
 subsection (d):
 ``(d) Critical Munitions Reserve.--(1) For each critical munitions 
program, the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment 
shall establish and maintain a critical munitions reserve, through 
which the Under Secretary shall procure longest lead sub-components, 
concurrent with year production, to provide the capability to quickly 
access the amount of critical munitions inventory required for one or 
more years in order to accelerate the delivery of such munitions.
 ``(2) A critical munitions reserve under paragraph (1) may take the 
form of a rotable pool to facilitate the timely use of critical 
munitions material while producing sufficient quantities of such 
material to maintain an ongoing reserve of such material.
 ``(3) The Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and 
Sustainment shall submit to the congressional defense committees 
quarterly reports on the critical munitions reserves maintained under 
this paragraph, which shall include the recommendations of the Under 
Secretary with respect to--
 ``(A) the management of the critical munition reserves, 
 including any recommendations for legislative changes; and
 ``(B) critical munitions components for inclusion in the 
 critical munitions reserves and funding requirements for each 
 such component.''; and
 (6) in subsection (e), as so redesignated, by striking 
 paragraph (1) and inserting the following new paragraph (1):
 ``(1) The term `critical munition' means a munition that--
 ``(A) is considered to be among the most important 
 for executing plan objectives in one or more conflict 
 scenarios;
 ``(B) has an inventory that is insufficient to meet 
 the requirements of the national defense strategy under 
 section 113(g) of this title; and
 ``(C) has a projected inventory that is forecasted 
 to remain insufficient at the end of the period covered 
 by the future-years defense program most recently 
 submitted to Congress pursuant to section 221 of this 
 title.''.
 (b) Report on Critical Munitions Reserve.--Not later than 90 days 
after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Under Secretary of 
Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report on the progress of the Under 
Secretary in establishing the critical munitions reserves required by 
subsection (d) of section 222c of title 10, United States Code, as 
added by subsection (a)(5).

SEC. 1707. IDENTIFICATION OF SUBCONTRACTORS FOR CRITICAL MUNITIONS 
 CONTRACTS.

 (a) Identification of Subcontractors.--Not later than 210 days 
after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Under Secretary of 
Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment shall carry out a pilot program 
to establish a process for identifying subcontractors (at any tier) 
that, on the date on which the process described in subsection (a) is 
implemented--
 (1) are performing one or more critical munitions 
 contracts; and
 (2)(A) provide products to a prime contractor or a higher-
 tier subcontractor for such prime contractor under such a 
 contract; or
 (B) are responsible for the storage or handling of 
 controlled unclassified information under such a contract.
 (b) Use of Framework.--The Under Secretary shall, to the extent 
practicable, use the framework developed under section 4819 of title 
10, United States Code, to carry out the pilot program established 
under this section.
 (c) Implementation Plan.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, the Under Secretary shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees an implementation plan for the pilot 
program required by this section. Such plan shall include the 
following:
 (1) Information on the practices that will be used to apply 
 processes established under the pilot program, including an 
 identification of any practices used by the Missile Defense 
 Agency or the Strategic Capabilities Office that identify 
 subcontractors (at any tier) for covered contracts.
 (2) A list of programs of the Department of Defense to 
 which the Under Secretary will apply the process established 
 under this section.
 (d) Recommendations.--Not later than 90 days after the 
implementation of the pilot program required by this section, the Under 
Secretary shall submit to the congressional defense committees 
recommendations on the feasibility of expanding, beginning on or after 
November 1, 2023, the pilot program established under this section to 
Department of Defense program under which a DO-rated order or a DX-
rated order may be placed.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered contract'' means a critical 
 munitions contract for which a subcontractor (at any tier)--
 (A) provides products to a prime contractor or a 
 higher-tier subcontractor for such prime contractor; or
 (B) is responsible for the storage or handling of 
 controlled unclassified information.
 (2) The term ``critical munition'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 1705 of this Act.
 (3) The term ``critical munitions contract'' means a 
 contract between the Department of Defense and a prime 
 contractor for the procurement of critical munitions.
 (4) The term ``DO-rated order'' means an order with a 
 priority rating of ``critical to national defense'' in the 
 Defense Priorities and Allocation System pursuant to part 700 
 of title 15, Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor 
 regulation).
 (5) The term ``DX-rated order'' means an order with a 
 priority rating of ``highest national defense urgency'' in the 
 Defense Priorities and Allocation System pursuant to part 700 
 of title 15, Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor 
 regulation).

SEC. 1708. STUDY ON STOCKPILES AND PRODUCTION OF CRITICAL GUIDED 
 MUNITIONS.

 (a) Study.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall complete a study to 
determine how rapidly stockpiles of the United States of critical 
guided munitions would become depleted in the event of the involvement 
of the United States in a large-scale conflict.
 (b) Matters.--The study under subsection (a) shall include, at a 
minimum, the following:
 (1) Modeling of the monthly munitions expenditure of the 
 United States in the scenario of a large-scale conflict 
 (lasting for a period of at least 180 days) in Europe during 
 fiscal year 2025, at various levels of conflict intensity, 
 including conflicts involving 25, 50, and 75 percent of the 
 force structure of the land, naval, and air forces of the 
 active Armed Forces.
 (2) Modeling of the monthly munitions expenditure of the 
 United States in the scenario of a large-scale conflict 
 (lasting for a period of at least 180 days) in East Asia during 
 fiscal year 2025, at various levels of conflict intensity, 
 including conflicts involving 25, 50, and 75 percent of the 
 force structure of the land, naval, and air forces of the 
 active Armed Forces.
 (3) An analysis of how rapidly stockpiles of the United 
 States of critical guided munitions would become depleted in 
 each of the scenarios referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2) 
 for, at a minimum, the following munitions:
 (A) Air Intercept Missile-260.
 (B) Joint Direct Attack Munition.
 (C) Long Range Anti-Ship Missile.
 (D) Naval Strike Missile.
 (E) Standard Missile-2.
 (F) Standard Missile-6.
 (G) Harpoon Anti-ship Missile.
 (H) MK-48 torpedo.
 (I) Each variant of the following:
 (i) Air Intercept Missile-9.
 (ii) Air Intercept Missile-120.
 (iii) Army Tactical Missile System.
 (iv) Guided Multiple Launch Rocket System.
 (v) Javelin.
 (vi) Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff Missile.
 (vii) Patriot Missile.
 (viii) Precision Strike Missile.
 (ix) Stinger.
 (x) Tomahawk Cruise Missile.
 (4) An analysis of the time and resources that would be 
 necessary to restart production lines for the critical guided 
 munitions specified in paragraph (3) that, as of the period 
 during which the study is conducted, are not in production by 
 the United States.
 (5) An analysis of the time and resources that would be 
 necessary to increase the monthly production of critical guided 
 munitions to meet the expenditure rates projected pursuant to 
 the modeling under paragraphs (1) and (2).
 (c) Report and Briefing.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 120 days after the date of 
 the completion of the study under subsection (a), the Secretary 
 of Defense shall submit to the congressional defense committees 
 a report, and provide to the congressional defense committees a 
 briefing, on the study. Such report shall contain the 
 following:
 (A) A summary of the findings of the study.
 (B) Recommendations to expedite the production of 
 the munitions specified in subsection (b)(3).
 (2) Form.--The report under paragraph (1) shall be 
 submitted in unclassified form, but may contain a classified 
 annex.
 (d) Critical Guided Munition.--In this section, the term ``critical 
guided munition'' means--
 (1) any munition specified in subsection (b)(3); and
 (2) any other munition designated as such by the Secretary 
 of Defense.

SEC. 1709. UKRAINE CRITICAL MUNITIONS ACQUISITION FUND.

 (a) Establishment.--There shall be established in the Treasury of 
the United States a revolving fund to be known as the ``Ukraine 
Critical Munitions Acquisition Fund'' (in this section referred to as 
the ``Fund'').
 (b) Purpose.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, 
amounts in the Fund shall be made available by the Secretary of 
Defense--
 (1) to ensure that adequate stocks of critical munitions 
 are available for allies and partners of the United States 
 during the war in Ukraine; and
 (2) to finance the acquisition of critical munitions in 
 advance of the transfer of such munitions to foreign countries 
 during the war in Ukraine.
 (c) Additional Authority.--Subject to the availability of 
appropriations, the Secretary may also use amounts made available to 
the Fund--
 (1) to keep on continuous order munitions that the 
 Secretary deems as critical due to a reduction in current 
 stocks as a result of the drawdown of stocks provided to the 
 government of Ukraine for transfer to Ukraine; or
 (2) with the concurrence of the Secretary of State, to 
 procure munitions identified as having a high use rate during 
 the war in Ukraine.
 (d) Deposits.--
 (1) In general.--The Fund shall consist of each of the 
 following:
 (A) Collections from sales made under letters of 
 offer (or transfers made under the Foreign Assistance 
 Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2151 et seq.)) of munitions 
 acquired using amounts made available from the Fund 
 pursuant to this section, representing the value of 
 such items calculated, as applicable, in accordance 
 with--
 (i) subparagraph (B) or (C) of section 
 21(a)(1) of the Arms Export Control Act (22 
 U.S.C. 2761(a)(1);
 (ii) section 22 of the Arms Export Control 
 Act (22 U.S.C. 2762); or
 (iii) section 644(m) of the Foreign 
 Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2403).
 (B) Such amounts as may be appropriated pursuant to 
 the authorization under this section or otherwise made 
 available for the purposes of the Fund.
 (C) Not more than $500,000,000 may be transferred 
 to the Fund for any fiscal year, in accordance with 
 subsection (e), from amounts authorized to be 
 appropriated by this Act for the Department in such 
 amounts as the Secretary determines necessary to carry 
 out the purposes of this section, which shall remain 
 available until expended. The transfer authority 
 provided by this paragraph is in addition to any other 
 transfer authority available to the Secretary.
 (2) Contributions from foreign governments.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
 Secretary of Defense may accept contributions of 
 amounts to the Fund from any foreign government or 
 international organization. Any amounts so accepted 
 shall be credited to the Ukraine Critical Munitions 
 Acquisition Fund and shall be available for use as 
 authorized under subsection (b).
 (B) Limitation.--The Secretary may not accept a 
 contribution under this paragraph if the acceptance of 
 the contribution would compromise, or appear to 
 compromise, the integrity of any program of the 
 Department of Defense.
 (C) Notification.--If the Secretary accepts any 
 contribution under this paragraph, the Secretary shall 
 notify the congressional defense committees, the 
 Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate, and the 
 Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives. Such notice shall specify the source 
 and amount of any contribution so accepted and the use 
 of any amount so accepted.
 (e) Notification.--
 (1) In general.--No amount may be transferred pursuant to 
 subsection (d)(1)(C) until the date that is 15 days after the 
 date on which the Secretary provides to the congressional 
 defense committees, the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the 
 House of Representatives, and the Committee on Foreign 
 Relations of the Senate--
 (A) notice in writing of the amount and purpose of 
 the proposed transfer; and
 (B) a description of how the Secretary intends to 
 use the munitions acquired under this section to meet 
 national defense requirements as specified in 
 subsection (f)(1)(A).
 (2) Ammunition purchases.--No amounts in the Fund may be 
 used to purchase ammunition, as authorized by this Act, until 
 the date that is 15 days after the date on which the Secretary 
 notifies the congressional defense committees in writing of the 
 amount and purpose of the proposed purchase.
 (3) Foreign transfers.--No munition purchased using amounts 
 in the Fund may be transferred to a foreign country until the 
 date that is 15 days after the date on which the Secretary 
 notifies the congressional defense committees in writing of the 
 proposed transfer.
 (f) Limitations.--
 (1) Limitation on transfer.--No munition acquired by the 
 Secretary of Defense using amounts made available from the Fund 
 pursuant to this section may be transferred to any foreign 
 country unless such transfer is authorized by the Arms Export 
 Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2751 et seq.), the Foreign Assistance 
 Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2151 et seq.), or other applicable law, 
 except as follows:
 (A) The Secretary of Defense, with the concurrence 
 of the Secretary of State, may authorize the use by the 
 Department of Defense of munitions acquired under this 
 section prior to transfer to a foreign country, if such 
 use is necessary to meet national defense requirements 
 and the Department bear the costs of replacement and 
 transport, maintenance, storage, and other such 
 associated costs of such munitions.
 (B) Except as required by subparagraph (A), amounts 
 made available to the Fund may be used to pay for 
 storage, maintenance, and other costs related to the 
 storage, preservation and preparation for transfer of 
 munitions acquired under this section prior to their 
 transfer, and the administrative costs of the 
 Department of Defense incurred in the acquisition of 
 such items, to the extent such costs are not eligible 
 for reimbursement pursuant to section 43(b) of the Arms 
 Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2792(b)).
 (2) Certification requirement.--
 (A) In general.--No amounts in the Fund may be used 
 pursuant to this section unless the President--
 (i) certifies to the congressional defense 
 committees, the Committee on Foreign Affairs of 
 the House of Representatives, and the Committee 
 on Foreign Relations of the Senate that the 
 Special Defense Acquisition Fund established 
 pursuant to chapter 5 of the Arms Export 
 Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2795 et seq.) cannot be 
 used to fulfill the same functions and 
 objectives for which such amounts to be made 
 available from the Fund are to be used; and
 (ii) includes in such certification a 
 justification therefor, which may be included 
 in a classified annex, if necessary.
 (B) Non-delegation.--The President may not delegate 
 any responsibility of the President under subparagraph 
 (A).
 (g) Termination.--The authority for the Fund under this section 
shall expire on December 31, 2024.

SEC. 1710. QUARTERLY BRIEFINGS ON REPLENISHMENT AND REVITALIZATION OF 
 STOCKS OF DEFENSIVE AND OFFENSIVE WEAPONS PROVIDED TO 
 UKRAINE.

 (a) Quarterly Briefings.--The Secretary of Defense shall provide to 
the congressional defense committees quarterly briefings, in accordance 
with subsection (b), on the progress of the Department of Defense 
toward replenishing and sustaining the production capacity and stocks 
of covered weapons that have been delivered to Ukraine as part of the 
effort to--
 (1) support Ukraine's resistance against Russian 
 aggression; and
 (2) buy down strategic risks.
 (b) Elements of Briefings.--
 (1) Briefings on us weapons.--The Secretary of Defense 
 shall provide to the congressional defense committees quarterly 
 briefings that include each of the following:
 (A) A timeline and budgetary estimate for 
 developing and procuring replacement stocks of covered 
 weapons for the United States.
 (B) An identification of any opportunities to allow 
 vendors to compete for agreements to produce next-
 generation weapons.
 (C) An analysis of risks within the industrial base 
 that provides support for covered weapons, and detailed 
 options to mitigate those risks.
 (D) A discussion of options to maximize competition 
 among providers of covered weapons and components 
 thereof, and an identification of any gaps in legal 
 authority to pursue and achieve the objectives of 
 maximizing competition and replenishing and sustaining 
 the production capacity of covered weapons.
 (E) An update on the use of the authorities of the 
 Department of Defense to replenish and sustain the 
 production capacity and stocks of covered weapons 
 referred to in subsection (a).
 (2) Briefing on weapons of allies and partners.--The 
 Secretary of Defense shall provide to the congressional defense 
 committees, the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives, and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the 
 Senate a briefing on the plan to use authorities for--
 (A) developing and procuring replacement stocks of 
 covered weapons for allies and partners of the United 
 States; and
 (B) advancing the replenishment of weapons for such 
 allies and partners that have provided, or are 
 contemplating providing, such weapons to Ukraine.
 (c) Covered Weapon.--In this section, the term ``covered weapon'' 
means any weapon other than a covered system, as that term is defined 
in section 1703(d).
 (d) Termination.--The requirement to provide quarterly briefings 
under subsection (b)(1) shall terminate on December 31, 2026.

 DIVISION B--MILITARY CONSTRUCTION AUTHORIZATIONS

SEC. 2001. SHORT TITLE.

 This division and title XLVI of division D may be cited as the 
``Military Construction Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023''.

SEC. 2002. EXPIRATION OF AUTHORIZATIONS AND AMOUNTS REQUIRED TO BE 
 SPECIFIED BY LAW.

 (a) Expiration of Authorizations After Three Years.--Except as 
provided in subsection (b), all authorizations contained in titles XXI 
through XXVII for military construction projects, land acquisition, 
family housing projects and facilities, and contributions to the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization Security Investment Program (and 
authorizations of appropriations therefor) shall expire on the later 
of--
 (1) October 1, 2025; or
 (2) the date of the enactment of an Act authorizing funds 
 for military construction for fiscal year 2026.
 (b) Exception.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to authorizations 
for military construction projects, land acquisition, family housing 
projects and facilities, and contributions to the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization Security Investment Program (and authorizations of 
appropriations therefor), for which appropriated funds have been 
obligated before the later of--
 (1) October 1, 2025; or
 (2) the date of the enactment of an Act authorizing funds 
 for fiscal year 2026 for military construction projects, land 
 acquisition, family housing projects and facilities, or 
 contributions to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
 Security Investment Program.

SEC. 2003. EFFECTIVE DATE AND AUTOMATIC EXECUTION OF CONFORMING CHANGES 
 TO TABLES OF SECTIONS, TABLES OF CONTENTS, AND SIMILAR 
 TABULAR ENTRIES.

 (a) Effective Date.--Titles XXI through XXVII shall take effect on 
the later of--
 (1) October 1, 2022; or
 (2) the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Elimination of Need for Certain Separate Conforming 
Amendments.--
 (1) Automatic execution of conforming changes.--When an 
 amendment made by a provision of this division to a covered 
 defense law adds a section or larger organizational unit to the 
 covered defense law, repeals or transfers a section or larger 
 organizational unit in the covered defense law, or amends the 
 designation or heading of a section or larger organizational 
 unit in the covered defense law, that amendment also shall have 
 the effect of amending any table of sections, table of 
 contents, or similar table of tabular entries in the covered 
 defense law to alter the table to conform to the changes made 
 by the amendment.
 (2) Exceptions.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to an 
 amendment described in such paragraph when--
 (A) the amendment, or a separate clerical amendment 
 enacted at the same time as the amendment, expressly 
 amends a table of sections, table of contents, or 
 similar table of tabular entries in the covered defense 
 law to alter the table to conform to the changes made 
 by the amendment; or
 (B) the amendment otherwise expressly exempts 
 itself from the operation of this section.
 (3) Covered defense law.--In this subsection, the term 
 ``covered defense law'' means--
 (A) titles 10, 32, and 37 of the United States 
 Code;
 (B) any national defense authorization Act or 
 military construction authorization Act that authorizes 
 funds to be appropriated for a fiscal year to the 
 Department of Defense; and
 (C) any other law designated in the text thereof as 
 a covered defense law for purposes of application of 
 this section.

SEC. 2004. DIRECTING THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE TO CONTINUE MILITARY 
 HOUSING REFORMS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense shall consider--
 (1) partnerships with innovative housing production 
 companies to build cost-effective multi-family housing that is 
 energy efficient and improve energy resiliency in order to 
 increase the supply of affordable housing available to active 
 duty members of the Armed Forces; or
 (2) purchasing multiple multi-family housing if this 
 results in an additional lower cost.
 (b) Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall report to 
Congress on the considerations under subsection (a).
 (c) Innovative Housing Production Company Defined.--In this 
section, the term ``innovative housing production company'' means a 
company that offers housing in an area for which the costs per unit is 
lower than the cost per unit of other housing in the area that meets 
Federal, State, and local housing standards, based on quality, 
accessibility, and durability.

 TITLE XXI--ARMY MILITARY CONSTRUCTION

SEC. 2101. AUTHORIZED ARMY CONSTRUCTION AND LAND ACQUISITION PROJECTS.

 (a) Inside the United States.--Using amounts appropriated pursuant 
to the authorization of appropriations in section 2103(a) and available 
for military construction projects inside the United States as 
specified in the funding table in section 4601, the Secretary of the 
Army may acquire real property and carry out military construction 
projects for the installations or locations inside the United States, 
and in the amounts, set forth in the following table:

 Army: Inside the United States
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 State Installation or Location Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Colorado....................................... Fort Carson................................... $14,200,000
Louisiana...................................... Fort Polk..................................... $32,000,000
North Carolina................................. Fort Bragg.................................... $34,000,000
New Jersey..................................... Picatinny Arsenal............................. $3,654,000
Pennsylvania................................... Letterkenny Army Depot........................ $38,000,000
Texas.......................................... Corpus Christi Army Depot..................... $103,000,000
 Fort Bliss.................................... $15,000,000
Washington..................................... Joint Base Lewis-McChord...................... $49,000,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 (b) Outside the United States.--Using amounts appropriated pursuant 
to the authorization of appropriations in section 2103(a) and available 
for military construction projects outside the United States as 
specified in the funding table in section 4601, the Secretary of the 
Army may acquire real property and carry out military construction 
projects for the installations outside the United States, and in the 
amounts, set forth in the following table:

 Army: Outside the United States
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 State Installation Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Germany........................................ East Camp Grafenwoehr......................... $168,000,000
 Kwajalein..................................... Kwajalein Atoll.............................. $69,000,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SEC. 2102. FAMILY HOUSING.

 (a) Construction and Acquisition.--Using amounts appropriated 
pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in section 2103(a) and 
available for military family housing functions as specified in the 
funding table in section 4601, the Secretary of the Army may construct 
or acquire family housing units (including land acquisition and 
supporting facilities) at the installation, in the number of units or 
for the purpose, and in the amount set forth in the following table:

 Army: Family Housing
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Country Installation or Location Units Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Germany................................ Baumholder................. Family Housing New $57,000,000
 Construction............
Italy.................................. Vincenza................... Family Housing New $95,000,000
 Construction............
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 (b) Planning and Design.--Using amounts appropriated pursuant to 
the authorization of appropriations in section 2103(a) and available 
for military family housing functions as specified in the funding table 
in section 4601, the Secretary of the Army may carry out architectural 
and engineering services and construction design activities with 
respect to the construction or improvement of family housing units in 
an amount not to exceed $17,339,000.

SEC. 2103. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS, ARMY.

 (a) Authorization of Appropriations.--Funds are hereby authorized 
to be appropriated for fiscal years beginning after September 30, 2022, 
for military construction, land acquisition, and military family 
housing functions of the Department of the Army as specified in the 
funding table in section 4601.
 (b) Limitation on Total Cost of Construction Projects.--
Notwithstanding the cost variations authorized by section 2853 of title 
10, United States Code, and any other cost variation authorized by law, 
the total cost of all projects carried out under section 2101 may not 
exceed the total amount authorized to be appropriated under subsection 
(a), as specified in the funding table in section 4601.

SEC. 2104. DEMOLITION OF DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA FORT MCNAIR QUARTERS 4, 
 13, AND 15.

 Not later than one year after the date on which all the individuals 
occupying District of Columbia Fort McNair Quarters 4, 13, and 15, as 
of the date of the enactment of this Act, have moved out of such 
Quarters, the Secretary of the Army shall demolish such Quarters.

SEC. 2105. MODIFICATION OF AUTHORITY TO CARRY OUT CERTAIN FISCAL YEAR 
 2019 PROJECT.

 In the case of the authorization contained in the table in section 
2101(b) of the Military Construction Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
2019 (Public Law 115-232; 132 Stat. 2242) for Camp Tango, Korea, for 
construction of a command and control facility at the installation, the 
Secretary of the Army may increase scope for a dedicated, enclosed 
egress pathway out of the underground facility to facilitate safe 
escape in case of fire.

SEC. 2106. EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY TO CARRY OUT CERTAIN FISCAL YEAR 2018 
 PROJECTS.

 (a) Extension.--(1) Notwithstanding section 2002 of the Military 
Construction Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 (division B of 
Public Law 115-91; 131 Stat. 1817), the authorization set forth in the 
table in paragraph (2), as provided in section 2101(b) of that Act (131 
Stat. 1819), shall remain in effect until October 1, 2023, or the date 
of the enactment of an Act authorizing funds for military construction 
for fiscal year 2024, whichever is later.
 (2) The table referred to in paragraph (1) is as follows:

 Army: Extension of 2018 Project Authorization
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Original
 Country Installation or Location Project Authorized Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Korea................................. Kunsan Air Base........... Unmanned Aerial Vehicle $53,000,000
 Hangar..................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 (b) Army Family Housing.--(1) Notwithstanding section 2002 of the 
Military Construction Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 (division 
B of Public Law 115-91; 131 Stat. 1817), the authorization set forth in 
the table in paragraph (2), as provided in section 2102 of that Act 
(131 Stat. 1820), shall remain in effect until October 1, 2023, or the 
date of the enactment of an Act authorizing funds for military 
construction for fiscal year 2024, whichever is later.
 (2) The table referred to in paragraph (1) is as follows:

 Army: Extension of 2018 Project Authorization
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Original
 Country Installation or Location Project Authorized Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Kwajalein............................. Kwajalein Atoll........... Family Housing $31,000,000
 Replacement Construction
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SEC. 2107. MODIFICATION OF AUTHORITY TO CARRY OUT CERTAIN FISCAL YEAR 
 2018 PROJECTS.

 (a) Kunsan Air Base, Korea.--In the case of the authorization 
contained in the table in section 2101(b) of the Military Construction 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 (division B of Public Law 115-
91; 131 Stat. 1819) for Kunsan Air Base, Korea, for construction of an 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Hangar at the installation, the Secretary of 
the Army may--
 (1) construct the hangar at Camp Humphries, Korea; and
 (2) remove primary scope associated with the relocation of 
 the air defense artillery battalion facilities to include a 
 ground based missile defense equipment area, fighting 
 positions, a missile resupply area air defense artillery 
 facility, a ready building and command post, a battery command 
 post area, a safety shelter, and a guard booth.
 (b) Kwajalein Atoll, Hwajalein.--Section 2879(a)(1)(A) of the 
Military Construction Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 (division 
B of Public Law 115-91; 131 Stat. 1874) is amended by striking ``at 
least 26 family housing units'' and inserting ``not more than 26 family 
housing units''.

 TITLE XXII--NAVY MILITARY CONSTRUCTION

SEC. 2201. AUTHORIZED NAVY CONSTRUCTION AND LAND ACQUISITION PROJECTS.

 (a) Inside the United States.--Using amounts appropriated pursuant 
to the authorization of appropriations in section 2203(a) and available 
for military construction projects inside the United States as 
specified in the funding table in section 4601, the Secretary of the 
Navy may acquire real property and carry out military construction 
projects for the installations or locations inside the United States, 
and in the amounts, set forth in the following table:

 Navy: Inside the United States
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 State Installation or Location Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
California................................... Marine Corps Base Ground Combat Center $120,382,000
 Twentynine Palms...............................
 Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton............... $85,210,000
 Naval Air Station Lemoore....................... $201,261,000
 Naval Base Point Loma........................... $56,450,000
Connecticut.................................. Naval Submarine Base New London................. $15,514,000
Florida...................................... Naval Air Station Jacksonville.................. $86,232,000
 Naval Air Station Whiting Field................. $57,789,000
Georgia...................................... Naval Submarine Base Kings Bay.................. $279,171,000
Guam......................................... Marine Corps Base Camp Blaz..................... $330,589,000
Hawaii....................................... Marine Corps Base Kaneohe Bay................... $87,930,000
 Joint Base Pearl Harbor- Hickam................. $3,637,692,000
North Carolina............................... Marine Corps Air Station Cherry Point........... $38,415,000
 Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune.................. $47,475,000
Nevada....................................... Naval Air Station Fallon........................ $97,865,000
Virginia..................................... Naval Station Norfolk........................... $16,863,000
Washington................................... Naval Air Station Whidbey Island................ $37,461,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 (b) Outside the United States.--Using amounts appropriated pursuant 
to the authorization of appropriations in section 2203(a) and available 
for military construction projects outside the United States as 
specified in the funding table in section 4601, the Secretary of the 
Navy may acquire real property and carry out military construction 
projects for the installation outside the United States, and in the 
amount, set forth in the following table:

 Navy: Outside the United States
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Country Installation or Location Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Australia..................................... Royal Australian Air Base Darwin................ $258,831,000
Japan......................................... Kadena Air Base................................. $195,400,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SEC. 2202. FAMILY HOUSING.

 (a) Construction and Acquisition.--Using amounts appropriated 
pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in section 2203(a) and 
available for military family housing functions as specified in the 
funding table in section 4601, the Secretary of the Navy may construct 
or acquire family housing units (including land acquisition and 
supporting facilities) at the installations or locations, in the number 
of units or for the purposes, and in the amounts set forth in the 
following table:

 Navy: Family Housing
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Location Installation Units or Purpose Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Guam................................... Naval Support Activity Family housing new $248,634,000
 Anderson.................. construction............
 ......................... ...............
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 (b) Improvements to Military Family Housing Units.--Subject to 
section 2825 of title 10, United States Code, and using amounts 
appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in section 
2203(a) and available for military family housing functions as 
specified in the funding table in section 4601, the Secretary of the 
Navy may improve existing military family housing units in an amount 
not to exceed $74,540,000.
 (c) Planning and Design.--Using amounts appropriated pursuant to 
the authorization of appropriations in section 2203(a) and available 
for military family housing functions as specified in the funding table 
in section 4601, the Secretary of the Navy may carry out architectural 
and engineering services and construction design activities with 
respect to the construction or improvement of family housing units in 
an amount not to exceed $24,224,000.

SEC. 2203. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS, NAVY.

 (a) Authorization of Appropriations.--Funds are hereby authorized 
to be appropriated for fiscal years beginning after September 30, 2022, 
for military construction, land acquisition, and military family 
housing functions of the Department of the Navy, as specified in the 
funding table in section 4601.
 (b) Limitation on Total Cost of Construction Projects.--
Notwithstanding the cost variations authorized by section 2853 of title 
10, United States Code, and any other cost variation authorized by law, 
the total cost of all projects carried out under section 2201 of this 
Act may not exceed the total amount authorized to be appropriated under 
subsection (a), as specified in the funding table in section 4601.

SEC. 2204. EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY TO CARRY OUT CERTAIN FISCAL YEAR 2018 
 PROJECT.

 (a) Extension.--Notwithstanding section 2002 of the Military 
Construction Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 (division B of 
Public Law 115-91; 131 Stat. 1817), the authorization set forth in the 
table in subsection (a), as provided in section 2201(a) of that Act 
(131 Stat. 1822), shall remain in effect until October 1, 2023, or the 
date of the enactment of an Act authorizing funds for military 
construction for fiscal year 2024, whichever is later.
 (b) Table.--The table referred to in subsection (a) is as follows:

 Navy: Extension of 2018 Project Authorization
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Original
 Country Installation or Location Project Authorized Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Guam.................................. Joint Region Marianas..... Navy-Commercial Tie-in $37,180,000
 Hardening...............
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SEC. 2205. TRANSFER OF CUSTOMERS FROM ELECTRICAL UTILITY SYSTEM OF THE 
 NAVY AT FORMER NAVAL AIR STATION BARBER'S POINT, HAWAII, 
 TO NEW ELECTRICAL SYSTEM IN KALAELOA, HAWAII.

 (a) In General.--Subject to the availability of appropriations for 
such purpose, the Secretary of the Navy shall pay the reasonable costs 
to transfer all customers off of the electrical utility system of the 
Navy located at former Naval Air Station Barber's Point, Hawaii, to the 
new electrical system in Kalaeloa, Hawaii, operated by Hawaii Electric.
 (b) Facilitation of Transfer.--To facilitate the transfer of 
customers described in subsection (a), the Secretary of the Navy shall 
provide the following to the State of Hawaii:
 (1) A load analysis and design necessary to complete such 
 transfer.
 (2) Such rights of way and easements as may be necessary to 
 support the construction of replacement electrical 
 infrastructure.
 (c) Disposal of Navy Electrical System.--After all customers have 
been transferred as required under subsection (a), the Secretary of the 
Navy may dispose of the electrical system of the Navy located at former 
Naval Air Station Barber's Point, Hawaii.
 (d) Authority for Third-party Agreement.--The Secretary of the Navy 
may enter into a cooperative agreement or other appropriate instrument 
with a non-Department of Defense entity under which--
 (1) such entity shall agree to facilitate the transfer of 
 customers under subsection (a); and
 (2) subject to the availability of appropriations for such 
 purpose, the Secretary of the Navy shall agree to reimburse 
 such entity for the reasonable costs of such transfer.

 TITLE XXIII--AIR FORCE MILITARY CONSTRUCTION

SEC. 2301. AUTHORIZED AIR FORCE CONSTRUCTION AND LAND ACQUISITION 
 PROJECTS.

 (a) Inside the United States.--Using amounts appropriated pursuant 
to the authorization of appropriations in section 2303(a) and available 
for military construction projects inside the United States as 
specified in the funding table in section 4601, the Secretary of the 
Air Force may acquire real property and carry out military construction 
projects for the installations or locations inside the United States, 
and in the amounts, set forth in the following table:

 Air Force: Inside the United States
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 State Installation or Location Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alaska......................................... Clear Air Force Station..................... $68,000,000
Alabama........................................ Maxwell Air Force Base...................... $15,000,000
California..................................... Travis Air Force Base....................... $7,500,000
 Vandenberg Air Force Base................... $89,000,000
Florida Patrick Space Force Base.................... $97,000,000
Hawaii......................................... Kirtland Air Force Base, Maui Experimental $89,000,000
 Site.......................................
Ohio........................................... Wright-Patterson Air Force Base............. $29,000,000
Oklahoma....................................... Altus Air Force Base........................ $4,750,000
 Tinker Air Force Base....................... $43,600,000
South Carolina................................. Shaw Air Force Base......................... $10,000,000
South Dakota................................... Ellsworth Air Force Base.................... $328,000,000
Tennessee...................................... Arnold Air Force Base....................... $38,000,000
Texas.......................................... Joint Base San Antonio-Randolph............. $29,000,000
Utah........................................... Hill Air Force Base......................... $84,000,000
Wyoming........................................ F.E. Warren Air Force Base.................. $176,000,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 (b) Outside the United States.--Using amounts appropriated pursuant 
to the authorization of appropriations in section 230_(a) and available 
for military construction projects outside the United States as 
specified in the funding table in section 4601, the Secretary of the 
Air Force may acquire real property and carry out military construction 
projects for the installations or locations outside the United States, 
and in the amounts, set forth in the following table:

 Air Force: Outside the United States
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Country Installation or Location Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hungary........................................ Papa Air Base............................... $71,000,000
Iceland........................................ Keflavik.................................... $94,000,000
Italy.......................................... Aviano Air Base............................. $46,500,000
Japan.......................................... Kadena Air Base............................. $307,000,000
Jordan......................................... Azraq Air Base.............................. $50,000,000
Norway......................................... Rygge....................................... $8,200,000
Spain.......................................... Moron Air Base.............................. $29,000,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SEC. 2302. FAMILY HOUSING AND IMPROVEMENTS TO MILITARY FAMILY HOUSING 
 UNITS.

 (a) Improvements to Military Family Housing Units.--Subject to 
section 2825 of title 10, United States Code, and using amounts 
appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in section 
230_(a) and available for military family housing functions as 
specified in the funding table in section 4601, the Secretary of the 
Air Force may improve existing military family housing units in an 
amount not to exceed $230,058,000.
 (b) Planning and Design.--Using amounts appropriated pursuant to 
the authorization of appropriations in section 230_(a) and available 
for military family housing functions as specified in the funding table 
in section 4601, the Secretary of the Air Force may carry out 
architectural and engineering services and construction design 
activities with respect to the construction or improvement of family 
housing units in an amount not to exceed $2,730,000.

SEC. 2303. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS, AIR FORCE.

 (a) Authorization of Appropriations.--Funds are hereby authorized 
to be appropriated for fiscal years beginning after September 30, 2022, 
for military construction, land acquisition, and military family 
housing functions of the Department of the Air Force, as specified in 
the funding table in section 4601.
 (b) Limitation on Total Cost of Construction Projects.--
Notwithstanding the cost variations authorized by section 2853 of title 
10, United States Code, and any other cost variation authorized by law, 
the total cost of all projects carried out under section 2301 may not 
exceed the total amount authorized to be appropriated under subsection 
(a), as specified in the funding table in section 4601.

SEC. 2304. EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY TO CARRY OUT CERTAIN FISCAL YEAR 2018 
 PROJECTS.

 (a) Extension.--
 (1) Extension.--Notwithstanding section 2002 of the 
 Military Construction Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 
 (division B of Public Law 115-91; 131 Stat. 1817), the 
 authorizations set forth in the table in paragraph (2), as 
 provided in section 2301(a) of that Act (131 Stat. 1825), shall 
 remain in effect until October 1, 2023, or the date of the 
 enactment of an Act authorizing funds for military construction 
 for fiscal year 2024, whichever is later.
 (2) Table.--The table referred to in paragraph (1) is as 
 follows:

 Air Force: Extension of 2018 Project Authorizations
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Original
 State Installation or Location Project Authorized Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Florida............................... Tyndall Air Force Base.... Fire Station............. $17,000,000
Texas................................. Joint Base San Antonio.... BMT Classrooms/Dining.... $38,000,000
 Joint Base San Antonio.... Camp Bullis Dining $18,500,000
 Facility................
Wyoming............................... F. E. Warren Air Force Consolidated Helo/TRF Ops/ $62,000,000
 Base..................... AMU and Alert Fac.......
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 (b) Overseas Contingency Operations.--
 (1) Extension.--Notwithstanding section 2002 of the 
 Military Construction Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 
 (division B of Public Law 115-91; 131 Stat. 1817), the 
 authorizations set forth in the table in paragraph (2), as 
 provided in section 2903 of that Act (131 Stat. 1876), shall 
 remain in effect until October 1, 2023, or the date of the 
 enactment of an Act authorizing funds for military construction 
 for fiscal year 2024, whichever is later.
 (2) Table.--The table referred to in paragraph (1) is as 
 follows:

 Air Force: Extension of 2018 Project Authorizations
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Original
 Country Installation or Location Project Authorized Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hungary............................... Kecskemet Air Base........ ERI: Airfield Upgrades... $12,900,000
 Kecskemet Air Base........ ERI: Construct Parallel $30,000,000
 Taxiway.................
 Kecskemet Air Base........ ERI: Increase POL Storage $12,500,000
 Capacity................
Luxembourg............................ Sanem..................... ERI: ECAOS Deployable $67,400,000
 Airbase System Storage..
Slovakia.............................. Malacky................... ERI: Airfield Upgrades... $4,000,000
 Malacky................... ERI: Increase POL Storage $20,000,000
 Capacity................
 ERI: Airfield Upgrades.... Construct Combat Arms $22,000,000
 Training and Maintenance
 Facility................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SEC. 2305. MODIFICATION OF AUTHORITY TO CARRY OUT CERTAIN FISCAL YEAR 
 2021 PROJECT.

 In the case of the authorization contained in the table in section 
2301(a) of the Military Construction Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
2021 (division B of Public Law 116-283; 134 Stat. 4299) for Hill Air 
Force Base, Utah, for construction of GBSD Organic Software Sustainment 
Center, the Secretary of the Air Force may construct--
 (1) up to 7,526 square meters of Surface Parking Lot in 
 lieu of constructing a 13,434 square meters vehicle parking 
 garage; and
 (2) up to 402 square meters of Storage Igloo.

SEC. 2306. MODIFICATION OF AUTHORITY TO CARRY OUT CERTAIN MILITARY 
 CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS AT TYNDALL AIR FORCE BASE, FLORIDA.

 In the case of the authorization contained in section 2912(a) of 
the Military Construction Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020 
(division B of Public Law 116-92; 133 Stat. 1913) for Tyndall Air Force 
Base, Florida--
 (1) for construction of Lodging Facilities Phases 1-2, as 
 specified in such funding table and modified by section 
 2306(a)(7) of the Military Construction Authorization Act for 
 Fiscal Year 2021 (division B of Public Law 116-283; 134 Stat. 
 4302), the Secretary of the Air Force may construct two 
 emergency backup generators;
 (2) for construction of Dorm Complex Phases 1-2, as 
 specified in such funding table and modified by section 
 2306(a)(8) of the Military Construction Authorization Act for 
 Fiscal Year 2021 (division B of Public Law 116-283; 134 Stat. 
 4302), the Secretary of the Air Force may construct an 
 emergency backup generator;
 (3) for construction of Site Development, Utilities, and 
 Demo Phase 2, as specified in such funding table and modified 
 by section 2306(a)(6) of the Military Construction 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (division B of Public 
 Law 116-283; 134 Stat. 4302), the Secretary of the Air Force 
 may construct--
 (A) up to 6,248 lineal meters of storm water 
 utilities;
 (B) up to 55,775 square meters of roads;
 (C) up to 4,334 lineal meters of gas pipeline; and
 (D) up to 28,958 linear meters of electrical;
 (4) for construction of Tyndall AFB Gate Complex, as 
 specified in such funding table and modified by section 
 2306(a)(9) of the Military Construction Authorization Act for 
 Fiscal Year 2021 (division B of Public Law 116-283; 134 Stat. 
 4302), the Secretary of the Air Force may construct up to 
 55,694 square meters of roadway with serpentines; and
 (5) for construction of Deployment Center/Flight Line 
 Dining/AAFES, as specified in such funding table and modified 
 by section 2306(a)(11) of the Military Construction 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (division B of Public 
 Law 116-283; 134 Stat. 4303), the Secretary of the Air Force 
 may construct up to 164 square meters of AAFES (Shoppette).

 TITLE XXIV--DEFENSE AGENCIES MILITARY CONSTRUCTION

SEC. 2401. AUTHORIZED DEFENSE AGENCIES CONSTRUCTION AND LAND 
 ACQUISITION PROJECTS.

 (a) Inside the United States.--Using amounts appropriated pursuant 
to the authorization of appropriations in section 2403(a) and available 
for military construction projects inside the United States as 
specified in the funding table in section 4601, the Secretary of 
Defense may acquire real property and carry out military construction 
projects for the installations or locations inside the United States, 
and in the amounts, set forth in the following table:

 Defense Agencies: Inside the United States
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 State Installation or Location Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
California................................... Coronado....................................... $75,712,000
Florida...................................... Hurlburt Field................................. $9,100,000
 MacDill Air Force Base......................... $50,000,000
North Carolina............................... Fort Bragg..................................... $34,470,000
Texas........................................ Joint Base San Antonio......................... $58,600,000
Virginia..................................... Dam Neck....................................... $26,600,000
 Pentagon....................................... $18,000,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 (b) Outside the United States.--Using amounts appropriated pursuant 
to the authorization of appropriations in section 2403(a) and available 
for military construction projects outside the United States as 
specified in the funding table in section 4601, the Secretary of 
Defense may acquire real property and carry out military construction 
projects for the installation or location outside the United States, 
and in the amount, set forth in the following table:

 Defense Agencies: Outside the United States
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Country Installation or Location Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Germany...................................... Baumholder.................................... $149,023,000
Japan........................................ Yokota Air Base............................... $72,154,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SEC. 2402. AUTHORIZED ENERGY RESILIENCE AND CONSERVATION INVESTMENT 
 PROGRAM PROJECTS.

 (a) Inside the United States.--Using amounts appropriated pursuant 
to the authorization of appropriations in section 2403(a) and available 
for energy conservation projects as specified in the funding table in 
section 4601, the Secretary of Defense may carry out energy 
conservation projects under chapter 173 of title 10, United States 
Code, for the installations or locations inside the United States, and 
in the amounts, set forth in the following table:

 ERCIP Projects: Inside the United States
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 State Installation or Location Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alabama...................................... Redstone Arsenal.............................. $10,700,000
California................................... Marine Corps Mountain Warfare Training Center $25,560,000
 Bridgeport...................................
 Naval Base Ventura County, PT Magu............ $13,360,000
 Florida..................................... Naval Air Station Jacksonville................ $2,400,000
 Patrick Space Force Base...................... $18,000,000
Georgia...................................... Fort Stewart-Hunter Army Airfield............. $25,400,000
 Naval Submarine Base Kings Bay................ $11,200,000
Guam......................................... Naval Base Guam............................... $34,360,000
Hawaii....................................... Joint Base Pearl Harbor- Hickam............... $25,000,000
Kansas....................................... Fort Riley.................................... $25,780,000
Maryland..................................... Fort George G. Meade.......................... $23,310,000
Texas........................................ Fort Hood..................................... $31,500,000
 U.S. Army Reserve Center, Conroe.............. $9,600,000
Virginia..................................... Naval Support Activity, Hampton Roads......... $22,400,000
 NCE Springfield, Fort Belvoir................. $1,100,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 (b) Outside the United States.--Using amounts appropriated pursuant 
to the authorization of appropriations in section 2403(a) and available 
for energy conservation projects as specified in the funding table in 
section 4601, the Secretary of Defense may carry out energy 
conservation projects under chapter 173 of title 10, United States 
Code, for the installations or locations outside the United States, and 
in the amounts, set forth in the following table:

 ERCIP Projects: Outside the United States
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Country Installation or Location Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Djibouti..................................... Camp Lemmonier................................ $24,000,000
Japan........................................ Kadena Air Base............................... $780,000
Kuwait....................................... Camp Arifjan.................................. $26,850,000
Norway....................................... Rygge......................................... $8,200,000
Spain........................................ Moron Air Base................................ $29,000,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SEC. 2403. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS, DEFENSE AGENCIES.

 (a) Authorization of Appropriations.--Funds are hereby authorized 
to be appropriated for fiscal years beginning after September 30, 2022, 
for military construction, land acquisition, and military family 
housing functions of the Department of Defense (other than the military 
departments), as specified in the funding table in section 4601.
 (b) Limitation on Total Cost of Construction Projects.--
Notwithstanding the cost variations authorized by section 2853 of title 
10, United States Code, and any other cost variation authorized by law, 
the total cost of all projects carried out under section 2401 may not 
exceed the total amount authorized to be appropriated under subsection 
(a), as specified in the funding table in section 4601.

SEC. 2404. EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY TO CARRY OUT CERTAIN FISCAL YEAR 2018 
 PROJECTS.

 (a) Extension.--Notwithstanding section 2002 of the Military 
Construction Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 (division B of 
Public Law 115-91; 131 Stat. 1817), the authorization set forth in the 
table in subsection (b), as provided in section 2401(b) of that Act 
(131 Stat. 1829), shall remain in effect until October 1, 2023, or the 
date of the enactment of an Act authorizing funds for military 
construction for fiscal year 2024, whichever is later.
 (b) Table.--The table referred to in subsection (a) is as follows:

 Defense Agencies: Extension of 2017 Project Authorization
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Original
 Country Installation Project Authorized Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Japan................................. Iwakuni................... Construct Bulk Storage $30,800,000
 Tanks PH 1..............
Puerto Rico........................... USCG Station; Punta Ramey Unit School $61,071,000
 Borinquen................ Replacement.............
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 TITLE XXV--INTERNATIONAL PROGRAMS

 Subtitle A--North Atlantic Treaty Organization Security Investment 
 Program

SEC. 2501. AUTHORIZED NATO CONSTRUCTION AND LAND ACQUISITION PROJECTS.

 The Secretary of Defense may make contributions for the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization Security Investment Program as provided in 
section 2806 of title 10, United States Code, in an amount not to 
exceed the sum of the amount authorized to be appropriated for this 
purpose in section 2502 and the amount collected from the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization as a result of construction previously 
financed by the United States.

SEC. 2502. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS, NATO.

 Funds are hereby authorized to be appropriated for fiscal years 
beginning after September 30, 2022, for contributions by the Secretary 
of Defense under section 2806 of title 10, United States Code, for the 
share of the United States of the cost of projects for the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization Security Investment Program authorized by 
section 2501 as specified in the funding table in section 4601.

 Subtitle B--Host Country In-Kind Contributions

SEC. 2511. REPUBLIC OF KOREA FUNDED CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS.

 Pursuant to agreement with the Republic of Korea for required in-
kind contributions, the Secretary of Defense may accept military 
construction projects for the installations or locations in the 
Republic of Korea, and in the amounts, set forth in the following 
table:

 Republic of Korea Funded Construction Projects
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Installation or
 Component Location Project Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Army................................. Camp Humphreys......... Quartermaster Laundry/ $24,000,000
 Dry Cleaner Facility..
Army................................. Camp Humphreys......... MILVAN CONNEX Storage $20,000,000
 Yard..................
Navy................................. Camp Mujuk............. Replace Ordnance $150,000,000
 Storage Magazines.....
Navy................................. Fleet Activities Water Treatment Plant $6,000,000
 Chinhae............... Relocation............
Air Force............................ Gimhae Air Base........ Refueling Vehicle Shop. $8,800,000
Air Force............................ Osan Air Base.......... Combined Air and Space $306,000,000
 Operations
 Intelligence Center...
Air Force............................ Osan Air Base.......... Upgrade Electrical $235,000,000
 Distribution West,
 Phase 3...............
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SEC. 2512. REPEAL OF AUTHORIZED APPROACH TO CERTAIN CONSTRUCTION 
 PROJECT.

 Section 2511 of the Military Construction Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2022 (division B of Public Law 117-81; 135 Stat. 2177) is 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``(a) Authority to Accept Projects.--''; 
 and
 (2) by striking subsection (b).

 TITLE XXVI--GUARD AND RESERVE FORCES FACILITIES

SEC. 2601. AUTHORIZED ARMY NATIONAL GUARD CONSTRUCTION AND LAND 
 ACQUISITION PROJECTS.

 Using amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of 
appropriations in section 2605 and available for the National Guard and 
Reserve as specified in the funding table in section 4601, the 
Secretary of the Army may acquire real property and carry out military 
construction projects for the Army National Guard installations or 
locations inside the United States, and in the amounts, set forth in 
the following table:

 Army National Guard
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 State Installation or Location Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Delaware.................................... New Castle....................................... $16,000,000
Florida..................................... Palm Coast....................................... $12,000,000
 Camp Blanding.................................... $24,700,000
Hawaii...................................... Kapolei.......................................... $29,000,000
Iowa........................................ West Des Moines................................. $15,000,000
Indiana..................................... Atlanta.......................................... $20,000,000
Michigan.................................... Camp Grayling.................................... $16,000,000
Minnesota................................... New Ulm.......................................... $17,000,000
North Carolina.............................. McLeansville..................................... $15,000,000
Nevada...................................... Reno............................................. $18,000,000
New York.................................... Troy............................................. $17,000,000
Vermont..................................... Bennington....................................... $14,800,000
West Virginia............................... Buckhannon....................................... $14,000,000
Wyoming..................................... Sheridan......................................... $14,800,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SEC. 2602. AUTHORIZED ARMY RESERVE CONSTRUCTION AND LAND ACQUISITION 
 PROJECTS.

 Using amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of 
appropriations in section 2606 and available for the National Guard and 
Reserve as specified in the funding table in section 4601, the 
Secretary of the Army may acquire real property and carry out military 
construction projects for the Army Reserve installations or locations 
inside the United States, and in the amounts, set forth in the 
following table:

 Army Reserve
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 State Installation or Location Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Florida....................................... Perrine........................................ $46,000,000
Puerto Rico................................... Fort Buchanan.................................. $24,000,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SEC. 2603. AUTHORIZED AIR NATIONAL GUARD CONSTRUCTION AND LAND 
 ACQUISITION PROJECTS.

 Using amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of 
appropriations in section 2606 and available for the National Guard and 
Reserve as specified in the funding table in section 4601, the 
Secretary of the Air Force may acquire real property and carry out 
military construction projects for the Air National Guard installations 
or locations inside the United States, and in the amounts, set forth in 
the following table:

 Air National Guard
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 State Installation or Location Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alabama....................................... Birmingham International Airport............... $7,500,000
Arizona....................................... Morris Air National Guard Base................. $12,000,000
 Tucson International Airport................... $10,000,000
Florida....................................... Jacksonville International Airport............. $22,200,000
Indiana....................................... Fort Wayne International Airport............... $12,800,000
Tennessee..................................... Mcghee-Tyson Airport........................... $23,800,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SEC. 2604. AUTHORIZED AIR FORCE RESERVE CONSTRUCTION AND LAND 
 ACQUISITION PROJECTS.

 Using amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of 
appropriations in section 2606 and available for the National Guard and 
Reserve as specified in the funding table in section 4601, the 
Secretary of the Air Force may acquire real property and carry out 
military construction projects for the installations inside the United 
States, and in the amounts, set forth in the following table:

 Air Force Reserve
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 State Installation Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
California.................................... Beale Air Force Base........................... $33,000,000
Virginia...................................... Joint Base Langley-Eustis...................... $10,500,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SEC. 2605. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS, NATIONAL GUARD AND RESERVE.

 Funds are hereby authorized to be appropriated for fiscal years 
beginning after September 30, 2022, for the costs of acquisition, 
architectural and engineering services, and construction of facilities 
for the Guard and Reserve Forces, and for contributions therefor, under 
chapter 1803 of title 10, United States Code (including the cost of 
acquisition of land for those facilities), as specified in the funding 
table in section 4601.

SEC. 2606. CORRECTIONS TO AUTHORITY TO CARRY OUT CERTAIN FISCAL YEAR 
 2022 PROJECTS.

 The authorization table in section 2601 of the Military 
Construction Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (division B of 
Public Law 117-81; 135 Stat. 2178) is amended--
 (1) in the item relating to Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, by 
 striking ``Redstone Arsenal'' and inserting ``Huntsville'';
 (2) in the item relating to Jerome National Guard Armory, 
 Idaho, by striking ``Jerome National Guard Armory'' and 
 inserting ``Jerome'';
 (3) in the item relating to Nickell Memorial Armory Topeka, 
 Kansas, by striking ``Nickell Memorial Armory Topeka'' and 
 inserting ``Topeka'';
 (4) in the item relating to Lake Charles National Guard 
 Readiness Center, Louisiana, by striking ``Lake Charles 
 National Guard Readiness Center'' and inserting ``Lake 
 Charles'';
 (5) in the item relating to Camp Grayling, Michigan, by 
 striking ``Camp Grayling'' and inserting ``Grayling'';
 (6) in the item relating to Butte Military Entrance Testing 
 Site, Montana, by striking ``Butte Military Entrance Testing 
 Site'' and inserting ``Butte'';
 (7) in the item relating to Mead Army National Guard 
 Readiness Center, Nebraska, by striking ``Mead Army National 
 Guard Readiness Center'' and inserting ``Mead Training Site'';
 (8) in the item relating to Dickinson National Guard 
 Armory, North Dakota, by striking ``Dickinson National Guard 
 Armory'' and inserting ``Dickinson'';
 (9) in the item relating to Bennington National Guard 
 Armory, Vermont, by striking ``Bennington National Guard 
 Armory'' and inserting ``Bennington''; and
 (10) in the item relating to Camp Ethan Allen Training 
 Site, Vermont, by striking ``Camp Ethan Allen Training Site'' 
 and inserting ``Ethan Allen Air Force Base TS''.

SEC. 2607. EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY TO CARRY OUT CERTAIN FISCAL YEAR 2018 
 PROJECTS.

 (a) Extension.--Notwithstanding section 2002 of the Military 
Construction Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 (division B of 
Public Law 115-91; 131 Stat. 1817), the authorizations set forth in the 
table in subsection (b), as provided in section 2604 of that Act (131 
Stat. 1836), shall remain in effect until October 1, 2023, or the date 
of the enactment of an Act authorizing funds for military construction 
for fiscal year 2024, whichever is later.
 (b) Table.--The table referred to in subsection (a) is as follows:

 Air Force: Extension of 2018 Project Authorizations
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Original
 State Installation or Location Project Authorized Amount
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Indiana............................... Hulman Regional Airport... Construct Small Arms $8,000,000
 Range...................
South Dakota.......................... Joe Foss Field............ Aircraft Maintenance $12,000,000
 Shops...................
Wisconsin............................. Dane County Regional/ Construct Small Arms $8,000,000
 Airport Truax Field...... Range...................
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 TITLE XXVII--BASE REALIGNMENT AND CLOSURE ACTIVITIES

SEC. 2701. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR BASE REALIGNMENT AND 
 CLOSURE ACTIVITIES FUNDED THROUGH DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 BASE CLOSURE ACCOUNT.

 Funds are hereby authorized to be appropriated for fiscal years 
beginning after September 30, 2022, for base realignment and closure 
activities, including real property acquisition and military 
construction projects, as authorized by the Defense Base Closure and 
Realignment Act of 1990 (part A of title XXIX of Public Law 101-510; 10 
U.S.C. 2687 note) and funded through the Department of Defense Base 
Closure Account established by section 2906 of such Act (as amended by 
section 2711 of the Military Construction Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2013 (division B of Public Law 112-239; 126 Stat. 2140)), as 
specified in the funding table in section 4601.

SEC. 2702. AUTHORIZATION TO FUND CERTAIN DEMOLITION AND REMOVAL 
 ACTIVITIES THROUGH DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BASE CLOSURE 
 ACCOUNT.

 (a) In General.--Section 2906(c)(1) of the Defense Base Closure and 
Realignment Act of 1990 (10 U.S.C. 2687 note) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(E) To carry out the demolition or removal of any 
 building or structure under the control of the 
 Secretary of the Navy that is not designated as 
 historic under a Federal, State, or local law and is 
 located on a military installation closed or realigned 
 under a base closure law (as such term is defined in 
 section 101 of title 10, United States Code) at which 
 the sampling or remediation of radiologically 
 contaminated materials has been the subject of 
 substantiated allegations of fraud, without regard to--
 ``(i) whether the building or structure is 
 radiologically impacted; or
 ``(ii) whether such demolition or removal 
 is carried out, as part of a response action or 
 otherwise, under the Defense Environmental 
 Restoration Program specified in subparagraph 
 (A) or CERCLA (as such term is defined in 
 section 2700 of title 10, United States 
 Code).''.
 (b) Funding.--The amendment made by this section may only be 
carried out using funds authorized to be appropriated in the table in 
section 4601.

 TITLE XXVIII--MILITARY CONSTRUCTION GENERAL PROVISIONS

 Subtitle A--Military Construction Program Changes

SEC. 2801. MODIFICATION OF ANNUAL LOCALITY ADJUSTMENT OF DOLLAR 
 THRESHOLDS APPLICABLE TO UNSPECIFIED MINOR MILITARY 
 CONSTRUCTION AUTHORITIES.

 Section 2805(f)(2) of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by striking ``or the Commonwealth'' and inserting 
 ``Wake Island, the Commonwealth''; and
 (2) by inserting ``, or a former United States Trust 
 Territory now in a Compact of Free Association with the United 
 States'' after ``Mariana Islands''.

SEC. 2802. MILITARY CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS FOR INNOVATION, RESEARCH, 
 DEVELOPMENT, TEST, AND EVALUATION.

 (a) In General.--Subchapter I of chapter 169 of title 10, United 
States Code, is amended by inserting after section 2809 the following 
new section:
``Sec. 2810. Military construction projects for innovation, research, 
 development, test, and evaluation
 ``(a) Project Authorization Required.--The Secretary of Defense may 
carry out such military construction projects for innovation, research, 
development, test, and evaluation as are authorized by law, using funds 
appropriated or otherwise made available for that purpose.
 ``(b) Submission of Project Proposals.--As part of the Department 
of Defense Form 1391 submitted to the appropriate committees of 
Congress for a military construction project covered by subsection (a), 
the Secretary of Defense shall include the following information:
 ``(1) The project title.
 ``(2) The location of the project.
 ``(3) A brief description of the scope of work.
 ``(4) The original project cost estimate and the current 
 working cost estimate, if different.
 ``(5) Such other information as the Secretary considers 
 appropriate.
 ``(c) Application to Military Construction Projects.--This section 
shall apply to military construction projects covered by subsection (a) 
for which a Department of Defense Form 1391 is submitted to the 
appropriate committees of Congress in connection with the budget of the 
Department of Defense for fiscal year 2023 and thereafter.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
such subchapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to 
section 2809 the following new item:

``2810. Military construction projects for innovation, research, 
 development, test, and evaluation.''.

SEC. 2803. FURTHER CLARIFICATION OF REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO AUTHORIZED 
 COST AND SCOPE OF WORK VARIATIONS.

 (a) Clarifications and Technical Corrections Relating to Exceptions 
to Cost Variation and Scope of Work.--Subsection (c)(1) of section 2853 
of title 10, United States Code, as amended by section 2802 of the 
Military Construction Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (division 
B of Public Law 117-81), is further amended--
 (1) by striking subparagraph (A) and inserting the 
 following new subparagraph (A):
 ``(A) The Secretary concerned may waive the percentage or dollar 
cost limitation applicable to a military construction project or a 
military family housing project under subsection (a) and approve an 
increase in the cost authorized for the project in excess of that 
limitation only if--
 ``(i) the total cost of the project is less than 
 $500,000,000;
 ``(ii) the cost increase is an amount equal to or less than 
 50 percent of the original authorized amount; and
 ``(iii) the Secretary notifies the appropriate committees 
 of Congress of such waiver and approval in the manner provided 
 in this paragraph.''; and
 (2) by striking subparagraph (D) and redesignating 
 subparagraph (E) as subparagraph (D).
 (b) Technical Correction Related to Exceptions to Limitation on 
Scope of Work Increases.--Subsection (d)(4) of such section, as so 
amended, is further amended by striking ``and approve an increase in 
the scope of work for the project that would increase the scope of 
work''.

SEC. 2804. USE OF OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE FUNDS FOR CERTAIN 
 CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS OUTSIDE THE UNITED STATES.

 (a) Permanent Authority.--Subsection (a) of section 2808 of the 
Military Construction Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2004 (division 
B of Public Law 108-136; 117 Stat. 1723), as amended, including most 
recently by section 2806 of the Military Construction Authorization Act 
for Fiscal Year 2022 (division B of Public Law 117-81), is amended--
 (1) by striking ``, inside the area of responsibility of 
 the United States Central Command or certain countries in the 
 area of responsibility of the United States Africa Command,'';
 (2) by inserting ``outside the United States'' after 
 ``construction project''; and
 (3) in paragraph (2), by striking ``, unless the military 
 installation is located in Afghanistan, for which projects 
 using this authority may be carried out at installations deemed 
 as supporting a long-term presence''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--Such section is further amended--
 (1) in subsection (b), by striking ``subsection (f)'' and 
 inserting ``subsection (d)'';
 (2) by striking subsection (e);
 (3) by redesignating subsections (f) and (g) as subsections 
 (d) and (e), respectively;
 (4) in subsection (e), as so redesignated, by striking 
 ``subsection (f)'' and inserting ``subsection (d)''; and
 (5) by striking subsections (h) and (i).
 (c) Clerical Amendments.--Such section is further amended as 
follows:
 (1) The section heading for such section is amended--
 (A) by striking ``temporary, limited''; and
 (B) by inserting ``certain'' before ``construction 
 projects''.
 (2) The subsection heading for subsection (a) of such 
 section is amended by striking ``Temporary Authority'' and 
 inserting ``In General''.
 (d) Classification.--The Law Revision Counsel is directed to 
classify section 2808 of the Military Construction Authorization Act 
for Fiscal Year 2004 (division B of Public Law 108-136; 117 Stat. 
1723), as amended by subsection (a), as a note following section 2804 
of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 2805. INCREASE IN MAXIMUM APPROVED COST OF UNSPECIFIED MINOR 
 MILITARY CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS.

 Section 2805(a)(2) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
striking ``$6,000,000'' and inserting ``$12,000,000''.

SEC. 2806. INCREASE IN UNSPECIFIED MINOR MILITARY CONSTRUCTION 
 AUTHORITY FOR LABORATORY REVITALIZATION PROJECTS.

 (a) Laboratory Revitalization.--Subsection (d) of section 2805 of 
title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``$6,000,000'' both 
 places it appears and inserting ``$12,000,000'';
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking ``$6,000,000'' and 
 inserting ``$12,000,000, incrementally across multiple fiscal 
 years''; and
 (3) by striking paragraph (5).
 (b) Adjustment of Dollar Limitations for Location.--Subsection (f) 
of such section is amended--
 (1) by striking ``$10,000,000'' and inserting 
 ``$12,000,000''; and
 (2) by striking subparagraph (3).

SEC. 2807. PERMANENT APPLICATION OF DOLLAR LIMITS FOR LOCATION AND 
 APPLICATION TO PROJECTS OUTSIDE THE UNITED STATES.

 Section 2805 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
striking subsection (f) and inserting the following new subsection (f):
 ``(f) Adjustment of Dollar Limits for Location.--Each fiscal year, 
the Secretary concerned shall adjust the dollar limitations specified 
in this section applicable to an unspecified minor military 
construction project to reflect the area construction cost index for 
military construction projects published by the Department of Defense 
during the prior fiscal year for the location of the project, except 
that no limitation specified in this section may exceed $16,000,000 as 
the result of any adjustment made under this paragraph.''.

SEC. 2808. PROHIBITION ON AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS FOR SPECIAL OPERATIONS 
 FORCES MILITARY CONSTRUCTION.

 (a) Prohibition.--None of the funds authorized to be appropriated 
by this Act or otherwise made available for fiscal year 2023 for the 
Department of Defense may be obligated or expended for the Commander of 
Special Operations Command for military construction in Baumholder, 
Germany.
 (b) Waiver.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense may waive the 
 prohibition under subsection (a) if the Secretary--
 (A) determines that such a waiver is in the 
 national security interests of the United States; and
 (B) not later than 14 days after issuing the 
 waiver, submits to the congressional defense committees 
 a detailed justification for the waiver in accordance 
 with paragraph (2).
 (2) Elements.--A justification under paragraph (1)(B) shall 
 include each of the following:
 (A) The determination of the Secretary that none of 
 the following countries would provide preferable host 
 nation funding for an equivalent project in such 
 country:
 (i) Romania.
 (ii) Poland.
 (iii) Latvia.
 (iv) Estonia.
 (v) Lithuania.
 (B) The determination of the Secretary that hosting 
 such forces in Germany would provide greater deterrence 
 or greater operational utility than host nation support 
 in Romania, Poland, Latvia, Estonia or Lithuania.
 (C) An explanation for how the waiver is in the 
 national security interests of the United States.
 (D) Any other information the Secretary determines 
 appropriate.

SEC. 2809. REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO CERTAIN MILITARY CONSTRUCTION 
 PROJECTS.

 (a) Supervision of Military Construction Projects.--
 (1) In general.--Section 2851 of title 10, United States 
 Code, is amended--
 (A) in subsection (c)(1), by inserting ``or 
 appropriated'' after ``funds authorized'' each place 
 such term appears;
 (B) in subsection (c)(2)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by inserting ``, 
 deadline for bid submissions,'' after 
 ``solicitation date'';
 (ii) in subparagraph (B), by inserting 
 ``(including the address of such recipient)'' 
 after ``contract recipient''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following 
 new subparagraphs:
 ``(H) Any subcontracting plan required under paragraph (4) 
 or (5) of section 8(d) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 
 637(d)) for the project submitted by the contract recipient to 
 the Secretary of Defense.
 ``(I) A detailed written statement describing and 
 justifying any exception applied or waiver granted under--
 ``(i) chapter 83 of title 41;
 ``(ii) section 4862 of this title; or
 ``(iii) section 4863 of this title.''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(4) The information required to be published on the Internet 
website under subsection (c) shall constitute a record for the purposes 
of chapters 21, 29, 31, and 33 of title 44.''.
 (2) Federal procurement data system.--The Secretary of 
 Defense shall ensure that there is a clear and unique 
 indication of any covered contract with subcontracting work of 
 an estimated value of $250,000 or more in the Federal 
 Procurement Data System established pursuant to section 
 1122(a)(4) of title 41, United States Code (or any successor 
 system).
 (b) Increased Transparency and Public Availability of Information 
Regarding Solicitation and Award of Subcontracts Under Military 
Construction Contracts.--
 (1) Availability of certain information relating to 
 military construction subcontracts.--Section 2851 of title 10, 
 United States Code, is amended--
 (A) by redesignating subsection (d) as subsection 
 (g);
 (B) by inserting after subsection (c) (as amended 
 by this section) the following new subsections:
 ``(d) Information and Notice Requirements Regarding Solicitation 
and Award of Subcontracts.--
 ``(1) The recipient of a contract for a construction 
 project described in subsection (c)(1) to be carried out in a 
 State shall make publicly available on a website of the General 
 Services Administration or the Small Business Administration, 
 as applicable, any solicitation made by the contract recipient 
 under the contract for a subcontract with an estimated value of 
 $250,000 or more.
 ``(2) The Secretary of Defense shall--
 ``(A) maintain on the Internet site required by 
 subsection (c)(1) information regarding the 
 solicitation date and award date (or anticipated date) 
 for each subcontract described in paragraph (1); and
 ``(B) submit written notice of the award of the 
 original contract for a project described in subsection 
 (c)(1) to be carried out in a State, and each 
 subcontract described in paragraph (1) under the 
 contract, to each State agency that enforces workers' 
 compensation or minimum wage laws in the State in which 
 the contract or subcontract will be carried out.
 ``(e) Congressional Notification.--In the case of the award of a 
contract for a project described in subsection (c)(1) to be carried out 
in a State, and any subcontract described in subsection (d)(1) under 
the contract, where such award has an estimated value of $2,000,000 or 
more, the Secretary of Defense shall submit written notice of such 
award within 30 days after the award to each Senator of the State in 
which the contract or subcontract will be carried out and the Member of 
the House of Representatives representing the congressional district in 
which the contract or subcontract will be carried out.
 ``(f) Exclusion of Classified Projects.--Subsections (c), (d), and 
(e) do not apply to a classified construction project otherwise 
described in subsection (c)(1).''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(h) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `Member of the House of Representatives' 
 includes a Delegate to the House of Representatives and the 
 Resident Commissioner from Puerto Rico.
 ``(2) The term `State' means any of the several States, the 
 District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, 
 American Samoa, the United States Virgin Islands, and the 
 Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.''.
 (2) Applicability.--Subsections (d) and (e) of section 2851 
 of title 10, United States Code, as added by subsection 
 (ba)(2), shall apply with respect to a contract for a 
 construction project described in subsection (c)(1) of such 
 section that--
 (A) is entered into on or after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act; or
 (B) was entered into before the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, if the first solicitation made 
 by the contract recipient under the contract for a 
 subcontract with an estimated value of $250,000 or more 
 is made on or after the date of the enactment of this 
 Act.
 (c) Requirements Relating to the Award of Covered Military 
Construction Contracts.--Subchapter III of chapter 169 of title 10, 
United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 2851a the 
following new section:
``Sec. 2851b. Requirements relating to the award of covered military 
 construction contracts
 ``(a) Publication of Certain Information Relating to Covered 
Military Construction Contracts.--A contractor that has been awarded a 
covered military construction contract shall--
 ``(1) make publicly available on a website of the General 
 Services Administration or the Small Business Administration, 
 as applicable, any solicitation under that covered military 
 construction contract for a subcontract of an estimated value 
 of $250,000 or more; and
 ``(2) submit written notification of the award of the 
 covered military construction contract, and of any subcontract 
 awarded under the covered military construction contract, to 
 the relevant agency of a covered State that enforces workers' 
 compensation or minimum wage laws in such covered State.
 ``(b) Notice.--Upon award of a covered military construction 
contract with an estimated value greater than or equal to $2,000,000, 
the Secretary concerned shall notify any applicable Member of Congress 
representing the covered State in which that covered military 
construction contract is to be performed of such award in a timely 
manner.''.

SEC. 2809A. SUPERVISION OF LARGE MILITARY CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS.

 (a) Supervision of Large Military Construction Projects.--Section 
2851 of title 10, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (h) (as added by section 
 2809 of this Act) as subsection (i);
 (2) by redesignating subsection (g) (as designated by 
 section 2809 of this Act) as subsection (h);
 (3) by inserting after subsection (f) section 2809 of this 
 Act (as added by the following new subsection:
 ``(g) Report on Supervision of Large Military Construction 
Projects.--Before the award of a contract of a value greater than 
$500,000,000 in connection with a military construction project, the 
individual directing and supervising such military construction project 
under subsection (a) or the individual designated pursuant to 
subsection (b) (as applicable) shall submit to the appropriate 
committees of Congress a report on the intended supervision, 
inspection, and overhead plan to manage such military construction 
project. Each report shall include the following:
 ``(1) A determination of the overall funding intended to 
 manage the supervision, inspection, and overhead of the 
 military construction project.
 ``(2) An assessment of whether a Department of Defense 
 Field Activity that shall directly report to such individual 
 should be established.
 ``(3) A description of the quality assurance approach to 
 the military construction project.
 ``(4) The independent cost estimate described in section 
 3221(b)(6)(A) of this title.
 ``(5) The overall staffing approach to oversee the military 
 construction project for each year of the contract term.''.
 (b) Coforming Amendment to Duties of the Director of Cost 
Assessment and Program Evaluation.--Section 3221(b)(6)(A) of title 10, 
United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in clause (iii), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(v) any decision to enter into a contract 
 in connection with a military construction 
 project of a value greater than $500,000,000; 
 and''.

SEC. 2809B. LOCAL HIRE REQUIREMENTS FOR MILITARY CONSTRUCTION 
 CONTRACTS.

 (a) Local Hire Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--To the extent practicable, in awarding a 
 covered contract, the Secretary concerned (as defined in 
 section 101 of title 10, United States Code) shall give a 
 preference to a person who certifies that at least 51 percent 
 of the total number of employees hired to perform the covered 
 contract (including any employees hired by a subcontractor (at 
 any tier) for such covered contract) shall reside in the same 
 State as, or within a 60-mile radius of, the location of the 
 work to be performed pursuant to the covered contract.
 (2) Justification required.--The Secretary concerned shall 
 prepare a written justification, and make such justification 
 available on the Internet site required under section 2851(c) 
 of title 10, United States Code, for the award of any covered 
 contract to a person that is not described under paragraph (1).
 (b) Licensing.--A contractor and any subcontractors (at any tier) 
performing a covered contract shall be licensed to perform the work 
under such covered contract in the State in which the work will be 
performed.
 (c) Covered Contract Defined.--In this section, the term ``covered 
contract'' means a contract for a military construction project, 
military family housing project, or other project described in section 
2851(c)(1) of title 10, United States Code.

 Subtitle B--Continuation of Military Housing Reforms

SEC. 2811. STANDARDIZATION OF MILITARY INSTALLATION HOUSING 
 REQUIREMENTS AND MARKET ANALYSES.

 (a) In General.--Subchapter II of chapter 169 of title 10, United 
States Code, is amended by inserting after section 2836 the following 
new section:
``Sec. 2837. Housing Requirements and Market Analysis
 ``(a) In General.--Not less frequently than once every five years, 
and in accordance with the requirements of this section, the Secretary 
concerned shall conduct a Housing Requirements and Market Analysis (in 
this section referred to as an `HRMA') for each military installation 
under the jurisdiction of the Secretary that is located in the United 
States.
 ``(b) Prioritization of Installations.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 Secretary concerned shall prioritize the conduct of HRMAs for 
 installations--
 ``(A) for which an HRMA has not been conducted for 
 five years or longer; or
 ``(B) in locations with housing shortages.
 ``(2) Existing 5-year requirement.--Paragraph (1) shall not 
 apply to a military department that required an HRMA to be 
 conducted for each installation not less frequently than once 
 every five years before the date of the enactment of this 
 section.
 ``(c) Submittal to Congress.--The Secretary of Defense shall 
include with the budget for the Department of Defense for fiscal year 
2024 and each subsequent fiscal year, as submitted to Congress pursuant 
to section 1105 of title 31, United States Code, a list of the military 
installations for which the Secretary concerned plans to conduct an 
HRMA during such fiscal year.
 ``(d) Housing Requirements and Market Analysis.--The term `Housing 
Requirements and Market Analysis'or `HRMA' means, with respect to a 
military installation, a structured analytical process under which an 
assessment is made of both the suitability and availability of the 
private sector rental housing market using assumed specific standards 
related to affordability, location, features, physical condition, and 
the housing requirements of the total military population of the 
installation.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 
2836 the following new item:

``2837. Housing Requirements and Market Analysis.''.
 (c) Time Frame.--
 (1) In general.--During each of fiscal years 2023 through 
 2027, the Secretary concerned shall conduct an HRMA for 20 
 percent of the military installations under the jurisdiction of 
 the Secretary located in the United States.
 (2) Submittal of information to congress.--Not later than 
 January 15, 2023, the Secretary concerned shall submit to the 
 congressional defense committees a list of military 
 installations for which the Secretary plans to conduct an HRMA 
 during fiscal year 2023.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``HRMA'' means, with respect to a military 
 installation, a structured analytical process under which an 
 assessment is made of both the suitability and availability of 
 the private sector rental housing market using assumed specific 
 standards related to affordability, location, features, 
 physical condition, and the housing requirements of the total 
 military population of the installation.
 (2) The term ``Secretary concerned'' has the meaning given 
 that term in section 101(a)(9) of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 2812. NOTICE REQUIREMENT FOR MHPI GROUND LEASE EXTENSIONS.

 Section 2878 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding 
at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(f) Notice of Lease Extensions.--Not later than 90 days before 
extending the term of any ground lease of property or facilities under 
this section, the Secretary concerned shall provide to the 
congressional defense committees notice in writing of the extension and 
a briefing. Such notice and briefing shall include each of the 
following:
 ``(1) A description of any material differences between the 
 extended ground lease and the original ground lease, including 
 with respect to--
 ``(A) the length of the term of the lease, as 
 extended; and
 ``(B) any new provisions that materially affect the 
 rights and responsibilities of the ground lessor or the 
 ground lessee under the original ground lease.
 ``(2) The number of housing units or facilities subject to 
 the ground lease that, during the lease extension, are to be--
 ``(A) constructed;
 ``(B) demolished; or
 ``(C) renovated.
 ``(3) The source of any additional financing the lessor has 
 obtained, or intends to obtain, during the term of the ground 
 lease extension that will be used for the development of the 
 property or facilities subject to the ground lease.
 ``(4) The following information, displayed annually, for 
 the five-year period preceding the date of the notice and 
 briefing:
 ``(A) The debt-to-net operating income ratio for 
 the property or facility subject to the ground lease.
 ``(B) The occupancy rates for the housing units 
 subject to the ground lease.
 ``(C) An report on maintenance response times and 
 completion of maintenance requests for the housing 
 units subject to the ground lease.
 ``(D) The occupancy rates and debt-to-net operating 
 income ratios of any other military privatized housing 
 initiative projects managed by a company that controls, 
 or that is under common control with, the ground lessee 
 entering into the lease extension.''.

SEC. 2813. ANNUAL BRIEFINGS ON MILITARY HOUSING PRIVATIZATION PROJECTS.

 Section 2884 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding 
at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(d) Annual Briefings.--Not later than February 1 of each year, 
the Secretary concerned shall provide to the Committees on Armed 
Services of the Senate and House of Representatives a briefing on 
military housing privatization projects under the jurisdiction of the 
Secretary. Such briefing shall include, for the 12-month period 
preceding the date of the briefing, each of the following:
 ``(1) The information described in paragraphs (1) through 
 (14) of subsection (c) with respect to all military housing 
 privatization projects under the jurisdiction of the Secretary.
 ``(2) A review of any such project that is expected to 
 require the restructuring of a loan, including any public or 
 private loan.
 ``(3) For any such project expected to require 
 restructuring, a timeline for when such restructuring is 
 expected to occur.
 ``(4) Such other information as the Secretary determines 
 appropriate.''.

SEC. 2814. PRIVATIZATION OF NAVY AND AIR FORCE TRANSIENT HOUSING.

 (a) Privatization Required.--Beginning on the date that is 11 years 
after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary concerned 
shall begin the process of privatizing all transient housing in the 
United States under the jurisdiction of the Secretary concerned through 
the conveyance of the transient housing to one or more eligible 
entities. Such process shall be completed by not later than the date 
that is 15 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Applicable Privatization Laws.--The Secretary concerned shall 
carry out this section using the authority provided by section 2872 of 
title 10, United States Code, consistent with subchapters IV and V of 
chapter 169 of such title.
 (c) Limitations.--No Government direct loans, Government 
guarantees, or Government equity may be extended in consideration of 
any privatization carried out pursuant to subsection (a).
 (d) Consultations.--In establishing a plan to carry out the 
privatization of transient housing pursuant to subsection (a), the 
Secretary concerned shall--
 (1) consult with the Secretary of the Army; and
 (2) to the greatest extent possible, incorporate into such 
 plan the best practices and efficiencies of the Secretary of 
 the Army in carrying out the privatization of transient housing 
 under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of the Army.
 (d) Report Required.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter until the privatization 
required under subsection (a) is complete, the Secretary concerned 
shall submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and 
House of Representatives a report that includes--
 (1) detailed plans for the privatization of all transient 
 housing under the jurisdiction of the Secretary; and
 (2) timelines for conveyances and other critical 
 milestones.
 (e) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to affect any transient housing or lodging program 
administered by the Coast Guard.
 (f) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``eligible entity'' has the meaning given that 
 term in section 2871 of title 10, United States Code.
 (2) The term ``transient housing'' means lodging intended 
 to be occupied by members of the Armed Forces on temporary 
 duty.
 (3) The term ``Secretary concerned'' means--
 (A) the Secretary of the Navy, with respect to 
 transient housing under the jurisdiction of the 
 Secretary of the Navy; and
 (B) the Secretary of the Air Force, with respect to 
 transient housing under the jurisdiction of the 
 Secretary of the Air Force.

SEC. 2815. MILITARY HOUSING FEEDBACK TOOL.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense shall provide for a 
feedback tool, such as a rating system or similar mechanism, under 
which members of the Armed Forces and their spouses may anonymously 
identify, rate, and compare housing under the jurisdiction of the 
Department of Defense (including privatized military housing).
 (b) Components.--The tool required under subsection (a) shall 
include the following components:
 (1) The capability for users to--
 (A) rate housing using multiple quality measures, 
 including safety, the timeliness and quality of 
 maintenance services, and the responsiveness of 
 management;
 (B) upload visual media, including images;
 (C) include written comments; and
 (D) submit an alert for potential major health 
 risks, such as the potential presence of lead paint, 
 asbestos, mold, hazardous materials contaminated or 
 unsafe drinking water, or serious safety issues, such 
 as potential problems with fire or carbon monoxide 
 detection equipment.
 (2) A comparison feature that can be used to compare 
 ratings for different housing communities.
 (3) Accessibility by members of the Armed Forces, their 
 family members, and members of Congress.
 (4) An educational feature to help users better identify 
 potential environmental and safety hazards like lead paint, 
 asbestos, mold and unsafe water, and potentially non-functional 
 fire or carbon monoxide detection equipment for the purposes of 
 protecting residents and submitting alerts described in 
 paragraph (1)(D) for potential problems that may need urgent 
 professional attention.
 (c) Reporting Requirement.--The Secretary of Defense shall submit 
to the appropriate congressional committees, and make available to the 
Secretary concerned, an annual report that includes a summary of the 
data collected using the feedback tool required under this section 
during the year covered by the report.
 (d) Appropriate Congressional Committees.--In this section, the 
term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate.

SEC. 2816. SCREENING AND REGISTRY OF INDIVIDUALS WITH HEALTH CONDITIONS 
 RESULTING FROM UNSAFE HOUSING UNITS.

 (a) In General.--Subchapter V of chapter 169 of title 10, United 
States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section:
``Sec. 2895. Screening and registry of individuals with health 
 conditions resulting from unsafe housing units
 ``(a) Screening.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense, in 
 consultation with appropriate scientific agencies as determined 
 by the Secretary, shall ensure that all military medical 
 treatment facilities screen eligible individuals for covered 
 conditions.
 ``(2) Establishment of procedures.--The Secretary may 
 establish procedures through which screening under paragraph 
 (1) may allow an eligible individual to be included in the 
 registry under subsection (b).
 ``(b) Registry.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense shall establish 
 and maintain a registry of eligible individuals who have a 
 covered condition.
 ``(2) Inclusion of information.--The Secretary shall 
 include any information in the registry under paragraph (1) 
 that the Secretary determines necessary to ascertain and 
 monitor the health of eligible individuals and the connection 
 between the health of such individuals and an unsafe housing 
 unit.
 ``(3) Public information campaign.--The Secretary shall 
 develop a public information campaign to inform eligible 
 individuals about the registry under paragraph (1), including 
 how to register and the benefits of registering.
 ``(c) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `covered condition' means a medical 
 condition that is determined by the Secretary of Defense to 
 have resulted from residing in an unsafe housing unit.
 ``(2) The term `eligible individual' means a member of the 
 armed forces or a family member of a member of the armed forces 
 who has resided in an unsafe housing unit.
 ``(3) The term `unsafe housing unit' means a dwelling unit 
 that--
 ``(A) does not meet the housing quality standards 
 established under section 8(o)(8)(B) of the United 
 States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f(o)(8)(B)); 
 or
 ``(B) is not free from dangerous air pollution 
 levels from mold.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
such subchapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to 
section 2894a the following new item:

``2895. Screening and registry of individuals with health conditions 
 resulting from unsafe housing units.''.

SEC. 2817. MANDATORY DISCLOSURE OF PRESENCE OF MOLD AND HEALTH EFFECTS 
 OF MYCOTOXINS BEFORE A LEASE IS SIGNED FOR PRIVATIZED 
 MILITARY HOUSING.

 (a) In General.--Subchapter V of chapter 169 of title 10, United 
States Code, is amended by inserting after section 2890 the following 
new section:
``Sec. 2890a. Disclosure of presence of mold and health effects of 
 mycotoxins
 ``The Secretary of Defense shall require that each landlord, before 
signing a lease with a prospective tenant for a housing unit, disclose 
to such prospective tenant--
 ``(1) whether there is any mold present in the housing unit 
 at levels that could cause harmful impacts on human health; and
 ``(2) information regarding the health effects of 
 mycotoxins.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such subchapter 
is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 2890 the 
following new item:

``2890a. Disclosure of presence of mold and health effects of 
 mycotoxins.''.

SEC. 2818. MODIFICATION OF PROHIBITION ON OWNERSHIP OR TRADING OF 
 STOCKS IN CERTAIN COMPANIES BY CERTAIN OFFICIALS OF THE 
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE.

 Section 988(a) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
striking ``if that company is one of the 10 entities awarded the most 
amount of contract funds by the Department of Defense in a fiscal year 
during the five preceding fiscal years'' and inserting ``if, during the 
preceding calendar year, the company received more than $1,000,000,000 
in revenue from the Department of Defense, including through 1 or more 
contracts with the Department''.

 Subtitle C--Real Property and Facilities Administration

SEC. 2821. AUTHORIZED LAND AND FACILITIES TRANSFER TO SUPPORT CONTRACTS 
 WITH FEDERALLY FUNDED RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT CENTERS.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 159 of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended by inserting after section 2668a the following new section:
``Sec. 2669. Transfer of land and facilities to support contracts with 
 federally-funded research and development centers
 ``(a) Lease of Land, Facilities, and Improvements.--(1) The 
Secretary of a military department may lease, for no consideration, 
land, facilities, and improvements to a covered FFRDC if the lease is 
to further the purposes of a contract between the Department of Defense 
and the covered FFRDC.
 ``(2) A lease entered into under paragraph (1) shall terminate on 
the earlier of the following dates:
 ``(A) The date that is 50 years after the date on which the 
 Secretary enters into the lease.
 ``(B) The date of the termination or non-renewal of the 
 contract between the Department of Defense and the covered 
 FFRDC.
 ``(b) Conveyance of Facilities and Improvements.--(1) The Secretary 
of a military department may convey, for no consideration, ownership of 
facilities and improvements located on land leased to a covered FFRDC 
to further the purposes of a contract between the Department of Defense 
and the covered FFRDC.
 ``(2) The ownership of any facilities and improvements conveyed 
under this subsection shall revert to the United States upon the 
termination or non-renewal of the underlying land lease.
 ``(c) Covered FFRDC.--In this section, the term `covered FFRDC' 
means a federally-funded research and development center that is 
sponsored by, and has entered into a contract with, the Department of 
Defense.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 
2668a the following new item:

``2669. Transfer of land and facilities to support contracts with 
 federally-funded research and development 
 centers.''.

SEC. 2822. RESTORATION OR REPLACEMENT OF DAMAGED, DESTROYED, OR 
 ECONOMICALLY UNREPAIRABLE FACILITIES.

 (a) Inclusion of Appropriations Account in Congressional 
Notification Regarding Funding.--Subsection (b) of section 2854 of 
title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``military 
construction appropriations account that is the'' before ``source of 
funds''.
 (b) Economically Unrepairable Facilities.--Subsection (c)(1) of 
such section is amended--
 (1) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by inserting 
 ``or is economically unrepairable'' after ``damaged or 
 destroyed'';
 (2) in subparagraph (A), by inserting ``, or the situation 
 that rendered the facility economically unrepairable,'' after 
 ``facility''; and
 (3) in subparagraph (B)(iii), by striking ``damage to a 
 facility rather than destruction'' and inserting ``a facility 
 that has been damaged or rendered economically unrepairable 
 rather than destroyed''.

SEC. 2823. DEFENSE ACCESS ROAD PROGRAM ENHANCEMENTS TO ADDRESS 
 TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE IN VICINITY OF MILITARY 
 INSTALLATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 2816 of the National Defense Authorization 
Act for Fiscal Year 2012 (Public Law 112-81) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``this Act'' and 
 inserting ``the National Defense Authorization Act for 
 Fiscal Year 2023''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``this Act'' and 
 inserting ``the National Defense Authorization Act for 
 Fiscal Year 2023''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsections:
 ``(d) Petition for Certification of Roads as Defense Access 
Roads.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than October 1, 2023, the 
 Secretary of Defense shall establish a formal mechanism under 
 which--
 ``(A) a State, county, or municipality may petition 
 the Secretary to certify roads as defense access roads 
 under section 210 of title 23, United States Code; and
 ``(B) the Secretary shall respond, in writing, to 
 any such petition by not later than 90 days after 
 receiving the petition.
 ``(2) State defined.--In this subsection, the term `State' 
 means any of the several States, the District of Columbia, 
 American Samoa, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
 Islands, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the United States 
 Virgin Islands.
 ``(e) Public Availability of Information.--The Secretary of Defense 
shall maintain and update regularly on an appropriate website of the 
Federal Government, a list of all roads certified as important to the 
national defense by the Secretary or by such other official as the 
President may designate. Such website shall include, for each such 
road, each of the following:
 ``(1) The military installation (as such term is defined in 
 section 2687(g)(1) of title 10, United States Code) that is in 
 closest proximity to the road.
 ``(2) The date on which the road was so certified.
 ``(3) Any fiscal year for which the President transmitted 
 to Congress under section 1105 of title 31, United States Code, 
 a budget request that included an amount for such road.
 ``(4) Any fiscal year for which Congress appropriated an 
 amount for such road.
 ``(f) Treatment of Classified Information.--Nothing in subsection 
(d) or (e) shall be construed as a requirement for the Secretary of 
Defense to make publicly available any classified information.''.
 (b) Report on Defense Access Roads.--Section 2814(b) of the Duncan 
Hunter National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2009 (Public 
Law 110-417) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``April 1, 2009'' and inserting ``one year 
 after the date of the enactment of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023''; and
 (2) by inserting before the period at the end the 
 following: ``and name any road that the commander of a military 
 installation (as such term is defined in section 2687(g)(1) of 
 title 10, United States Code) or the Secretary of a military 
 department has recommended that the Secretary of Defense 
 certify as a defense access road during the period beginning on 
 April 1, 2009, and ending on the date of the enactment of the 
 National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023''.
 (c) Report on Designation of Certain Highways as Defense Access 
Roads.--
 (1) Report.--Not later than October 1, 2023, the Secretary 
 of the Air Force shall submit to the Committees on Armed 
 Services of the Senate and House of Representatives a report 
 containing the results of a study on the advisability of 
 designating each of the roads identified under paragraph (2) as 
 defense access roads for purposes of section 210 of title 23, 
 United States Code.
 (2) Roads identified.--The roads identified under this 
 subsection are each of the following:
 (A) For Beale Air Force Base, California:
 (i) Chuck Yeager Road.
 (ii) North Beale Road.
 (iii) Spenceville Road, also known as Camp 
 Beale Highway.
 (iv) South Beale Road.
 (B) For Travis Air Force Base, California:
 (i) Air Base Parkway.
 (ii) Canon Road.
 (iii) Gate Road, including North Gate Road.
 (iv) Petersen Road.
 (v) Vanden Road.

SEC. 2824. PHYSICAL ENTRANCES TO CERTAIN MILITARY INSTALLATIONS.

 The Secretary of Defense shall ensure that, to the extent 
practicable--
 (1) each military installation in the United States has a 
 designated main entrance that, at all times, is manned by at 
 least 1 member of the Armed Forces or civilian employee of the 
 Department of Defense;
 (2) the location of each such designated main entrance is 
 published on a publicly accessible Internet website of the 
 Department;
 (3) if a military installation in the United States has any 
 additional entrance designated for commercial deliveries to the 
 military installation, the location of such entrance (and any 
 applicable days or hours of operation for such entrance) is 
 published on the same Internet website specified in paragraph 
 (2); and
 (4) the information published on the Internet website 
 specified in paragraph (2) is reviewed and, as necessary, 
 updated on a basis that is not less frequent than annually.

SEC. 2825. IMPROVEMENTS RELATING TO ACCESS TO MILITARY INSTALLATIONS IN 
 UNITED STATES.

 (a) Additional Categories for Expedited Access.--Chapter 159 of 
title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the 
following new section (and conforming the table of sections at the 
beginning of such chapter accordingly):
``Sec. 2698. Access to military installations: standards for entry to 
 military installations in United States
 ``(a) Access to Military Installations in United States.--(1) The 
Secretary of Defense shall maintain access standards applicable to all 
military installations in the United States. Such standards shall 
require screening standards appropriate to the type of installation 
involved, the security level of the installation, the category of 
individuals authorized to visit the installation, and the level of 
access to be granted, including--
 ``(A) protocols and criteria to determine the fitness of 
 the individual to enter an installation;
 ``(B) standards and methods for verifying the identity of 
 the individual; and
 ``(C) other factors the Secretary determines appropriate.
 ``(2) In developing the standards under paragraph (1), the 
Secretary shall, with respect to military installations in the United 
States--
 ``(A) include procedures for recurring unescorted access to 
 facilitate future visits to the installation for individuals 
 who--
 ``(i) are non-Department of Defense personnel; and
 ``(ii) are determined to be eligible under such 
 standards; and
 ``(B) ensure that access for such individuals is based on 
 the use of credentials non-Department of Defense personnel 
 already posses, to the extent practical.
 ``(3) Upon publication in the Federal Register of final regulations 
to carry out paragraph (1), the Secretary shall publish the standards 
set forth therein on a publicly accessible Internet website of the 
Department of Defense.
 ``(4) In carrying out this subsection, the Secretary shall seek to 
procure and field existing identification screening technology 
(including technology to enable the Secretary to validate other 
Federally recognized access credentials) and develop additional 
technology only to the extent necessary to assist commanders of 
military installations in the United States in implementing the 
standards under paragraph (1) at points of entry for such 
installations.
 ``(b) Pre-arrival Registration and Screening Protocol for Access to 
Military Installations in United States.--The Secretary shall ensure 
that the standards under subsection (a) include a specific protocol for 
the voluntary pre-arrival registration and screening of individuals 
anticipating a need for access to a military installation in the United 
States to establish the fitness and purpose of such individual. Under 
such protocol--
 ``(1) such a screening shall occur not less than 24 hours, 
 and not more than 14 days prior, to the time of such access; 
 and
 ``(2) if an individual is determined fit to enter the 
 installation pursuant to the pre-arrival registration and 
 screening, access may only be granted upon arrival at the 
 military installation on the date of the established purpose, 
 following a verification of the identity of the individual.
 ``(c) Unescorted Access to Military Installations in United States 
for Certain Individuals.--The Secretary shall maintain guidance 
regarding the granting of unescorted access to military installations 
in the United States for covered individuals and ensure such guidance 
is circulated to the commanders of each such military installation. 
Such guidance shall--
 ``(1) identify the categories of covered individuals that 
 may obtain such unescorted access;
 ``(2) include a list of credentials that can be used for 
 access to an installation that are, to the extent practical, 
 types of identification non-Department of Defense personnel 
 already posses.
 ``(3) be consistent across military installations in the 
 United States; and
 ``(4) be in accordance with any privileges or benefits 
 accorded under, procedures developed pursuant to, or 
 requirements of, each covered provision and subsection (a).
 ``(d) Physical Entrances to Certain Military Installations.--The 
Secretary shall ensure that, to the extent practicable--
 ``(1) each military installation in the United States has a 
 designated main entrance that, at all times, is manned by at 
 least one member of the Armed Forces or civilian employee of 
 the Department;
 ``(2) the location of each such designated main entrance is 
 published on a publicly accessible Internet website of the 
 Department;
 ``(3) if a military installation in the United States has 
 any additional entrance designated for commercial deliveries to 
 the military installation, the location of such entrance (and 
 any applicable days or hours of operation for such entrance) is 
 published on the same Internet website specified in paragraph 
 (2); and
 ``(4) the information published on the Internet website 
 specified in paragraph (2) is reviewed and, as necessary, 
 updated on a basis that is not less frequent than annually.
 ``(e) Reviews and Submission to Congress.--On a basis that is not 
less frequent than once every five years, the Secretary shall--
 ``(1) review the standards and guidance under this section, 
 and make such updates as may be determined appropriate by the 
 Secretary; and
 ``(2) submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the 
 House of Representatives and the Senate the most recently 
 reviewed and, as applicable, updated version of such standards 
 and guidance.
 ``(f) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `covered individual' means, with respect to 
 a military installation in the United States, the following:
 ``(A) A member of the armed forces or civilian 
 employee of the Department of Defense, or an employee 
 or family member of such member or employee, who 
 resides, attends school, receives health care services, 
 or shops at a commissary or exchange store on the 
 installation.
 ``(B) A retired member of the armed forces, 
 including the reserve components, or a family member of 
 such retired member, who resides, attend schools, 
 receives health care services, or shops at a commissary 
 or exchange store on the installation.
 ``(C) An individual performing work at the 
 installation under a contract or subcontract (at any 
 tier), including a military construction project, 
 military family housing project, or a Facilities 
 Sustainment, Restoration, and Modernization project.
 ``(D) A motor carrier or household goods motor 
 carrier providing transportation services for the 
 United States Transportation Command.
 ``(E) An official who is employed by an agency of 
 the State in which the installation is located that 
 enforces laws relating to workers' compensation or 
 minimum wage with respect to such State and who is 
 seeking such access pertaining to a specific military 
 construction project, military family housing project, 
 or Facilities Sustainment, Restoration, and 
 Modernization project.
 ``(F) A representative of any labor organization 
 (as defined in section 2 of the National Labor 
 Relations Act (29 U.S.C. 152)), including a member of 
 any labor management committee described in section 
 205A of the Labor Management Relations Act, 1947 (29 
 U.S.C. 175a), who is--
 ``(i) seeking access to an individual 
 performing work at the installation who is a 
 member of such labor organization--
 ``(I) in connection with a specific 
 military construction project, military 
 family housing project, or Facilities 
 Sustainment, Restoration, and 
 Modernization project; or
 ``(II) pursuant to a concessions or 
 service contract subject to chapter 67 
 of title 41 (known as the `McNamara-
 O'Hara Service Contract Act of 1965'); 
 or
 ``(ii) seeking access to an individual 
 performing work at the installation for the 
 purposes of soliciting such individual to join 
 such labor organization.
 ``(G) A representative of any labor organization 
 (as defined in section 2 of the National Labor 
 Relations Act (29 U.S.C. 152)), including a member of 
 any labor management committee described in section 
 205A of the Labor Management Relations Act, 1947 (29 
 U.S.C. 175a), or a representative of a program 
 registered under the Act of August 16, 1937 (commonly 
 known as the `National Apprenticeship Act'; 29 U.S.C. 
 50 et seq.) conducting a vocational training, job fair, 
 or similar workforce development event for members of 
 the armed forces or veterans at the installation.
 ``(2) The term `covered provision' means the following:
 ``(A) Chapter 54 of this title.
 ``(B) Section 202 of the REAL ID Act of 2005 
 (Public Law 109-13; 49 U.S.C. 30301 note).
 ``(C) Section 2812 of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2013 (Public Law 112-
 239; 126 Stat. 2150; 10 U.S.C. 113 note).
 ``(D) Sections 346 and 1050 of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017 (Public Law 114-
 328; 10 U.S.C. 113 note).
 ``(E) Section 626 of the John S. McCain National 
 Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public 
 Law 115-232; 132 Stat. 1802; 10 U.S.C. 113 note).
 ``(F) Section 1090 of the William M. (Mac) 
 Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for 
 Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283; 134 Stat. 3879; 
 10 U.S.C. 113 note).
 ``(3) The term `Federally recognized access credential' 
 means a credential authorized by Federal law or otherwise 
 issued by the head of a Federal department or agency that 
 requires the vetting of an individual for access to a facility, 
 area, or program.
 ``(4) The term `military installation' has the meaning 
 given that term in section 2801 of this title.
 ``(5) The term `State' means any of the several States, the 
 District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, 
 American Samoa, the Virgin Islands of the United States, or the 
 Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
 ``(6) The term `United States' includes each State, as such 
 term is defined in this subsection.''.
 (b) Deadline for First Review and Submission to Congress.--Not 
later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
Secretary of Defense shall--
 (1) conduct the first review of the standards and guidance 
 required under section 2698 of title 10, United States Code (as 
 added by subsection (a)); and
 (2) submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the House 
 of Representatives and the Senate the reviewed and, as 
 applicable, updated version of such standards and guidance.
 (c) Modification to Certain Notification Requirement.--Section 
1090(b)(2)(B) of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283; 134 Stat. 
3879; 10 U.S.C. 113 note) is amended by striking ``is'' and inserting 
``and, as appropriate, the Secretary of Homeland Security and the 
Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, are''.
 (d) Technical and Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Repeal of duplicate provision.--Section 1069 of the 
 National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008 (Public 
 Law 110-181; 122 Stat. 326) is repealed.
 (2) Conforming amendments to prior national defense 
 authorization act.--Section 1050 of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017 (10 U.S.C. 113 note; 130 
 Stat. 2396) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a), by striking ``Department of 
 Defense installations'' and inserting ``military 
 installations in the United States'';
 (B) in subsection (b), by striking ``Department of 
 Defense facilities'' and inserting ``military 
 installations in the United States''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(c) Definitions.--In this section, the terms `military 
installation' and `United States' have the meanings given such terms in 
section 2698(e) of title 10, United States Code.''.

 Subtitle D--Military Facilities Master Plan Requirements

SEC. 2831. LIMITATION ON USE OF FUNDS PENDING COMPLETION OF MILITARY 
 INSTALLATION RESILIENCE COMPONENT OF MASTER PLANS FOR AT-
 RISK MAJOR MILITARY INSTALLATIONS.

 Of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this Act or 
otherwise made available for fiscal year 2023 for the Office of the 
Secretary of Defense for administration and service-wide activities, 
not more than 50 percent may be obligated or expended until the date on 
which the each Secretary of a military department has satisfied the 
requirements of section 2833 of the National Defense Authorization Act 
for Fiscal Year 2022 (Public Law 117-81; 10 U.S.C. 2864 note).

Subtitle E--Matters Related to Unified Facilities Criteria and Military 
 Construction Planning and Design

SEC. 2841. CONSIDERATION OF INSTALLATION OF INTEGRATED SOLAR ROOFING TO 
 IMPROVE ENERGY RESILIENCY OF MILITARY INSTALLATIONS.

 The Secretary of Defense shall amend the Unified Facilities 
Criteria/DoD Building Code (UFC 1- 200-01) to require that planning and 
design for military construction projects inside the United States 
include consideration of the feasibility and cost-effectiveness of 
installing integrated solar roofing as part of the project, for the 
purpose of--
 (1) promoting on-installation energy security and energy 
 resilience;
 (2) providing grid support to avoid energy disruptions; and
 (3) facilitating implementation and greater use of the 
 authority provided by subsection (h) of section 2911 of title 
 10, United States Code, as added and amended by section 2825 of 
 the Military Construction Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
 2021 (division B of Public Law 116-283).

SEC. 2842. STUDY OF MILITARY HOUSING RESILIENCE AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY.

 (a) Study.--The Secretary of Defense shall conduct a study of 
military housing resilience and energy efficiency to assess compliance 
with the Unified Facilities Criteria for Housing and with the latest 
published editions of relevant codes, specifications, and standards 
that incorporate the latest hazard-resistant and energy-efficient 
designs and establish minimum acceptable criteria for the design, 
construction, and maintenance of residential structures.
 (b) Elements.--The study shall include the following elements:
 (1) An identification and assessment of deficiencies, 
 costs, and timelines to relocate, rehabilitate, repair, or 
 retrofit as needed all military housing, including barracks, 
 family housing, and privatized family and unaccompanied 
 housing, to ensure health, safety, energy security, and 
 resilience.
 (2) An inventory of all housing structures that are located 
 in floodprone areas and within the Wildland-Urban Interface.
 (3) An identification and inventory of all housing 
 structures that experienced loss or damage due to weather or 
 other natural hazards during the preceding five years.
 (4) An identification of any needed updates to the Unified 
 Facilities Criteria to ensure such Criteria comports with the 
 latest published editions of relevant codes, specifications, 
 and standards that incorporate the latest hazard-resistant and 
 energy-efficient designs and establish minimum acceptable 
 criteria for the design, construction, and maintenance of 
 residential structures.
 (c) Initial Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the congressional 
defense committees a report on the study required under subsection (a).
 (d) Annual Reports.--One year after the date of the submittal of 
the initial report under subsection (c), and annually thereafter, the 
Secretary shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report 
on the progress of the Department of defense in addressing deficiencies 
identified in the initial report, with the goal of addressing all 
deficiencies for all military housing within five years and to ensure 
that all military housing is sited, designed, and maintained to comply 
with the latest codes, specifications, and standards for health, 
safety, energy security, and resilience.

 Subtitle F--Land Conveyances

SEC. 2851. EXTENSION OF TIME FRAME FOR LAND CONVEYANCE, SHARPE ARMY 
 DEPOT, LATHROP, CALIFORNIA.

 Section 2833(g) of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283) is amended 
by striking ``one year'' and inserting ``three years''.

SEC. 2852. AUTHORITY FOR TRANSFER OF ADMINISTRATIVE JURISDICTION, 
 CASTNER RANGE, FORT BLISS, TEXAS.

 Section 2844 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2013 (Public Law 112-239) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by redesignating the text beginning 
 with ``convey'' and ending with ``Franklin 
 Mountains State Park.'' as subparagraph (B);
 (ii) by striking ``may'' and inserting 
 ``may--''; and
 (iii) by inserting after subparagraph (B), 
 as redesignated by subparagraph (A) of this 
 paragraph, the following new subparagraph (A):
 ``(A) transfer administrative jurisdiction of 
 approximately 7,081 acres at Fort Bliss, Texas, to the 
 Secretary of the Interior (acting through the Director 
 of the Bureau of Land Management) which shall be 
 managed in accordance with the Federal Land Policy and 
 Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) and any 
 other applicable laws; or''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) by inserting ``transfer of 
 administrative jurisdiction or'' before 
 ``conveyance'';
 (ii) by inserting ``transfer to the 
 Secretary of the Interior or'' before ``convey 
 to the Department''; and
 (iii) by striking ``Department's'';
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) by inserting ``conveys the real property under 
 subsection (a)(1)(B) and'' after ``If the Secretary''; 
 and
 (B) by striking ``conveyed under subsection (a)'';
 (3) in the first subsection (c), by striking ``the land 
 conveyance under this section'' and inserting ``a land 
 conveyance under subsection (a)(1)(B)'';
 (4) by redesignating the second subsection (c) and 
 subsections (d) and (e) as subsections (d), (e), and (f), 
 respectively;
 (5) in subsection (d), as so redesignated, by inserting 
 ``transferred or'' before ``conveyed'';
 (6) in subsection (e), as so redesignated, by striking 
 ``the conveyances under subsection (a)'' and inserting ``a 
 conveyance under subsection (a)(1)(B)'';
 (7) in subsection (f), as so redesignated--
 (A) by striking ``federal'' each place it appears 
 and inserting ``Federal'';
 (B) by striking ``non-federal'' each place it 
 appears and inserting ``non-Federal''; and
 (C) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``transferred 
 or'' before ``conveyed''; and
 (8) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(g) Memorandum of Understanding.--The Secretary may enter into a 
memorandum of understanding with the Secretary of the Interior (acting 
through the Director of the Bureau of Land Management) regarding any 
transfer of administrative jurisdiction under subsection (a)(1)(A).''.

SEC. 2853. CONVEYANCE, JOINT BASE CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA.

 (a) Conveyance Authorized.--The Secretary of the Air Force (in this 
section referred to as the ``Secretary'') may convey to the City of 
North Charleston, South Carolina (in this section referred to as the 
``City'') all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to 
a parcel of real property, including any improvements thereon, 
consisting of approximately 26 acres known as the Old Navy Yard at 
Joint Base Charleston, South Carolina, for the purpose of permitting 
the City to use the property for economic development.
 (b) Consideration.--
 (1) In general.--As consideration for the conveyance under 
 subsection (a), the City shall pay to the United States an 
 amount at least equal to the fair market value, as determined 
 by the Secretary, based on an appraisal of the property to be 
 conveyed under such subsection. Consideration may be cash 
 payment, in-kind consideration as described under paragraph 
 (2), or a combination thereof. The consideration paid to the 
 Secretary must be sufficient, as determined by the Secretary, 
 to provide replacement space for, and for the relocation of, 
 any personnel, furniture, fixtures, equipment, and personal 
 property of any kind and belonging to any military department, 
 located upon the property to be conveyed under subsection (a). 
 All cash consideration must be paid in full, and any in-kind 
 consideration must be complete and useable, and delivered to 
 the satisfaction of the Secretary at or prior to date of the 
 conveyance under subsection (a).
 (2) In-kind consideration.--In-kind consideration described 
 in this paragraph may include the acquisition, construction, 
 provision, improvement, maintenance, repair, or restoration 
 (including environmental restoration), or combination thereof, 
 of any facilities or infrastructure within proximity to the 
 Joint Base Charleston Weapons Station (South Annex) and located 
 on Joint Base Charleston, that the Secretary considers 
 acceptable.
 (3) Treatment of cash consideration received.--Any cash 
 payment received by the United States under paragraph (1) shall 
 be deposited in the special account in the Treasury referred to 
 in subparagraph (A) of paragraph (5) of subsection (b) of 
 section 572 of title 40, United States Code, and shall be 
 available in accordance with subparagraph (B) of such 
 paragraph.
 (c) Payment of Costs of Conveyance.--
 (1) Payment required.--The Secretary may require the City 
 to cover all costs to be incurred by the Secretary, or to 
 reimburse the Secretary for costs incurred by the Secretary, to 
 carry out the conveyance under subsection (a), including survey 
 costs, appraisal costs, costs related to environmental 
 documentation, and any other administrative costs related to 
 the conveyance. If amounts paid by the City to the Secretary in 
 advance exceed the costs actually incurred by the Secretary to 
 carry out the conveyance, the Secretary shall refund the excess 
 amount to the City.
 (2) Treatment of amounts received.--Amounts received under 
 paragraph (1) as reimbursement for costs incurred by the 
 Secretary to carry out the conveyance under subsection (a) 
 shall be credited to the fund or account that was used to cover 
 the costs incurred by the Secretary in carrying out the 
 conveyance, or to an appropriate fund or account that is 
 available to the Secretary for the purposes for which the costs 
 were paid. Amounts so credited shall be merged with amounts in 
 such fund or account and shall be available for the same 
 purposes, and subject to the same conditions and limitations, 
 as amounts in such fund or account.
 (d) Description of Property.--The exact acreage and legal 
description of the property to be conveyed under subsection (a) shall 
be determined by a survey satisfactory to the Secretary.
 (e) Condition of Conveyance.--The conveyance under subsection (a) 
shall be subject to all valid existing rights and the condition that 
the City accept the property (and any improvements thereon) in its 
condition at the time of the conveyance (commonly known as a conveyance 
``as is'').
 (f) Additional Terms and Conditions.--The Secretary may require 
such additional terms and conditions in connection with the conveyance 
under subsection (a) as the Secretary considers appropriate to protect 
the interests of the United States.
 (g) Old Navy Yard.--In this section, the term ``Old Navy Yard'' 
includes the facilities used by the Naval Information Warfare Center 
Atlantic including, buildings 1602, 1603, 1639, 1648, and such other 
facilities, infrastructure, and land along or near the Cooper River 
waterfront at Joint Base Charleston as the Secretary considers to be 
appropriate.

SEC. 2854. LAND CONVEYANCE, NAVAL AIR STATION OCEANA, DAM NECK ANNEX, 
 VIRGINIA BEACH, VIRGINIA.

 (a) Conveyance Authorized.--The Secretary of the Navy may convey to 
the Hampton Roads Sanitation District (in this section referred to as 
the ``HRSD'') all right, title, and interest of the United States in 
and to a parcel of installation real property, including any 
improvements thereon, consisting of approximately 7.9 acres located at 
Naval Air Station Oceana in Dam Neck Annex, Virginia Beach, Virginia. 
The Secretary may void any land use restrictions associated with the 
property to be conveyed under this subsection.
 (b) Consideration.--
 (1) Amount and determination.--As consideration for the 
 conveyance under subsection (a), the HRSD shall pay to the 
 Secretary of the Navy an amount that is not less than the fair 
 market value of the property conveyed, as determined by the 
 Secretary. The Secretary's determination of fair market value 
 shall be final. In lieu of all or a portion of cash payment of 
 consideration, the Secretary may accept in-kind consideration.
 (2) Treatment of cash consideration.--The Secretary of the 
 Navy shall deposit any cash payment received under paragraph 
 (1) in the special account in the Treasury established for the 
 Secretary of the Navy under subsection (a) of paragraph (1) of 
 subsection (e) of section 2667 of title 10, United States Code. 
 The entire amount deposited shall be available for use in 
 accordance with subparagraph (D) of such paragraph.
 (c) Payment of Costs of Conveyance.--
 (1) Payment required.--The Secretary of the Navy shall 
 require the HRSD to cover costs to be incurred by the 
 Secretary, or to reimburse the Secretary for costs incurred by 
 the Secretary, to carry out the conveyance under subsection 
 (a), including survey costs, costs related to environmental 
 documentation, and any other administrative costs related to 
 the conveyance. If amounts are collected in advance of the 
 Secretary incurring the actual costs, and the amount collected 
 exceeds the costs actually incurred by the Secretary to carry 
 out the conveyance, the Secretary shall refund the excess 
 amount to the HRSD.
 (2) Treatment of amounts received.--Amounts received as 
 reimbursement under paragraph (1) shall be credited to the fund 
 or account that was used to cover those costs incurred by the 
 Secretary in carrying out the conveyance. Amounts so credited 
 shall be merged with amounts in such fund or account and shall 
 be available for the same purposes, and subject to the same 
 conditions and limitations, as amounts in such fund or account.
 (d) Description of Property.--The exact acreage and legal 
description of the parcel of real property to be conveyed under 
subsection (a) shall be determined by a survey satisfactory to the 
Secretary of the Navy.
 (e) Additional Terms and Conditions.--The Secretary of the Navy may 
require such additional terms and conditions in connection with the 
conveyance under subsection (a) as the Secretary considers appropriate 
to protect the interests of the United States.

SEC. 2855. LAND EXCHANGE, MARINE RESERVE TRAINING CENTER, OMAHA, 
 NEBRASKA.

 (a) Land Exchange Authorized.--The Secretary of the Navy may convey 
to the Metropolitan Community College Area, a political subdivision of 
the State of Nebraska, (in this section referred to as the 
``College''), all right, title, and interest of the United States in 
and to a parcel of real property, including improvements thereon, known 
as the Marine Reserve Training Center in Omaha, Nebraska.
 (b) Consideration.--As consideration for the conveyance under 
subsection (a), the College shall convey to the Secretary of the Navy 
real property interests either adjacent or proximate, to Offutt Air 
Force Base, Nebraska.
 (c) Land Exchange Agreement.--The Secretary of the Navy and the 
College may enter into a land exchange agreement to implement this 
section.
 (d) Valuation.--The value of each property interest to be exchanged 
by the Secretary of the Navy and the College described in subsections 
(a) and (b) shall be determined--
 (1) by an independent appraiser selected by the Secretary; 
 and
 (2) in accordance with the Uniform Appraisal Standards for 
 Federal Land Acquisitions and the Uniform Standards of 
 Professional Appraisal Practice.
 (e) Cash Equalization Payments.--
 (1) To the secretary.--If the value of the property 
 interests described in subsection (a) is greater than the value 
 of the property interests described in subsection (b), the 
 values shall be equalized through either of the following or a 
 combination thereof:
 (A) A cash equalization payment from the College to 
 the Department of the Navy.
 (B) In-kind consideration provided by the College, 
 which may include the acquisition, construction, 
 provision, improvement, maintenance, repair, or 
 restoration (including environmental restoration), or 
 combination thereof, of any facilities or 
 infrastructure, or delivery of services relating to the 
 needs of Marine Corps Reserve Training Center Omaha.
 (2) No equalization.--If the value of the property 
 interests described in subsection (b) is greater than the value 
 of the property interests described in subsection (a), the 
 Secretary may not make a cash equalization payment to equalize 
 the values.
 (f) Payment of Costs of Conveyance.--
 (1) Payment required.--The Secretary of the Navy shall 
 require the College to pay all costs to be incurred by the 
 Secretary to carry out the exchange of property interests under 
 this section, including such costs related to land survey, 
 environmental documentation, real estate due diligence such as 
 appraisals, and any other administrative costs related to the 
 exchange of property interests, including costs incurred 
 preparing and executing a land exchange agreement authorized 
 under subsection (c). If amounts are collected from the College 
 in advance of the Secretary incurring the actual costs and the 
 amount collected exceeds the costs actually incurred by the 
 Secretary to carry out the exchange of property interests, the 
 Secretary shall refund the excess amount to the College.
 (2) Treatment of amounts received.--Amounts received by the 
 Secretary of the Navy under paragraph (1) shall be used in 
 accordance with section 2695(c) of title 10, United States 
 Code.
 (g) Description of Property.--The exact acreage and legal 
description of the property interests to be exchanged under this 
section shall be determined by surveys that are satisfactory to the 
Secretary of the Navy.
 (h) Conveyance Agreement.--The exchange of real property interests 
under this section shall be accomplished using an appropriate legal 
instrument and upon terms and conditions mutually satisfactory to the 
Secretary of the Navy and the College, including such additional terms 
and conditions as the Secretary considers appropriate to protect the 
interests of the United States.
 (i) Exemption From Screening Requirements for Additional Federal 
Use.--The authority under this section is exempt from the screening 
process required under section 2696(b) of title 10, United States Code.

 Subtitle G--Miscellaneous Studies and Reports

SEC. 2861. FFRDC STUDY ON PRACTICES WITH RESPECT TO DEVELOPMENT OF 
 MILITARY CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS.

 (a) Study Required.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall seek to enter 
into an agreement with a federally funded research and development 
center for the conduct of a study on the practices of the Department of 
Defense with respect to the development of military construction 
projects.
 (b) Elements.--An agreement under subsection (a) shall specify that 
the study conducted pursuant to the agreement shall address each of the 
following:
 (1) Practices with respect to adoption of United Facilities 
 Criteria changes and their inclusion into advanced planning, DD 
 form 1391 budget justifications, and planning and design.
 (2) Practices with respect to how sustainable materials, 
 such as mass timber and low carbon concrete, are assessed and 
 included in advanced planning, DD form 1391 budget 
 justifications, and planning and design.
 (3) Barriers to incorporating innovative techniques, 
 including 3D printed building techniques.
 (4) Whether the Strategic Environmental Research and 
 Development Program or the Environmental Security Technology 
 Certification Program could be used to validate such materials 
 and techniques to provide the Army Corps of Engineers and the 
 Naval Facilities Engineering Systems Command with confidence in 
 the use of such materials and techniques.
 (c) Report to Congress.--Not later than 60 days after the 
completion of a study pursuant to an agreement under subsection (a), 
the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a report on the results of the study.

SEC. 2862. FEASIBILITY STUDY FOR BLUE GRASS CHEMICAL AGENT-DESTRUCTION 
 PILOT PLANT.

 (a) Study.--The Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the 
Secretary of the Army, shall conduct a feasibility study to assess 
potential missions, plants, or industries feasible for Army or 
Department of Defense needs at the Blue Grass Chemical Agent-
Destruction Pilot Plant following the demolition and remediation of the 
Blue Grass Chemical Agent-Destruction Pilot Plant located at the Blue 
Grass Army Depot in Richmond, Kentucky. The study shall include the 
following:
 (1) Identification of any buildings and infrastructure in 
 the Blue Grass Chemical Agent-Destruction Pilot Plant that 
 could remain for future Army or Department of Defense use.
 (2) Cost savings associated with repurposing existing 
 infrastructure for Army or Department of Defense purposes.
 (3) Opportunities to fulfil requirements for defense 
 organic industrial base operations.
 (4) Opportunities to fulfil requirements of Army Materiel 
 Command strategic planning, including ammunition production.
 (5) Opportunities to fulfil Army or Department of Defense 
 modernization requirements.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the 
study conducted under subsection (a).

SEC. 2863. COMPTROLLER GENERAL ASSESSMENT OF MILITARY CONSTRUCTION, 
 MAINTENANCE, AND UPGRADES OF JOINT BASE INFRASTRUCTURE 
 AND FACILITIES.

 (a) In General.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall 
conduct an assessment of possible inequitable prioritization of 
military construction, maintenance, and upgrades of joint base 
infrastructure and facilities, with a focus on facilities as they 
relate to subordinate components relative to the supporting component 
on joint bases.
 (b) Elements.--The assessment required by subsection (a) shall 
include the following elements:
 (1) Historical analysis of investments made in 
 infrastructure used by supported components, including 
 allocation of new infrastructure spending between supported and 
 supporting components.
 (2) The policies and procedures at the departmental and 
 installation level designed to ensure the proper sustainment, 
 restoration, modernization, recapitalization, new construction, 
 and demolition of infrastructure used by supported components.
 (3) Efforts to address the priorities of the supported 
 components through military construction and facility upgrades.
 (4) Potential benefits of using the supported components' 
 service-specific construction agents for major infrastructure 
 investments.

SEC. 2864. REPORT ON UNDERGROUND TUNNELS AND FACILITIES IN HAWAII.

 (a) Requirements Survey.--Not later than 120 days after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for 
Sustainment shall submit to the congressional defense committees a 
report containing the results of a survey of underground tunnels and 
facilities on Department of Defense property located in Hawaii, and 
such report shall include--
 (1) a description of the location, size, and condition of 
 underground tunnels and facilities currently in use;
 (2) a description of the location, size, and condition of 
 unused underground tunnels and facilities;
 (3) a description of any current proposed future uses for 
 each of the unused underground tunnels and facilities, if any;
 (4) a summary of existing unmet requirements for hardened 
 underground facilities for each service; and
 (5) efforts to coordinate across the services the 
 assessments and potential future use of hardened underground 
 facilities.
 (b) Form.--The survey required under subsection (a) shall be 
submitted in unclassified form, but shall include a classified annex to 
include all information responsive to the study directive that is 
classified.

SEC. 2865. COMPTROLLER GENERAL REPORT ON COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT 
 ACTIVITIES AT MILITARY INSTALLATIONS IN FOREIGN 
 COUNTRIES.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to the 
congressional defense committees a report containing the results of a 
study conducted by the Comptroller General on community engagement 
activities at military installations located in foreign countries. The 
report shall address the following:
 (1) The programs and processes that exist at military 
 installations located in foreign countries to manage 
 relationships with the local community.
 (2) Whether existing programs and authorities are effective 
 at fostering positive community relations at military 
 installations located in foreign countries.
 (3) An identification of any authorities or changes to 
 existing programs that could help the Department of Defense 
 improve relationships with local communities at military 
 installations located in foreign countries.

SEC. 2866. REPORT ON RECOGNITION OF AFRICAN AMERICAN SERVICEMEMBERS IN 
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE NAMING PRACTICES.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a report containing the following information:
 (1) A description of current Department of Defense naming 
 conventions for military installations, infrastructure, 
 vessels, and weapon systems.
 (2) A list of all military installations (including reserve 
 component facilities), infrastructure (including reserve 
 component infrastructure), vessels, and weapon systems that are 
 currently named after African Americans who served in the Armed 
 Forces.
 (3) An explanation of the steps being taken to recognize 
 the service of African Americans who have served in the Armed 
 Forces with honor, heroism, and distinction by increasing the 
 number of military installations, infrastructure, vessels, and 
 weapon systems named after deserving African American members 
 of the Armed Forces.

SEC. 2867. REPORT ON CAPACITY OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE TO PROVIDE 
 SURVIVORS OF NATURAL DISASTERS WITH EMERGENCY SHORT-TERM 
 HOUSING.

 Not later than 220 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a report analyzing the capacity of the Department of Defense 
to provide survivors of natural disasters with emergency short-term 
housing.

SEC. 2868. DIRECTING THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE TO DELIVER A BRIEFING ON 
 HOUSING WITH RESPECT TO JUNIOR MEMBERS OF THE ARMED 
 FORCES.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Defense shall deliver a briefing on the housing 
realities, difficulties, and needs facing junior members of the Armed 
Forces to the Committee on Armed Services of the House of 
Representatives. The briefing shall include:
 (1) An overview of the available on-base housing stock, 
 military services' and individual bases' housing requirements 
 and practices, as well as other possible options for housing 
 junior members of the Armed Forces.
 (2) An outline of Department plans for identifying 
 installations with a shortage of on-base or off-base housing 
 for junior enlisted members of the Armed Forces and plans to 
 address any shortages in order to enable bases to house their 
 junior members of the Armed Forces more productively, cost-
 effectively, and safely, with an eye to quality of life and 
 force readiness.
 (3) Any other information the Secretary determines to be 
 relevant.

SEC. 2869. REPORTING ON LEAD SERVICE LINES AND LEAD PLUMBING.

 (a) Initial Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition 
and Sustainment shall submit to the congressional defense committees a 
report that includes--
 (1) a description of the state of lead service lines and 
 lead plumbing on military installations, military housing, and 
 privatized military housing;
 (2) an evaluation of whether military installations, 
 military housing, and privatized military housing are in 
 compliance with the standards established in the Lead and 
 Copper rule and, if not, an identification of the areas of non-
 compliance; and
 (3) an identification of steps and resources needed to 
 remove remaining lead service lines and lead plumbing in 
 military installations and housing.
 (b) Inclusion of Information in Annual Report.--The Secretary shall 
include in the Defense Environmental Programs annual report for each 
year after the year in which the initial report is submitted 
information on the compliance of Department of Defense facilities and 
housing with the Lead and Copper Rule.

 Subtitle H--Other Matters

SEC. 2871. DEFENSE COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM.

 Section 2391(e)(4)(A)(i) of title 10, United States Code, is 
amended by inserting ``or on property subject to a real estate 
agreement with a military installation, including a lease or easement'' 
after ``installation''.

SEC. 2872. INCLUSION IN DEFENSE COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE PILOT PROGRAM 
 OF CERTAIN PROJECTS FOR ROTC TRAINING.

 Section 2391 of title 10, United States Code, is further amended--
 (1) in subsection (d)(1)(B)--
 (A) by redesignating clauses (ii) and (iii) as 
 clauses (iii) and (iv), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting after clause (i) the following new 
 clause (ii):
 ``(ii) Projects that will contribute to the training of 
 cadets enrolled in an independent Reserve Officer Training 
 Corps program at a covered educational institution.''; and
 (2) in subsection (e), by adding at the end the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(6) The term `covered educational institution' means a 
 college or university that is--
 ``(A) a part B institution, as defined in section 
 322 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 1061);
 ``(B) an 1890 Institution, as defined in section 2 
 of the Agricultural Research, Extension, and Education 
 Reform Act of 1998 (7 U.S.C. 7601);
 ``(C) not affiliated with a consortium; and
 ``(D) located at least 40 miles from a major 
 military installation.''.

SEC. 2873. BASING DECISION SCORECARD CONSISTENCY AND TRANSPARENCY.

 Section 2883(h) of the Military Construction Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283; 10 U.S.C. 1781b note) is amended 
by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
 ``(4) Coordination with secretary of defense.--In 
 establishing a scorecard under this subsection, the Secretary 
 of the military department concerned shall coordinate with the 
 Secretary of Defense to ensure consistency among the military 
 departments.
 ``(5) Publication in federal register.--The methodology and 
 criteria for establishing each scorecard under this subsection 
 shall be published in the Federal Register for public 
 comment.''.

SEC. 2874. LEASE OR USE AGREEMENT FOR CATEGORY 3 SUBTERRANEAN TRAINING 
 FACILITY.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense shall seek to enter into 
a lease or use agreement with a category 3 subterranean training 
facility that--
 (1) is located in close proximity to air assault and 
 special forces units; and
 (2) has the capacity to--
 (A) provide brigade or large full-mission profile 
 training;
 (B) rapidly replicate full-scale underground 
 venues;
 (C) support helicopter landing zones; and
 (D) support underground live fire.
 (b) Use of Facility.--A lease or use agreement entered into 
pursuant to subsection (a) shall provide that the category 3 
subterranean training facility shall be available for--
 (1) the hosting of training and testing exercises for--
 (A) for members of the Armed Forces, including 
 special operations forces;
 (B) personnel of combat support agencies, including 
 the Defense Threat Reduction Agency; and
 (C) such other personnel as the Secretary of 
 Defense determines appropriate; and
 (2) for such other purposes as the Secretary of Defense 
 determines appropriate.
 (c) Duration.--The duration of any lease or use agreement entered 
into pursuant to subsection (a) shall be for a period of not less than 
5 years.
 (d) Category 3 Subterranean Training Facility Defined.--In this 
section, the term ``category 3 subterranean training facility'' means 
an underground structure designed and built--
 (1) to be unobserved and to provide maximum protection; and
 (2) to serve as a command and control, operations, storage, 
 production, and protection facility.

SEC. 2875. REQUIRED CONSULTATION WITH STATE AND LOCAL ENTITIES ON 
 ISSUES RELATED TO INCREASE IN NUMBER OF MILITARY 
 PERSONNEL AT MILITARY INSTALLATIONS.

 If any decision of the Secretary of Defense or the Secretary of a 
military department would result in a significant increase in the 
number of members of the Armed Forces assigned to a military 
installation, the Secretary of Defense or the Secretary of the military 
department concerned, during the development of the plans to implement 
the decision with respect to that installation, shall consult with 
appropriate State and local entities to ensure that matters affecting 
the local community, including requirements for transportation, utility 
infrastructure, housing, education, and family support activities, are 
considered.

SEC. 2876. REQUIRED INVESTMENTS IN IMPROVING CHILD DEVELOPMENT CENTERS.

 (a) Investments in Child Development Centers.--Of the total amount 
authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Defense for 
Facilities Sustainment, Restoration, and Modernization activities of a 
military department, the Secretary of that military department shall 
reserve the following amounts of the estimated replacement cost of the 
total inventory of child development centers under the jurisdiction of 
that Secretary for the purpose of carrying out projects for the 
improvement of child development centers:
 (1) An amount equal to one percent of such cost for fiscal 
 year 2023.
 (2) An amount equal to two percent of such cost for fiscal 
 year 2024.
 (3) An amount equal to three percent of such cost for 
 fiscal year 2025.
 (4) An amount equal to five percent or such cost for fiscal 
 year 2026.
 (b) Child Development Center Defined.--The term ``child development 
center'' has meaning given the term ``military child development 
center'' in section 1800(1) of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 2877. LIMITATION ON USE OF FUNDS FOR CLOSURE OF COMBAT READINESS 
 TRAINING CENTERS.

 (a) In General.--None of the funds authorized to be appropriated by 
this Act or otherwise made available for fiscal year 2023 for the Air 
Force may be obligated or expended to close, or prepare to close, any 
combat readiness training center.
 (b) Waiver.--The Secretary of the Air Force may waive the 
limitation under subsection (a) with respect to a combat readiness 
training center, if the Secretary submits to the congressional defense 
committees each of the following:
 (1) A certification that--
 (A) the closure of the center would not be in 
 violation of section 2687 of title 10, United States 
 Code; and
 (B) the support capabilities provided by the center 
 will not be diminished as a result of the closure of 
 the center.
 (2) A report that includes--
 (A) a detailed business case analysis for the 
 closure of the center; and
 (B) an assessment of the effects the closure of the 
 center would have on unit training, including active 
 duty units that may use the center.

SEC. 2878. PILOT PROGRAM ON USE OF MASS TIMBER IN MILITARY CONSTRUCTION 
 PROJECTS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of each of the military departments 
shall carry out a pilot program to evaluate how the use of mass timber 
as the primary construction material in military construction projects 
affects the environmental sustainability, infrastructure resilience, 
cost effectiveness, and construction timeliness of such projects. The 
Secretary of a military department may carry out a military 
construction project under the pilot program using the authorities 
available to the Secretary of Defense under section 2914 of title 10, 
United States Code, regarding military construction projects for energy 
resilience, energy security, and energy conservation.
 (b) Project Selection and Location.--
 (1) Minimum number.--Each Secretary of a military 
 department shall carry out at least one military construction 
 project under the pilot program.
 (2) Project locations.--The pilot program shall be 
 conducted at military installations in the United States--
 (A) that are identified as vulnerable to extreme 
 weather events; and
 (B) for which a military construction project is 
 authorized but a request for proposal has not been 
 released.
 (3) Military unaccompanied housing.--In selecting military 
 construction projects for the pilot program, the Secretaries of 
 the military departments shall coordinate to ensure that at 
 least one of the projects involves the construction of military 
 unaccompanied housing.
 (c) Reports.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, and every 180 days thereafter until 
 December 31, 2025, the Secretaries of the military departments 
 shall jointly submit to the congressional defense committees a 
 report on the progress of the pilot program.
 (2) Elements.--Each report required under paragraph (1) 
 shall include each of the following:
 (A) A description of the status of the military 
 construction projects selected to be conducted under 
 the pilot program.
 (B) An explanation of the reasons for the selection 
 of such military construction projects.
 (C) An analysis of the projected or actual carbon 
 footprint, including stored carbon in building 
 materials, resilience to extreme weather events, 
 construction timeliness, and cost effectiveness, of the 
 military construction projects conducted under the 
 pilot program using mass timber as compared to other 
 materials historically used in military construction.
 (D) Any updated guidance the Under Secretary of 
 Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment has released in 
 relation to the procurement policy for future military 
 construction projects based on comparable benefits 
 realized from use of mass timber, including guidance on 
 prioritizing sustainable materials in establishing 
 evaluation criteria for military construction project 
 contracts when technically feasible.
 (d) Mass Timber Defined.--In this section, the term ``mass timber'' 
means any of the following:
 (1) Cross-laminated timber.
 (2) Nail-laminated timber.
 (3) Glue-laminated timber.
 (4) Laminated strand lumber.
 (5) Laminated veneer lumber,
 (e) Termination.--The authority of the Secretary of a military 
department to carry out a military construction project under this 
section shall expire on September 30, 2025. Any construction commenced 
under the pilot program before such date may continue until completion.

SEC. 2879. CONTRIBUTIONS FOR CLIMATE RESILIENCE FOR NORTH ATLANTIC 
 TREATY ORGANIZATIONS SECURITY INVESTMENT.

 Section 2806(a) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
striking ``and construction'' and inserting ``construction, and climate 
resilience''.

SEC. 2880. SCREENING AND REGISTRY OF INDIVIDUALS WITH HEALTH CONDITIONS 
 RESULTING FROM UNSAFE HOUSING UNITS.

 (a) In General.--Subchapter V of chapter 169 of title 10, United 
States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section:
``Sec. 2895. Screening and registry of individuals with health 
 conditions resulting from unsafe housing units
 ``(a) Screening.--(1) The Secretary of Defense, in consultation 
with appropriate scientific agencies as determined by the Secretary, 
may ensure that all military medical treatment facilities screen 
eligible individuals for covered conditions and covered lead exposure.
 ``(2) The Secretary may establish procedures through which 
screening under paragraph (1) may allow an eligible individual to be 
included in the registry under subsection (b).
 ``(b) Registry.--(1) The Secretary of Defense shall establish and 
maintain a registry of eligible individuals who have a covered 
condition.
 ``(2) The Secretary shall include any information in the registry 
under paragraph (1) that the Secretary determines necessary to 
ascertain and monitor the health of eligible individuals and the 
connection between the health of such individuals and an unsafe housing 
unit.
 ``(3) The Secretary shall develop a public information campaign to 
inform eligible individuals about the registry under paragraph (1), 
including how to register and the benefits of registering.
 ``(c) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `covered armed force' means the following:
 ``(A) The Army.
 ``(B) The Navy.
 ``(C) The Marine Corps.
 ``(D) The Air Force.
 ``(E) The Space Force.
 ``(2) The term `covered condition' means a medical 
 condition that is determined by the Secretary of Defense to 
 have resulted from residing in an unsafe housing unit.
 ``(3) The term `covered lead exposure' means lead exposure 
 that is determined by the Secretary of Defense to have resulted 
 from residing in an unsafe housing unit.
 ``(4) The term `eligible individual' means a member of a 
 covered armed force or a family member of a member of a covered 
 armed force who has resided in an unsafe housing unit.
 ``(5) The term `unsafe housing unit' means a dwelling unit 
 that--
 ``(A) does not meet the housing quality standards 
 established under section 8(o)(8)(B) of the United 
 States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f(o)(8)(B)); 
 or
 ``(B) is not free from dangerous air pollution 
 levels from mold.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
such subchapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to 
section 2894a the following new item:

``2895. Screening and registry of individuals with health conditions 
 resulting from unsafe housing units.''.

SEC. 2881. RECOGNITION OF MEMORIAL, MEMORIAL GARDEN, AND K9 MEMORIAL OF 
 THE NATIONAL NAVY UDT-SEAL MUSEUM IN FORT PIERCE, 
 FLORIDA, AS A NATIONAL MEMORIAL, MEMORIAL GARDEN, AND K9 
 MEMORIAL, RESPECTIVELY, OF NAVY SEALS AND THEIR 
 PREDECESSORS.

 The Memorial, Memorial Garden, and K9 Memorial of the National Navy 
UDT-SEAL Museum, located at 3300 North Highway A1A, North Hutchinson 
Island, in Fort Pierce, Florida, are recognized as a national memorial, 
memorial garden, and K9 memorial, respectively, of Navy SEALs and their 
predecessors.

SEC. 2882. ENSURING THAT CONTRACTOR EMPLOYEES ON ARMY CORPS PROJECTS 
 ARE PAID PREVAILING WAGES AS REQUIRED BY LAW.

 The Assistant Secretary of the Army for Civil Works shall provide 
to each Army Corps district clarifying, uniform guidance with respect 
to prevailing wage requirements for contractors and subcontractors of 
the Army Corps that--
 (1) conforms with the Department of Labor's regulations, 
 policies, and guidance with respect to the proper 
 implementation and enforcement of subchapter IV of chapter 31 
 of title 40, United States Code (commonly known as the ``Davis-
 Bacon Act'') and other related Acts, including the proper 
 classification of all crafts by Federal construction 
 contractors and subcontractors;
 (2) directs Army Corps districts to investigate worker 
 complaints and third-party complaints within 30 days of the 
 date of filing; and
 (3) instructs Army Corps districts that certified payroll 
 reports submitted by contractors and subcontractors and the 
 information contained therein shall be publicly available and 
 are not exempt from disclosure under section 552(b) of title 5, 
 United States Code.

SEC. 2883. INCLUSION OF CLIMATE RESILIENCE SERVICES IN THE COMBATANT 
 COMMANDER INITIATIVE FUND.

 Section 166a(b) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by 
adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
 ``(11) Climate resilience of military installations and 
 essential civilian infrastructure.
 ``(12) Military support to civilian and military 
 authorities to combat illegal wildlife trafficking, illegal 
 timber trafficking, and illegal, unreported, or unregulated 
 fishing.''.

SEC. 2884. INTERAGENCY REGIONAL COORDINATOR FOR RESILIENCE PILOT 
 PROJECT.

 (a) Pilot Project.--The Secretary of Defense shall carry out a 
pilot program under which the Secretary shall establish within the 
Department of Defense four Interagency Regional Coordinators. Each 
Interagency Regional Coordinator shall be responsible for improving the 
resilience of a community that supports a military installation and 
serving as a model for enhancing community resilience before disaster 
strikes.
 (b) Selection.--Each Interagency Regional Coordinator shall support 
military installations and surrounding communities within a geographic 
area, with at least one such Coordinator serving each of the East, 
West, and Gulf coasts. For purposes of the project, the Secretary shall 
select geographic areas--
 (1) with significant sea level rise and recurrent flooding 
 that prevents members of the Armed Forces from reaching their 
 posts or jeopardizes military readiness; and
 (2) where communities have collaborated on multi-
 jurisdictional climate adaptation planning efforts, including 
 such collaboration with the Army Corps of Engineers Civil Works 
 Department and through Joint Land Use Studies.
 (c) Collaboration.--In carrying out the pilot project, the 
Secretary shall build on existing efforts through collaboration with 
State and local entities, including emergency management, 
transportation, planning, housing, community development, natural 
resource managers, and governing bodies and with the heads of 
appropriate Federal departments and agencies.

 TITLE XXIX--SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY MILITARY CONSTRUCTION

SEC. 2901. AUTHORIZED ARMY CONSTRUCTION AND LAND ACQUISITION PROJECTS.

 The Secretary of the Army may acquire real property and carry out 
the military construction projects for the installations inside the 
United States, and in the amounts, set forth in the following table:

 Army: Inside the United States
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Country Installation Amount
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Alabama........................ Redstone Arsenal.. $50,000,000
Maryland........................ Aberdeen.......... $85,000,000
Mississippi..................... Vicksburg......... $20,000,000
New Jersey...................... Picatinny Arsenal. $12,000,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

SEC. 2902. AUTHORIZED NAVY CONSTRUCTION AND LAND ACQUISITION PROJECT.

 The Secretary of the Navy may acquire real property and carry out 
the military construction project for the installation inside the 
United States, and in the amount, set forth in the following table:

 Navy: Inside the United States
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Country Installation Amount
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 California..................... Corona............ $15,000,000
Maryland........................ Carderock......... $2,073,000
 Indian Head....... $8,039,000
Virginia........................ Dahlgren.......... $2,503,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

SEC. 2903. AUTHORIZED AIR FORCE CONSTRUCTION AND LAND ACQUISITION 
 PROJECTS.

 The Secretary of the Air Force may acquire real property and carry 
out the military construction projects for the installations inside the 
United States, and in the amounts, set forth in the following table:

 Air Force: Inside the United States
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Country Installation Amount
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Hawaii......................... AFRL Maui......... $89,000,000
New York........................ AFRL Rome......... $4,200,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------

SEC. 2904. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 Funds are hereby authorized to be appropriated for fiscal years 
beginning after September 30, 2022, for the military construction 
projects inside the United States authorized by this title as specified 
in the funding table in section 4601.

 DIVISION C--DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY NATIONAL SECURITY AUTHORIZATIONS AND 
 OTHER AUTHORIZATIONS

 TITLE XXXI--DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY NATIONAL SECURITY PROGRAMS

 Subtitle A--National Security Programs and Authorizations

SEC. 3101. NATIONAL NUCLEAR SECURITY ADMINISTRATION.

 (a) Authorization of Appropriations.--Funds are hereby authorized 
to be appropriated to the Department of Energy for fiscal year 2023 for 
the activities of the National Nuclear Security Administration in 
carrying out programs as specified in the funding table in section 
4701.
 (b) Authorization of New Plant Projects.--From funds referred to in 
subsection (a) that are available for carrying out plant projects, the 
Secretary of Energy may carry out new plant projects for the National 
Nuclear Security Administration as follows:
 Project 23-D-516, Energetic Materials Characterization 
 Facility, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New 
 Mexico, $19,000,000.
 Project 23-D-517, Electrical Power Capacity Upgrade, Los 
 Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico, 
 $24,000,000.
 Project 23-D-518, Plutonium Modernization Operations & 
 Waste Management Office Building, Los Alamos National 
 Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico, $48,500,000.
 Project 23-D-519, Special Materials Facility, Y-12 National 
 Security Complex, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, $49,500,000.
 Project 23-D-533, Component Test Complex Project, Bettis 
 Atomic Power Laboratory, West Mifflin, Pennsylvania, 
 $57,420,000.

SEC. 3102. DEFENSE ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP.

 (a) Authorization of Appropriations.--Funds are hereby authorized 
to be appropriated to the Department of Energy for fiscal year 2023 for 
defense environmental cleanup activities in carrying out programs as 
specified in the funding table in section 4701.
 (b) Authorization of New Plant Projects.--From funds referred to in 
subsection (a) that are available for carrying out plant projects, the 
Secretary of Energy may carry out, for defense environmental cleanup 
activities, the following new plant projects:
 Project 23-D-402, Calcine Construction, Idaho National 
 Laboratory, Idaho Falls, Idaho, $10,000,000.
 Project 23-D-403, Hanford 200 West Area Tank Farms Risk 
 Management Project, Office of River Protection, Richland, 
 Washington, $45,000,000.
 Project 23-D-404, 181D Export Water System Reconfiguration 
 and Upgrade, Hanford Site, Richland, Washington, $6,770,000.
 Project 23-D-405, 181B Export Water System Reconfiguration 
 and Upgrade, Hanford Site, Richland, Washington, $480,000.

SEC. 3103. OTHER DEFENSE ACTIVITIES.

 Funds are hereby authorized to be appropriated to the Department of 
Energy for fiscal year 2023 for other defense activities in carrying 
out programs as specified in the funding table in section 4701.

SEC. 3104. NUCLEAR ENERGY.

 Funds are hereby authorized to be appropriated to the Department of 
Energy for fiscal year 2023 for nuclear energy as specified in the 
funding table in section 4701.

 Subtitle B--Program Authorizations, Restrictions, Limitations, and 
 Other Matters

SEC. 3111. PLUTONIUM PIT PRODUCTION CAPACITY.

 (a) Finding.--Congress finds that the National Nuclear Security 
Administration and the Nuclear Weapons Council have acknowledged that 
producing 80 war reserve plutonium pit per year by 2030 is not 
achievable.
 (b) Requirement.--Subsection (a) of section 4219 of the Atomic 
Energy Defense Act (50 U.S.C. 2538a) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(a) Production.--
 ``(1) Requirement.--The Secretary of Energy shall produce 
 the annual number of war reserve plutonium pits that the 
 Secretary of Defense identifies as a requirement of the 
 Department of Defense.
 ``(2) Capacity.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the 
 Secretary of Energy shall--
 ``(A) ensure that Los Alamos National Laboratory, 
 Los Alamos, New Mexico, has the ability to--
 ``(i) produce 30 war reserve plutonium pits 
 during any year that the Secretary of Defense 
 identifies such production amount as a 
 requirement of the Department of Defense; and
 ``(ii) implement surge efforts to produce 
 more than 30 war reserve plutonium pits during 
 any year that the Secretaries identifies such 
 production amount as a requirement of the 
 Department of Defense;
 ``(B) ensure that the Savannah River Plutonium 
 Processing Facility at the Savannah River Site, Aiken, 
 South Carolina, has a sustainable ability to--
 ``(i) produce 50 war reserve plutonium pits 
 during any year the Secretary of Defense 
 identifies such production amount as a 
 requirement of the Department of Defense; and
 ``(ii) implement surge efforts to produce 
 more than 50 war reserve plutonium pits during 
 any year that the Secretaries identifies such 
 production amount as a requirement of the 
 Department of Defense; and
 ``(C) maintain the Los Alamos National Laboratory 
 as the Plutonium Science and Production Center of 
 Excellence for the United States.''.
 (c) Certifications.--Such section is further amended--
 (1) by striking subsections (b) and (c);
 (2) by redesignating subsections (d) through (f) as 
 subsections (c) through (e), respectively;
 (3) by inserting after subsection (a) the following new 
 subsection (b):
 ``(b) Annual Notifications, Certifications, and Plans.--
 ``(1) Department of defense.--Not later than March 1, 2023, 
 and each year thereafter, the Secretary of Defense shall notify 
 the Secretary of Energy and the appropriate congressional 
 committees of the following:
 ``(A) The requirement of the Department of Defense 
 with respect to the total minimum number of war reserve 
 plutonium pits to be produced during the 10-year period 
 following the notification and a justification of the 
 requirement.
 ``(B) The year, if any, in which not fewer than 80 
 war reserve plutonium pits are needed to be produced to 
 meet the requirement of the Department of Defense.
 ``(2) Department of energy.--Not later than 30 days after 
 the date on which the Secretary of Energy receives a 
 notification under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall submit to 
 the appropriate congressional committees the following:
 ``(A) A certification of whether the programs and 
 budget of the Secretary will enable the nuclear 
 security enterprise to meet the requirements identified 
 by the Secretary of Defense in the notification.
 ``(B) A plan by the Secretary of Energy to meet 
 such requirements, including an identification of the 
 number of war reserve plutonium pits the Secretary will 
 produce during each year covered by the notification 
 and a cost estimate to meet such requirements.''; and
 (4) by striking subsection (e), as so redesignated, and 
 inserting the following new subsection:
 ``(e) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `appropriate congressional committees' means 
 the following:
 ``(A) The congressional defense committees.
 ``(B) The Committee on Energy and Commerce of the 
 House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy 
 and Natural Resources of the Senate.
 ``(2) The term `covered project' means--
 ``(A) the Savannah River Plutonium Processing 
 Facility, Savannah River Site, Aiken, South Carolina 
 (Project 21-D-511); or
 ``(B) the Plutonium Pit Production Project, Los 
 Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 
 (Project 21-D-512).''.
 (d) Conforming Repeal.--Section 3120 of the John S. McCain National 
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115-232; 132 
Stat. 2292) is repealed.
 (e) Briefing.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 120 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Administrator for Nuclear 
 Security shall submit to the appropriate congressional 
 committees a briefing that assesses the options for partnering 
 with covered entities to seek cost efficiencies and mitigate 
 supply chain risks related to the production of plutonium pits, 
 including the production and integration of glove boxes.
 (2) Covered entities defined.--In this subsection, the term 
 ``covered entities'' means entities from private industry with 
 expertise in advanced manufacturing and production techniques 
 related to plutonium pits.

SEC. 3112. NUCLEAR WARHEAD ACQUISITION PROCESS.

 (a) Expansion of Reporting and Certification Requirements.--Section 
4223 of the Atomic Energy Defense Act (50 U.S.C. 2538e), as amended by 
section 3114, is further amended as follows:
 (1) By striking ``the W93 nuclear weapon'' each place it 
 appears and inserting ``a covered nuclear weapon''.
 (2) By striking ``a W93 nuclear weapon program'' each place 
 it appears and inserting ``a program for that nuclear weapon''.
 (3) In subsection (b)(2), by striking ``for the sub-surface 
 ballistic nuclear (SSBN) force''.
 (4) By striking subsection (d) and inserting the following 
 new subsection (d):
 ``(d) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `covered nuclear weapon' means the 
 following:
 ``(A) The W93 nuclear weapon.
 ``(B) A modified nuclear weapon.
 ``(C) A new nuclear weapon.
 ``(2) The term `joint nuclear weapons life cycle' has the 
 meaning given that term in section 4220.
 ``(3) The terms `modified nuclear weapon' and `new nuclear 
 weapon' have the meaning given those terms in section 4209.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Such Act is further amended by striking 
the section heading for section 4223 and inserting the following (and 
conforming the table of contents at the beginning of such Act 
accordingly): ``nuclear warhead acquisition process''.

SEC. 3113. AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL LEVELS OF THE OFFICE OF THE 
 ADMINISTRATOR.

 (a) Modification of Authorized Levels.--Subsection (a) of section 
3241A of the National Nuclear Security Administration Act (50 U.S.C. 
2441a) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(a) Full-time Equivalent Personnel Levels.--
 ``(1) Authorized level.--For fiscal year 2023 and each 
 fiscal year thereafter, the total number of employees of the 
 Office of the Administrator may not exceed 110 percent of the 
 total number of employees of the Office during the previous 
 fiscal year unless, during each fiscal year in which such 
 number is exceeded, the Administrator submits to the 
 congressional defense committees a report justifying such 
 excess.
 ``(2) Notification of total number.--Not later than 
 December 31, 2022, and each year thereafter, the Administrator 
 shall notify the congressional defense committees, the 
 Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of 
 Representatives, and the Committee on Energy and Natural 
 Resources of the Senate of the total number of employees of the 
 Office of the Administrator during the previous fiscal year, 
 broken down by the office in which the employees are 
 assigned.''.
 (b) Report.--Subsection (f) of such section is amended to read as 
follows:
 ``(f) Annual Report.--The Administrator shall include in the budget 
justification materials submitted to Congress in support of the budget 
of the Administration for each fiscal year (as submitted with the 
budget of the President under section 1105(a) of title 31, United 
States Code) a report containing the following information:
 ``(1) A projection of the expected number of employees of 
 the Office of the Administrator, as counted under subsection 
 (a), for the fiscal year covered by the budget justification 
 materials and the four subsequent fiscal years, broken down by 
 the office in which the employees are projected to be assigned.
 ``(2) With respect to the most recent fiscal year for which 
 data is available--
 ``(A) the number of service support contracts of 
 the Administration and whether such contracts are 
 funded using program or program direction funds;
 ``(B) the number of full-time equivalent contractor 
 employees working under each contract identified under 
 subparagraph (A);
 ``(C) the number of full-time equivalent contractor 
 employees described in subparagraph (B) that have been 
 employed under such a contract for a period greater 
 than two years;
 ``(D) with respect to each contract identified 
 under subparagraph (A)--
 ``(i) identification of each appropriations 
 account that supports the contract; and
 ``(ii) the amount obligated under the 
 contract during the fiscal year, listed by each 
 such account; and
 ``(E) with respect to each appropriations account 
 identified under subparagraph (D)(i), the total amount 
 obligated for contracts identified under subparagraph 
 (A).''.

SEC. 3114. MODIFICATION TO CERTAIN REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) Reports on Nuclear Warhead Acquisition Process.--Section 4223 
of the Atomic Energy Defense Act (50 U.S.C. 2538e) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(2)(A), by striking ``submit to the 
 congressional defense committees a plan'' and inserting 
 ``provide to the congressional defense committees a briefing on 
 a plan''; and
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``certify to the 
 congressional defense committees that'' and inserting 
 ``provide to the congressional defense committees a 
 briefing that includes certifications that--''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) by inserting ``, or provide to such 
 committees a briefing on,'' after ``a report 
 containing''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``or briefing, as the 
 case may be'' after ``date of the report''.
 (b) Reports on Transfers of Civil Nuclear Technology.--Section 3136 
of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 (42 
U.S.C. 2077a) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (i) as subsection (j); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (h) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(i) Combination of Reports.--The Secretary of Energy may submit 
the annual reports required by subsections (a), (d), and (e) as a 
single annual report, including by providing portions of the 
information so required as an annex to the single annual report.''.
 (c) Conforming Amendment.--Section 161 n. of the Atomic Energy Act 
of 1954 (50 U.S.C. 2201(n)) is amended by striking ``section 3136(i) of 
the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 (42 U.S.C. 
2077a(i)))'' and inserting ``section 3136 of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016 (42 U.S.C. 2077a(j)))''.

SEC. 3115. MODIFICATIONS TO LONG-TERM PLAN FOR MEETING NATIONAL 
 SECURITY REQUIREMENTS FOR UNENCUMBERED URANIUM.

 (a) Timing.--Subsection (a) of section 4221 of the Atomic Energy 
Defense Act (50 U.S.C. 2538c) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``each even-numbered year through 2026'' 
 and inserting ``each odd-numbered year through 2029''; and
 (2) by striking ``2065'' and inserting ``2070''.
 (b) Plan Requirements.--Subsection (b) of such section is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``through 2070'' after 
 ``unencumbered uranium'';
 (2) by redesignating paragraphs (4) through (8) as 
 paragraphs (5) through (9), respectively;
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new 
 paragraph (4):
 ``(4) An assessment of current and projected unencumbered 
 uranium production by private industry in the United States 
 that could support future defense requirements.''; and
 (4) by striking paragraphs (8) and (9), as so redesignated, 
 and inserting the following new paragraphs:
 ``(8) An assessment of--
 ``(A) whether, and if so when, additional 
 enrichment of uranium will be required to meet national 
 security requirements; and
 ``(B) the options the Secretary is considering to 
 meet such requirements, including an estimated cost and 
 timeline for each option and a description of any 
 changes to policy or law that the Secretary determines 
 would be required for each option.
 ``(9) An assessment of whether, and how, options to provide 
 additional enriched uranium to meet national security 
 requirements could, as an additional benefit, contribute to the 
 establishment of a sustained domestic enrichment capacity and 
 allow the commercial sector of the United States to reduce 
 reliance on importing uranium from adversary countries.''.
 (c) Comptroller General Review.--Such section is further amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (d) as subsection (e); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(d) Comptroller General Briefing.--Not later than 180 days after 
the date on which the congressional defense committees receive each 
plan under subsection (a), the Comptroller General of the United States 
shall provide to the Committees on Armed Services of the House of 
Representatives and the Senate a briefing that includes an assessment 
of the plan.''.

SEC. 3116. MODIFICATION OF MINOR CONSTRUCTION THRESHOLD FOR PLANT 
 PROJECTS.

 Section 4701(2) of the Atomic Energy Defense Act (50 U.S.C. 
2741(2)) is amended by striking ``$25,000,000'' and inserting 
``$30,000,000''.

SEC. 3117. PROHIBITION ON AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS TO RECONVERT OR RETIRE 
 W76-2 WARHEADS.

 (a) Prohibition.--Except as provided in subsection (b), none of the 
funds authorized to be appropriated by this Act or otherwise made 
available for fiscal year 2023 for the National Nuclear Security 
Administration may be obligated or expended to reconvert or retire a 
W76-2 warhead.
 (b) Waiver.--The Administrator for Nuclear Security may waive the 
prohibition in subsection (a) if the Administrator, in consultation 
with the Secretary of Defense, and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff, certifies in writing to the congressional defense committees--
 (1) that Russia and China do not possess naval capabilities 
 similar to the W76-2 warhead in the active stockpiles of the 
 respective country; and
 (2) that the Department of Defense does not have a valid 
 military requirement for the W76-2 warhead.

SEC. 3118. COMPTROLLER GENERAL STUDY ON NATIONAL NUCLEAR SECURITY 
 ADMINISTRATION MANAGEMENT AND OPERATION CONTRACTING 
 PROCESS.

 (a) Study and Report Required.--Not later than 180 days after the 
date of the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the 
United States shall--
 (1) conduct a study to identify and assess the process by 
 which the Administrator for Nuclear Security awards management 
 and operation contracts for Kansas City National Security 
 Campus, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Los Alamos 
 National Laboratory, Nevada National Security Site, Y-12 
 National Security Complex, Pantex Plant, Sandia National 
 Laboratories, and Savannah River Site; and
 (2) submit to the Administrator, the Nuclear Weapons 
 Council, and the congressional defense committees a report 
 containing the findings of such study and any recommendations 
 that the Comptroller General identifies based on its analysis.
 (b) Matters.--The report under subsection (a) shall include the 
following:
 (1) An evaluation of the process by which management and 
 operation contracts are awarded to contractors for National 
 Nuclear Security Administration facilities.
 (2) A detailed analysis of the impact that transitioning to 
 a new contractor has on the mission and workforce of the 
 National Nuclear Security Administration, including an 
 assessment of--
 (A) costs incurred when a management and operation 
 contract is awarded and then later canceled;
 (B) cost estimates for the contract award process; 
 and
 (C) any impact to the overall mission of the 
 facility.
 (3) An identification of factors involved in the awarding 
 of the contract that could negatively affect the workforce.
 (4) A review of any recent successful protests against the 
 award of a management and operation contract.
 (5) Such other matters as may be determined appropriate by 
 the Comptroller General.
 (c) Briefing.--Not later than 90 days after the date on which the 
Administrator receives the report submitted under subsection (a), the 
Administrator, in coordination with the Nuclear Weapons Council, shall 
provide to the congressional defense committees a briefing on any 
statutory changes the Administrator determines necessary to improve the 
management and operation contract awarding process and to conduct the 
process in a more cost effective manner.

SEC. 3119. FUNDING FOR W80-4 LIFE EXTENSION PROGRAM.

 (a) Increase.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 3101 for the National Nuclear Security Administration, as 
specified in the corresponding funding table in section 4701, for 
Stockpile Major Modernization, W80-4 Life Extension Program is hereby 
increased by $5,000,000.
 (b) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated in 
section 3101 for the National Nuclear Security Administration, as 
specified in the corresponding funding table in section 4701, for 
Maintenance and Repair of Facilities, Deferred Maintenance is hereby 
reduced by $5,000,000.

SEC. 3120. REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC REQUEST FOR NEW OR MODIFIED 
 NUCLEAR WEAPONS.

 (a) Activities Covered.--Subsection (a)(2) of section 4209 of the 
Atomic Energy Defense Act (50 U.S.C. 2529) is amended by striking 
``research and development which could lead to the production'' both 
places it appears and inserting ``research and development for the 
production''.
 (b) Modification to Funding Request Format.--Subsection (b)(1) of 
such section is amended by striking ``, or any concept work prior to 
phase 1 or 6.1 (as the case may be),''.
 (c) Exceptions.--Subsection (c) of such section is amended to read 
as follows:
 ``(c) Exceptions.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to funds for 
purposes of conducting, or providing for the conduct of, any of the 
following:
 ``(1) Research and development, or manufacturing and 
 engineering, determined by the Secretary to be necessary to 
 address proliferation concerns.
 ``(2) Research and development for exploratory concept work 
 relating to nuclear weapons.''.

SEC. 3121. EXTENSION OF DEADLINE FOR TRANSFER OF PARCELS OF LAND IN NEW 
 MEXICO.

 Section 3120 of the Ike Skelton National Defense Authorization Act 
for Fiscal Year 2011 (42 U.S.C. 2391 note) is amended by striking 
``2022'' each place that it appears and inserting ``2032''.

SEC. 3122. DESIGNATION OF NATIONAL NUCLEAR SECURITY ADMINISTRATION AS 
 TECHNICAL NUCLEAR FORENSICS LEAD.

 (a) In General.--Section 3211(b) of the National Nuclear Security 
Administration Act (50 U.S.C. 2401(b)) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new paragraph:
 ``(7) To lead the technical nuclear forensics efforts of 
 the United States.''.
 (b) Rule of Construction.--The amendment made by this section may 
not be construed to alter the functions vested in any department or 
agency of the Federal Government by statute other than the National 
Nuclear Security Administration pursuant to such amendment.

 TITLE XXXII--DEFENSE NUCLEAR FACILITIES SAFETY BOARD

SEC. 3201. AUTHORIZATION.

 There are authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 2023, 
$41,401,000 for the operation of the Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety 
Board under chapter 21 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2286 
et seq.).

SEC. 3202. CONTINUATION OF FUNCTIONS AND POWERS DURING LOSS OF QUORUM.

 Section 311(e) of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2286(e)) 
is amended--
 (1) by striking ``Three members'' and inserting ``(1) Three 
 members''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
 ``(2) During a covered period, the Chairperson may carry out the 
functions and powers of the Board under sections 312 through 316, 
notwithstanding that a quorum does not exist.
 ``(3) In carrying out the functions and powers of the Board during 
a covered period pursuant to paragraph (2), the Chairperson shall 
consult with any other member of the Board who is serving during the 
covered period and not incapacitated, except that the Chairperson may 
make recommendations to the Secretary of Energy and initiate 
investigations under section 312 only with the concurrence of any such 
other member.
 ``(4) In this subsection, the term `covered period' means a period 
beginning on the date on which a quorum specified in paragraph (1) does 
not exist by reason of either or both a vacancy in the membership of 
the Board or the incapacity of a member of the Board and ending on the 
earlier of--
 ``(A) the date that is one year after such beginning date; 
 or
 ``(B) the date on which a quorum exists.''.

 TITLE XXXIV--NAVAL PETROLEUM RESERVES

SEC. 3401. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 (a) Amount.--There are hereby authorized to be appropriated to the 
Secretary of Energy $13,004,000 for fiscal year 2023 for the purpose of 
carrying out activities under chapter 869 of title 10, United States 
Code, relating to the naval petroleum reserves.
 (b) Period of Availability.--Funds appropriated pursuant to the 
authorization of appropriations in subsection (a) shall remain 
available until expended.

 TITLE XXXV--MARITIME SECURITY

 Subtitle A--Maritime Administration

SEC. 3501. AUTHORIZATION OF THE MARITIME ADMINISTRATION.

 (a) In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the 
Department of Transportation for fiscal year 2023 for programs 
associated with maintaining the United States merchant marine, the 
following amounts:
 (1) For expenses necessary for operations of the United 
 States Merchant Marine Academy, $99,748,000, of which--
 (A) $87,848,000 shall be for Academy operations; 
 and
 (B) $11,900,000 shall be for capital asset 
 management at the Academy.
 (2) For expenses necessary to support the State maritime 
 academies, $120,700,000, of which--
 (A) $2,400,000 is for the Student Incentive 
 Program;
 (B) $6,000,000 is for direct payments;
 (C) $6,800,000 is for training ship fuel 
 assistance;
 (D) $30,500,000 for school ship maintenance and 
 repair; and
 (E) $75,000,000 for the National Security Multi-
 Mission Vessel.
 (3) For expenses necessary to support Maritime 
 Administration operations and programs, Headquarters 
 Operations, $67,433,000.
 (4) For expenses necessary to dispose of vessels in the 
 National Defense Reserve Fleet, $6,000,000.
 (5) For expenses necessary to maintain and preserve a 
 United States flag merchant marine to serve the national 
 security needs of the United States under chapter 531 of title 
 46, United States Code, $318,000,000.
 (6) For expenses necessary for the loan guarantee program 
 authorized under chapter 537 of title 46, United States Code, 
 $33,000,000, of which--
 (A) $30,000,000 may be used for the cost (as 
 defined in section 502(5) of the Federal Credit Reform 
 Act of 1990 (2 U.S.C. 661a(5))) of loan guarantees 
 under the program; and
 (B) $3,000,000 may be used for administrative 
 expenses relating to loan guarantee commitments under 
 the program.
 (7) For expenses necessary to provide for the Tanker 
 Security Fleet, as authorized under chapter 534 of title 46, 
 United States Code, $60,000,000.
 (8) For expenses necessary to support maritime 
 environmental and technical assistance activities authorized 
 under section 50307 of title 46, United States Code, 
 $15,000,000.
 (9) For expenses necessary to support marine highway 
 program activities authorized under chapter 556 of such title, 
 $15,000,000.
 (10) For expenses necessary to provide assistance to small 
 shipyards and for the maritime training program authorized 
 under section 54101 of title 46, United States Code, 
 $30,000,000.
 (11) For expenses necessary to implement the port 
 infrastructure development activities authorized under 
 subsections (a) and (b) of section 54301 of title 46, United 
 States Code, $685,000,000.
 (12) For expenses necessary to provide for sealift 
 contested environment evaluation, $2,000,000.
 (13) For expenses necessary to provide for National Defense 
 Reserve Fleet resiliency, $800,000.
 (14) For expenses necessary to provide for training ship 
 State of Michigan maritime training platform requirements, 
 $1,200,000.
 (b) Limitation.--None of the amounts authorized to be appropriated 
for port infrastructure development activities under subsection (a)(11) 
may be used to provide a grant to purchase fully automated cargo 
handling equipment that is remotely operated or remotely monitored, 
with or without the exercise of human intervention or control, if the 
Secretary of Transportation determines such equipment would result in a 
net loss of jobs within a port or port terminal.

SEC. 3502. SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION RESPONSIBILITY WITH RESPECT TO 
 CARGOES PROCURED, FURNISHED, OR FINANCED BY OTHER FEDERAL 
 DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Maritime Administration 
shall issue a final rule to implement and enforce section 55305(d) of 
title 46, United States Code.
 (b) Programs of Other Agencies.--Section 55305(d)(2)(A) of title 
46, United States Code, is amended by inserting after ``section'' the 
following: ``and annually submit to the Committee on Transportation and 
Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and the Committee on 
Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate a report on the 
administration of such programs''.

SEC. 3503. UNITED STATES MARINE HIGHWAY PROGRAM.

 (a) United States Marine Highway Program.--Section 55601 of title 
46, United States Code, is amended to read as follows:
``Sec. 55601. United States marine highway program
 ``(a) Establishment.--There is in the Department of Transportation 
a program, to be known as the `United States marine highway program'.
 ``(b) Criteria.--In order to be designated as a marine highway 
transportation route under subsection (c) or as a marine highway 
transportation project under subsection (d), a route or project shall--
 ``(1) provide a coordinated and capable alternative to 
 landside transportation;
 ``(2) mitigate or relieve landside congestion; or
 ``(3) promote marine highway transportation.
 ``(c) Marine Highway Transportation Routes.--The Secretary may--
 ``(1) designate a route that meets the criteria under 
 subsection (b) as a marine highway transportation route; and
 ``(2) collect and disseminate data related to such 
 designation.
 ``(d) Project Designation.--The Secretary may--
 ``(1) designate a project that meets the criteria under 
 subsection (b) as a marine highway transportation project if 
 the Secretary determines that such project uses vessels 
 documented under chapter 121 and--
 ``(A) develops, expands, or promotes--
 ``(i) marine highway transportation 
 services;
 ``(ii) shipper utilization of marine 
 highway transportation; or
 ``(iii) port and landside infrastructure 
 for which assistance is not available under 
 section 54301; or
 ``(B) implements strategies developed under section 
 5560; and
 ``(2) conduct research on solutions to impediments to such 
 projects.
 ``(e) Assistance.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may make grants, or enter 
 into contracts or cooperative agreements, to implement a marine 
 highway transportation project designated under subsection (e) 
 or a component of such a project.
 ``(2) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant or to 
 enter into a contract or cooperative agreement under this 
 subsection, an applicant shall--
 ``(A) submit to the Secretary an application in 
 such form and manner, at such time, and containing such 
 information as the Secretary may require; and
 ``(B) demonstrate to the satisfaction of the 
 Secretary that--
 ``(i) the proposed project is financially 
 viable;
 ``(ii) the funds received under the grant, 
 contract, or cooperative agreement will be 
 spent or used efficiently and effectively; and
 ``(iii) a market exists for the services of 
 the proposed project, as evidenced by contracts 
 or written statements of intent from potential 
 customers.
 ``(3) Non-federal share.--Not more than 80 percent of the 
 funding for any project for which funding is provided under 
 this subsection may come from Federal sources.
 ``(4) Preference for financially viable projects.-- In 
 awarding grants or entering in contracts or cooperative 
 agreements under this subsection, the Secretary shall give a 
 preference to those projects or components that present the 
 most financially viable transportation services and require the 
 lowest percentage Federal share of the costs.
 ``(f) Additional Program Activities.--In carrying out the program 
established under subsection (a), the Secretary of Transportation may--
 ``(1) coordinate with ports, State departments of 
 transportation, localities, other public agencies, and 
 appropriate private sector entities on the development of 
 landside facilities and infrastructure to support marine 
 highway transportation; and
 ``(2) develop performance measures for the program.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 556 of title 46, 
United States Code, is amended by striking the item relating to section 
55601 and inserting the following:

``55601. United States marine highway program.''.

SEC. 3504. MULTISTATE, STATE, AND REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION PLANNING.

 (a) Multistate, State, and Regional Transportation Planning.--
Chapter 556 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by inserting 
after section 55602 the following:
``Sec. 55603. Multistate, State, and regional transportation planning
 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with Federal 
entities, State and local governments, and appropriate private sector 
entities, may develop strategies to encourage the use of marine highway 
transportation for transportation of passengers and cargo.
 ``(b) Strategies.--If the Secretary develops strategies under 
subsection (a), the Secretary may--
 ``(1) assess the extent to which States and local 
 governments include marine highway transportation and other 
 marine transportation solutions in transportation planning;
 ``(2) encourage State departments of transportation to 
 develop strategies, where appropriate, to incorporate marine 
 highway transportation, ferries, and other marine 
 transportation solutions for regional and interstate transport 
 of freight and passengers in transportation planning; and
 ``(3) encourage groups of States and multistate 
 transportation entities to determine how marine highways can 
 address congestion, bottlenecks, and other interstate 
 transportation challenges.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 556 of title 46, 
United States Code, is amended by striking the item relating to section 
55603 and inserting the following:

``55603. Multistate, State, and regional transportation planning.''.

 Subtitle B--Merchant Marine Academy

SEC. 3511. APPOINTMENT OF SUPERINTENDENT OF UNITED STATES MERCHANT 
 MARINE ACADEMY.

 Subsection (c) of section 51301 of title 46, United States Code, is 
amended to read as follows:
 ``(c) Superintendent.--The immediate command of the United States 
Merchant Marine Academy shall be in the Superintendent of the Academy, 
who shall be appointed by the Secretary of Transportation and subject 
to the direction of the Maritime Administrator under the general 
supervision of the Secretary of Transportation.''.

SEC. 3512. EXEMPTION OF CERTAIN STUDENTS FROM REQUIREMENT TO OBTAIN 
 MERCHANT MARINER LICENSE.

 Section 51309 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by adding 
at the end the following:
 ``(d) Exemption From Requirement to Obtain License.--The Secretary 
may modify or waive the requirements of section 51306(a)(2) for 
students who provide reasonable concerns with obtaining a merchant 
mariner license, including fear for safety while at sea after instances 
of trauma, medical condition, or inability to obtain required sea time 
or endorsement so long as such inability is not due to a lack of 
proficiency or violation of Academy policy. The issuance of a 
modification or waiver under this subsection shall not delay or impede 
graduation from the Academy.''.

SEC. 3513. PROTECTION OF CADETS FROM SEXUAL ASSAULT ONBOARD VESSELS.

 (a) In General.--Section 51322 of title 46, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) by striking subsection (a) and inserting the following:
 ``(a) Safety Criteria.--The Maritime Administrator, after 
consulting with the Secretary of the department in which the Coast 
Guard is operating, shall establish--
 ``(1) criteria, to which an owner or operator of a vessel 
 engaged in commercial service shall adhere prior to carrying a 
 cadet performing their Sea Year service from the United States 
 Merchant Marine Academy, that addresses prevention of, and 
 response to, sexual harassment, dating violence, domestic 
 violence, sexual assault, and stalking; and
 ``(2) a process for collecting pertinent information from 
 such owners or operators and verifying their compliance with 
 the criteria.
 ``(b) Minimum Standards.--At a minimum, the criteria established 
under subsection (a) shall require the vessel owners or operators to 
have policies that address--
 ``(1) communication between a cadet and an individual 
 ashore who is trained in responding to incidents of sexual 
 harassment, dating violence, domestic violence, sexual assault, 
 and stalking;
 ``(2) the safety and security of cadet staterooms while a 
 cadet is onboard the vessel;
 ``(3) requirements for crew to report complaints or 
 incidents of sexual assault, sexual harassment, dating 
 violence, domestic violence, and stalking consistent with the 
 requirements in section 10104;
 ``(4) the maintenance of records of reports of sexual 
 harassment, dating violence, domestic violence, sexual assault, 
 and stalking onboard a vessel carrying a cadet;
 ``(5) the maintenance of records of sexual harassment, 
 dating violence, domestic violence, sexual assault, and 
 stalking training as required under subsection (f);
 ``(6) a requirement for the owner or operator provide each 
 cadet a copy of the policies and procedures related to sexual 
 harassment, dating violence, domestic violence, sexual assault, 
 and stalking policies that pertain to the vessel on which they 
 will be employed; and
 ``(7) any other issues the Maritime Administrator 
 determines necessary to ensure the safety of cadets during Sea 
 Year training.
 ``(c) Self-certification by Owners or Operators.--The Maritime 
Administrator shall require the owner or operator of any commercial 
vessel that is carrying a cadet from the United States Merchant Marine 
Academy to annually certify that--
 ``(1) the vessel owner or operator is in compliance with 
 the criteria established under subsection (a); and
 ``(2) the vessel is in compliance with the International 
 Convention of Safety of Life at Sea, 1974 (32 UST 47) and 
 sections 8106 and 70103(c).
 ``(d) Information, Training, and Resources.--The Maritime 
Administrator shall ensure that a cadet participating in Sea Year--
 ``(1) receives training specific to vessel safety, 
 including sexual harassment, dating violence, domestic 
 violence, sexual assault, and stalking prevention and response 
 training, prior to the cadet boarding a vessel for Sea Year 
 training;
 ``(2) is equipped with an appropriate means of 
 communication and has been trained on its use;
 ``(3) has access to a helpline to report incidents of 
 sexual harassment, dating violence, domestic violence, sexual 
 assault, or stalking that is monitored by trained personnel; 
 and
 ``(4) is informed of the legal requirements for vessel 
 owners and operators to provide for the security of individuals 
 onboard, including requirements under section 70103(c) and 
 chapter 81.'';
 (2) by redesignating subsections (b) through (d) as 
 subsections (e) through (g), respectively;
 (3) in subsection (e), as so redesignated, by striking 
 paragraph (2) and inserting the following new paragraphs:
 ``(2) Access to information.--The vessel operator shall 
 make available to staff conducting a vessel check such 
 information as the Maritime Administrator determines is 
 necessary to determine whether the vessel is being operated in 
 compliance with the criteria established under subsection (a).
 ``(3) Removal of students.--If staff of the Academy or 
 staff of the Maritime Administration determine that a 
 commercial vessel is not in compliance with the criteria 
 established under subsection (a), the staff--
 ``(A) may remove a cadet of the Academy from the 
 vessel; and
 ``(B) shall report such determination of non-
 compliance to the owner or operator of the vessel.'';
 (4) in subsection (f), as so redesignated, by striking ``or 
 the seafarer union'' and inserting ``and the seafarer union''; 
 and
 (5) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(h) Noncommercial Vessels.--
 ``(1) In general.--A public vessel (as defined in section 
 2101) shall not be subject to the requirements of this section.
 ``(2) Requirements for participation.--The Maritime 
 Administrator may establish criteria and requirements that the 
 operators of public vessels shall meet to participate in the 
 Sea Year program of the United States Merchant Marine Academy 
 that addresses prevention of, and response to, sexual 
 harassment, dating violence, domestic violence, sexual assault, 
 and stalking.''.
 (b) Regulations.--
 (1) In general.--The Maritime Administrator may prescribe 
 rules necessary to carry out the amendments made by this 
 section.
 (2) Interim rules.--The Maritime Administrator may 
 prescribe interim rules necessary to carry out the amendments 
 made by this section. For this purpose, the Maritime 
 Administrator in prescribing rules under paragraph (1) is 
 excepted from compliance with the notice and comment 
 requirements of section 553 of title 5, United States Code. All 
 rules prescribed under the authority of the amendments made by 
 this section shall remain in effect until superseded by a final 
 rule.
 (c) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Sea year compliance.--Section 3514 of the National 
 Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017 (46 U.S.C. 51318 
 note) is repealed.
 (2) Access of academy cadets to dod safe or equivalent 
 helpline.--Section 3515 of the National Defense Authorization 
 Act for Fiscal Year 2018 (46 U.S.C. 51518 note) is amended by 
 striking subsection (b) and redesignating subsection (c) as 
 subsection (b).

SEC. 3514. REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO TRAINING OF MERCHANT MARINE ACADEMY 
 CADETS ON CERTAIN VESSELS.

 (a) Requirements Relating to Protection of Cadets From Sexual 
Assault Onboard Vessels.--
 (1) In general.--Subsection (b) of section 51307 of title 
 46, United States Code, is amended to read as follows:
 ``(b) Sea Year Cadets on Certain Vessels.--
 ``(1) Requirements.--The Secretary shall require an 
 operator of a vessel participating in the Maritime Security 
 Program under chapter 531 of this title, the Cable Security 
 Fleet under chapter 532 of this title, or the Tanker Security 
 Fleet under chapter 534 of this title to--
 ``(A) carry on each Maritime Security Program 
 vessel, Cable Security Fleet vessel, or Tanker Security 
 Fleet vessel 2 United States Merchant Marine Academy 
 cadets, if available, on each voyage; and
 ``(B) implement and adhere to policies, programs, 
 criteria, and requirements established pursuant to 
 section 51322 of this title.
 ``(2) Failure to implement or adhere to requirements.--
 Failure to implement or adhere to the policies, programs, 
 criteria, and requirements referred to in paragraph (1)(B) may, 
 as determined by the Maritime Administrator, constitute a 
 violation of an operating agreement entered into under chapter 
 531, 532, or 533 of this title and the Maritime Administrator 
 may--
 ``(A) require the operator to take corrective 
 actions; or
 ``(B) withhold payment due to the operator until 
 the violation, as determined by the Maritime 
 Administrator, has been remedied.
 ``(3) Withheld payments.--Any payment withheld pursuant to 
 paragraph (2)(B) may be paid, upon a determination by the 
 Maritime Administrator that the operator is in compliance with 
 the policies, programs, criteria, and requirements referred to 
 in paragraph (1)(B).''.
 (2) Applicability.--Paragraph (2) of subsection (b) of 
 section 51307, as amended by paragraph (1), shall apply with 
 respect to any failure to implement or adhere to the policies, 
 programs, criteria, and requirements referred to in paragraph 
 (1)(B) of such subsection that occurs on or after the date that 
 is one year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Requirements for Government-owned Vessels.--Subsection (c) of 
such section is amended--
 (1) in the subsection heading by striking ``Military 
 Sealift Command Vessels'' and inserting ``Government-owned 
 Vessels'';
 (2) in paragraph (1), by redesignating subparagraphs (A) 
 and (B) as clauses (i) and (ii), respectively, and adjusting 
 the margins accordingly;
 (3) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B), respectively, and adjusting the 
 margins accordingly;
 (4) by inserting before subparagraph (A), as so 
 redesignated, the following:
 ``(1) In general.--Consistent with the purpose of the 
 United States Merchant Marine Academy, as described in section 
 51301(b) of this chapter, vessels owned or chartered by the 
 United States Government, including vessels of the United 
 States Coast Guard, United States Navy, Military Sealift 
 Command, are proper vessels for training cadets.
 ``(2) Military sealift command vessels.--'';
 (5) in subparagraph (A), as so redesignated, by striking 
 ``paragraph (2)'' and inserting ``subparagraph (B)''; and
 (6) in subparagraph (B), as so redesignated, by striking 
 ``paragraph (1)'' and inserting ``subparagraph (A)''.
 (c) Conforming Amendments.--Title 46, United States Code, is 
further amended--
 (1) in section 53106(a)(2), by inserting ``or section 
 51307(b)'' after ``this section'';
 (2) in section 53206(a)(2), by inserting ``or section 
 51307(b)'' after ``this section''; and
 (3) in section 53406(a), by inserting ``or section 
 51307(b)'' after ``this section''.

SEC. 3515. REPORTS ON MATTERS RELATING TO THE UNITED STATES MERCHANT 
 MARINE ACADEMY.

 (a) Report on Implementation of NAPA Recommendations.--
 (1) In general.--In accordance with paragraph (3), the 
 Secretary of Transportation shall submit to the appropriate 
 congressional committees reports on the status of the 
 implementation of the recommendations specified in paragraph 
 (4).
 (2) Elements.--Each report under paragraph (1) shall 
 include the following:
 (A) A description of the status of the 
 implementation of each recommendation specified in 
 paragraph (4), including whether the Secretary--
 (i) concurs with the recommendation;
 (ii) partially concurs with the 
 recommendation; or
 (iii) does not concur with the 
 recommendation.
 (B) An explanation of--
 (i) with respect to a recommendation with 
 which the Secretary concurs, the actions the 
 Secretary intends to take to implement such 
 recommendation, including--
 (I) any rules, regulations, 
 policies, or other guidance that have 
 been issued, revised, changed, or 
 cancelled as a result of the 
 implementation of the recommendation; 
 and
 (II) any impediments to the 
 implementation of the recommendation;
 (ii) with respect to a recommendation with 
 which the Secretary partially concurs, the 
 actions the Secretary intends to take to 
 implement the portion of such recommendation 
 with which the Secretary concurs, including--
 (I) intermediate actions, milestone 
 dates, and the expected completion date 
 for the implementation of the portion 
 of the recommendation; and
 (II) any rules, regulations, 
 policies, or other guidance that are 
 expected to be issued, revised, 
 changed, or cancelled as a result of 
 the implementation of the portion of 
 the recommendation;
 (iii) with respect to a recommendation with 
 which the Secretary does not concur, an 
 explanation of why the Secretary does not 
 concur with such recommendation; and
 (iv) any statutory changes that may be 
 necessary--
 (I) to fully implement the 
 recommendations specified in paragraph 
 (4) with which the Secretary concurs; 
 or
 (II) to partially implement the 
 recommendations specified in such 
 paragraph with which the Secretary 
 partially concurs.
 (C) A visual depiction of the status of the 
 completion of the recommendations specified in 
 paragraph (4).
 (3) Timing of reports.--The Secretary of Transportation 
 shall submit an initial report under paragraph (1) not later 
 than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act. 
 Following the submittal of the initial report, the Secretary 
 shall submit updated versions of the report not less frequently 
 than once every 180 days until the date on which the Secretary 
 submits to the appropriate congressional committees a 
 certification that each recommendation specified in paragraph 
 (4)--
 (A) with which the Secretary concurs--
 (i) has been fully implemented; or
 (ii) cannot be fully implemented, including 
 an explanation of why; and
 (B) with which the Secretary partially concurs--
 (i) has been partially implemented; or
 (ii) cannot be partially implemented, 
 including an explanation of why.
 (4) Recommendations specified.--The recommendations 
 specified in this paragraph are the recommendations set forth 
 in the report prepared by a panel of the National Academy of 
 Public Administration pursuant to section 3513 of the National 
 Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020 (Public Law 116-
 92; 133 Stat. 1979) titled ``Organizational Assessment of the 
 U.S. Merchant Marine Academy: A Path Forward'', dated November 
 2021.
 (b) Report on Implementation of Policy Relating to Sexual 
Harassment and Other Matters.--Not later than one year after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall 
submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report on the 
status of the implementation the policy on sexual harassment, dating 
violence, domestic violence, sexual assault, and stalking at the United 
States Merchant Marine Academy as required under section 51318 of title 
46, United States Code.
 (c) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate; and
 (2) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of 
 Representatives.

 Subtitle C--Vessels

SEC. 3521. WAIVER OF NAVIGATION AND VESSEL-INSPECTION LAWS.

 Section 501 of title 46, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)(1) by inserting ``on a vessel 
 specific basis'' after ``those laws''; and
 (2) in subsection (c)(1)--
 (A) by inserting ``and the individual requesting 
 such waiver (if not the owner or operator of the 
 vessel)'' before ``shall submit'';
 (B) in subparagraph (C) by striking ``and'';
 (C) by redesignating subparagraphs (B), (C), and 
 (D), as subparagraphs (C), (D), and (G), respectively;
 (D) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the 
 following:
 ``(B) the name of the owner and operator of the 
 vessel;''; and
 (E) by inserting after subparagraph (D), as so 
 redesignated, the following:
 ``(E) a description of the cargo carried;
 ``(F) an explanation as to why the waiver is 
 necessary in the interest of national defense; and''.

SEC. 3522. CERTIFICATES OF NUMBERS FOR UNDOCUMENTED VESSELS.

 Section 12304(a) of title 46, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by striking ``shall be pocketsized,''; and
 (2) by inserting ``in hard copy or digital form. Any 
 certificate issued in hard copy under this section shall be 
 pocketsized. The certificate shall be'' after ``and may be''.

SEC. 3523. RECAPITALIZATION OF NATIONAL DEFENSE RESERVE FLEET.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Transportation, in consultation 
with the Chief of Naval Operations and the Commandant of the Coast 
Guard, shall direct the Maritime Administrator to carry out a program 
under which the Administrator--
 (1) shall complete the design of a roll-on, roll-off cargo 
 vessel for the National Defense Reserve Fleet to allow for the 
 construction of such vessel to begin in fiscal year 2024; and
 (2) subject to the availability of appropriations, shall 
 have an entity enter into a contract for the construction of 
 not more than ten such vessels in accordance with this section.
 (b) Construction and Documentation Requirements.--A vessel 
constructed pursuant to this section shall meet the requirements for 
and be issued a certificate of documentation and a coastwise 
endorsement under chapter 121 of title 46, United States Code.
 (c) Design Standards and Construction Practices.--Subject to 
subsection (b), a vessel constructed pursuant to this section shall be 
constructed using commercial design standards and commercial 
construction practices that are consistent with the best interests of 
the Federal Government.
 (d) Consultation With Other Federal Entities.--The Maritime 
Administrator may consult and coordinate with the Secretary of the Navy 
regarding the vessel described in subsection (a) and activities 
associated with such vessel.
 (e) Contracting.--The Maritime Administrator shall provide for an 
entity other than the Maritime Administration to contract for the 
construction of the vessel described in subsection (a).
 (f) Limitation on Use of Funds for Used Vessels.--Amounts 
authorized to be appropriated by this or any other Act for use by the 
Maritime Administration to carry out this section may not be used for 
the procurement of any used vessel.
 (g) Buy America Requirement.--Section 4864 of title 10, United 
States Code, shall apply to all components of a vessel constructed 
under this section.

SEC. 3524. CARGOES PROCURED, FURNISHED, OR FINANCED BY THE UNITED 
 STATES GOVERNMENT.

 (a) In General.--Section 55305 of title 46, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) by striking subsection (a);
 (2) by redesignating subsection (b) as subsection (a);
 (3) in subsection (c)--
 (A) by striking ``The President'' and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(1) In general.--The President''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) Submission to congress.--At least once each fiscal 
 year, the President or the Secretary of Defense, as applicable, 
 shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees, in 
 writing, a notice of any waiver granted under this subsection 
 and the reasons for granting such waiver.'';
 (4) by redesignating subsections (c) through (e) as 
 subsections (d) through (f), respectively;
 (5) by inserting after subsection (a) the following:
 ``(b) Eligible Vessels.--To be eligible to carry cargo under this 
section, a privately-owned commercial vessel--
 ``(1) shall be documented under the laws of the United 
 States for at least 3 years; or
 ``(2) may be documented under the laws of the United States 
 for less than 3 years if the vessel owner signs an agreement 
 with the Secretary providing that--
 ``(A) the vessel shall remain documented under the 
 laws of the United States for at least 3 years; and
 ``(B) the vessel owner shall, upon request of the 
 Secretary, agree to enroll the vessel in an Emergency 
 Preparedness Program under chapter 531 or voluntary 
 agreement authorized under section 708 of the Defense 
 Production Act of 1950 (50 U.S.C. 4558) and shall 
 remain so enrolled until the vessel ceases to be 
 documented under the laws of the United States.
 ``(c) Violation of Agreement.--
 ``(1) In general.--A vessel under an agreement described in 
 subsection (b)(2) may be seized by and forfeited to the United 
 States if, in violation of such agreement--
 ``(A) the vessel owner places the vessel under 
 foreign registry; or
 ``(B) a person operates the vessel under the 
 authority of a foreign country.
 ``(2) Inapplicability of other law.--Section 12112 of title 
 46, United States Code, shall not apply to the seizure and 
 forfeiture of a vessel pursuant to paragraph (1).''; and
 (6) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(g) Audit and Report.--In carrying out this section, the 
Secretary shall annually--
 ``(1) audit the list of vessels that are operating under an 
 agreement described in subsection (b)(2); and
 ``(2) submit to Congress a report describing--
 ``(A) each of the vessels operating under paragraph 
 (2) of section 55305(b) and each agreement signed by 
 the Secretary pursuant to such paragraph;
 ``(B) the results of any audit described in 
 paragraph (1); and
 ``(C) any other pertinent information that the 
 Secretary determines to be of interest to Congress.''.
 (b) Technical Amendment.--
 (1) Chapter analysis.--The analysis for chapter 553 of 
 title 46, United States Code, is amended by striking the item 
 relating to subchapter I and inserting the following:

 ``subchapter i--government impelled transportation''.

 (2) Cargoes procured, furnished, or financed by the united 
 states government.--Section 55305(d)(2)(D) of title 46, United 
 States Code, is amended by striking ``section 25(c)(1) of the 
 Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 U.S.C. 
 1303(a)(1))'' and inserting ``section 1303(a)(1) of title 41, 
 United States Code,''.

 Subtitle D--Reports and Other Matters

SEC. 3532. NATIONAL MARITIME TRANSPORTATION REPORT AND STRATEGY.

 (a) National Maritime Transportation Report.--Not later than 
October 31, 2023, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
appropriate congressional committees a national maritime transportation 
report. Such report shall include each of the following:
 (1) An analysis of the causes for the decline in the number 
 of vessels documented under chapter 121 of title 46, United 
 States Code and operating in the international trade.
 (2) An examination of the national security and economic 
 requirements for the United States merchant marine during 
 peacetime and during surge and sustained national defense 
 sealift that addresses--
 (A) whether existing United States-flag shipping, 
 maritime labor, and shipbuilding and repair capacity is 
 sufficient to fulfill such sealift requirements; and
 (B) if such capacity is not sufficient, the 
 capacity, including naval auxiliary ships, that would 
 be needed during a major conflict by--
 (i) the military for strategic sealift; and
 (ii) the private sector to sustain the 
 economy.
 (3) An evaluation of the contracting procedures for United 
 States Government cargo transport and a determination of 
 whether such policies ensure sufficient access to vessels 
 documented under chapter 121 of title 46, United States Code.
 (4) A review of the objectives under section 50101(a) of 
 title 46, United States Code, and a determination of the extent 
 to which legislation, programs, policies, and regulations 
 adopted since the adoption of such objectives in the Merchant 
 Marine Act, 1936 have aligned with such objectives.
 (5) A comparison between the subsidy programs of other 
 beneficial flag programs and the existing support programs in 
 the United States.
 (b) National Maritime Transportation Strategy.--Not later than 
October 31, 2024, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the 
appropriate congressional committees a national maritime transportation 
strategy. Such strategy shall include each of the following:
 (1) Recommendations to encourage the growth of shipping by 
 United States-flag and United States-owned vessels and the 
 growth of the United States shipbuilding industrial base that 
 are--
 (A) sufficient for national and economic security;
 (B) consistent with the objectives and policy under 
 section 50101 of title 46, United States Code;
 (C) compatible with international treaties and 
 agreements governing maritime safety, security, and 
 environmental protection; and
 (D) compatible with rapidly evolving maritime 
 transportation technology.
 (2) Recommendations to increase the size of the United 
 States-flagged fleet and increase the pool of United States 
 mariners through--
 (A) bolstering existing funding sources;
 (B) new funding; or
 (C) new programs.
 (c) Independent Entity Preparation.--The Secretary of Defense shall 
seek to enter into an agreement with an appropriate non-Department of 
Defense entity that specializes in maritime research under which such 
entity shall prepare the report and strategy required under this 
section.
 (d) Consultation Requirement.--In carrying out this section, the 
Secretary of Defense shall consult with--
 (1) the Secretary of Transportation, acting through the 
 Maritime Administrator; and
 (2) the Secretary of the Department in which the Coast 
 Guard operating, acting through the Commandant of the Coast 
 Guard.
 (e) Appropriate Congressional Committees.--In this section, the 
term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of the 
 Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Commerce, Science and Transportation of the Senate.

 DIVISION D--FUNDING TABLES

SEC. 4001. AUTHORIZATION OF AMOUNTS IN FUNDING TABLES.

 (a) In General.--Whenever a funding table in this division 
specifies a dollar amount authorized for a project, program, or 
activity, the obligation and expenditure of the specified dollar amount 
for the project, program, or activity is hereby authorized, subject to 
the availability of appropriations.
 (b) Merit-based Decisions.--
 (1) In general.--A decision to commit, obligate, or expend 
 funds with or to a specific entity on the basis of a dollar 
 amount authorized pursuant to subsection (a) shall--
 (A) except as provided in paragraph (2), be based 
 on merit-based selection procedures in accordance with 
 the requirements of sections 2304(k) and 2374 of title 
 10, United States Code, or on competitive procedures; 
 and
 (B) comply with other applicable provisions of law.
 (2) Exception.--Paragraph (1)(A) does not apply to a 
 decision to commit, obligate, or expend funds on the basis of a 
 dollar amount authorized pursuant to subsection (a) if the 
 project, program, or activity involved--
 (A) is listed in section 4201; and
 (B) is identified as Community Project Funding 
 through the inclusion of the abbreviation ``CPF'' 
 immediately before the name of the project, program, or 
 activity.
 (c) Relationship to Transfer and Programming Authority.--An amount 
specified in the funding tables in this division may be transferred or 
reprogrammed under a transfer or reprogramming authority provided by 
another provision of this Act or by other law. The transfer or 
reprogramming of an amount specified in such funding tables shall not 
count against a ceiling on such transfers or reprogrammings under 
section 1001 of this Act or any other provision of law, unless such 
transfer or reprogramming would move funds between appropriation 
accounts.
 (d) Applicability to Classified Annex.--This section applies to any 
classified annex that accompanies this Act.
 (e) Oral and Written Communications.--No oral or written 
communication concerning any amount specified in the funding tables in 
this division shall supersede the requirements of this section.

 TITLE XLI--PROCUREMENT

SEC. 4101. PROCUREMENT.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
 SEC. 4101. PROCUREMENT (In Thousands of Dollars)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 FY 2023 House
 Line Item Request Authorized
------------------------------------------------------------------------
 AIRCRAFT PROCUREMENT,
 ARMY
 FIXED WING
002 MQ-1 UAV............. 350,000
 Program increase-- [350,000]
 MQ-1 for Army
 National Guard.
005 SMALL UNMANNED 10,598 20,598
 AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS.
 Short Range [10,000]
 Reconnaissance
 acceleration.
 ROTARY
007 AH-64 APACHE BLOCK 524,661 524,661
 IIIA REMAN.
008 AH-64 APACHE BLOCK 169,218 169,218
 IIIA REMAN AP.
010 UH-60 BLACKHAWK M 650,406 706,806
 MODEL (MYP).
 Add 2 aircraft-- [57,400]
 combat loss
 replacement.
 Unjustified [-1,000]
 growth- program
 management
 administration.
011 UH-60 BLACKHAWK M 68,147 68,147
 MODEL (MYP) AP.
012 UH-60 BLACK HAWK L 178,658 178,658
 AND V MODELS.
013 CH-47 HELICOPTER..... 169,149 366,849
 Three additional [197,700]
 aircraft.
014 CH-47 HELICOPTER AP.. 18,749 18,749
 MODIFICATION OF
 AIRCRAFT
016 MQ-1 PAYLOAD......... 57,700 177,700
 Program increase-- [120,000]
 recapitalize 12
 MQ-1 aircraft.
018 GRAY EAGLE MODS2..... 13,038 13,038
019 MULTI SENSOR ABN 21,380 21,380
 RECON.
020 AH-64 MODS........... 85,840 122,849
 AH-64 Link 16 [22,009]
 modifications.
 Manned-unmanned [15,000]
 teaming.
021 CH-47 CARGO 11,215 36,215
 HELICOPTER MODS
 (MYP).
 Degraded visual [25,000]
 environment
 system.
024 EMARSS SEMA MODS..... 1,591 1,591
026 UTILITY HELICOPTER 21,346 33,346
 MODS.
 Load [12,000]
 stabilization
 systems.
027 NETWORK AND MISSION 44,526 44,026
 PLAN.
 Unjustified [-500]
 growth--program
 management
 administration.
028 COMMS, NAV 72,387 72,387
 SURVEILLANCE.
030 AVIATION ASSURED PNT. 71,130 71,130
031 GATM ROLLUP.......... 14,683 14,683
 GROUND SUPPORT
 AVIONICS
034 AIRCRAFT 167,927 167,927
 SURVIVABILITY
 EQUIPMENT.
035 SURVIVABILITY CM..... 6,622 6,622
036 CMWS................. 107,112 107,112
037 COMMON INFRARED 288,209 288,209
 COUNTERMEASURES
 (CIRCM).
 OTHER SUPPORT
039 COMMON GROUND 20,823 20,823
 EQUIPMENT.
040 AIRCREW INTEGRATED 25,773 25,773
 SYSTEMS.
041 AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL.. 27,492 27,492
042 LAUNCHER, 2.75 ROCKET 1,275 1,275
 TOTAL AIRCRAFT 2,849,655 3,657,264
 PROCUREMENT,
 ARMY.

 MISSILE PROCUREMENT,
 ARMY
 SURFACE-TO-AIR
 MISSILE SYSTEM
001 LOWER TIER AIR AND 4,260 4,260
 MISSILE DEFENSE
 (AMD) SEN.
002 LOWER TIER AIR AND 9,200 9,200
 MISSILE DEFENSE
 (AMD) SEN AP.
003 M-SHORAD--PROCUREMENT 135,747 410,809
 Additional units-- [111,100]
 Army UPL.
 Hellfire pod [55,740]
 replacement--Army
 UPL.
 Production line-- [108,222]
 Army UPL.
004 MSE MISSILE.......... 1,037,093 1,037,093
005 PRECISION STRIKE 213,172 213,172
 MISSILE (PRSM).
006 INDIRECT FIRE 18,924 20,174
 PROTECTION
 CAPABILITY INC 2-I.
 Force Protection [1,250]
 Systems--Indirect
 Fire Protection
 Capability.
 AIR-TO-SURFACE
 MISSILE SYSTEM
007 HELLFIRE SYS SUMMARY. 111,294 111,294
008 JOINT AIR-TO-GROUND 216,030 216,030
 MSLS (JAGM).
010 LONG-RANGE HYPERSONIC 249,285 249,285
 WEAPON.
 ANTI-TANK/ASSAULT
 MISSILE SYS
011 JAVELIN (AAWS-M) 162,968 258,868
 SYSTEM SUMMARY.
 Program increase-- [95,900]
 CLU.
012 TOW 2 SYSTEM SUMMARY. 105,423 105,423
013 GUIDED MLRS ROCKET 785,028 750,028
 (GMLRS).
 Prior Year [-35,000]
 carryover.
014 MLRS REDUCED RANGE 4,354 4,354
 PRACTICE ROCKETS
 (RRPR).
015 HIGH MOBILITY 155,705 155,705
 ARTILLERY ROCKET
 SYSTEM (HIMARS.
016 LETHAL MINIATURE 37,937 112,937
 AERIAL MISSILE
 SYSTEM (LMAMS.
 Procurement of [75,000]
 Switchblade 600
 variant.
 MODIFICATIONS
017 PATRIOT MODS......... 253,689 1,253,689
 4 Additional Fire [1,000,000]
 Units to Equip
 16th Patriot
 Battalion.
020 ITAS/TOW MODS........ 5,154 5,154
021 MLRS MODS............ 218,359 208,359
 Program decrease. [-10,000]
022 HIMARS MODIFICATIONS. 20,468 20,468
 SPARES AND REPAIR
 PARTS
023 SPARES AND REPAIR 6,508 6,508
 PARTS.
 SUPPORT EQUIPMENT &
 FACILITIES
024 AIR DEFENSE TARGETS.. 11,317 11,317
 TOTAL MISSILE 3,761,915 5,164,127
 PROCUREMENT,
 ARMY.

 PROCUREMENT OF W&TCV,
 ARMY
 TRACKED COMBAT
 VEHICLES
001 ARMORED MULTI PURPOSE 380,677 780,677
 VEHICLE (AMPV).
 Program increase. [400,000]
002 ASSAULT BREACHER 3,852 3,852
 VEHICLE (ABV).
003 MOBILE PROTECTED 356,708 356,708
 FIREPOWER.
 MODIFICATION OF
 TRACKED COMBAT
 VEHICLES
004 STRYKER UPGRADE...... 671,271 891,171
 Program increase [219,900]
 modifications--Ar
 my UPL.
005 BRADLEY PROGRAM (MOD) 279,531 335,631
 Improved Bradley [56,100]
 Acquisition
 Subsystem
 upgrade--Army UPL.
006 M109 FOV 3,028 3,028
 MODIFICATIONS.
007 PALADIN INTEGRATED 493,003 653,003
 MANAGEMENT (PIM).
 Procure 40 [160,000]
 additional sets.
008 IMPROVED RECOVERY 138,759 138,759
 VEHICLE (M88A2
 HERCULES).
012 JOINT ASSAULT BRIDGE. 36,990 36,990
014 ABRAMS UPGRADE 656,340 1,289,934
 PROGRAM.
 Program increase [108,994]
 modifications--Ar
 my UPL.
 Program increase [524,600]
 upgrades--Army
 UPL.
 WEAPONS & OTHER
 COMBAT VEHICLES
017 MULTI-ROLE ANTI-ARMOR 26,627 26,627
 ANTI-PERSONNEL
 WEAPON S.
018 MORTAR SYSTEMS....... 8,516 8,516
019 LOCATION & AZIMUTH 48,301 48,301
 DETERMINATION SYSTEM
 (LADS.
020 XM320 GRENADE 11,703 11,703
 LAUNCHER MODULE
 (GLM).
021 PRECISION SNIPER 6,436 6,436
 RIFLE.
024 NEXT GENERATION SQUAD 221,293 221,293
 WEAPON.
 MOD OF WEAPONS AND
 OTHER COMBAT VEH
028 M777 MODS............ 3,374 3,374
029 M4 CARBINE MODS...... 8,000
 M4 Carbine Upper [8,000]
 Receivers.
033 M119 MODIFICATIONS... 2,263 2,263
 SUPPORT EQUIPMENT &
 FACILITIES
036 ITEMS LESS THAN $5.0M 2,138 2,138
 (WOCV-WTCV).
037 PRODUCTION BASE 225,220 225,220
 SUPPORT (WOCV-WTCV).
 TOTAL 3,576,030 5,053,624
 PROCUREMENT OF
 W&TCV, ARMY.

 PROCUREMENT OF
 AMMUNITION, ARMY
 SMALL/MEDIUM CAL
 AMMUNITION
001 CTG, 5.56MM, ALL 59,447 71,067
 TYPES.
 Program increase. [11,620]
002 CTG, 7.62MM, ALL 90,019 110,589
 TYPES.
 Program increase. [20,570]
003 NEXT GENERATION SQUAD 128,662 128,662
 WEAPON AMMUNITION.
004 CTG, HANDGUN, ALL 317 317
 TYPES.
005 CTG, .50 CAL, ALL 35,849 65,355
 TYPES.
 Program increase. [29,506]
006 CTG, 20MM, ALL TYPES. 11,761 21,761
 CRAM Program [10,000]
 increase.
007 CTG, 25MM, ALL TYPES. 10,270 10,270
008 CTG, 30MM, ALL TYPES. 143,045 163,045
 Program increase-- [20,000]
 M-SHORAD ground
 vehicle programs.
009 CTG, 40MM, ALL TYPES. 85,213 85,213
 MORTAR AMMUNITION
010 60MM MORTAR, ALL 33,338 33,338
 TYPES.
011 81MM MORTAR, ALL 56,577 56,577
 TYPES.
012 120MM MORTAR, ALL 127,168 127,168
 TYPES.
 TANK AMMUNITION
013 CARTRIDGES, TANK, 296,943 293,443
 105MM AND 120MM, ALL
 TYPES.
 120mm MPT--Unit [-3,500]
 cost growth.
 ARTILLERY AMMUNITION
014 ARTILLERY CARTRIDGES, 7,647 5,647
 75MM & 105MM, ALL
 TYPES.
 Artillery [-2,000]
 Cartridge unit
 cost growth.
015 ARTILLERY PROJECTILE, 182,455 172,455
 155MM, ALL TYPES.
 Proj Arty 155mm [-10,000]
 HE RAP M1210--
 Early to need.
017 PRECISION ARTILLERY 166,334 166,334
 MUNITIONS.
018 ARTILLERY 143,763 143,763
 PROPELLANTS, FUZES
 AND PRIMERS, ALL.
 MINES
019 MINES & CLEARING 80,920 65,920
 CHARGES, ALL TYPES.
 M58A4 Linear [-10,000]
 Demolition
 Charge--Program
 Reduction.
 MK22 rocket-- [-5,000]
 Program Reduction.
020 CLOSE TERRAIN SHAPING 53,579 53,579
 OBSTACLE.
 ROCKETS
021 SHOULDER LAUNCHED 18,159 18,159
 MUNITIONS, ALL TYPES.
022 ROCKET, HYDRA 70, ALL 171,697 171,697
 TYPES.
 OTHER AMMUNITION
023 CAD/PAD, ALL TYPES... 7,643 7,643
024 DEMOLITION MUNITIONS, 29,796 29,796
 ALL TYPES.
025 GRENADES, ALL TYPES.. 36,251 36,251
026 SIGNALS, ALL TYPES... 13,852 13,852
027 SIMULATORS, ALL TYPES 9,350 9,350
028 REACTIVE ARMOR TILES. 6,025
 Additional [6,025]
 Bradley tiles--
 Army UPL.
 MISCELLANEOUS
029 AMMO COMPONENTS, ALL 3,823 3,823
 TYPES.
030 ITEMS LESS THAN $5 19,921 19,921
 MILLION (AMMO).
031 AMMUNITION PECULIAR 13,001 13,001
 EQUIPMENT.
032 FIRST DESTINATION 17,528 17,528
 TRANSPORTATION
 (AMMO).
033 CLOSEOUT LIABILITIES. 101 101
 PRODUCTION BASE
 SUPPORT
034 INDUSTRIAL FACILITIES 499,613 678,063
 Construction of [10,000]
 Automated
 Contaminated
 Waste Plant, Lake
 City AAP.
 Construction of [3,000]
 Electrical System
 Upgrade Phase I,
 Scranton AAP.
 Construction of [700]
 Erie 1--Unload
 Manipulator,
 Scranton AAP.
 Construction of [500]
 Forge Shop -
 Process Smog
 Removal System,
 Scranton AAP.
 Construction of [1,250]
 Forge Shop--
 Replace Pipes
 (Subway Area),
 Scranton AAP.
 Construction of [1,600]
 Industrial Sewer
 Modernization,
 Iowa AAP.
 Construction of [4,300]
 Infrastructure
 Repairs Phase
 I, Scranton AAP.
 Construction of [3,030]
 Infrastructure
 Repairs Phase
 II, Scranton AAP.
 Construction of [2,400]
 Medium Cal X-Ray
 Equipment &
 Infrastructure,
 Iowa AAP.
 Construction of [8,530]
 Replace Internal
 Water/Condensate
 Lines, Bldgs 1,
 2, & 3, Lake City
 AAP.
 Construction of [8,000]
 Small Caliber
 Automated Primer
 Design, Lake City
 AAP.
 Construction of [3,300]
 Storage Yard K
 Mod & Automation,
 Iowa AAP.
 Construction of [3,740]
 Ultra Violet Fire
 Detection System,
 Iowa AAP.
 Construction of [5,600]
 Upgrade Laundry
 Facility, Holston
 AAP.
 Construction of [25,000]
 Water
 Distribution
 System, Radford
 AAP.
 Construction of [2,500]
 Water In-take
 Pumps (B. 407),
 Radford AAP.
 Urgent Safety [95,000]
 Upgrades to LCAAP.
035 CONVENTIONAL 80,970 80,970
 MUNITIONS
 DEMILITARIZATION.
036 ARMS INITIATIVE...... 4,039 4,039
 TOTAL 2,639,051 2,884,722
 PROCUREMENT OF
 AMMUNITION, ARMY.

 OTHER PROCUREMENT,
 ARMY
 TACTICAL VEHICLES
002 SEMITRAILERS, 23,021 23,021
 FLATBED:.
003 SEMITRAILERS, TANKERS 21,869 21,869
004 HI MOB MULTI-PURP 6,121 6,121
 WHLD VEH (HMMWV).
005 GROUND MOBILITY 34,316 47,116
 VEHICLES (GMV).
 Program increase. [12,800]
007 JOINT LIGHT TACTICAL 703,110 703,110
 VEHICLE FAMILY OF
 VEHICL.
008 TRUCK, DUMP, 20T 30,000
 (CCE).
 Program increase. [30,000]
009 FAMILY OF MEDIUM 74,086 157,746
 TACTICAL VEH (FMTV).
 Program increase. [83,660]
010 FAMILY OF COLD 23,772 23,772
 WEATHER ALL-TERRAIN
 VEHICLE (C.
011 FIRETRUCKS & 39,950 39,950
 ASSOCIATED
 FIREFIGHTING EQUIP.
012 FAMILY OF HEAVY 96,112 239,612
 TACTICAL VEHICLES
 (FHTV).
 Program increase. [143,500]
013 PLS ESP.............. 54,674 54,674
016 MODIFICATION OF IN 31,819 214,819
 SVC EQUIP.
 HMMWV safety [183,000]
 upgrades.
 NON-TACTICAL VEHICLES
017 PASSENGER CARRYING 1,286 1,286
 VEHICLES.
018 NONTACTICAL VEHICLES, 15,059 15,059
 OTHER.
 COMM--JOINT
 COMMUNICATIONS
019 SIGNAL MODERNIZATION 179,853 169,853
 PROGRAM.
 Equipment Cost [-5,000]
 Growth.
 Software Cost [-5,000]
 Growth.
020 TACTICAL NETWORK 382,007 417,007
 TECHNOLOGY MOD IN
 SVC.
 Program [35,000]
 acceleration
 (mobile
 networking for
 three maneuver
 battalions).
022 DISASTER INCIDENT 4,066 4,066
 RESPONSE COMMS
 TERMINAL (DI.
023 JCSE EQUIPMENT 5,505 5,505
 (USRDECOM).
 COMM--SATELLITE
 COMMUNICATIONS
026 DEFENSE ENTERPRISE 107,228 107,228
 WIDEBAND SATCOM
 SYSTEMS.
027 TRANSPORTABLE 119,259 119,259
 TACTICAL COMMAND
 COMMUNICATIONS.
028 SHF TERM............. 23,173 23,173
029 ASSURED POSITIONING, 184,911 204,911
 NAVIGATION AND
 TIMING.
 MAPS--Army UPL... [20,000]
030 EHF SATELLITE 5,853 5,853
 COMMUNICATION.
031 SMART-T (SPACE)...... 4,916 4,916
032 GLOBAL BRDCST SVC-- 3,179 3,179
 GBS.
 COMM--C3 SYSTEM
034 COE TACTICAL SERVER 94,287 87,287
 INFRASTRUCTURE (TSI).
 Unjustified cost [-7,000]
 growth.
 COMM--COMBAT
 COMMUNICATIONS
035 HANDHELD MANPACK 728,366 728,366
 SMALL FORM FIT (HMS).
037 ARMY LINK 16 SYSTEMS. 47,581 47,581
039 UNIFIED COMMAND SUITE 20,178 20,178
040 COTS COMMUNICATIONS 320,595 320,595
 EQUIPMENT.
041 FAMILY OF MED COMM 7,621 7,621
 FOR COMBAT CASUALTY
 CARE.
042 ARMY COMMUNICATIONS & 59,705 59,705
 ELECTRONICS.
 COMM--INTELLIGENCE
 COMM
043 CI AUTOMATION 13,891 13,891
 ARCHITECTURE-INTEL.
045 MULTI-DOMAIN 20,637 20,637
 INTELLIGENCE.
 INFORMATION SECURITY
046 INFORMATION SYSTEM 1,019 1,019
 SECURITY PROGRAM-
 ISSP.
047 COMMUNICATIONS 125,692 125,692
 SECURITY (COMSEC).
049 INSIDER THREAT 1,796 1,796
 PROGRAM--UNIT
 ACTIVITY MONITO.
051 BIOMETRIC ENABLING 816 816
 CAPABILITY (BEC).
052 ARCYBER DEFENSIVE 18,239 18,239
 CYBER OPERATIONS.
 COMM--LONG HAUL
 COMMUNICATIONS
054 BASE SUPPORT 10,262 25,262
 COMMUNICATIONS.
 CONUS land mobile [15,000]
 radio.
 COMM--BASE
 COMMUNICATIONS
055 INFORMATION SYSTEMS.. 116,522 140,522
 IT Network [24,000]
 Refresh.
056 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 5,036 5,036
 MODERNIZATION
 PROGRAM.
059 INSTALLATION INFO 214,806 214,806
 INFRASTRUCTURE MOD
 PROGRAM.
 ELECT EQUIP--TACT INT
 REL ACT (TIARA)
062 TITAN................ 84,821 0
 Army requested [-19,680]
 realignment to
 OPA line 66.
 Army Requested [-50,900]
 Realignment to
 RDTE.
 Funding ahead of [-14,241]
 need.
063 JTT/CIBS-M........... 2,352 2,352
064 TERRESTRIAL LAYER 88,915 88,915
 SYSTEMS (TLS).
066 DCGS-A-INTEL......... 76,771 116,451
 Additional [20,000]
 systems--Army UPL.
 Army requested [19,680]
 realignment from
 OPA line 62.
067 JOINT TACTICAL GROUND 349 349
 STATION (JTAGS)-
 INTEL.
068 TROJAN............... 20,562 69,282
 Add 15--Army UPL. [48,720]
069 MOD OF IN-SVC EQUIP 30,424 59,724
 (INTEL SPT).
 Prophet Enhanced [20,000]
 ESP Kits.
 Service Tactical [9,300]
 SIGINT upgrades--
 INDOPACOM UPL.
070 BIOMETRIC TACTICAL 2,269 2,269
 COLLECTION DEVICES.
 ELECT EQUIP--
 ELECTRONIC WARFARE
 (EW)
073 AIR VIGILANCE (AV)... 5,688 5,688
074 MULTI-FUNCTION 3,060 3,060
 ELECTRONIC WARFARE
 (MFEW) SYST.
076 COUNTERINTELLIGENCE/ 19,519 19,519
 SECURITY
 COUNTERMEASURES.
077 CI MODERNIZATION..... 437 437
 ELECT EQUIP--TACTICAL
 SURV. (TAC SURV)
078 SENTINEL MODS........ 166,736 166,736
079 NIGHT VISION DEVICES. 424,253 619,953
 ENVGB program [100,000]
 extension.
 IVAS--Army UPL... [95,700]
080 SMALL TACTICAL 11,357 11,357
 OPTICAL RIFLE
 MOUNTED MLRF.
082 FAMILY OF WEAPON 202,258 194,258
 SIGHTS (FWS).
 Program decrease. [-8,000]
083 ENHANCED PORTABLE 5,116 5,116
 INDUCTIVE ARTILLERY
 FUZE SE.
084 FORWARD LOOKING 37,914 37,914
 INFRARED (IFLIR).
085 COUNTER SMALL 326,364 448,364
 UNMANNED AERIAL
 SYSTEM (C-SUAS).
 Coyote BLK2+ [122,000]
 interceptors--Arm
 y UPL.
086 JOINT BATTLE COMMAND-- 186,515 176,515
 PLATFORM (JBC-P).
 Program growth... [-10,000]
087 JOINT EFFECTS 10,304 10,304
 TARGETING SYSTEM
 (JETS).
088 COMPUTER BALLISTICS: 3,038 3,038
 LHMBC XM32.
089 MORTAR FIRE CONTROL 4,879 4,879
 SYSTEM.
090 MORTAR FIRE CONTROL 4,370 4,370
 SYSTEMS
 MODIFICATIONS.
091 COUNTERFIRE RADARS... 162,208 162,208
 ELECT EQUIP--TACTICAL
 C2 SYSTEMS
092 ARMY COMMAND POST 60,455 60,455
 INTEGRATED
 INFRASTRUCTURE (.
093 FIRE SUPPORT C2 9,676 9,676
 FAMILY.
094 AIR & MSL DEFENSE 72,619 72,619
 PLANNING & CONTROL
 SYS.
095 IAMD BATTLE COMMAND 438,967 438,967
 SYSTEM.
096 LIFE CYCLE SOFTWARE 4,586 4,586
 SUPPORT (LCSS).
097 NETWORK MANAGEMENT 37,199 37,199
 INITIALIZATION AND
 SERVICE.
098 GLOBAL COMBAT SUPPORT 4,102 4,102
 SYSTEM-ARMY (GCSS-A).
099 INTEGRATED PERSONNEL 6,926 6,926
 AND PAY SYSTEM-ARMY
 (IPP.
101 MOD OF IN-SVC 4,076 15,076
 EQUIPMENT (ENFIRE).
 GPS laser [11,000]
 leveling system.
 ELECT EQUIP--
 AUTOMATION
102 ARMY TRAINING 8,033 8,033
 MODERNIZATION.
103 AUTOMATED DATA 96,554 106,554
 PROCESSING EQUIP.
 AFRICOM [10,000]
 Enterprise C2
 Network
 Resiliency.
104 ACCESSIONS 43,767 33,767
 INFORMATION
 ENVIRONMENT (AIE).
 Insufficient [-10,000]
 justification.
105 GENERAL FUND 97 97
 ENTERPRISE BUSINESS
 SYSTEMS FAM.
106 HIGH PERF COMPUTING 73,655 73,655
 MOD PGM (HPCMP).
107 CONTRACT WRITING 17,701 17,701
 SYSTEM.
108 CSS COMMUNICATIONS... 88,141 88,141
 ELECT EQUIP--SUPPORT
111 BCT EMERGING 12,853 12,853
 TECHNOLOGIES.
 CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS
111A CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS.. 1,596 1,596
 CHEMICAL DEFENSIVE
 EQUIPMENT
113 BASE DEFENSE SYSTEMS 47,960 47,960
 (BDS).
114 CBRN DEFENSE......... 56,129 56,129
 BRIDGING EQUIPMENT
116 TACTICAL BRIDGING.... 13,785 13,785
118 BRIDGE SUPPLEMENTAL 6,774 6,774
 SET.
119 COMMON BRIDGE 10,379 10,379
 TRANSPORTER (CBT)
 RECAP.
 ENGINEER (NON-
 CONSTRUCTION)
 EQUIPMENT
124 ROBOTICS AND APPLIQUE 52,340 37,340
 SYSTEMS.
 SMETS program [-15,000]
 delay.
 COMBAT SERVICE
 SUPPORT EQUIPMENT
127 HEATERS AND ECU'S.... 7,672 7,672
129 PERSONNEL RECOVERY 4,691 4,691
 SUPPORT SYSTEM
 (PRSS).
130 GROUND SOLDIER SYSTEM 124,953 124,953
131 MOBILE SOLDIER POWER. 15,933 15,933
132 FORCE PROVIDER....... 58,000
 Program increase. [58,000]
134 CARGO AERIAL DEL & 42,444 42,444
 PERSONNEL PARACHUTE
 SYSTEM.
136 ITEMS LESS THAN $5M 4,155 4,155
 (ENG SPT).
 PETROLEUM EQUIPMENT
137 QUALITY SURVEILLANCE 2,845 2,845
 EQUIPMENT.
138 DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS, 26,433 45,733
 PETROLEUM & WATER.
 Modular Fuel [19,300]
 System--Tank Rack
 Module - Army UPL.
 MEDICAL EQUIPMENT
139 COMBAT SUPPORT 75,606 75,606
 MEDICAL.
 MAINTENANCE EQUIPMENT
140 MOBILE MAINTENANCE 3,936 3,936
 EQUIPMENT SYSTEMS.
 CONSTRUCTION
 EQUIPMENT
147 ALL TERRAIN CRANES... 31,341 31,341
148 HIGH MOBILITY 18,300
 ENGINEER EXCAVATOR
 (HMEE).
 Program increase. [18,300]
149 FAMILY OF DIVER 3,256 3,256
 SUPPORT EQUIPMENT.
150 CONST EQUIP ESP...... 9,104 9,104
 RAIL FLOAT
 CONTAINERIZATION
 EQUIPMENT
151 ARMY WATERCRAFT ESP.. 47,889 47,889
152 MANEUVER SUPPORT 104,676 104,676
 VESSEL (MSV).
153 ITEMS LESS THAN $5.0M 10,131 10,131
 (FLOAT/RAIL).
 GENERATORS
154 GENERATORS AND 54,400 54,400
 ASSOCIATED EQUIP.
155 TACTICAL ELECTRIC 8,293 8,293
 POWER
 RECAPITALIZATION.
 MATERIAL HANDLING
 EQUIPMENT
156 FAMILY OF FORKLIFTS.. 8,819 8,819
 TRAINING EQUIPMENT
157 COMBAT TRAINING 48,046 48,046
 CENTERS SUPPORT.
158 TRAINING DEVICES, 201,966 194,966
 NONSYSTEM.
 Program decrease. [-7,000]
159 SYNTHETIC TRAINING 255,670 295,670
 ENVIRONMENT (STE).
 One World Terrain [40,000]
 (STE-OWT)--Army
 UPL.
160 GAMING TECHNOLOGY IN 9,546 9,546
 SUPPORT OF ARMY
 TRAINING.
 TEST MEASURE AND DIG
 EQUIPMENT (TMD)
162 INTEGRATED FAMILY OF 36,514 36,514
 TEST EQUIPMENT
 (IFTE).
164 TEST EQUIPMENT 32,734 32,734
 MODERNIZATION
 (TEMOD).
 OTHER SUPPORT
 EQUIPMENT
166 PHYSICAL SECURITY 102,556 110,706
 SYSTEMS (OPA3).
 Force Protection [14,150]
 Systems--Physical
 Security Systems.
 Program decrease. [-6,000]
167 BASE LEVEL COMMON 31,417 31,417
 EQUIPMENT.
168 MODIFICATION OF IN- 24,047 24,047
 SVC EQUIPMENT (OPA-
 3).
169 BUILDING, PRE-FAB, 32,151 32,151
 RELOCATABLE.
170 SPECIAL EQUIPMENT FOR 84,779 80,779
 TEST AND EVALUATION.
 Program decrease. [-4,000]
 OPA2
172 INITIAL SPARES--C&E.. 10,463 10,463
 TOTAL OTHER 8,457,509 9,448,798
 PROCUREMENT,
 ARMY.

 AIRCRAFT PROCUREMENT,
 NAVY
 COMBAT AIRCRAFT
001 F/A-18E/F (FIGHTER) 90,865 737,065
 HORNET.
 8 aircraft--USNR. [666,000]
 Program decrease. [-19,800]
002 JOINT STRIKE FIGHTER 1,663,515 1,704,115
 CV.
 TR-3 Organic [40,600]
 Depot Standup.
003 JOINT STRIKE FIGHTER 387,596 387,596
 CV AP.
004 JSF STOVL............ 1,909,635 1,950,235
 TR-3 Organic [40,600]
 Depot Standup.
005 JSF STOVL AP......... 200,118 200,118
006 CH-53K (HEAVY LIFT).. 1,669,986 1,913,986
 Add 2 aircraft... [250,000]
 Unjustified cost [-2,000]
 growth--Other ILS.
 Unjustified cost [-4,000]
 growth--Pubs/
 Tech data.
007 CH-53K (HEAVY LIFT) 357,824 357,824
 AP.
008 V-22 (MEDIUM LIFT)... 31,795 243,795
 Unit quantity [212,000]
 increase--2
 aircraft.
011 P-8A POSEIDON........ 41,521 31,521
 Program decrease. [-10,000]
012 E-2D ADV HAWKEYE..... 842,401 1,242,301
 2 additional E-2D [399,900]
 aircraft--Navy
 UPL.
 TRAINER AIRCRAFT
014 MULTI-ENGINE TRAINING 123,217 123,217
 SYSTEM (METS).
015 ADVANCED HELICOPTER 119,816 119,816
 TRAINING SYSTEM.
 OTHER AIRCRAFT
016 KC-130J.............. 439,501 1,138,601
 2 additional USMC [252,900]
 C-130 aircraft--
 USMC UPL.
 3 additional Navy [446,200]
 C-130 aircraft--
 Navy UPL.
017 KC-130J AP........... 29,122 44,522
 Advanced [15,400]
 Procurement for
 USMC aircraft--
 USMC UPL.
019 MQ-4 TRITON.......... 587,820 567,820
 Program decrease. [-20,000]
020 MQ-4 TRITON AP....... 75,235 75,235
021 MQ-8 UAV............. 21,000
 Costs associated [21,000]
 with restoring 5
 LCS.
022 STUASL0 UAV.......... 2,703 2,703
023 MQ-25................ 696,713 696,713
024 MQ-25 AP............. 51,463 51,463
025 MARINE GROUP 5 UAS... 103,882 93,882
 Program decrease. [-10,000]
 MODIFICATION OF
 AIRCRAFT
027 F-18 A-D UNIQUE...... 141,514 141,514
028 F-18E/F AND EA-18G 572,681 572,681
 MODERNIZATION AND
 SUSTAINM.
029 MARINE GROUP 5 UAS 86,116 86,116
 SERIES.
030 AEA SYSTEMS.......... 25,058 25,058
031 AV-8 SERIES.......... 26,657 26,657
032 INFRARED SEARCH AND 144,699 144,699
 TRACK (IRST).
033 ADVERSARY............ 105,188 105,188
034 F-18 SERIES.......... 480,663 480,663
035 H-53 SERIES.......... 40,151 40,151
036 MH-60 SERIES......... 126,238 126,238
037 H-1 SERIES........... 122,498 135,798
 H-1 Digital [13,300]
 Interoperability
 (DI) Link-16.
038 EP-3 SERIES.......... 8,492 8,492
039 E-2 SERIES........... 188,897 188,897
040 TRAINER A/C SERIES... 9,568 9,568
042 C-130 SERIES......... 132,170 132,170
043 FEWSG................ 695 695
044 CARGO/TRANSPORT A/C 10,902 10,902
 SERIES.
045 E-6 SERIES........... 129,049 129,049
046 EXECUTIVE HELICOPTERS 55,265 55,265
 SERIES.
047 T-45 SERIES.......... 201,670 201,670
048 POWER PLANT CHANGES.. 24,685 24,685
049 JPATS SERIES......... 19,780 19,780
050 AVIATION LIFE SUPPORT 1,143 1,143
 MODS.
051 COMMON ECM EQUIPMENT. 129,722 129,722
052 COMMON AVIONICS 136,883 136,883
 CHANGES.
053 COMMON DEFENSIVE 6,373 6,373
 WEAPON SYSTEM.
054 ID SYSTEMS........... 3,828 3,828
055 P-8 SERIES........... 249,342 310,042
 2 additional kits [60,700]
 for P-8 increment
 3--Navy UPL.
056 MAGTF EW FOR AVIATION 24,684 24,684
057 MQ-8 SERIES.......... 9,846 17,146
 Costs associated [7,300]
 with restoring 5
 LCS.
058 V-22 (TILT/ROTOR 207,621 290,121
 ACFT) OSPREY.
 V-22 Nacelle [82,500]
 Improvement.
059 NEXT GENERATION 401,563 468,563
 JAMMER (NGJ).
 Program increase-- [67,000]
 2 shipsets - Navy
 UPL.
060 F-35 STOVL SERIES.... 216,356 216,356
061 F-35 CV SERIES....... 208,336 208,336
062 QRC.................. 47,864 47,864
063 MQ-4 SERIES.......... 94,738 94,738
064 RQ-21 SERIES......... 6,576 6,576
 AIRCRAFT SPARES AND
 REPAIR PARTS
068 SPARES AND REPAIR 1,872,417 2,071,365
 PARTS.
 Costs associated [1,200]
 with restoring 5
 LCS.
 F-35B Engine/Lift [117,000]
 System--USMC UPL.
 MH-60R spares.... [23,143]
 MH-60S spares.... [7,605]
 Various systems-- [50,000]
 Navy UPL.
 AIRCRAFT SUPPORT
 EQUIP & FACILITIES
069 COMMON GROUND 542,214 542,214
 EQUIPMENT.
070 AIRCRAFT INDUSTRIAL 101,559 101,559
 FACILITIES.
071 WAR CONSUMABLES...... 40,316 40,316
072 OTHER PRODUCTION 46,403 46,403
 CHARGES.
073 SPECIAL SUPPORT 423,280 423,280
 EQUIPMENT.
 TOTAL AIRCRAFT 16,848,428 19,556,976
 PROCUREMENT,
 NAVY.

 WEAPONS PROCUREMENT,
 NAVY
 MODIFICATION OF
 MISSILES
001 TRIDENT II MODS...... 1,125,164 1,125,164
 SUPPORT EQUIPMENT &
 FACILITIES
002 MISSILE INDUSTRIAL 7,767 7,767
 FACILITIES.
 STRATEGIC MISSILES
003 TOMAHAWK............. 160,190 403,790
 Expeditionary VLS [1,600]
 Reload System--
 Navy UPL.
 Unit quantity [242,000]
 increase.
 TACTICAL MISSILES
004 AMRAAM............... 335,900 335,900
005 SIDEWINDER........... 63,288 89,188
 Additional [25,900]
 missiles--Navy
 UPL.
006 STANDARD MISSILE..... 489,123 489,123
008 JASSM................ 58,481 58,481
009 SMALL DIAMETER BOMB 108,317 108,317
 II.
010 RAM.................. 92,131 92,131
011 JOINT AIR GROUND 78,395 78,395
 MISSILE (JAGM).
012 HELLFIRE............. 6,603 6,603
013 AERIAL TARGETS....... 183,222 183,222
014 DRONES AND DECOYS.... 62,930 62,930
015 OTHER MISSILE SUPPORT 3,524 3,524
016 LRASM................ 226,022 259,122
 Additional [33,100]
 missiles--Navy
 UPL.
017 NAVAL STRIKE MISSILE 59,034 59,034
 (NSM).
 MODIFICATION OF
 MISSILES
018 TOMAHAWK MODS........ 435,308 435,308
019 ESSM................. 282,035 282,035
020 AARGM................ 131,275 131,275
021 STANDARD MISSILES 71,198 71,198
 MODS.
 SUPPORT EQUIPMENT &
 FACILITIES
022 WEAPONS INDUSTRIAL 1,976 1,976
 FACILITIES.
 ORDNANCE SUPPORT
 EQUIPMENT
025 ORDNANCE SUPPORT 40,793 40,793
 EQUIPMENT.
 TORPEDOES AND RELATED
 EQUIP
026 SSTD................. 3,789 3,789
027 MK-48 TORPEDO........ 151,128 200,128
 MK 48 Heavyweight [49,000]
 Torpedo
 Procurement--Navy
 UPL.
028 ASW TARGETS.......... 14,403 14,403
 MOD OF TORPEDOES AND
 RELATED EQUIP
029 MK-54 TORPEDO MODS... 106,772 126,772
 Program increase. [20,000]
030 MK-48 TORPEDO ADCAP 18,502 18,502
 MODS.
031 MARITIME MINES....... 9,282 9,282
 SUPPORT EQUIPMENT
032 TORPEDO SUPPORT 87,044 87,044
 EQUIPMENT.
033 ASW RANGE SUPPORT.... 3,965 3,965
 DESTINATION
 TRANSPORTATION
034 FIRST DESTINATION 5,315 5,315
 TRANSPORTATION.
 GUNS AND GUN MOUNTS
035 SMALL ARMS AND 13,859 13,859
 WEAPONS.
 MODIFICATION OF GUNS
 AND GUN MOUNTS
036 CIWS MODS............ 2,655 2,655
037 COAST GUARD WEAPONS.. 34,259 34,259
038 GUN MOUNT MODS....... 81,725 81,725
039 LCS MODULE WEAPONS... 4,580 4,580
040 AIRBORNE MINE 8,710 8,710
 NEUTRALIZATION
 SYSTEMS.
 SPARES AND REPAIR
 PARTS
042 SPARES AND REPAIR 170,041 170,041
 PARTS.
 TOTAL WEAPONS 4,738,705 5,110,305
 PROCUREMENT,
 NAVY.

 PROCUREMENT OF AMMO,
 NAVY & MC
 NAVY AMMUNITION
001 GENERAL PURPOSE BOMBS 47,198 47,198
002 JDAM................. 76,688 76,688
003 AIRBORNE ROCKETS, ALL 70,005 70,005
 TYPES.
004 MACHINE GUN 20,586 20,586
 AMMUNITION.
005 PRACTICE BOMBS....... 51,109 51,109
006 CARTRIDGES & CART 72,534 72,534
 ACTUATED DEVICES.
007 AIR EXPENDABLE 114,475 114,475
 COUNTERMEASURES.
008 JATOS................ 7,096 7,096
009 5 INCH/54 GUN 30,018 30,018
 AMMUNITION.
010 INTERMEDIATE CALIBER 40,089 40,089
 GUN AMMUNITION.
011 OTHER SHIP GUN 42,707 42,707
 AMMUNITION.
012 SMALL ARMS & LANDING 49,023 49,023
 PARTY AMMO.
013 PYROTECHNIC AND 9,480 9,480
 DEMOLITION.
014 AMMUNITION LESS THAN 1,622 1,622
 $5 MILLION.
 MARINE CORPS
 AMMUNITION
015 MORTARS.............. 71,214 71,214
016 DIRECT SUPPORT 65,169 65,169
 MUNITIONS.
017 INFANTRY WEAPONS 225,271 225,271
 AMMUNITION.
018 COMBAT SUPPORT 19,691 19,691
 MUNITIONS.
019 AMMO MODERNIZATION... 17,327 17,327
020 ARTILLERY MUNITIONS.. 15,514 15,514
021 ITEMS LESS THAN $5 5,476 5,476
 MILLION.
 TOTAL 1,052,292 1,052,292
 PROCUREMENT OF
 AMMO, NAVY & MC.

 SHIPBUILDING AND
 CONVERSION, NAVY
 FLEET BALLISTIC
 MISSILE SHIPS
001 OHIO REPLACEMENT 3,079,223 3,079,223
 SUBMARINE.
002 OHIO REPLACEMENT 2,778,553 2,778,553
 SUBMARINE AP.
 OTHER WARSHIPS
003 CARRIER REPLACEMENT 1,481,530 1,466,530
 PROGRAM.
 Program decrease. [-15,000]
004 CVN-81............... 1,052,024 1,037,024
 Program decrease. [-15,000]
005 VIRGINIA CLASS 4,534,184 4,534,184
 SUBMARINE.
006 VIRGINIA CLASS 2,025,651 2,025,651
 SUBMARINE AP.
008 CVN REFUELING 618,295 618,295
 OVERHAULS AP.
009 DDG 1000............. 72,976 72,976
010 DDG-51............... 4,376,537 5,814,806
 Large Surface [250,000]
 Combatant
 Shipyard
 Infrastructure.
 One additional [1,188,269]
 ship.
011 DDG-51 AP............ 618,352 748,352
 Third DDG in FY [130,000]
 2024.
013 FFG-FRIGATE.......... 1,085,224 2,082,473
 One additional [923,849]
 ship.
 Wholeness for FFG- [73,400]
 62 Procurement--
 Navy UPL.
014 FFG-FRIGATE AP....... 74,949 74,949
 AMPHIBIOUS SHIPS
015 LPD FLIGHT II........ 1,673,000 1,673,000
016 LPD FLIGHT II AP..... 250,000
 LPD-33 Advanced [250,000]
 Procurement.
020 LHA REPLACEMENT...... 1,085,470 1,374,470
 LHA 10 advance [289,000]
 procurement.
021 EXPEDITIONARY FAST 695,000
 TRANSPORT (EPF).
 EMS.............. [695,000]
 AUXILIARIES, CRAFT
 AND PRIOR YR PROGRAM
 COST
022 TAO FLEET OILER...... 794,719 1,540,719
 One additional [746,000]
 ship.
024 TOWING, SALVAGE, AND 95,915 95,915
 RESCUE SHIP (ATS).
027 OUTFITTING........... 707,412 707,412
028 SHIP TO SHORE 190,433 391,838
 CONNECTOR.
 Unit quantity [201,405]
 increase.
029 SERVICE CRAFT........ 68,274 68,274
030 LCAC SLEP............ 36,301 36,301
031 AUXILIARY VESSELS 140,686 140,686
 (USED SEALIFT).
032 COMPLETION OF PY 1,328,146 1,373,146
 SHIPBUILDING
 PROGRAMS.
 CVN 73 RCOH Cost- [45,000]
 to-Complete--Navy
 UPL.
 TOTAL 27,917,854 32,679,777
 SHIPBUILDING AND
 CONVERSION, NAVY.

 OTHER PROCUREMENT,
 NAVY
 SHIP PROPULSION
 EQUIPMENT
001 SURFACE POWER 46,478 46,478
 EQUIPMENT.
 GENERATORS
002 SURFACE COMBATANT 84,615 84,615
 HM&E.
 NAVIGATION EQUIPMENT
003 OTHER NAVIGATION 98,079 78,079
 EQUIPMENT.
 Program decrease. [-20,000]
 OTHER SHIPBOARD
 EQUIPMENT
004 SUB PERISCOPE, 266,300 226,300
 IMAGING AND SUPT
 EQUIP PROG.
 Unjustified [-40,000]
 growth.
005 DDG MOD.............. 770,341 770,341
006 FIREFIGHTING 19,687 19,687
 EQUIPMENT.
007 COMMAND AND CONTROL 2,406 2,406
 SWITCHBOARD.
008 LHA/LHD MIDLIFE...... 38,200 53,700
 LHD and LHA Class [15,500]
 Electric Plant
 Wholeness--Navy
 UPL.
009 LCC 19/20 EXTENDED 20,028 15,028
 SERVICE LIFE PROGRAM.
 Program decrease. [-5,000]
010 POLLUTION CONTROL 17,682 17,682
 EQUIPMENT.
011 SUBMARINE SUPPORT 117,799 117,799
 EQUIPMENT.
012 VIRGINIA CLASS 32,300 32,300
 SUPPORT EQUIPMENT.
013 LCS CLASS SUPPORT 15,238 10,238
 EQUIPMENT.
 Unjustified [-5,000]
 growth.
014 SUBMARINE BATTERIES.. 24,137 24,137
015 LPD CLASS SUPPORT 54,496 54,496
 EQUIPMENT.
016 DDG 1000 CLASS 314,333 284,333
 SUPPORT EQUIPMENT.
 Program decrease. [-30,000]
017 STRATEGIC PLATFORM 13,504 13,504
 SUPPORT EQUIP.
018 DSSP EQUIPMENT....... 3,660 3,660
019 CG MODERNIZATION..... 59,054 59,054
020 LCAC................. 17,452 17,452
021 UNDERWATER EOD 35,417 35,417
 EQUIPMENT.
022 ITEMS LESS THAN $5 60,812 60,812
 MILLION.
023 CHEMICAL WARFARE 3,202 3,202
 DETECTORS.
 REACTOR PLANT
 EQUIPMENT
025 SHIP MAINTENANCE, 1,242,532 1,242,532
 REPAIR AND
 MODERNIZATION.
026 REACTOR POWER UNITS.. 4,690 4,690
027 REACTOR COMPONENTS... 408,989 408,989
 OCEAN ENGINEERING
028 DIVING AND SALVAGE 11,773 11,773
 EQUIPMENT.
 SMALL BOATS
029 STANDARD BOATS....... 57,262 78,730
 Six additional 40- [21,468]
 foot Patrol Boats.
 PRODUCTION FACILITIES
 EQUIPMENT
030 OPERATING FORCES IPE. 174,743 174,743
 OTHER SHIP SUPPORT
031 LCS COMMON MISSION 57,313 57,313
 MODULES EQUIPMENT.
032 LCS MCM MISSION 94,987 97,187
 MODULES.
 Mine [2,200]
 Countermeasures
 Mission Package
 Capacity and
 Wholeness--Navy
 UPL.
033 LCS ASW MISSION 3,594 0
 MODULES.
 Program decrease. [-3,594]
034 LCS SUW MISSION 5,100 5,100
 MODULES.
035 LCS IN-SERVICE 76,526 111,526
 MODERNIZATION.
 Costs associated [65,000]
 with restoring 5
 LCS.
 Program decrease. [-30,000]
036 SMALL & MEDIUM UUV... 49,763 44,763
 Unjustified [-5,000]
 growth.
 SHIP SONARS
037 SPQ-9B RADAR......... 12,063 12,063
038 AN/SQQ-89 SURF ASW 141,591 141,591
 COMBAT SYSTEM.
039 SSN ACOUSTIC 446,653 446,653
 EQUIPMENT.
040 UNDERSEA WARFARE 17,424 17,424
 SUPPORT EQUIPMENT.
 ASW ELECTRONIC
 EQUIPMENT
041 SUBMARINE ACOUSTIC 31,708 31,708
 WARFARE SYSTEM.
042 SSTD................. 14,325 14,325
043 FIXED SURVEILLANCE 266,228 266,228
 SYSTEM.
044 SURTASS.............. 25,030 46,130
 Navy UPL......... [21,100]
 ELECTRONIC WARFARE
 EQUIPMENT
045 AN/SLQ-32............ 292,417 292,417
 RECONNAISSANCE
 EQUIPMENT
046 SHIPBOARD IW EXPLOIT. 311,210 316,910
 Counter-Command, [5,700]
 Control,
 Communications,
 Computers and
 Combat Systems
 Intelligence,
 Surveillance and
 Reconnaissance
 and Targeting (C-
 C5ISR&T)--Navy
 UPL.
047 AUTOMATED 2,487 2,487
 IDENTIFICATION
 SYSTEM (AIS).
 OTHER SHIP ELECTRONIC
 EQUIPMENT
048 COOPERATIVE 34,500 34,500
 ENGAGEMENT
 CAPABILITY.
049 NAVAL TACTICAL 19,038 19,038
 COMMAND SUPPORT
 SYSTEM (NTCSS).
050 ATDLS................ 73,675 73,675
051 NAVY COMMAND AND 3,435 3,435
 CONTROL SYSTEM
 (NCCS).
052 MINESWEEPING SYSTEM 16,336 16,336
 REPLACEMENT.
054 NAVSTAR GPS RECEIVERS 30,439 30,439
 (SPACE).
055 AMERICAN FORCES RADIO 2,724 2,724
 AND TV SERVICE.
056 STRATEGIC PLATFORM 6,266 6,266
 SUPPORT EQUIP.
 AVIATION ELECTRONIC
 EQUIPMENT
057 ASHORE ATC EQUIPMENT. 89,396 89,396
058 AFLOAT ATC EQUIPMENT. 86,732 86,732
059 ID SYSTEMS........... 59,226 59,226
060 JOINT PRECISION 8,186 8,186
 APPROACH AND LANDING
 SYSTEM (.
061 NAVAL MISSION 26,778 26,778
 PLANNING SYSTEMS.
 OTHER SHORE
 ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT
062 MARITIME INTEGRATED 3,520 3,520
 BROADCAST SYSTEM.
063 TACTICAL/MOBILE C4I 31,840 31,840
 SYSTEMS.
064 DCGS-N............... 15,606 15,606
065 CANES................ 402,550 382,550
 Insufficient [-40,000]
 justification.
 Intel secure data [20,000]
 links.
066 RADIAC............... 9,062 9,062
067 CANES-INTELL......... 48,665 48,665
068 GPETE................ 23,479 23,479
069 MASF................. 11,792 11,792
070 INTEG COMBAT SYSTEM 6,053 6,053
 TEST FACILITY.
071 EMI CONTROL 4,219 4,219
 INSTRUMENTATION.
072 ITEMS LESS THAN $5 102,846 102,846
 MILLION.
 SHIPBOARD
 COMMUNICATIONS
073 SHIPBOARD TACTICAL 36,941 36,941
 COMMUNICATIONS.
074 SHIP COMMUNICATIONS 101,691 101,691
 AUTOMATION.
075 COMMUNICATIONS ITEMS 55,290 55,290
 UNDER $5M.
 SUBMARINE
 COMMUNICATIONS
076 SUBMARINE BROADCAST 91,150 91,150
 SUPPORT.
077 SUBMARINE 74,569 74,569
 COMMUNICATION
 EQUIPMENT.
 SATELLITE
 COMMUNICATIONS
078 SATELLITE 39,827 39,827
 COMMUNICATIONS
 SYSTEMS.
079 NAVY MULTIBAND 24,586 24,586
 TERMINAL (NMT).
 SHORE COMMUNICATIONS
080 JOINT COMMUNICATIONS 4,699 4,699
 SUPPORT ELEMENT
 (JCSE).
 CRYPTOGRAPHIC
 EQUIPMENT
081 INFO SYSTEMS SECURITY 156,034 156,034
 PROGRAM (ISSP).
082 MIO INTEL 1,055 1,055
 EXPLOITATION TEAM.
 CRYPTOLOGIC EQUIPMENT
083 CRYPTOLOGIC 18,832 20,332
 COMMUNICATIONS EQUIP.
 Service Tactical [1,500]
 SIGINT Upgrades--
 INDOPACOM UPL.
 OTHER ELECTRONIC
 SUPPORT
092 COAST GUARD EQUIPMENT 68,556 68,556
 SONOBUOYS
094 SONOBUOYS--ALL TYPES. 291,670 303,521
 Program increase. [11,851]
 AIRCRAFT SUPPORT
 EQUIPMENT
095 MINOTAUR............. 5,247 5,247
096 WEAPONS RANGE SUPPORT 106,209 106,209
 EQUIPMENT.
097 AIRCRAFT SUPPORT 275,461 275,461
 EQUIPMENT.
098 ADVANCED ARRESTING 22,717 22,717
 GEAR (AAG).
099 ELECTROMAGNETIC 18,594 18,594
 AIRCRAFT LAUNCH
 SYSTEM (EMALS.
100 METEOROLOGICAL 15,175 15,175
 EQUIPMENT.
101 LEGACY AIRBORNE MCM.. 4,689 4,689
102 LAMPS EQUIPMENT...... 1,610 1,610
103 AVIATION SUPPORT 86,409 86,409
 EQUIPMENT.
104 UMCS-UNMAN CARRIER 136,647 136,647
 AVIATION(UCA)MISSION
 CNTRL.
 SHIP GUN SYSTEM
 EQUIPMENT
105 SHIP GUN SYSTEMS 5,902 5,902
 EQUIPMENT.
 SHIP MISSILE SYSTEMS
 EQUIPMENT
106 HARPOON SUPPORT 217 217
 EQUIPMENT.
107 SHIP MISSILE SUPPORT 286,788 292,788
 EQUIPMENT.
 SPY-1 Low Noise [6,000]
 Amplyfier.
108 TOMAHAWK SUPPORT 95,856 95,856
 EQUIPMENT.
 FBM SUPPORT EQUIPMENT
109 STRATEGIC MISSILE 279,430 279,430
 SYSTEMS EQUIP.
 ASW SUPPORT EQUIPMENT
110 SSN COMBAT CONTROL 128,874 128,874
 SYSTEMS.
111 ASW SUPPORT EQUIPMENT 26,920 35,720
 Secure Autonomous [8,800]
 Data Link for USW
 Portable Ranges.
 OTHER ORDNANCE
 SUPPORT EQUIPMENT
112 EXPLOSIVE ORDNANCE 17,048 20,548
 DISPOSAL EQUIP.
 Dismounted [3,500]
 Reconnaissance--S
 ets, Kits and
 Outfits (DR-SKO).
113 ITEMS LESS THAN $5 5,938 5,938
 MILLION.
 OTHER EXPENDABLE
 ORDNANCE
114 ANTI-SHIP MISSILE 86,264 86,264
 DECOY SYSTEM.
115 SUBMARINE TRAINING 80,591 80,591
 DEVICE MODS.
116 SURFACE TRAINING 198,695 198,695
 EQUIPMENT.
 CIVIL ENGINEERING
 SUPPORT EQUIPMENT
117 PASSENGER CARRYING 4,799 4,799
 VEHICLES.
118 GENERAL PURPOSE 2,542 2,542
 TRUCKS.
119 CONSTRUCTION & 50,619 61,019
 MAINTENANCE EQUIP.
 GPS laser [9,200]
 leveling system.
 VLS training [1,200]
 equipment--Navy
 UPL.
120 FIRE FIGHTING 16,305 16,305
 EQUIPMENT.
121 TACTICAL VEHICLES.... 28,586 33,386
 Program increase-- [4,800]
 Navy UPL.
122 POLLUTION CONTROL 2,840 2,840
 EQUIPMENT.
123 ITEMS LESS THAN $5 64,311 64,311
 MILLION.
124 PHYSICAL SECURITY 1,263 1,263
 VEHICLES.
 SUPPLY SUPPORT
 EQUIPMENT
125 SUPPLY EQUIPMENT..... 32,338 32,338
126 FIRST DESTINATION 6,255 6,255
 TRANSPORTATION.
127 SPECIAL PURPOSE 613,039 613,039
 SUPPLY SYSTEMS.
 TRAINING DEVICES
128 TRAINING SUPPORT 1,285 1,285
 EQUIPMENT.
129 TRAINING AND 44,618 44,618
 EDUCATION EQUIPMENT.
 COMMAND SUPPORT
 EQUIPMENT
130 COMMAND SUPPORT 55,728 55,728
 EQUIPMENT.
131 MEDICAL SUPPORT 5,325 5,325
 EQUIPMENT.
133 NAVAL MIP SUPPORT 6,077 6,077
 EQUIPMENT.
134 OPERATING FORCES 16,252 16,252
 SUPPORT EQUIPMENT.
135 C4ISR EQUIPMENT...... 6,497 6,497
136 ENVIRONMENTAL SUPPORT 36,592 36,592
 EQUIPMENT.
137 PHYSICAL SECURITY 118,598 114,598
 EQUIPMENT.
 Program decrease. [-4,000]
138 ENTERPRISE 29,407 29,407
 INFORMATION
 TECHNOLOGY.
 OTHER
142 NEXT GENERATION 201,314 201,314
 ENTERPRISE SERVICE.
143 CYBERSPACE ACTIVITIES 5,018 5,018
144 CYBER MISSION FORCES. 17,115 17,115
 CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS
144A CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS.. 17,295 17,295
 SPARES AND REPAIR
 PARTS
145 SPARES AND REPAIR 532,313 532,313
 PARTS.
 TOTAL OTHER 11,746,503 11,761,728
 PROCUREMENT,
 NAVY.

 PROCUREMENT, MARINE
 CORPS
 TRACKED COMBAT
 VEHICLES
001 AAV7A1 PIP........... 5,653 5,653
002 AMPHIBIOUS COMBAT 536,678 536,678
 VEHICLE FAMILY OF
 VEHICLES.
003 LAV PIP.............. 57,099 57,099
 ARTILLERY AND OTHER
 WEAPONS
004 155MM LIGHTWEIGHT 1,782 1,782
 TOWED HOWITZER.
005 ARTILLERY WEAPONS 143,808 143,808
 SYSTEM.
006 WEAPONS AND COMBAT 11,118 11,118
 VEHICLES UNDER $5
 MILLION.
 GUIDED MISSILES
007 TOMAHAWK............. 42,958 42,958
008 NAVAL STRIKE MISSILE 174,369 174,369
 (NSM).
009 GROUND BASED AIR 173,801 230,601
 DEFENSE.
 MADIS Inc 1 [56,800]
 fielding--USMC
 UPL.
010 ANTI-ARMOR MISSILE- 18,495 18,495
 JAVELIN.
011 FAMILY ANTI-ARMOR 21,419 21,419
 WEAPON SYSTEMS
 (FOAAWS).
012 ANTI-ARMOR MISSILE- 663 663
 TOW.
013 GUIDED MLRS ROCKET 7,605 7,605
 (GMLRS).
 COMMAND AND CONTROL
 SYSTEMS
014 COMMON AVIATION 30,292 30,292
 COMMAND AND CONTROL
 SYSTEM (C.
 REPAIR AND TEST
 EQUIPMENT
015 REPAIR AND TEST 58,024 58,024
 EQUIPMENT.
 OTHER SUPPORT (TEL)
016 MODIFICATION KITS.... 293 293
 COMMAND AND CONTROL
 SYSTEM (NON-TEL)
017 ITEMS UNDER $5 83,345 83,345
 MILLION (COMM &
 ELEC).
018 AIR OPERATIONS C2 11,048 11,048
 SYSTEMS.
 RADAR + EQUIPMENT
 (NON-TEL)
019 GROUND/AIR TASK 61,943 441,943
 ORIENTED RADAR (G/
 ATOR).
 Additional G/ATOR [380,000]
 radars--USMC UPL.
 INTELL/COMM EQUIPMENT
 (NON-TEL)
020 GCSS-MC.............. 1,663 1,663
021 FIRE SUPPORT SYSTEM.. 48,322 48,322
022 INTELLIGENCE SUPPORT 182,894 177,894
 EQUIPMENT.
 Program decrease. [-5,000]
024 UNMANNED AIR SYSTEMS 47,595 47,595
 (INTEL).
025 DCGS-MC.............. 47,998 47,998
026 UAS PAYLOADS......... 8,619 8,619
 OTHER SUPPORT (NON-
 TEL)
029 MARINE CORPS 276,763 276,763
 ENTERPRISE NETWORK
 (MCEN).
030 COMMON COMPUTER 40,096 40,096
 RESOURCES.
031 COMMAND POST SYSTEMS. 58,314 58,314
032 RADIO SYSTEMS........ 612,450 600,450
 Program decrease. [-12,000]
033 COMM SWITCHING & 51,976 51,976
 CONTROL SYSTEMS.
034 COMM & ELEC 26,029 26,029
 INFRASTRUCTURE
 SUPPORT.
035 CYBERSPACE ACTIVITIES 17,759 17,759
036 CYBER MISSION FORCES. 4,036 4,036
 CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS
038A CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS.. 3,884 3,884
 ADMINISTRATIVE
 VEHICLES
039 COMMERCIAL CARGO 35,179 35,179
 VEHICLES.
 TACTICAL VEHICLES
040 MOTOR TRANSPORT 17,807 17,807
 MODIFICATIONS.
041 JOINT LIGHT TACTICAL 222,257 339,657
 VEHICLE.
 Accelerate HMMWV [117,400]
 replacement--USMC
 UPL.
043 TRAILERS............. 2,721 2,721
 ENGINEER AND OTHER
 EQUIPMENT
045 TACTICAL FUEL SYSTEMS 7,854 7,854
046 POWER EQUIPMENT 5,841 5,841
 ASSORTED.
047 AMPHIBIOUS SUPPORT 38,120 38,120
 EQUIPMENT.
048 EOD SYSTEMS.......... 201,047 191,047
 Unjustified [-10,000]
 growth--MEGFoS.
 MATERIALS HANDLING
 EQUIPMENT
049 PHYSICAL SECURITY 69,967 69,967
 EQUIPMENT.
 GENERAL PROPERTY
050 FIELD MEDICAL 21,780 21,780
 EQUIPMENT.
051 TRAINING DEVICES..... 86,272 111,272
 Program increase [25,000]
 (Force on Force
 Training System).
052 FAMILY OF 27,605 27,605
 CONSTRUCTION
 EQUIPMENT.
053 ULTRA-LIGHT TACTICAL 15,033 15,033
 VEHICLE (ULTV).
 OTHER SUPPORT
054 ITEMS LESS THAN $5 26,433 26,433
 MILLION.
 SPARES AND REPAIR
 PARTS
055 SPARES AND REPAIR 34,799 34,799
 PARTS.
 TOTAL 3,681,506 4,233,706
 PROCUREMENT,
 MARINE CORPS.

 AIRCRAFT PROCUREMENT,
 AIR FORCE
 STRATEGIC OFFENSIVE
001 B-21 RAIDER.......... 1,498,431 1,498,431
002 B-21 RAIDER AP....... 288,165 288,165
 TACTICAL FORCES
003 F-35................. 3,320,757 3,516,957
 Technical [115,000]
 realignment.
 TR-3 Organic [81,200]
 Depot Standup.
004 F-35 AP.............. 594,886 479,886
 Technical [-115,000]
 realignment.
005 F-15EX............... 2,422,348 2,422,348
006 F-15EX AP............ 264,000 264,000
 TACTICAL AIRLIFT
007 KC-46A MDAP.......... 2,684,503 2,684,503
 OTHER AIRLIFT
008 C-130J............... 75,293 75,293
009 MC-130J.............. 40,351 40,351
 UPT TRAINERS
011 ADVANCED TRAINER 10,507 10,507
 REPLACEMENT T-X.
 HELICOPTERS
012 MH-139A.............. 156,192 152,492
 Unjustified [-3,700]
 growth--governmen
 t costs.
013 COMBAT RESCUE 707,018 707,018
 HELICOPTER.
 MISSION SUPPORT
 AIRCRAFT
015 CIVIL AIR PATROL A/C. 2,952 11,600
 Program increase. [8,648]
 OTHER AIRCRAFT
016 TARGET DRONES........ 128,906 128,906
017 COMPASS CALL......... 553,700
 Add 4 EC-37B [553,700]
 aircraft.
018 E-11 BACN/HAG........ 67,260 66,847
 Technical [-413]
 realignment.
019 MQ-9................. 17,039 7,012
 Early to need-- [-10,027]
 production
 shutdown.
021 AGILITY PRIME 3,612 3,612
 PROCUREMENT.
 STRATEGIC AIRCRAFT
022 B-2A................. 106,752 106,752
023 B-1B................. 36,313 38,813
 Additional Pylon [5,000]
 Purchases.
 Program decrease. [-2,500]
024 B-52................. 127,854 120,908
 Technical [-6,946]
 realignment.
025 LARGE AIRCRAFT 25,286 25,286
 INFRARED
 COUNTERMEASURES.
 TACTICAL AIRCRAFT
026 A-10................. 83,972 83,972
027 E-11 BACN/HAG........ 10,309 10,309
028 F-15................. 194,379 194,379
029 F-16................. 700,455 700,455
030 F-22A................ 764,222 764,222
031 F-35 MODIFICATIONS... 414,382 414,382
032 F-15 EPAW............ 259,837 259,837
034 KC-46A MDAP.......... 467 467
 AIRLIFT AIRCRAFT
035 C-5.................. 46,027 5,673
 Program decrease. [-10,000]
 Technical [-30,354]
 realignment.
036 C-17A................ 152,009 157,509
 Technical [5,500]
 realignment.
037 C-32A................ 4,068 4,068
038 C-37A................ 6,062 6,062
 TRAINER AIRCRAFT
039 GLIDER MODS.......... 149 149
040 T-6.................. 6,215 6,215
041 T-1.................. 6,262 6,262
042 T-38................. 111,668 161,168
 Ejection Seat [49,500]
 Upgrade.
 OTHER AIRCRAFT
044 U-2 MODS............. 81,650 81,650
045 KC-10A (ATCA)........ 3,443 3,443
046 C-21................. 2,024 2,024
047 VC-25A MOD........... 2,146 2,146
048 C-40................. 2,197 2,197
049 C-130................ 114,268 131,768
 Technical [17,500]
 realignment.
050 C-130J MODS.......... 112,299 112,299
051 C-135................ 149,023 163,523
 Program decrease. [-5,000]
 Technical [19,500]
 realignment.
052 COMPASS CALL......... 16,630 346,630
 Add 4 EC-37B A & [330,000]
 B kits, spares,
 and installation.
053 RC-135............... 212,828 252,828
 M-code compliance [39,400]
 Service Tactical [600]
 SIGINT Upgrades--
 INDOPACOM UPL.
054 E-3.................. 54,247 54,247
055 E-4.................. 5,973 5,973
056 E-8.................. 16,610 0
 Program decrease. [-16,610]
059 H-1.................. 1,757 1,757
060 H-60................. 10,820 10,820
061 COMBAT RESCUE 3,083 3,083
 HELICOPTER
 MODIFICATION.
062 RQ-4 MODS............ 1,286 1,286
063 HC/MC-130 138,956 118,956
 MODIFICATIONS.
 Technical [-20,000]
 realignment.
064 OTHER AIRCRAFT....... 29,029 70,296
 Maritime Patrol [28,500]
 Aircraft.
 Technical [12,767]
 realignment.
065 MQ-9 MODS............ 64,370 215,095
 Multi-Domain [156,725]
 Operations
 modernization.
 Unjustified cost-- [-6,000]
 MQ-9 Upgrade.
066 MQ-9 UAS PAYLOADS.... 40,000
 Program increase-- [40,000]
 electronic
 support measure
 payload.
067 SENIOR LEADER C3, 24,784 24,784
 SYSTEM--AIRCRAFT.
068 CV-22 MODS........... 153,026 168,826
 CV-22 Reliability [15,800]
 Acceleration.
 AIRCRAFT SPARES AND
 REPAIR PARTS
069 INITIAL SPARES/REPAIR 623,661 725,407
 PARTS.
 Program increase-- [94,800]
 Compass Call
 spare engines (4)
 - USAF UPL.
 Technical [6,946]
 realignment.
 COMMON SUPPORT
 EQUIPMENT
070 AIRCRAFT REPLACEMENT 138,935 138,935
 SUPPORT EQUIP.
 OTHER AIRCRAFT
 POST PRODUCTION
 SUPPORT
063A HC/MC-130 POST 20,000
 PRODUCTION SUPPORT.
 Technical [20,000]
 realignment.
071 B-2A................. 1,802 1,802
072 B-2B................. 36,325 36,325
073 B-52................. 5,883 5,883
074 F-15................. 2,764 2,764
075 F-16................. 5,102 5,102
077 MQ9 POST PROD........ 7,069 7,069
078 RQ-4 POST PRODUCTION 40,845 40,845
 CHARGES.
 AIRLIFT AIRCRAFT
 INDUSTRIAL
 PREPAREDNESS
035A C-5 POST PRODUCTION 18,000
 SUPPORT.
 Technical [18,000]
 realignment.
079 INDUSTRIAL 19,128 19,128
 RESPONSIVENESS.
 WAR CONSUMABLES
080 WAR CONSUMABLES...... 31,165 31,165
 OTHER PRODUCTION
 CHARGES
081 OTHER PRODUCTION 1,047,300 1,440,300
 CHARGES.
 Program decrease-- [-75,000]
 early to need.
 Program increase. [468,000]
 CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS
083A CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS.. 18,092 18,092
 TOTAL AIRCRAFT 18,517,428 20,302,964
 PROCUREMENT, AIR
 FORCE.

 MISSILE PROCUREMENT,
 AIR FORCE
 MISSILE REPLACEMENT
 EQUIPMENT--BALLISTIC
001 MISSILE REPLACEMENT 57,476 57,476
 EQ-BALLISTIC.
 STRATEGIC
004 LONG RANGE STAND-OFF 31,454 31,454
 WEAPON.
 TACTICAL
005 REPLAC EQUIP & WAR 30,510 30,510
 CONSUMABLES.
006 AGM-183A AIR-LAUNCHED 46,566 0
 RAPID RESPONSE
 WEAPON.
 Technical [-46,566]
 realignment.
007 JOINT AIR-SURFACE 784,971 784,971
 STANDOFF MISSILE.
008 LRASM0............... 114,025 114,025
009 SIDEWINDER (AIM-9X).. 111,855 111,855
010 AMRAAM............... 320,056 320,056
011 PREDATOR HELLFIRE 1,040 1,040
 MISSILE.
012 SMALL DIAMETER BOMB.. 46,475 46,475
013 SMALL DIAMETER BOMB 279,006 379,006
 II.
 Program increase-- [100,000]
 Air Force UPL.
014 STAND-IN ATTACK 77,975 77,975
 WEAPON (SIAW).
 INDUSTRIAL FACILITIES
015 INDUSTR'L PREPAREDNS/ 868 868
 POL PREVENTION.
 CLASS IV
018 ICBM FUZE MOD........ 99,691 99,691
019 ICBM FUZE MOD AP..... 37,673 37,673
020 MM III MODIFICATIONS. 68,193 68,193
022 AIR LAUNCH CRUISE 33,778 33,778
 MISSILE (ALCM).
 MISSILE SPARES AND
 REPAIR PARTS
023 MSL SPRS/REPAIR PARTS 15,354 15,354
 (INITIAL).
024 MSL SPRS/REPAIR PARTS 62,978 62,978
 (REPLEN).
 SPECIAL PROGRAMS
028 SPECIAL UPDATE 36,933 36,933
 PROGRAMS.
 CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS
028A CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS.. 705,540 705,540
 TOTAL MISSILE 2,962,417 3,015,851
 PROCUREMENT, AIR
 FORCE.

 PROCUREMENT OF
 AMMUNITION, AIR
 FORCE
 ROCKETS
001 ROCKETS.............. 22,190 22,190
 CARTRIDGES
002 CARTRIDGES........... 124,164 124,164
 BOMBS
004 GENERAL PURPOSE BOMBS 162,800 162,800
005 MASSIVE ORDNANCE 19,743 19,743
 PENETRATOR (MOP).
006 JOINT DIRECT ATTACK 251,956 251,956
 MUNITION.
 OTHER ITEMS
008 CAD/PAD.............. 50,473 50,473
009 EXPLOSIVE ORDNANCE 6,343 9,843
 DISPOSAL (EOD).
 Dismounted [3,500]
 Reconnaissance--S
 ets, Kits and
 Outfits (DR-SKO).
010 SPARES AND REPAIR 573 573
 PARTS.
012 FIRST DESTINATION 1,903 1,903
 TRANSPORTATION.
013 ITEMS LESS THAN 5,014 1,014
 $5,000,000.
 Program decrease-- [-4,000]
 Flares.
 FLARES
014 EXPENDABLE 120,548 105,548
 COUNTERMEASURES.
 Program decrease. [-15,000]
 FUZES
015 FUZES................ 121,528 121,528
 SMALL ARMS
016 SMALL ARMS........... 16,395 16,395
 TOTAL 903,630 888,130
 PROCUREMENT OF
 AMMUNITION, AIR
 FORCE.

 PROCUREMENT, SPACE
 FORCE
 SPACE PROCUREMENT, SF
002 AF SATELLITE COMM 51,414 51,414
 SYSTEM.
003 COUNTERSPACE SYSTEMS. 62,691 62,691
004 FAMILY OF BEYOND LINE- 26,394 26,394
 OF-SIGHT TERMINALS.
005 WIDEBAND GAPFILLER 21,982 21,982
 SATELLITES (SPACE).
006 GENERAL INFORMATION 5,424 5,424
 TECH--SPACE.
007 GPSIII FOLLOW ON..... 657,562 657,562
008 GPS III SPACE SEGMENT 103,340 103,340
009 GLOBAL POSTIONING 950 950
 (SPACE).
010 HERITAGE TRANSITION.. 21,896 21,896
011 SPACEBORNE EQUIP 29,587 29,587
 (COMSEC).
012 MILSATCOM............ 29,333 29,333
013 SBIR HIGH (SPACE).... 148,666 148,666
014 SPECIAL SPACE 817,484 805,484
 ACTIVITIES.
 Underexecution... [-12,000]
015 MOBILE USER OBJECTIVE 46,833 46,833
 SYSTEM.
016 NATIONAL SECURITY 1,056,133 1,056,133
 SPACE LAUNCH.
017 NUDET DETECTION 7,062 7,062
 SYSTEM.
018 PTES HUB............. 42,464 42,464
019 ROCKET SYSTEMS LAUNCH 39,145 39,145
 PROGRAM.
020 SPACE DEVELOPMENT 314,288 514,288
 AGENCY LAUNCH.
 Technical [200,000]
 realignment.
022 SPACE MODS........... 73,957 73,957
023 SPACELIFT RANGE 71,712 71,712
 SYSTEM SPACE.
 SPARES
024 SPARES AND REPAIR 1,352 1,352
 PARTS.
 TOTAL 3,629,669 3,817,669
 PROCUREMENT,
 SPACE FORCE.

 OTHER PROCUREMENT,
 AIR FORCE
 PASSENGER CARRYING
 VEHICLES
001 PASSENGER CARRYING 2,446 2,446
 VEHICLES.
 CARGO AND UTILITY
 VEHICLES
002 MEDIUM TACTICAL 1,125 1,125
 VEHICLE.
003 CAP VEHICLES......... 999 1,900
 Program increase. [901]
004 CARGO AND UTILITY 35,220 35,220
 VEHICLES.
 SPECIAL PURPOSE
 VEHICLES
005 JOINT LIGHT TACTICAL 60,461 60,461
 VEHICLE.
006 SECURITY AND TACTICAL 382 382
 VEHICLES.
007 SPECIAL PURPOSE 49,623 49,623
 VEHICLES.
 FIRE FIGHTING
 EQUIPMENT
008 FIRE FIGHTING/CRASH 11,231 11,231
 RESCUE VEHICLES.
 MATERIALS HANDLING
 EQUIPMENT
009 MATERIALS HANDLING 12,559 12,559
 VEHICLES.
 BASE MAINTENANCE
 SUPPORT
010 RUNWAY SNOW REMOV AND 6,409 6,409
 CLEANING EQU.
011 BASE MAINTENANCE 72,012 72,012
 SUPPORT VEHICLES.
 COMM SECURITY
 EQUIPMENT(COMSEC)
013 COMSEC EQUIPMENT..... 96,851 96,851
014 STRATEGIC 467,901 467,901
 MICROELECTRONIC
 SUPPLY SYSTEM.
 INTELLIGENCE PROGRAMS
015 INTERNATIONAL INTEL 7,043 7,043
 TECH & ARCHITECTURES.
016 INTELLIGENCE TRAINING 2,424 2,424
 EQUIPMENT.
017 INTELLIGENCE COMM 25,308 25,308
 EQUIPMENT.
 ELECTRONICS PROGRAMS
018 AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL & 65,531 65,531
 LANDING SYS.
019 BATTLE CONTROL 1,597 1,597
 SYSTEM--FIXED.
020 THEATER AIR CONTROL 9,611 9,611
 SYS IMPROVEMEN.
021 3D EXPEDITIONARY LONG- 174,640 167,140
 RANGE RADAR.
 Program decrease. [-7,500]
022 WEATHER OBSERVATION 20,658 20,658
 FORECAST.
023 STRATEGIC COMMAND AND 93,351 86,220
 CONTROL.
 Technical [-7,131]
 realignment.
024 CHEYENNE MOUNTAIN 6,118 55,418
 COMPLEX.
 Complex [49,300]
 Infrastructure
 Refurbishments.
025 MISSION PLANNING 13,947 13,947
 SYSTEMS.
 SPCL COMM-ELECTRONICS
 PROJECTS
028 GENERAL INFORMATION 101,517 131,517
 TECHNOLOGY.
 NORTHCOM UPL--AI/ [30,000]
 ML Enhancements.
029 AF GLOBAL COMMAND & 2,487 2,487
 CONTROL SYS.
030 BATTLEFIELD AIRBORNE 32,807 32,807
 CONTROL NODE (BACN).
031 MOBILITY COMMAND AND 10,210 10,210
 CONTROL.
035 COMBAT TRAINING 134,213 134,213
 RANGES.
036 MINIMUM ESSENTIAL 66,294 66,294
 EMERGENCY COMM N.
037 WIDE AREA 29,518 29,518
 SURVEILLANCE (WAS).
038 C3 COUNTERMEASURES... 55,324 55,324
040 GCSS-AF FOS.......... 786 786
042 MAINTENANCE REPAIR & 248 248
 OVERHAUL INITIATIVE.
043 THEATER BATTLE MGT C2 275 275
 SYSTEM.
044 AIR & SPACE 2,611 2,611
 OPERATIONS CENTER
 (AOC).
 AIR FORCE
 COMMUNICATIONS
046 BASE INFORMATION 29,791 29,791
 TRANSPT INFRAST
 (BITI) WIRED.
047 AFNET................ 83,320 83,320
048 JOINT COMMUNICATIONS 5,199 5,199
 SUPPORT ELEMENT
 (JCSE).
049 USCENTCOM............ 11,896 11,896
050 USSTRATCOM........... 4,619 4,619
 ORGANIZATION AND BASE
051 TACTICAL C-E 120,050 110,050
 EQUIPMENT.
 Program decrease. [-10,000]
052 RADIO EQUIPMENT...... 14,053 14,053
054 BASE COMM 91,313 96,413
 INFRASTRUCTURE.
 Alaskan Long- [5,100]
 Range Radars--
 Sites
 Digitalization.
 MODIFICATIONS
055 COMM ELECT MODS...... 167,419 167,419
 CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS
055A CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS.. 89,484 89,484
 PERSONAL SAFETY &
 RESCUE EQUIP
056 PERSONAL SAFETY AND 92,995 101,895
 RESCUE EQUIPMENT.
 Rapid Response [8,900]
 Shelters.
 DEPOT PLANT+MTRLS
 HANDLING EQ
057 POWER CONDITIONING 12,199 12,199
 EQUIPMENT.
058 MECHANIZED MATERIAL 9,326 9,326
 HANDLING EQUIP.
 BASE SUPPORT
 EQUIPMENT
059 BASE PROCURED 52,890 52,890
 EQUIPMENT.
060 ENGINEERING AND EOD 231,552 231,552
 EQUIPMENT.
061 MOBILITY EQUIPMENT... 28,758 28,758
062 FUELS SUPPORT 21,740 21,740
 EQUIPMENT (FSE).
 SPECIAL SUPPORT
 PROJECTS
065 DARP RC135........... 28,153 28,153
066 DCGS-AF.............. 217,713 217,713
070 SPECIAL UPDATE 978,499 978,499
 PROGRAM.
 CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS
070A CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS.. 21,702,225 21,452,225
 Excess carryover. [-250,000]
 SPARES AND REPAIR
 PARTS
071 SPARES AND REPAIR 1,007 1,007
 PARTS (CYBER).
072 SPARES AND REPAIR 23,175 23,175
 PARTS.
 TOTAL OTHER 25,691,113 25,510,683
 PROCUREMENT, AIR
 FORCE.

 PROCUREMENT, DEFENSE-
 WIDE
 MAJOR EQUIPMENT, SDA
025 MAJOR EQUIPMENT, DPAA 513 513
050 MAJOR EQUIPMENT, OSD. 64,291 64,291
 MAJOR EQUIPMENT, NSA
047 INFORMATION SYSTEMS 6,738 6,738
 SECURITY PROGRAM
 (ISSP).
 MAJOR EQUIPMENT, WHS
054 MAJOR EQUIPMENT, WHS. 310 310
 MAJOR EQUIPMENT, DISA
011 INFORMATION SYSTEMS 24,044 24,044
 SECURITY.
012 TELEPORT PROGRAM..... 50,475 50,475
013 JOINT FORCES 674 674
 HEADQUARTERS--DODIN.
014 ITEMS LESS THAN $5 46,614 46,614
 MILLION.
015 DEFENSE INFORMATION 87,345 87,345
 SYSTEM NETWORK.
016 WHITE HOUSE 130,145 130,145
 COMMUNICATION AGENCY.
017 SENIOR LEADERSHIP 47,864 47,864
 ENTERPRISE.
018 JOINT REGIONAL 17,135 10,135
 SECURITY STACKS
 (JRSS).
 Program decrease. [-7,000]
019 JOINT SERVICE 86,183 86,183
 PROVIDER.
020 FOURTH ESTATE NETWORK 42,756 42,756
 OPTIMIZATION (4ENO).
 MAJOR EQUIPMENT, DLA
022 MAJOR EQUIPMENT...... 24,501 24,501
 MAJOR EQUIPMENT, DCSA
001 MAJOR EQUIPMENT...... 2,346 2,346
 MAJOR EQUIPMENT, TJS
052 MAJOR EQUIPMENT, TJS. 3,900 3,900
 MAJOR EQUIPMENT,
 MISSILE DEFENSE
 AGENCY
030 THAAD................ 74,994 347,894
 25 additional [272,900]
 THAAD
 interceptors.
031 GROUND BASED 11,300 11,300
 MIDCOURSE.
032 AEGIS BMD............ 402,235 425,735
 Procure [23,500]
 Replacement IMU.
034 BMDS AN/TPY-2 RADARS. 4,606 59,606
 AN/TPY-2 TRIMM [30,000]
 Refresh.
 BMDS Sensors..... [10,000]
 HEMP Hardening... [15,000]
035 SM-3 IIAS............ 337,975 337,975
036 ARROW 3 UPPER TIER 80,000 80,000
 SYSTEMS.
037 SHORT RANGE BALLISTIC 40,000 40,000
 MISSILE DEFENSE
 (SRBMD).
038 DEFENSE OF GUAM 26,514 26,514
 PROCUREMENT.
039 AEGIS ASHORE PHASE 30,056 30,056
 III.
040 IRON DOME............ 80,000 80,000
041 AEGIS BMD HARDWARE 78,181 100,181
 AND SOFTWARE.
 SPY-1 Low Noise [22,000]
 Amplyfier.
 MAJOR EQUIPMENT, DHRA
003 PERSONNEL 4,522 4,522
 ADMINISTRATION.
 MAJOR EQUIPMENT,
 DEFENSE THREAT
 REDUCTION AGENCY
027 VEHICLES............. 139 139
028 OTHER MAJOR EQUIPMENT 14,296 14,296
 MAJOR EQUIPMENT,
 DODEA
024 AUTOMATION/ 2,048 2,048
 EDUCATIONAL SUPPORT
 & LOGISTICS.
 MAJOR EQUIPMENT,
 DMACT
023 MAJOR EQUIPMENT...... 11,117 11,117
 CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS
054A CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS.. 681,894 692,394
 JWICS [10,500]
 modernization.
 AVIATION PROGRAMS
055 ARMED OVERWATCH/ 246,000 246,000
 TARGETING.
056 MANNED ISR........... 5,000 5,000
057 MC-12................ 3,344 3,344
059 ROTARY WING UPGRADES 214,575 214,575
 AND SUSTAINMENT.
060 UNMANNED ISR......... 41,749 41,749
061 NON-STANDARD AVIATION 7,156 7,156
062 U-28................. 4,589 4,589
063 MH-47 CHINOOK........ 133,144 133,144
064 CV-22 MODIFICATION... 75,629 83,215
 CV-22 & MC-130J [7,586]
 Link-16 TacNet
 Tactical Receiver.
065 MQ-9 UNMANNED AERIAL 9,000 9,000
 VEHICLE.
066 PRECISION STRIKE 57,450 57,450
 PACKAGE.
067 AC/MC-130J........... 225,569 225,569
068 C-130 MODIFICATIONS.. 11,945 16,893
 CV-22 & MC-130J [4,948]
 Link-16 TacNet
 Tactical Receiver.
 SHIPBUILDING
069 UNDERWATER SYSTEMS... 45,631 45,631
 AMMUNITION PROGRAMS
070 ORDNANCE ITEMS <$5M.. 151,233 159,889
 M3E1 Multi [4,951]
 Purpose Anti
 Armor Anti
 Personnel Weapon
 System (MAWWS)
 Family of
 Munitions.
 Maritime Scalable [3,705]
 Effects (MSE)
 Electronic
 Warfare System
 Acceleration.
 OTHER PROCUREMENT
 PROGRAMS
071 INTELLIGENCE SYSTEMS. 175,616 219,094
 SOCOM Enclosed [15,000]
 Spaces
 Reconnaissance
 Collection Suite
 (ESRCS).
 Stalker VXE Block [28,478]
 30 Vertical
 Takeoff & Landing
 (VTOL)
 Acceleration.
072 DISTRIBUTED COMMON 2,214 2,214
 GROUND/SURFACE
 SYSTEMS.
073 OTHER ITEMS <$5M..... 98,096 98,096
074 COMBATANT CRAFT 85,566 85,566
 SYSTEMS.
075 SPECIAL PROGRAMS..... 20,042 249,042
 Medium Fixed Wing [229,000]
 Recapitalization.
076 TACTICAL VEHICLES.... 51,605 59,605
 PB-NSCV.......... [8,000]
077 WARRIOR SYSTEMS <$5M. 306,846 359,129
 AFSOC Force [18,730]
 Generation
 (AFSOFORGEN)
 Tactical
 Communications
 (TACCOM).
 Counter Unmanned [33,553]
 Systems (CUxS)
 Procurement
 Acceleration.
078 COMBAT MISSION 4,991 4,991
 REQUIREMENTS.
080 OPERATIONAL 18,723 24,137
 ENHANCEMENTS
 INTELLIGENCE.
 Low Visibility [5,414]
 Vanishing
 Technology (LVVT).
081 OPERATIONAL 347,473 374,227
 ENHANCEMENTS.
 Ground Vehicle [11,000]
 Forward Looking
 Infrared (FLIR).
 High Speed [5,000]
 Assault Craft
 (HSAC) Roof
 Application Kit
 (RAK)
 Acceleration.
 Intelligence, [10,754]
 Surveillance, and
 Reconnaissance
 (ISR)
 Transceivers
 Acceleration.
 CBDP
082 CHEMICAL BIOLOGICAL 199,439 199,439
 SITUATIONAL
 AWARENESS.
083 CB PROTECTION & 187,164 192,164
 HAZARD MITIGATION.
 Waterless & [5,000]
 Sprayable
 Solutions for
 Decontamination
 of Chemical and
 Biological
 Warfare Agents.
 TOTAL 5,245,500 6,013,519
 PROCUREMENT,
 DEFENSE-WIDE.

 NATIONAL GUARD AND
 RESERVE EQUIPMENT
 UNDISTRIBUTED
007 UNDISTRIBUTED........ 50,000
 Program increase. [50,000]
 TOTAL NATIONAL 50,000
 GUARD AND
 RESERVE
 EQUIPMENT.

 TOTAL 144,219,205 160,202,135
 PROCUREMENT.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

 TITLE XLII--RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST, AND EVALUATION

SEC. 4201. RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST, AND EVALUATION.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 SEC. 4201. RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST, AND EVALUATION (In Thousands of Dollars)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 FY 2023 House
 Line Program Element Item Request Authorized
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 .................................. RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST &
 EVAL, ARMY
 .................................. BASIC RESEARCH
 001 0601102A DEFENSE RESEARCH SCIENCES......... 279,328 340,194
 .................................. Counter-UAS Technology [5,000]
 Research.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [55,866]
 002 0601103A UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INITIATIVES... 70,775 90,775
 .................................. Defense University Research [20,000]
 Instrumentation Program.
 003 0601104A UNIVERSITY AND INDUSTRY RESEARCH 100,909 109,909
 CENTERS.
 .................................. Automotive Research Center.... [5,000]
 .................................. Biotechnology................. [4,000]
 004 0601121A CYBER COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH 5,355 5,355
 ALLIANCE.
 005 0601601A ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND 10,456 15,456
 MACHINE LEARNING BASIC RESEARCH.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [5,000]
 .................................. SUBTOTAL BASIC RESEARCH........ 466,823 561,689
 ..................................
 .................................. APPLIED RESEARCH
 006 0602002A ARMY AGILE INNOVATION AND 9,534 9,534
 DEVELOPMENT-APPLIED RESEARCH.
 008 0602134A COUNTER IMPROVISED-THREAT ADVANCED 6,192 6,192
 STUDIES.
 009 0602141A LETHALITY TECHNOLOGY.............. 87,717 182,717
 .................................. Armament digital and mission [35,000]
 engineering.
 .................................. Collaborative networked [25,000]
 armament lethality and fire
 control.
 .................................. Investigate novel armament [5,000]
 systems and technologies.
 .................................. Modular open systems [5,000]
 architecture.
 .................................. Solid-state additive [20,000]
 manufacturing research.
 .................................. Turret gunner survivability [5,000]
 and simulation.
 010 0602142A ARMY APPLIED RESEARCH............. 27,833 57,533
 .................................. Digital night vision [9,700]
 technology.
 .................................. Warfighter Weapon Systems [20,000]
 Digital Integration.
 011 0602143A SOLDIER LETHALITY TECHNOLOGY...... 103,839 123,839
 .................................. Advanced textiles and shelters [6,000]
 .................................. Footwear research............. [4,000]
 .................................. Pathfinder.................... [10,000]
 .................................. Program decrease.............. [-5,000]
 .................................. Program increase.............. [5,000]
 012 0602144A GROUND TECHNOLOGY................. 52,848 96,048
 .................................. Advanced Gunner Restraint [2,200]
 System.
 .................................. Aerospace Manufacturing Center [12,000]
 Pilot Program.
 .................................. Cold and complex environments [9,000]
 sensing research.
 .................................. High performance polymer [10,000]
 composites and coatings.
 .................................. Polar proving ground and [5,000]
 training program.
 .................................. Unmanned mobility............. [5,000]
 013 0602145A NEXT GENERATION COMBAT VEHICLE 174,090 184,890
 TECHNOLOGY.
 .................................. Compact hyperspectral imager [4,800]
 development.
 .................................. Structural thermoplastics..... [6,000]
 014 0602146A NETWORK C3I TECHNOLOGY............ 64,115 136,115
 .................................. AI for position, navigation, [6,000]
 and timing.
 .................................. Alternative position, [20,000]
 navigation, and timing.
 .................................. Portable Doppler radar........ [7,500]
 .................................. Rapid design and fabrication [3,500]
 of high enthalpy alloys for
 long range precision fires
 missiles.
 .................................. Secure anti-tamper............ [15,000]
 .................................. Weapons system security....... [20,000]
 015 0602147A LONG RANGE PRECISION FIRES 43,029 99,779
 TECHNOLOGY.
 .................................. Carbon-carbon high-temperature [15,000]
 composites.
 .................................. Low cost missile technology [7,000]
 development.
 .................................. Low cost missile technology [3,000]
 development+J23.
 .................................. Novel printed armament [10,000]
 components.
 .................................. Precision long range [6,750]
 integrated strike missile.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [15,000]
 016 0602148A FUTURE VERTICLE LIFT TECHNOLOGY... 69,348 84,348
 .................................. High density eVTOL power [15,000]
 source.
 017 0602150A AIR AND MISSILE DEFENSE TECHNOLOGY 27,016 72,016
 .................................. CEMA missile defender......... [20,000]
 .................................. Counter-UAS Center of [10,000]
 Excellence.
 .................................. High energy laser engagement [15,000]
 technologies.
 018 0602180A ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND 16,454 21,454
 MACHINE LEARNING TECHNOLOGIES.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [5,000]
 019 0602181A ALL DOMAIN CONVERGENCE APPLIED 27,399 27,399
 RESEARCH.
 020 0602182A C3I APPLIED RESEARCH.............. 27,892 27,892
 021 0602183A AIR PLATFORM APPLIED RESEARCH..... 41,588 56,588
 .................................. Aerospace Propulsion and Power [10,000]
 Technology.
 .................................. Hybrid solar photovoltaic- [5,000]
 thermoelectric panel.
 022 0602184A SOLDIER APPLIED RESEARCH.......... 15,716 15,716
 023 0602213A C3I APPLIED CYBER................. 13,605 13,605
 024 0602386A BIOTECHNOLOGY FOR MATERIALS-- 21,919 171,919
 APPLIED RESEARCH.
 .................................. Tri-Service Biotechnology for [150,000]
 a Resilient Supply Chain /
 Biotechnology for Materials.
 025 0602785A MANPOWER/PERSONNEL/TRAINING 19,649 19,649
 TECHNOLOGY.
 026 0602787A MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY................ 33,976 33,976
 .................................. SUBTOTAL APPLIED RESEARCH...... 883,759 1,441,209
 ..................................
 .................................. ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
 027 0603002A MEDICAL ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY....... 5,207 11,907
 .................................. CPF--U.S. Army Battlefield [1,700]
 Exercise and Combat Related
 Traumatic Brain and Spinal
 Injury Research.
 .................................. Hearing protection for [5,000]
 communications.
 028 0603007A MANPOWER, PERSONNEL AND TRAINING 15,598 15,598
 ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY.
 029 0603025A ARMY AGILE INNOVATION AND 20,900 20,900
 DEMONSTRATION.
 030 0603040A ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND 6,395 11,395
 MACHINE LEARNING ADVANCED
 TECHNOLOGIES.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [5,000]
 031 0603041A ALL DOMAIN CONVERGENCE ADVANCED 45,463 45,463
 TECHNOLOGY.
 032 0603042A C3I ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY........... 12,716 12,716
 033 0603043A AIR PLATFORM ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY.. 17,946 27,946
 .................................. Integrated Floor System [10,000]
 Upgrades for H-60 Variants.
 034 0603044A SOLDIER ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY....... 479 10,499
 .................................. CPF--Advancing Military [2,890]
 Exoskeleton Technology State-
 of-The-Art Project.
 .................................. CPF--Building 2, Doriot [3,630]
 Climatic Chambers, Exterior
 Repair.
 .................................. CPF--Small Unit Digital Twin [3,500]
 for Robotic and Sensor Systems
 Integration.
 036 0603116A LETHALITY ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY..... 9,796 9,796
 037 0603117A ARMY ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY 134,874 134,874
 DEVELOPMENT.
 038 0603118A SOLDIER LETHALITY ADVANCED 100,935 120,935
 TECHNOLOGY.
 .................................. FRAG-CT....................... [4,000]
 .................................. Sensored head-borne suspension [8,000]
 systems.
 .................................. Soldier Integration [8,000]
 Experimentation/Airborne Rally
 Point.
 039 0603119A GROUND ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY........ 32,546 106,846
 .................................. Additive manufacturing with [15,000]
 indigenous materials.
 .................................. Cold Regions Research and [10,000]
 Engineering Laboratory.
 .................................. Concrete properties prediction [1,800]
 .................................. Platform agnostic remote [40,000]
 armament systems.
 .................................. Printed infrastructure and [7,500]
 cold weather construction
 capabilities.
 040 0603134A COUNTER IMPROVISED-THREAT 21,486 21,486
 SIMULATION.
 041 0603386A BIOTECHNOLOGY FOR MATERIALS-- 56,853 56,853
 ADVANCED RESEARCH.
 042 0603457A C3I CYBER ADVANCED DEVELOPMENT.... 41,354 41,354
 043 0603461A HIGH PERFORMANCE COMPUTING 251,964 301,964
 MODERNIZATION PROGRAM.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [50,000]
 044 0603462A NEXT GENERATION COMBAT VEHICLE 193,242 261,242
 ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY.
 .................................. Digital enterprise technology. [15,000]
 .................................. Electrified vehicle infrared [9,000]
 signature management.
 .................................. HTPEM APU..................... [10,000]
 .................................. Lithium 6T battery development [8,000]
 .................................. Soldier-ground vehicle [6,000]
 interface design.
 .................................. Synthetic graphite research... [20,000]
 045 0603463A NETWORK C3I ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY... 125,565 135,565
 .................................. PNT technologies in degraded [10,000]
 environments.
 046 0603464A LONG RANGE PRECISION FIRES 100,830 202,740
 ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY.
 .................................. Autoloader development........ [21,400]
 .................................. Hypersonic and strategic [20,000]
 materials and structures.
 .................................. Maneuvering submunitions...... [18,000]
 .................................. Missile Multi Agent eXtensible [15,000]
 Engagement Services (MAXES).
 .................................. PrSM Inc 4--Army UPL.......... [27,510]
 047 0603465A FUTURE VERTICAL LIFT ADVANCED 177,836 187,836
 TECHNOLOGY.
 .................................. Program increase--Additive [10,000]
 manufacturing.
 048 0603466A AIR AND MISSILE DEFENSE ADVANCED 11,147 81,147
 TECHNOLOGY.
 .................................. Integration of distributed [35,000]
 gain HEL laser weapon system.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [35,000]
 049 0603920A HUMANITARIAN DEMINING............. 8,933 8,933
 .................................. SUBTOTAL ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY 1,392,065 1,827,995
 DEVELOPMENT.
 ..................................
 .................................. ADVANCED COMPONENT DEVELOPMENT &
 PROTOTYPES
 050 0603305A ARMY MISSLE DEFENSE SYSTEMS 12,001 46,001
 INTEGRATION.
 .................................. Mobile Solid State High Power [12,000]
 Microwave.
 .................................. Position, Navigation, and [8,000]
 Timing (PNT) Resiliency.
 .................................. Sensing, Modeling, Analysis, [14,000]
 Requirements, and Testing.
 051 0603308A ARMY SPACE SYSTEMS INTEGRATION.... 17,945 21,445
 .................................. Mission Essential Weather [3,500]
 Small Satellites.
 053 0603619A LANDMINE WARFARE AND BARRIER--ADV 64,001 64,001
 DEV.
 054 0603639A TANK AND MEDIUM CALIBER AMMUNITION 64,669 64,669
 055 0603645A ARMORED SYSTEM MODERNIZATION--ADV 49,944 87,444
 DEV.
 .................................. AMPV--Hybrid electric vehicle. [37,500]
 056 0603747A SOLDIER SUPPORT AND SURVIVABILITY. 4,060 4,060
 057 0603766A TACTICAL ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE 72,314 72,314
 SYSTEM--ADV DEV.
 058 0603774A NIGHT VISION SYSTEMS ADVANCED 18,048 168,048
 DEVELOPMENT.
 .................................. IVAS--Army UPL................ [150,000]
 059 0603779A ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY TECHNOLOGY-- 31,249 38,749
 DEM/VAL.
 .................................. Underwater Demilitarization of [7,500]
 Munitions.
 060 0603790A NATO RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT..... 3,805 3,805
 061 0603801A AVIATION--ADV DEV................. 1,162,344 1,180,484
 .................................. Program increase--Future [23,000]
 Vertical Lift.
 .................................. Unjustified growth--FLRAA MTA [-4,860]
 program management.
 062 0603804A LOGISTICS AND ENGINEER EQUIPMENT-- 9,638 9,638
 ADV DEV.
 063 0603807A MEDICAL SYSTEMS--ADV DEV.......... 598 598
 064 0603827A SOLDIER SYSTEMS--ADVANCED 25,971 25,971
 DEVELOPMENT.
 065 0604017A ROBOTICS DEVELOPMENT.............. 26,594 26,594
 066 0604019A EXPANDED MISSION AREA MISSILE 220,820 220,820
 (EMAM).
 067 0604020A CROSS FUNCTIONAL TEAM (CFT) 106,000 111,000
 ADVANCED DEVELOPMENT &
 PROTOTYPING.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [5,000]
 069 0604035A LOW EARTH ORBIT (LEO) SATELLITE 35,509 35,509
 CAPABILITY.
 070 0604036A MULTI-DOMAIN SENSING SYSTEM (MDSS) 49,932 49,932
 ADV DEV.
 071 0604037A TACTICAL INTEL TARGETING ACCESS 863 863
 NODE (TITAN) ADV DEV.
 072 0604100A ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES.......... 10,659 10,659
 073 0604101A SMALL UNMANNED AERIAL VEHICLE 1,425 21,425
 (SUAV) (6.4).
 .................................. Program Protection............ [20,000]
 074 0604113A FUTURE TACTICAL UNMANNED AIRCRAFT 95,719 100,719
 SYSTEM (FTUAS).
 .................................. Identification Friend or Foe [5,000]
 (IFF) modernization.
 075 0604114A LOWER TIER AIR MISSILE DEFENSE 382,147 422,147
 (LTAMD) SENSOR.
 .................................. Program protection............ [40,000]
 076 0604115A TECHNOLOGY MATURATION INITIATIVES. 269,756 339,756
 .................................. Strategic long range cannon... [70,000]
 077 0604117A MANEUVER--SHORT RANGE AIR DEFENSE 225,147 225,147
 (M-SHORAD).
 078 0604119A ARMY ADVANCED COMPONENT 198,111 198,111
 DEVELOPMENT & PROTOTYPING.
 079 0604120A ASSURED POSITIONING, NAVIGATION 43,797 57,797
 AND TIMING (PNT).
 .................................. ALTNAV--Army UPL.............. [14,000]
 080 0604121A SYNTHETIC TRAINING ENVIRONMENT 166,452 215,852
 REFINEMENT & PROTOTYPING.
 .................................. AI prototype--Army UPL........ [13,500]
 .................................. Call for Fire Trainer--Army [10,000]
 UPL.
 .................................. Program increase (STE live [17,000]
 training systems).
 .................................. Program increase TSS/TMT and [8,900]
 SVT--Army UPL.
 081 0604134A COUNTER IMPROVISED-THREAT 15,840 15,840
 DEMONSTRATION, PROTOTYPE
 DEVELOPMENT, AND TESTING.
 082 0604135A STRATEGIC MID-RANGE FIRES......... 404,291 404,291
 083 0604182A HYPERSONICS....................... 173,168 223,168
 .................................. National Hypersonic [50,000]
 Initiative--Develop Leap-Ahead
 Concepts and Capabilities.
 084 0604403A FUTURE INTERCEPTOR................ 8,179 8,179
 085 0604531A COUNTER--SMALL UNMANNED AIRCRAFT 35,110 35,110
 SYSTEMS ADVANCED DEVELOPMENT.
 086 0604541A UNIFIED NETWORK TRANSPORT......... 36,966 76,966
 .................................. Common mounted form factor-- [40,000]
 Army UPL.
 089 0305251A CYBERSPACE OPERATIONS FORCES AND 55,677 55,677
 FORCE SUPPORT.
 .................................. SUBTOTAL ADVANCED COMPONENT 4,098,749 4,642,789
 DEVELOPMENT & PROTOTYPES.
 ..................................
 .................................. SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT & DEMONSTRATION
 090 0604201A AIRCRAFT AVIONICS................. 3,335 3,335
 091 0604270A ELECTRONIC WARFARE DEVELOPMENT.... 4,243 4,243
 092 0604601A INFANTRY SUPPORT WEAPONS.......... 66,529 76,529
 .................................. Commercial magazine [5,000]
 reliability testing.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [5,000]
 093 0604604A MEDIUM TACTICAL VEHICLES.......... 22,163 22,163
 094 0604611A JAVELIN........................... 7,870 7,870
 095 0604622A FAMILY OF HEAVY TACTICAL VEHICLES. 50,924 50,924
 096 0604633A AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL............... 2,623 2,623
 097 0604641A TACTICAL UNMANNED GROUND VEHICLE 115,986 115,986
 (TUGV).
 098 0604642A LIGHT TACTICAL WHEELED VEHICLES... 10,049
 .................................. Electric light recon vehicle-- [10,049]
 Army UPL.
 099 0604645A ARMORED SYSTEMS MODERNIZATION 71,287 71,287
 (ASM)--ENG DEV.
 100 0604710A NIGHT VISION SYSTEMS--ENG DEV..... 62,679 84,179
 .................................. IVAS--Army UPL................ [16,500]
 .................................. Third Generation Forward [5,000]
 Looking Infrared (3GFLIR)
 FALCONS.
 101 0604713A COMBAT FEEDING, CLOTHING, AND 1,566 1,566
 EQUIPMENT.
 102 0604715A NON-SYSTEM TRAINING DEVICES--ENG 18,600 18,600
 DEV.
 103 0604741A AIR DEFENSE COMMAND, CONTROL AND 39,541 35,541
 INTELLIGENCE--ENG DEV.
 .................................. Program decrease.............. [-4,000]
 104 0604742A CONSTRUCTIVE SIMULATION SYSTEMS 29,570 29,570
 DEVELOPMENT.
 105 0604746A AUTOMATIC TEST EQUIPMENT 5,178 5,178
 DEVELOPMENT.
 106 0604760A DISTRIBUTIVE INTERACTIVE 8,189 8,189
 SIMULATIONS (DIS)--ENG DEV.
 109 0604798A BRIGADE ANALYSIS, INTEGRATION AND 21,228 21,228
 EVALUATION.
 110 0604802A WEAPONS AND MUNITIONS--ENG DEV.... 263,778 259,178
 .................................. Program decrease.............. [-4,600]
 111 0604804A LOGISTICS AND ENGINEER EQUIPMENT-- 41,669 65,369
 ENG DEV.
 .................................. Chassis upgrade for ABV/JAB-- [23,700]
 Army UPL.
 112 0604805A COMMAND, CONTROL, COMMUNICATIONS 40,038 40,038
 SYSTEMS--ENG DEV.
 113 0604807A MEDICAL MATERIEL/MEDICAL 5,513 5,513
 BIOLOGICAL DEFENSE EQUIPMENT--ENG
 DEV.
 114 0604808A LANDMINE WARFARE/BARRIER--ENG DEV. 12,150 12,150
 115 0604818A ARMY TACTICAL COMMAND & CONTROL 111,690 111,690
 HARDWARE & SOFTWARE.
 116 0604820A RADAR DEVELOPMENT................. 71,259 71,259
 117 0604822A GENERAL FUND ENTERPRISE BUSINESS 10,402 10,402
 SYSTEM (GFEBS).
 119 0604827A SOLDIER SYSTEMS--WARRIOR DEM/VAL.. 11,425 11,425
 120 0604852A SUITE OF SURVIVABILITY ENHANCEMENT 109,702 146,802
 SYSTEMS--EMD.
 .................................. Active protection system [16,000]
 testing.
 .................................. Army Aviation & Missile Center [9,400]
 Digital Engineering Software
 pilot program.
 .................................. Autonomous Vehicle Test Bed... [11,700]
 121 0604854A ARTILLERY SYSTEMS--EMD............ 23,106 23,106
 122 0605013A INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT 124,475 124,475
 123 0605018A INTEGRATED PERSONNEL AND PAY 67,564 47,564
 SYSTEM-ARMY (IPPS-A).
 .................................. Unjustified growth............ [-20,000]
 125 0605030A JOINT TACTICAL NETWORK CENTER 17,950 17,950
 (JTNC).
 126 0605031A JOINT TACTICAL NETWORK (JTN)...... 30,169 30,169
 128 0605035A COMMON INFRARED COUNTERMEASURES 11,523 11,523
 (CIRCM).
 130 0605041A DEFENSIVE CYBER TOOL DEVELOPMENT.. 33,029 33,029
 131 0605042A TACTICAL NETWORK RADIO SYSTEMS 4,497 4,497
 (LOW-TIER).
 132 0605047A CONTRACT WRITING SYSTEM........... 23,487 13,487
 .................................. Unjustified growth............ [-10,000]
 133 0605051A AIRCRAFT SURVIVABILITY DEVELOPMENT 19,123 19,123
 134 0605052A INDIRECT FIRE PROTECTION 131,093 131,093
 CAPABILITY INC 2--BLOCK 1.
 135 0605053A GROUND ROBOTICS................... 26,809 26,809
 136 0605054A EMERGING TECHNOLOGY INITIATIVES... 185,311 259,311
 .................................. Program increase (10kw-50kw DE- [70,000]
 MSHORAD) and C-UAS P-HEL.
 .................................. Threat Simulation Modeling [4,000]
 (HNE-TSM).
 137 0605143A BIOMETRICS ENABLING CAPABILITY 11,091 11,091
 (BEC).
 138 0605144A NEXT GENERATION LOAD DEVICE-- 22,439 22,439
 MEDIUM.
 140 0605148A TACTICAL INTEL TARGETING ACCESS 58,087 108,987
 NODE (TITAN) EMD.
 .................................. Army Requested Realignment [50,900]
 from Procurement.
 141 0605203A ARMY SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT & 119,516 143,616
 DEMONSTRATION.
 .................................. CYBERCOM UPL--JCWA integration [24,100]
 142 0605205A SMALL UNMANNED AERIAL VEHICLE 6,530 6,530
 (SUAV) (6.5).
 143 0605224A MULTI-DOMAIN INTELLIGENCE......... 19,911 19,911
 145 0605231A PRECISION STRIKE MISSILE (PRSM)... 259,506 259,506
 146 0605232A HYPERSONICS EMD................... 633,499 633,499
 147 0605233A ACCESSIONS INFORMATION ENVIRONMENT 13,647 13,647
 (AIE).
 148 0605235A STRATEGIC MID-RANGE CAPABILITY.... 5,016 5,016
 149 0605236A INTEGRATED TACTICAL COMMUNICATIONS 12,447 12,447
 150 0605450A JOINT AIR-TO-GROUND MISSILE (JAGM) 2,366 2,366
 151 0605457A ARMY INTEGRATED AIR AND MISSILE 265,288 257,288
 DEFENSE (AIAMD).
 .................................. Program decrease.............. [-8,000]
 152 0605531A COUNTER--SMALL UNMANNED AIRCRAFT 14,892 14,892
 SYSTEMS SYS DEV & DEMONSTRATION.
 153 0605625A MANNED GROUND VEHICLE............. 589,762 589,762
 154 0605766A NATIONAL CAPABILITIES INTEGRATION 17,030 17,030
 (MIP).
 155 0605812A JOINT LIGHT TACTICAL VEHICLE 9,376 9,376
 (JLTV) ENGINEERING AND
 MANUFACTURING DEVELOPMENT PH.
 156 0605830A AVIATION GROUND SUPPORT EQUIPMENT. 2,959 2,959
 157 0303032A TROJAN--RH12...................... 3,761 3,761
 160 0304270A ELECTRONIC WARFARE DEVELOPMENT.... 56,938 97,774
 .................................. Service Tactical SIGINT [4,900]
 Upgrades--INDOPACOM UPL.
 .................................. Terrestrial Layer System EAB-- [35,936]
 Army UPL.
 .................................. SUBTOTAL SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT & 4,031,334 4,276,919
 DEMONSTRATION.
 ..................................
 .................................. MANAGEMENT SUPPORT
 161 0604256A THREAT SIMULATOR DEVELOPMENT...... 18,437 18,437
 162 0604258A TARGET SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT........ 19,132 39,132
 .................................. Small UAS engine development.. [20,000]
 163 0604759A MAJOR T&E INVESTMENT.............. 107,706 107,706
 164 0605103A RAND ARROYO CENTER................ 35,542 35,542
 165 0605301A ARMY KWAJALEIN ATOLL.............. 309,005 309,005
 166 0605326A CONCEPTS EXPERIMENTATION PROGRAM.. 87,122 87,122
 168 0605601A ARMY TEST RANGES AND FACILITIES... 401,643 401,643
 169 0605602A ARMY TECHNICAL TEST 37,962 72,962
 INSTRUMENTATION AND TARGETS.
 .................................. Rapid Assurance Modernization [35,000]
 Program-Test (RAMP-T).
 170 0605604A SURVIVABILITY/LETHALITY ANALYSIS.. 36,500 36,500
 171 0605606A AIRCRAFT CERTIFICATION............ 2,777 2,777
 172 0605702A METEOROLOGICAL SUPPORT TO RDT&E 6,958 6,958
 ACTIVITIES.
 173 0605706A MATERIEL SYSTEMS ANALYSIS......... 22,037 22,037
 174 0605709A EXPLOITATION OF FOREIGN ITEMS..... 6,186 6,186
 175 0605712A SUPPORT OF OPERATIONAL TESTING.... 70,718 70,718
 176 0605716A ARMY EVALUATION CENTER............ 67,058 67,058
 177 0605718A ARMY MODELING & SIM X-CMD 6,097 6,097
 COLLABORATION & INTEG.
 178 0605801A PROGRAMWIDE ACTIVITIES............ 89,793 89,793
 179 0605803A TECHNICAL INFORMATION ACTIVITIES.. 28,752 28,752
 180 0605805A MUNITIONS STANDARDIZATION, 48,316 53,316
 EFFECTIVENESS AND SAFETY.
 .................................. Agile Manufacturing for [5,000]
 Advanced Armament Systems.
 181 0605857A ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY TECHNOLOGY 1,912 1,912
 MGMT SUPPORT.
 182 0605898A ARMY DIRECT REPORT HEADQUARTERS-- 53,271 53,271
 R&D - MHA.
 183 0606002A RONALD REAGAN BALLISTIC MISSILE 90,088 98,088
 DEFENSE TEST SITE.
 .................................. Technology Refresh for Reagan [8,000]
 Test Site (RTS) Mission
 Control Centers.
 184 0606003A COUNTERINTEL AND HUMAN INTEL 1,424 1,424
 MODERNIZATION.
 186 0606942A ASSESSMENTS AND EVALUATIONS CYBER 5,816 5,816
 VULNERABILITIES.
 .................................. SUBTOTAL MANAGEMENT SUPPORT.... 1,554,252 1,622,252
 ..................................
 .................................. OPERATIONAL SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT
 188 0603778A MLRS PRODUCT IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM.. 18,463 18,463
 189 0605024A ANTI-TAMPER TECHNOLOGY SUPPORT.... 9,284 21,284
 .................................. Program increase.............. [12,000]
 190 0607131A WEAPONS AND MUNITIONS PRODUCT 11,674 16,674
 IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS.
 .................................. Materials improvements........ [5,000]
 193 0607137A CHINOOK PRODUCT IMPROVEMENT 52,513 72,513
 PROGRAM.
 .................................. Chinook 714C engine upgrade... [20,000]
 194 0607139A IMPROVED TURBINE ENGINE PROGRAM... 228,036 228,036
 195 0607142A AVIATION ROCKET SYSTEM PRODUCT 11,312 11,312
 IMPROVEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT.
 196 0607143A UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEM UNIVERSAL 512 512
 PRODUCTS.
 197 0607145A APACHE FUTURE DEVELOPMENT......... 10,074 35,074
 .................................. Program increase.............. [25,000]
 198 0607148A AN/TPQ-53 COUNTERFIRE TARGET 62,559 62,559
 ACQUISITION RADAR SYSTEM.
 199 0607150A INTEL CYBER DEVELOPMENT........... 13,343 13,343
 200 0607312A ARMY OPERATIONAL SYSTEMS 26,131 26,131
 DEVELOPMENT.
 201 0607313A ELECTRONIC WARFARE DEVELOPMENT.... 6,432 6,432
 202 0607665A FAMILY OF BIOMETRICS.............. 1,114 1,114
 203 0607865A PATRIOT PRODUCT IMPROVEMENT....... 152,312 162,312
 .................................. Patriot Obsolescence and [10,000]
 Program Protection.
 204 0203728A JOINT AUTOMATED DEEP OPERATION 19,329 19,329
 COORDINATION SYSTEM (JADOCS).
 205 0203735A COMBAT VEHICLE IMPROVEMENT 192,310 294,510
 PROGRAMS.
 .................................. Abrams modernization.......... [97,200]
 .................................. Auxiliary power unit [5,000]
 development.
 206 0203743A 155MM SELF-PROPELLED HOWITZER 136,680 136,680
 IMPROVEMENTS.
 207 0203744A AIRCRAFT MODIFICATIONS/PRODUCT 14,400
 IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS.
 .................................. Gray Eagle--M-code............ [14,400]
 208 0203752A AIRCRAFT ENGINE COMPONENT 148 148
 IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM.
 209 0203758A DIGITIZATION...................... 2,100 2,100
 210 0203801A MISSILE/AIR DEFENSE PRODUCT 3,109 53,109
 IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM.
 .................................. Stinger missile--Army UPL..... [50,000]
 211 0203802A OTHER MISSILE PRODUCT IMPROVEMENT 9,027 9,027
 PROGRAMS.
 212 0205412A ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY TECHNOLOGY-- 793 793
 OPERATIONAL SYSTEM DEV.
 213 0205778A GUIDED MULTIPLE-LAUNCH ROCKET 20,180 20,180
 SYSTEM (GMLRS).
 214 0208053A JOINT TACTICAL GROUND SYSTEM...... 8,813 8,813
 217 0303140A INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY 17,209 17,209
 PROGRAM.
 218 0303141A GLOBAL COMBAT SUPPORT SYSTEM...... 27,100 27,100
 219 0303142A SATCOM GROUND ENVIRONMENT (SPACE). 18,321 18,321
 222 0305179A INTEGRATED BROADCAST SERVICE (IBS) 9,926 9,926
 223 0305204A TACTICAL UNMANNED AERIAL VEHICLES. 4,500 4,500
 224 0305206A AIRBORNE RECONNAISSANCE SYSTEMS... 17,165 17,165
 227 0708045A END ITEM INDUSTRIAL PREPAREDNESS 91,270 91,270
 ACTIVITIES.
 227A 9999999999 CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS............... 6,664 6,664
 .................................. SUBTOTAL OPERATIONAL SYSTEMS 1,188,403 1,427,003
 DEVELOPMENT.
 ..................................
 .................................. SOFTWARE AND DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
 PILOT PROGRAMS
 228 0608041A DEFENSIVE CYBER--SOFTWARE 94,888 94,888
 PROTOTYPE DEVELOPMENT.
 .................................. SUBTOTAL SOFTWARE AND DIGITAL 94,888 94,888
 TECHNOLOGY PILOT PROGRAMS.
 ..................................
 .................................. TOTAL RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, 13,710,273 15,894,744
 TEST & EVAL, ARMY.
 ..................................
 .................................. RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST &
 EVAL, NAVY
 .................................. BASIC RESEARCH
 001 0601103N UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INITIATIVES... 90,076 209,700
 .................................. Advanced autonomous robotics.. [10,000]
 .................................. Program increase.............. [109,624]
 003 0601153N DEFENSE RESEARCH SCIENCES......... 499,116 499,116
 .................................. SUBTOTAL BASIC RESEARCH........ 589,192 708,816
 ..................................
 .................................. APPLIED RESEARCH
 004 0602114N POWER PROJECTION APPLIED RESEARCH. 22,953 38,953
 .................................. Next Generation Information [16,000]
 Operations.
 005 0602123N FORCE PROTECTION APPLIED RESEARCH. 133,426 194,926
 .................................. Additive Manufacturing of [10,000]
 Unmanned Maritime Systems.
 .................................. CPF--Resilient Autonomous [4,000]
 Systems Research and Workforce
 Diversity.
 .................................. CPF--Talent and Technology for [3,000]
 Navy Power and Energy Systems.
 .................................. Direct air capture and carbon [10,000]
 removal technology program.
 .................................. Intelligent Data Management [10,500]
 for Distributed Naval
 Platforms.
 .................................. Next Generation Integrated [10,500]
 Power and Energy Systems.
 .................................. Relative Positioning of [5,000]
 Autonomous Platforms.
 .................................. Resilient Autonomous Systems [8,500]
 Research & Workforce Diversity.
 006 0602131M MARINE CORPS LANDING FORCE 53,467 73,967
 TECHNOLOGY.
 .................................. Advanced lithium-ion batteries [5,000]
 .................................. CPF--Unmanned Logistics [3,000]
 Solutions for the U.S. Marine
 Corps.
 .................................. Cyber, AI & LVC Tech Scouting [2,500]
 & Workforce Development.
 .................................. Unmanned logistics solutions.. [10,000]
 007 0602235N COMMON PICTURE APPLIED RESEARCH... 51,911 56,911
 .................................. Program increase.............. [5,000]
 008 0602236N WARFIGHTER SUSTAINMENT APPLIED 70,957 85,957
 RESEARCH.
 .................................. Anti-corrosion coatings....... [10,000]
 .................................. High mobility ground robots... [5,000]
 009 0602271N ELECTROMAGNETIC SYSTEMS APPLIED 92,444 112,444
 RESEARCH.
 .................................. Chip Scale Open Architecture.. [20,000]
 010 0602435N OCEAN WARFIGHTING ENVIRONMENT 74,622 84,622
 APPLIED RESEARCH.
 .................................. Undersea distributed sensing [10,000]
 systems.
 011 0602651M JOINT NON-LETHAL WEAPONS APPLIED 6,700 6,700
 RESEARCH.
 012 0602747N UNDERSEA WARFARE APPLIED RESEARCH. 58,111 87,111
 .................................. CPF--Persistent Maritime [4,000]
 Surveillance.
 .................................. Undersea vehicle technology [20,000]
 partnerships.
 .................................. UUV Research.................. [5,000]
 013 0602750N FUTURE NAVAL CAPABILITIES APPLIED 173,641 205,641
 RESEARCH.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [32,000]
 014 0602782N MINE AND EXPEDITIONARY WARFARE 31,649 31,649
 APPLIED RESEARCH.
 015 0602792N INNOVATIVE NAVAL PROTOTYPES (INP) 120,637 146,237
 APPLIED RESEARCH.
 .................................. Advanced Concept of [25,600]
 Operations--Navy UPL.
 016 0602861N SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT-- 81,296 81,296
 ONR FIELD ACITIVITIES.
 .................................. SUBTOTAL APPLIED RESEARCH...... 971,814 1,206,414
 ..................................
 .................................. ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
 017 0603123N FORCE PROTECTION ADVANCED 16,933 16,933
 TECHNOLOGY.
 018 0603271N ELECTROMAGNETIC SYSTEMS ADVANCED 8,253 8,253
 TECHNOLOGY.
 019 0603640M USMC ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY 280,285 284,885
 DEMONSTRATION (ATD).
 .................................. Program increase.............. [4,600]
 020 0603651M JOINT NON-LETHAL WEAPONS 14,048 14,048
 TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT.
 021 0603673N FUTURE NAVAL CAPABILITIES ADVANCED 251,267 251,267
 TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT.
 022 0603680N MANUFACTURING TECHNOLOGY PROGRAM.. 60,704 60,704
 023 0603729N WARFIGHTER PROTECTION ADVANCED 4,999 19,999
 TECHNOLOGY.
 .................................. Multi-Medicine Manufacturing [15,000]
 Platform.
 024 0603758N NAVY WARFIGHTING EXPERIMENTS AND 83,137 84,287
 DEMONSTRATIONS.
 .................................. Naval virtual innovation...... [1,150]
 025 0603782N MINE AND EXPEDITIONARY WARFARE 2,007 2,007
 ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY.
 026 0603801N INNOVATIVE NAVAL PROTOTYPES (INP) 144,122 230,422
 ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT.
 .................................. Advanced Concept of [61,300]
 Operations--Navy UPL.
 .................................. Scalable laser weapon system.. [25,000]
 .................................. SUBTOTAL ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY 865,755 972,805
 DEVELOPMENT.
 ..................................
 .................................. ADVANCED COMPONENT DEVELOPMENT &
 PROTOTYPES
 027 0603128N UNMANNED AERIAL SYSTEM............ 96,883 96,883
 028 0603178N LARGE UNMANNED SURFACE VEHICLES 146,840 146,840
 (LUSV).
 029 0603207N AIR/OCEAN TACTICAL APPLICATIONS... 39,737 39,737
 030 0603216N AVIATION SURVIVABILITY............ 17,434 17,434
 031 0603239N NAVAL CONSTRUCTION FORCES......... 1,706 1,706
 033 0603254N ASW SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT........... 15,986 15,986
 034 0603261N TACTICAL AIRBORNE RECONNAISSANCE.. 3,562 3,562
 035 0603382N ADVANCED COMBAT SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY 18,628 66,828
 .................................. Advanced Concept of [40,700]
 Operations--Navy UPL.
 .................................. Data dissemination and [7,500]
 interoperability.
 036 0603502N SURFACE AND SHALLOW WATER MINE 87,825 87,825
 COUNTERMEASURES.
 037 0603506N SURFACE SHIP TORPEDO DEFENSE...... 473 6,623
 .................................. Nixie development............. [6,150]
 038 0603512N CARRIER SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT....... 11,567 11,567
 039 0603525N PILOT FISH........................ 672,461 672,461
 040 0603527N RETRACT LARCH..................... 7,483 7,483
 041 0603536N RETRACT JUNIPER................... 239,336 239,336
 042 0603542N RADIOLOGICAL CONTROL.............. 772 772
 043 0603553N SURFACE ASW....................... 1,180 1,180
 044 0603561N ADVANCED SUBMARINE SYSTEM 105,703 110,703
 DEVELOPMENT.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [5,000]
 045 0603562N SUBMARINE TACTICAL WARFARE SYSTEMS 10,917 10,917
 046 0603563N SHIP CONCEPT ADVANCED DESIGN...... 82,205 101,205
 .................................. Additive Manufacturing in Ship [5,000]
 Advanced Concept Design.
 .................................. Advance LAW development....... [4,000]
 .................................. Polymorphic Build Farms....... [10,000]
 047 0603564N SHIP PRELIMINARY DESIGN & 75,327 75,327
 FEASIBILITY STUDIES.
 048 0603570N ADVANCED NUCLEAR POWER SYSTEMS.... 227,400 227,400
 049 0603573N ADVANCED SURFACE MACHINERY SYSTEMS 176,600 185,600
 .................................. Lithium Iron Phosphate [9,000]
 Batteries Integration.
 050 0603576N CHALK EAGLE....................... 91,584 91,584
 051 0603581N LITTORAL COMBAT SHIP (LCS)........ 96,444 106,344
 .................................. LCS Fire Control RADAR [9,900]
 Demonstration.
 052 0603582N COMBAT SYSTEM INTEGRATION......... 18,236 18,236
 053 0603595N OHIO REPLACEMENT.................. 335,981 360,981
 .................................. Composites for Wet Submarine [15,000]
 Application.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [10,000]
 054 0603596N LCS MISSION MODULES............... 41,533 50,533
 .................................. Mine Countermeasures Mission [9,000]
 Package Capacity and
 Wholeness--Navy UPL.
 055 0603597N AUTOMATED TEST AND RE-TEST (ATRT). 9,773 9,773
 056 0603599N FRIGATE DEVELOPMENT............... 118,626 118,626
 057 0603609N CONVENTIONAL MUNITIONS............ 9,286 9,286
 058 0603635M MARINE CORPS GROUND COMBAT/SUPPORT 111,431 111,431
 SYSTEM.
 059 0603654N JOINT SERVICE EXPLOSIVE ORDNANCE 36,496 36,496
 DEVELOPMENT.
 060 0603713N OCEAN ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY 6,193 6,193
 DEVELOPMENT.
 061 0603721N ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION.......... 21,647 21,647
 062 0603724N NAVY ENERGY PROGRAM............... 60,320 70,320
 .................................. Marine energy systems......... [10,000]
 063 0603725N FACILITIES IMPROVEMENT............ 5,664 5,664
 064 0603734N CHALK CORAL....................... 833,634 833,634
 065 0603739N NAVY LOGISTIC PRODUCTIVITY........ 899 899
 066 0603746N RETRACT MAPLE..................... 363,973 363,973
 067 0603748N LINK PLUMERIA..................... 1,038,661 1,038,661
 068 0603751N RETRACT ELM....................... 83,445 83,445
 069 0603764M LINK EVERGREEN.................... 313,761 313,761
 070 0603790N NATO RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT..... 8,041 8,041
 071 0603795N LAND ATTACK TECHNOLOGY............ 358 358
 072 0603851M JOINT NON-LETHAL WEAPONS TESTING.. 30,533 30,533
 073 0603860N JOINT PRECISION APPROACH AND 18,628 18,628
 LANDING SYSTEMS--DEM/VAL.
 074 0603925N DIRECTED ENERGY AND ELECTRIC 65,080 65,080
 WEAPON SYSTEMS.
 075 0604014N F/A -18 INFRARED SEARCH AND TRACK 40,069 40,069
 (IRST).
 076 0604027N DIGITAL WARFARE OFFICE............ 165,753 165,753
 077 0604028N SMALL AND MEDIUM UNMANNED UNDERSEA 106,347 106,347
 VEHICLES.
 078 0604029N UNMANNED UNDERSEA VEHICLE CORE 60,697 60,697
 TECHNOLOGIES.
 079 0604030N RAPID PROTOTYPING, EXPERIMENTATION 57,000 57,000
 AND DEMONSTRATION..
 081 0604112N GERALD R. FORD CLASS NUCLEAR 116,498 116,498
 AIRCRAFT CARRIER (CVN 78--80).
 082 0604126N LITTORAL AIRBORNE MCM............. 47,389 47,389
 083 0604127N SURFACE MINE COUNTERMEASURES...... 12,959 12,959
 084 0604272N TACTICAL AIR DIRECTIONAL INFRARED 15,028 45,028
 COUNTERMEASURES (TADIRCM).
 .................................. Program increase--distributed [30,000]
 aperture infrared
 countermeasure system.
 085 0604289M NEXT GENERATION LOGISTICS......... 2,342 10,742
 .................................. Digital manufacturing data [8,400]
 vault.
 086 0604292N FUTURE VERTICAL LIFT (MARITIME 5,103 5,103
 STRIKE).
 087 0604320M RAPID TECHNOLOGY CAPABILITY 62,927 62,927
 PROTOTYPE.
 088 0604454N LX (R)............................ 26,630 26,630
 089 0604536N ADVANCED UNDERSEA PROTOTYPING..... 116,880 116,880
 090 0604636N COUNTER UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS 7,438 7,438
 (C-UAS).
 091 0604659N PRECISION STRIKE WEAPONS 84,734 109,734
 DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM.
 .................................. Research and development for a [25,000]
 nuclear-capable sea-launched
 cruise missile.
 092 0604707N SPACE AND ELECTRONIC WARFARE (SEW) 10,229 10,229
 ARCHITECTURE/ENGINEERING SUPPORT.
 093 0604786N OFFENSIVE ANTI-SURFACE WARFARE 124,204 261,304
 WEAPON DEVELOPMENT.
 .................................. Hypersonic Offensive Anti- [34,100]
 Surface Warfare Increment 2
 (OASuW Inc 2)--Navy UPL.
 .................................. Long Range Anti-Ship Missile [53,000]
 (LRASM) AGM-158C-3 range
 improvement (Navy JASSM)--Navy
 UPL.
 .................................. Long Range Anti-Ship Missile [50,000]
 (LRSAM).
 094 0605512N MEDIUM UNMANNED SURFACE VEHICLES 104,000 104,000
 (MUSVS)).
 095 0605513N UNMANNED SURFACE VEHICLE ENABLING 181,620 166,620
 CAPABILITIES.
 .................................. Program decrease.............. [-15,000]
 096 0605514M GROUND BASED ANTI-SHIP MISSILE.... 43,090 43,090
 097 0605516M LONG RANGE FIRES.................. 36,693 36,693
 098 0605518N CONVENTIONAL PROMPT STRIKE (CPS).. 1,205,041 1,225,041
 .................................. Full-Scale Rapid CPS Flight [20,000]
 Tests.
 099 0303354N ASW SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT--MIP...... 9,856 9,856
 100 0304240M ADVANCED TACTICAL UNMANNED 1,735 23,535
 AIRCRAFT SYSTEM.
 .................................. KARGO......................... [6,800]
 .................................. Transition of the Autonomous [15,000]
 Maritime Patrol Aircraft
 (AMPA) JCTD to Naval Aviation
 System Command (NAVAIR).
 101 0304270N ELECTRONIC WARFARE DEVELOPMENT-- 796 796
 MIP.
 .................................. SUBTOTAL ADVANCED COMPONENT 8,405,310 8,773,860
 DEVELOPMENT & PROTOTYPES.
 ..................................
 .................................. SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT & DEMONSTRATION
 102 0603208N TRAINING SYSTEM AIRCRAFT.......... 15,128 15,128
 103 0604038N MARITIME TARGETING CELL........... 39,600 39,600
 104 0604212N OTHER HELO DEVELOPMENT............ 66,010 66,010
 105 0604214M AV-8B AIRCRAFT--ENG DEV........... 9,205 9,205
 106 0604215N STANDARDS DEVELOPMENT............. 3,766 3,766
 107 0604216N MULTI-MISSION HELICOPTER UPGRADE 44,684 44,684
 DEVELOPMENT.
 108 0604221N P-3 MODERNIZATION PROGRAM......... 343 343
 109 0604230N WARFARE SUPPORT SYSTEM............ 12,337 12,337
 110 0604231N COMMAND AND CONTROL SYSTEMS....... 143,575 143,575
 111 0604234N ADVANCED HAWKEYE.................. 502,956 482,956
 .................................. Program decrease.............. [-20,000]
 112 0604245M H-1 UPGRADES...................... 43,759 58,559
 .................................. H-1 Digital Interoperability [14,800]
 (DI) Mobile User Objective
 System (MUOS).
 113 0604261N ACOUSTIC SEARCH SENSORS........... 50,231 50,231
 114 0604262N V-22A............................. 125,233 125,233
 115 0604264N AIR CREW SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT...... 43,282 43,282
 116 0604269N EA-18............................. 116,589 116,589
 117 0604270N ELECTRONIC WARFARE DEVELOPMENT.... 141,138 141,138
 118 0604273M EXECUTIVE HELO DEVELOPMENT........ 45,645 45,645
 119 0604274N NEXT GENERATION JAMMER (NGJ)...... 54,679 84,679
 .................................. Program Increase--MidBand [30,000]
 Capability.
 120 0604280N JOINT TACTICAL RADIO SYSTEM--NAVY 329,787 314,787
 (JTRS-NAVY).
 .................................. Program decrease.............. [-15,000]
 121 0604282N NEXT GENERATION JAMMER (NGJ) 301,737 151,737
 INCREMENT II.
 .................................. Program delay................. [-150,000]
 122 0604307N SURFACE COMBATANT COMBAT SYSTEM 347,233 347,233
 ENGINEERING.
 124 0604329N SMALL DIAMETER BOMB (SDB)......... 42,881 42,881
 125 0604366N STANDARD MISSILE IMPROVEMENTS..... 319,943 342,943
 .................................. SM-6 Rocket Motor Industrial [23,000]
 Base Expansion.
 126 0604373N AIRBORNE MCM...................... 10,882 10,882
 127 0604378N NAVAL INTEGRATED FIRE CONTROL-- 45,892 45,892
 COUNTER AIR SYSTEMS ENGINEERING.
 129 0604501N ADVANCED ABOVE WATER SENSORS...... 81,254 81,254
 130 0604503N SSN-688 AND TRIDENT MODERNIZATION. 93,501 103,001
 .................................. Submarine Electronic Warfare [9,500]
 Capabilitiy Improvements.
 131 0604504N AIR CONTROL....................... 39,138 39,138
 132 0604512N SHIPBOARD AVIATION SYSTEMS........ 11,759 11,759
 133 0604518N COMBAT INFORMATION CENTER 11,160 11,160
 CONVERSION.
 134 0604522N AIR AND MISSILE DEFENSE RADAR 87,459 87,459
 (AMDR) SYSTEM.
 135 0604530N ADVANCED ARRESTING GEAR (AAG)..... 151 151
 136 0604558N NEW DESIGN SSN.................... 307,585 504,985
 .................................. Accelerated design............ [188,900]
 .................................. Advanced Submarine Control.... [8,500]
 137 0604562N SUBMARINE TACTICAL WARFARE SYSTEM. 58,741 58,741
 138 0604567N SHIP CONTRACT DESIGN/ LIVE FIRE 60,791 60,791
 T&E.
 139 0604574N NAVY TACTICAL COMPUTER RESOURCES.. 4,177 4,177
 140 0604601N MINE DEVELOPMENT.................. 60,793 105,793
 .................................. INDOPACOM UPL--Anti-Surface [25,000]
 Warfare (ASuW) Hammerhead Mine.
 .................................. Quickstrike Powered Mines..... [20,000]
 141 0604610N LIGHTWEIGHT TORPEDO DEVELOPMENT... 142,000 142,000
 142 0604654N JOINT SERVICE EXPLOSIVE ORDNANCE 8,618 8,618
 DEVELOPMENT.
 143 0604657M USMC GROUND COMBAT/SUPPORTING ARMS 45,025 45,025
 SYSTEMS--ENG DEV.
 144 0604703N PERSONNEL, TRAINING, SIMULATION, 7,454 7,454
 AND HUMAN FACTORS.
 145 0604727N JOINT STANDOFF WEAPON SYSTEMS..... 758 758
 146 0604755N SHIP SELF DEFENSE (DETECT & 159,426 159,426
 CONTROL).
 147 0604756N SHIP SELF DEFENSE (ENGAGE: HARD 71,818 71,818
 KILL).
 148 0604757N SHIP SELF DEFENSE (ENGAGE: SOFT 92,687 127,087
 KILL/EW).
 .................................. Counter-Command, Control, [29,400]
 Communications, Computers and
 Combat Systems Intelligence,
 Surveillance and
 Reconnaissance and Targeting
 (C-C5ISR&T)--Navy UPL.
 .................................. Small Ship EW Self Protection [5,000]
 Demonstration.
 149 0604761N INTELLIGENCE ENGINEERING.......... 23,742 23,742
 150 0604771N MEDICAL DEVELOPMENT............... 3,178 3,178
 151 0604777N NAVIGATION/ID SYSTEM.............. 53,209 53,209
 152 0604800M JOINT STRIKE FIGHTER (JSF)--EMD... 611 611
 153 0604800N JOINT STRIKE FIGHTER (JSF)--EMD... 234 234
 154 0604850N SSN(X)............................ 143,949 143,949
 155 0605013M INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT 11,361 11,361
 156 0605013N INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT 290,353 295,353
 .................................. High performance data [10,000]
 analytics.
 .................................. Navy ePS--early to need....... [-5,000]
 157 0605024N ANTI-TAMPER TECHNOLOGY SUPPORT.... 7,271 7,271
 158 0605180N TACAMO MODERNIZATION.............. 554,193 554,193
 159 0605212M CH-53K RDTE....................... 220,240 224,240
 .................................. CPF--High-Energy Density and [4,000]
 High-Power Density Li-Ion
 Battery Magazines (HEBM) in
 Defense Applications.
 160 0605215N MISSION PLANNING.................. 71,107 71,107
 161 0605217N COMMON AVIONICS................... 77,960 77,960
 162 0605220N SHIP TO SHORE CONNECTOR (SSC)..... 2,886 10,106
 .................................. Program increase.............. [7,220]
 163 0605327N T-AO 205 CLASS.................... 220 220
 164 0605414N UNMANNED CARRIER AVIATION (UCA)... 265,646 265,646
 165 0605450M JOINT AIR-TO-GROUND MISSILE (JAGM) 371 371
 166 0605500N MULTI-MISSION MARITIME AIRCRAFT 37,939 37,939
 (MMA).
 167 0605504N MULTI-MISSION MARITIME (MMA) 161,697 161,697
 INCREMENT III.
 168 0605611M MARINE CORPS ASSAULT VEHICLES 94,569 94,569
 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT &
 DEMONSTRATION.
 169 0605813M JOINT LIGHT TACTICAL VEHICLE 2,856 2,856
 (JLTV) SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT &
 DEMONSTRATION.
 170 0204202N DDG-1000.......................... 197,436 197,436
 171 0301377N COUNTERING ADVANCED CONVENTIONAL 12,341 22,341
 WEAPONS (CACW).
 .................................. Threat Mosaic Warfare......... [10,000]
 175 0304785N ISR & INFO OPERATIONS............. 135,366 135,366
 176 0306250M CYBER OPERATIONS TECHNOLOGY 37,038 37,038
 DEVELOPMENT.
 .................................. SUBTOTAL SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT & 6,606,583 6,801,903
 DEMONSTRATION.
 ..................................
 .................................. MANAGEMENT SUPPORT
 177 0604256N THREAT SIMULATOR DEVELOPMENT...... 29,430 29,430
 178 0604258N TARGET SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT........ 13,708 13,708
 179 0604759N MAJOR T&E INVESTMENT.............. 95,316 97,316
 .................................. AUTEC data fusion capabilities [2,000]
 180 0605152N STUDIES AND ANALYSIS SUPPORT--NAVY 3,286 3,286
 181 0605154N CENTER FOR NAVAL ANALYSES......... 40,624 40,624
 183 0605804N TECHNICAL INFORMATION SERVICES.... 987 987
 184 0605853N MANAGEMENT, TECHNICAL & 105,152 165,152
 INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT.
 .................................. NRE project backlog reduction. [60,000]
 185 0605856N STRATEGIC TECHNICAL SUPPORT....... 3,787 3,787
 186 0605863N RDT&E SHIP AND AIRCRAFT SUPPORT... 173,352 173,352
 187 0605864N TEST AND EVALUATION SUPPORT....... 468,281 468,281
 188 0605865N OPERATIONAL TEST AND EVALUATION 27,808 27,808
 CAPABILITY.
 189 0605866N NAVY SPACE AND ELECTRONIC WARFARE 27,175 27,175
 (SEW) SUPPORT.
 190 0605867N SEW SURVEILLANCE/RECONNAISSANCE 7,186 7,186
 SUPPORT.
 191 0605873M MARINE CORPS PROGRAM WIDE SUPPORT. 39,744 39,744
 192 0605898N MANAGEMENT HQ--R&D................ 40,648 40,648
 193 0606355N WARFARE INNOVATION MANAGEMENT..... 52,060 52,060
 194 0305327N INSIDER THREAT.................... 2,315 2,315
 195 0902498N MANAGEMENT HEADQUARTERS 1,811 1,811
 (DEPARTMENTAL SUPPORT ACTIVITIES).
 .................................. SUBTOTAL MANAGEMENT SUPPORT.... 1,132,670 1,194,670
 ..................................
 .................................. OPERATIONAL SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT
 198 0603273N SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY FOR NUCLEAR 65,735 65,735
 RE-ENTRY SYSTEMS.
 201 0604840M F-35 C2D2......................... 525,338 525,338
 202 0604840N F-35 C2D2......................... 491,513 491,513
 203 0605520M MARINE CORPS AIR DEFENSE WEAPONS 48,663 48,663
 SYSTEMS.
 204 0607658N COOPERATIVE ENGAGEMENT CAPABILITY 156,121 156,121
 (CEC).
 205 0101221N STRATEGIC SUB & WEAPONS SYSTEM 284,502 304,502
 SUPPORT.
 .................................. D5LE2 Risk Reduction.......... [20,000]
 206 0101224N SSBN SECURITY TECHNOLOGY PROGRAM.. 50,939 50,939
 207 0101226N SUBMARINE ACOUSTIC WARFARE 81,237 88,237
 DEVELOPMENT.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [7,000]
 208 0101402N NAVY STRATEGIC COMMUNICATIONS..... 49,424 49,424
 209 0204136N F/A-18 SQUADRONS.................. 238,974 242,974
 .................................. Jet Noise Reduction........... [4,000]
 210 0204228N SURFACE SUPPORT................... 12,197 12,197
 211 0204229N TOMAHAWK AND TOMAHAWK MISSION 132,719 132,719
 PLANNING CENTER (TMPC).
 212 0204311N INTEGRATED SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM.... 68,417 82,917
 .................................. Deployable Surveillance [14,500]
 System, Deep Water Active.
 213 0204313N SHIP-TOWED ARRAY SURVEILLANCE 1,188 1,188
 SYSTEMS.
 214 0204413N AMPHIBIOUS TACTICAL SUPPORT UNITS 1,789 1,789
 (DISPLACEMENT CRAFT).
 215 0204460M GROUND/AIR TASK ORIENTED RADAR (G/ 61,422 85,422
 ATOR).
 .................................. G/ATOR air traffic control [24,000]
 development--USMC UPL.
 216 0204571N CONSOLIDATED TRAINING SYSTEMS 70,339 70,339
 DEVELOPMENT.
 217 0204575N ELECTRONIC WARFARE (EW) READINESS 47,436 47,436
 SUPPORT.
 218 0205601N ANTI-RADIATION MISSILE IMPROVEMENT 90,779 90,779
 219 0205620N SURFACE ASW COMBAT SYSTEM 28,999 28,999
 INTEGRATION.
 220 0205632N MK-48 ADCAP....................... 155,868 155,868
 221 0205633N AVIATION IMPROVEMENTS............. 130,450 130,450
 222 0205675N OPERATIONAL NUCLEAR POWER SYSTEMS. 121,439 121,439
 223 0206313M MARINE CORPS COMMUNICATIONS 114,305 114,305
 SYSTEMS.
 .................................. Classified--USMC UPL.......... [5,000]
 .................................. Program decrease.............. [-5,000]
 224 0206335M COMMON AVIATION COMMAND AND 14,865 14,865
 CONTROL SYSTEM (CAC2S).
 225 0206623M MARINE CORPS GROUND COMBAT/ 100,536 113,736
 SUPPORTING ARMS SYSTEMS.
 .................................. Program Increase--USMC UPL.... [6,600]
 .................................. Tactical Warfare Simulation [6,600]
 improvements--USMC UPL.
 226 0206624M MARINE CORPS COMBAT SERVICES 26,522 26,522
 SUPPORT.
 227 0206625M USMC INTELLIGENCE/ELECTRONIC 51,976 51,976
 WARFARE SYSTEMS (MIP).
 228 0206629M AMPHIBIOUS ASSAULT VEHICLE........ 8,246 8,246
 229 0207161N TACTICAL AIM MISSILES............. 29,236 29,236
 230 0207163N ADVANCED MEDIUM RANGE AIR-TO-AIR 30,898 30,898
 MISSILE (AMRAAM).
 231 0208043N PLANNING AND DECISION AID SYSTEM 3,609 3,609
 (PDAS).
 236 0303138N AFLOAT NETWORKS................... 45,693 45,693
 237 0303140N INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY 33,752 33,752
 PROGRAM.
 238 0305192N MILITARY INTELLIGENCE PROGRAM 8,415 8,415
 (MIP) ACTIVITIES.
 239 0305204N TACTICAL UNMANNED AERIAL VEHICLES. 10,576 10,576
 240 0305205N UAS INTEGRATION AND 18,373 18,373
 INTEROPERABILITY.
 241 0305208M DISTRIBUTED COMMON GROUND/SURFACE 45,705 41,705
 SYSTEMS.
 .................................. Program decrease.............. [-4,000]
 242 0305220N MQ-4C TRITON...................... 13,893 -1,107
 .................................. Program decrease.............. [-15,000]
 243 0305231N MQ-8 UAV.......................... 13,100
 .................................. Costs associated with [13,100]
 restoring 5 LCS.
 244 0305232M RQ-11 UAV......................... 1,234 1,234
 245 0305234N SMALL (LEVEL 0) TACTICAL UAS 3,761 3,761
 (STUASL0).
 247 0305241N MULTI-INTELLIGENCE SENSOR 56,261 56,261
 DEVELOPMENT.
 248 0305242M UNMANNED AERIAL SYSTEMS (UAS) 9,780 9,780
 PAYLOADS (MIP).
 249 0305251N CYBERSPACE OPERATIONS FORCES AND 36,505 36,505
 FORCE SUPPORT.
 250 0305421N RQ-4 MODERNIZATION................ 163,277 163,277
 251 0307577N INTELLIGENCE MISSION DATA (IMD)... 851 851
 252 0308601N MODELING AND SIMULATION SUPPORT... 9,437 24,437
 .................................. Multi-physics simulation...... [15,000]
 253 0702207N DEPOT MAINTENANCE (NON-IF)........ 26,248 26,248
 254 0708730N MARITIME TECHNOLOGY (MARITECH).... 2,133 2,133
 255A 9999999999 CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS............... 1,701,811 1,714,591
 .................................. Program increase.............. [12,780]
 .................................. SUBTOTAL OPERATIONAL SYSTEMS 5,483,386 5,587,966
 DEVELOPMENT.
 ..................................
 .................................. SOFTWARE AND DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
 PILOT PROGRAMS
 256 0608013N RISK MANAGEMENT INFORMATION-- 12,810 12,810
 SOFTWARE PILOT PROGRAM.
 257 0608231N MARITIME TACTICAL COMMAND AND 11,198 11,198
 CONTROL (MTC2)--SOFTWARE PILOT
 PROGRAM.
 .................................. SUBTOTAL SOFTWARE AND DIGITAL 24,008 24,008
 TECHNOLOGY PILOT PROGRAMS.
 ..................................
 .................................. TOTAL RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, 24,078,718 25,270,442
 TEST & EVAL, NAVY.
 ..................................
 .................................. RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST &
 EVAL, AF
 .................................. BASIC RESEARCH
 001 0601102F DEFENSE RESEARCH SCIENCES......... 375,325 455,397
 .................................. Drone medic platform.......... [5,000]
 .................................. Program increase.............. [75,072]
 002 0601103F UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INITIATIVES... 171,192 177,542
 .................................. CPF--Aeromedical Research [2,350]
 Center.
 .................................. CPF--GHz-THz Antenna Systems [4,000]
 for Massive Data Transmissions
 in Real-Time.
 .................................. SUBTOTAL BASIC RESEARCH........ 546,517 632,939
 ..................................
 .................................. APPLIED RESEARCH
 004 0602020F FUTURE AF CAPABILITIES APPLIED 88,672 88,672
 RESEARCH.
 005 0602102F MATERIALS......................... 134,795 144,795
 .................................. Thermal protection for [10,000]
 hypersonic vehicles.
 006 0602201F AEROSPACE VEHICLE TECHNOLOGIES.... 159,453 175,953
 .................................. Aeromechanics and integration. [10,000]
 .................................. Rapid aerospace fabrication [6,500]
 technology.
 007 0602202F HUMAN EFFECTIVENESS APPLIED 135,771 160,842
 RESEARCH.
 .................................. Digital engineering and [20,071]
 prototype capability.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [5,000]
 008 0602203F AEROSPACE PROPULSION.............. 172,861 172,861
 009 0602204F AEROSPACE SENSORS................. 192,733 197,733
 .................................. Program increase.............. [5,000]
 011 0602298F SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT-- 8,856 8,856
 MAJOR HEADQUARTERS ACTIVITIES.
 012 0602602F CONVENTIONAL MUNITIONS............ 137,303 147,303
 .................................. Advanced hypersonic propulsion [10,000]
 013 0602605F DIRECTED ENERGY TECHNOLOGY........ 109,302 104,947
 .................................. AI-enabled decisionmaking..... [4,000]
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [-8,355]
 014 0602788F DOMINANT INFORMATION SCIENCES AND 166,041 260,041
 METHODS.
 .................................. AI for networks............... [10,000]
 .................................. Internet of Things Laboratory. [7,000]
 .................................. Multi-Edge Computing Command [12,000]
 and Control.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [10,000]
 .................................. Quantum testbed............... [10,000]
 .................................. Trapped ion quantum computer.. [30,000]
 .................................. Trusted computing base for [5,000]
 mission flight computer.
 .................................. UAS traffic management........ [10,000]
 .................................. SUBTOTAL APPLIED RESEARCH...... 1,305,787 1,462,003
 ..................................
 .................................. ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
 016 0603032F FUTURE AF INTEGRATED TECHNOLOGY 152,559 146,559
 DEMOS.
 .................................. Automated geospatial [9,000]
 intelligence detection
 algorithm.
 .................................. Insufficient justification.... [-15,000]
 017 0603112F ADVANCED MATERIALS FOR WEAPON 29,116 53,116
 SYSTEMS.
 .................................. FSS & UWB radome production... [9,000]
 .................................. Metals Affordability [15,000]
 Initiative.
 018 0603199F SUSTAINMENT SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 10,695 10,695
 (S&T).
 019 0603203F ADVANCED AEROSPACE SENSORS........ 36,997 36,997
 020 0603211F AEROSPACE TECHNOLOGY DEV/DEMO..... 54,727 86,820
 .................................. Airborne Missile Defense Beam [10,000]
 Director Development and
 Flight Environmental
 Qualification.
 .................................. Modular Open Autonomous [5,600]
 Software Testing.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [25,000]
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [-8,507]
 021 0603216F AEROSPACE PROPULSION AND POWER 64,254 96,511
 TECHNOLOGY.
 .................................. Attritable combat UAV [13,750]
 propulsion.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [10,000]
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [8,507]
 022 0603270F ELECTRONIC COMBAT TECHNOLOGY...... 33,380 48,380
 .................................. High speed expendable [5,000]
 turboramjets.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [10,000]
 023 0603273F SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY FOR NUCLEAR 39,431 39,431
 RE-ENTRY SYSTEMS.
 026 0603456F HUMAN EFFECTIVENESS ADVANCED 20,652 20,652
 TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT.
 027 0603601F CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS TECHNOLOGY... 187,374 187,374
 028 0603605F ADVANCED WEAPONS TECHNOLOGY....... 98,503 98,503
 029 0603680F MANUFACTURING TECHNOLOGY PROGRAM.. 47,759 69,759
 .................................. Agile Factory Floor for Depot [8,000]
 Sustainment.
 .................................. Carbon/carbon for hypersonics. [10,000]
 .................................. CPF--Additive Manufacturing [4,000]
 and Ultra-High Performance
 Concrete.
 030 0603788F BATTLESPACE KNOWLEDGE DEVELOPMENT 51,824 51,824
 AND DEMONSTRATION.
 .................................. SUBTOTAL ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY 827,271 946,621
 DEVELOPMENT.
 ..................................
 .................................. ADVANCED COMPONENT DEVELOPMENT &
 PROTOTYPES
 031 0603036F MODULAR ADVANCED MISSILE.......... 125,688 125,688
 032 0603260F INTELLIGENCE ADVANCED DEVELOPMENT. 6,101 6,101
 033 0603742F COMBAT IDENTIFICATION TECHNOLOGY.. 17,318 17,318
 034 0603790F NATO RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT..... 4,295 4,295
 035 0603851F INTERCONTINENTAL BALLISTIC 46,432 46,432
 MISSILE--DEM/VAL.
 036 0604001F NC3 ADVANCED CONCEPTS............. 5,098 5,098
 038 0604003F ADVANCED BATTLE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 231,408 200,408
 (ABMS).
 .................................. Program decrease.............. [-31,000]
 039 0604004F ADVANCED ENGINE DEVELOPMENT....... 353,658 503,658
 .................................. AETP.......................... [150,000]
 040 0604006F DEPT OF THE AIR FORCE TECH 66,615 66,615
 ARCHITECTURE.
 041 0604015F LONG RANGE STRIKE--BOMBER......... 3,253,584 3,253,584
 042 0604032F DIRECTED ENERGY PROTOTYPING....... 4,269 4,269
 043 0604033F HYPERSONICS PROTOTYPING........... 431,868 172,547
 .................................. Flight in Relevant [11,000]
 Environments (FIRE) increase.
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [-270,321]
 044 0604183F HYPERSONICS PROTOTYPING-- 144,891 461,778
 HYPERSONIC ATTACK CRUISE MISSILE
 (HACM).
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [316,887]
 045 0604201F PNT RESILIENCY, MODS, AND 12,010 12,010
 IMPROVEMENTS.
 046 0604257F ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY AND SENSORS... 13,311 13,311
 047 0604288F SURVIVABLE AIRBORNE OPERATIONS 203,213 203,213
 CENTER.
 048 0604317F TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER............... 16,759 16,759
 049 0604327F HARD AND DEEPLY BURIED TARGET 106,826 141,826
 DEFEAT SYSTEM (HDBTDS) PROGRAM.
 .................................. Program Increase--Replace [35,000]
 Expended Inventory.
 050 0604414F CYBER RESILIENCY OF WEAPON SYSTEMS- 44,526 44,526
 ACS.
 051 0604668F JOINT TRANSPORTATION MANAGEMENT 51,758 51,758
 SYSTEM (JTMS).
 052 0604776F DEPLOYMENT & DISTRIBUTION 27,586 27,586
 ENTERPRISE R&D.
 053 0604858F TECH TRANSITION PROGRAM........... 649,545 600,795
 .................................. Program increase.............. [9,250]
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [-58,000]
 054 0604860F OPERATIONAL ENERGY AND 15,500
 INSTALLATION RESILIENCE.
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [15,500]
 055 0605230F GROUND BASED STRATEGIC DETERRENT.. 3,000
 .................................. ICBM transition readiness [3,000]
 modeling and simulation.
 056 0207110F NEXT GENERATION AIR DOMINANCE..... 1,657,733 1,608,233
 .................................. Program decrease.............. [-49,500]
 057 0207179F AUTONOMOUS COLLABORATIVE PLATFORMS 51,747 51,747
 058 0207420F COMBAT IDENTIFICATION............. 1,866 1,866
 059 0207455F THREE DIMENSIONAL LONG-RANGE RADAR 14,490 14,490
 (3DELRR).
 060 0207522F AIRBASE AIR DEFENSE SYSTEMS 52,498 48,498
 (ABADS).
 .................................. Program decrease.............. [-4,000]
 061 0208030F WAR RESERVE MATERIEL--AMMUNITION.. 10,288 10,288
 064 0305236F COMMON DATA LINK EXECUTIVE AGENT 37,460 37,460
 (CDL EA).
 065 0305601F MISSION PARTNER ENVIRONMENTS...... 17,378 17,378
 066 0306250F CYBER OPERATIONS TECHNOLOGY 234,576 286,476
 SUPPORT.
 .................................. Joint Cyber Warfighting [51,900]
 Architecture--CYBERCOM UPL.
 067 0306415F ENABLED CYBER ACTIVITIES.......... 16,728 16,728
 070 0808737F CVV INTEGRATED PREVENTION......... 9,315 9,315
 071 0901410F CONTRACTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 14,050 14,050
 SYSTEM.
 072 1206415F U.S. SPACE COMMAND RESEARCH AND 10,350 10,350
 DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT.
 .................................. SUBTOTAL ADVANCED COMPONENT 7,945,238 8,124,954
 DEVELOPMENT & PROTOTYPES.
 ..................................
 .................................. SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT & DEMONSTRATION
 073 0604200F FUTURE ADVANCED WEAPON ANALYSIS & 9,879 9,879
 PROGRAMS.
 074 0604201F PNT RESILIENCY, MODS, AND 176,824 176,824
 IMPROVEMENTS.
 075 0604222F NUCLEAR WEAPONS SUPPORT........... 64,425 64,425
 076 0604270F ELECTRONIC WARFARE DEVELOPMENT.... 2,222 2,222
 077 0604281F TACTICAL DATA NETWORKS ENTERPRISE. 133,117 133,117
 078 0604287F PHYSICAL SECURITY EQUIPMENT....... 8,493 8,493
 079 0604602F ARMAMENT/ORDNANCE DEVELOPMENT..... 5,279 5,279
 080 0604604F SUBMUNITIONS...................... 3,273 3,273
 081 0604617F AGILE COMBAT SUPPORT.............. 14,252 14,252
 083 0604706F LIFE SUPPORT SYSTEMS.............. 47,442 47,442
 084 0604735F COMBAT TRAINING RANGES............ 91,284 91,284
 086 0604932F LONG RANGE STANDOFF WEAPON........ 928,850 928,850
 087 0604933F ICBM FUZE MODERNIZATION........... 98,376 98,376
 088 0605030F JOINT TACTICAL NETWORK CENTER 2,222 2,222
 (JTNC).
 089 0605056F OPEN ARCHITECTURE MANAGEMENT...... 38,222 38,222
 090 0605223F ADVANCED PILOT TRAINING........... 37,121 37,121
 091 0605229F HH-60W............................ 58,974 58,974
 092 0605238F GROUND BASED STRATEGIC DETERRENT 3,614,290 3,614,290
 EMD.
 094 0207171F F-15 EPAWSS....................... 67,956 67,956
 095 0207279F ISOLATED PERSONNEL SURVIVABILITY 27,881 27,881
 AND RECOVERY.
 096 0207328F STAND IN ATTACK WEAPON............ 283,152 283,152
 097 0207701F FULL COMBAT MISSION TRAINING...... 3,028 12,528
 .................................. Airborne Augemented Reality... [9,500]
 102 0401221F KC-46A TANKER SQUADRONS........... 197,510 197,510
 103 0401319F VC-25B............................ 492,932 392,932
 .................................. Program decrease.............. [-100,000]
 104 0701212F AUTOMATED TEST SYSTEMS............ 16,664 16,664
 105 0804772F TRAINING DEVELOPMENTS............. 15,138 15,138
 107 1206442F NEXT GENERATION OPIR.............. 148 148
 .................................. SUBTOTAL SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT & 6,438,954 6,348,454
 DEMONSTRATION.
 ..................................
 .................................. MANAGEMENT SUPPORT
 108 0604256F THREAT SIMULATOR DEVELOPMENT...... 21,067 56,067
 .................................. Program increase.............. [35,000]
 109 0604759F MAJOR T&E INVESTMENT.............. 44,714 74,714
 .................................. Program increase.............. [30,000]
 110 0605101F RAND PROJECT AIR FORCE............ 37,921 37,921
 111 0605502F SMALL BUSINESS INNOVATION RESEARCH 86 86
 112 0605712F INITIAL OPERATIONAL TEST & 13,926 13,926
 EVALUATION.
 113 0605807F TEST AND EVALUATION SUPPORT....... 826,854 826,854
 115 0605827F ACQ WORKFORCE- GLOBAL VIG & COMBAT 255,995 283,995
 SYS.
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [28,000]
 116 0605828F ACQ WORKFORCE- GLOBAL REACH....... 457,589 457,589
 117 0605829F ACQ WORKFORCE- CYBER, NETWORK, & 459,223 473,423
 BUS SYS.
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [14,200]
 118 0605830F ACQ WORKFORCE- GLOBAL BATTLE MGMT. 3,696 3,696
 119 0605831F ACQ WORKFORCE- CAPABILITY 229,610 253,610
 INTEGRATION.
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [24,000]
 120 0605832F ACQ WORKFORCE- ADVANCED PRGM 92,648 67,361
 TECHNOLOGY.
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [-25,287]
 121 0605833F ACQ WORKFORCE- NUCLEAR SYSTEMS.... 241,226 236,382
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [-4,844]
 122 0605898F MANAGEMENT HQ--R&D................ 4,347 5,624
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [1,277]
 123 0605976F FACILITIES RESTORATION AND 77,820 77,820
 MODERNIZATION--TEST AND
 EVALUATION SUPPORT.
 124 0605978F FACILITIES SUSTAINMENT--TEST AND 31,561 31,561
 EVALUATION SUPPORT.
 125 0606017F REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS AND 101,844 101,844
 MATURATION.
 126 0606398F MANAGEMENT HQ--T&E................ 6,285 6,285
 127 0303166F SUPPORT TO INFORMATION OPERATIONS 556 556
 (IO) CAPABILITIES.
 128 0303255F COMMAND, CONTROL, COMMUNICATION, 15,559 35,559
 AND COMPUTERS (C4)--STRATCOM.
 .................................. Establishment and initial [20,000]
 operations of the NC3 Rapid
 Engineering Architecture
 Collaboration Hub (REACH).
 129 0308602F ENTEPRISE INFORMATION SERVICES 83,231 83,231
 (EIS).
 130 0702806F ACQUISITION AND MANAGEMENT SUPPORT 24,306 24,306
 131 0804731F GENERAL SKILL TRAINING............ 871 871
 134 1001004F INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES.......... 2,593 2,593
 .................................. SUBTOTAL MANAGEMENT SUPPORT.... 3,033,528 3,155,874
 ..................................
 .................................. OPERATIONAL SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT
 136 0604233F SPECIALIZED UNDERGRADUATE FLIGHT 18,037 18,037
 TRAINING.
 138 0604617F AGILE COMBAT SUPPORT.............. 8,199 8,199
 139 0604776F DEPLOYMENT & DISTRIBUTION 156 156
 ENTERPRISE R&D.
 140 0604840F F-35 C2D2......................... 1,014,708 1,014,708
 141 0605018F AF INTEGRATED PERSONNEL AND PAY 37,901 32,901
 SYSTEM (AF-IPPS).
 .................................. Insufficient justification.... [-5,000]
 142 0605024F ANTI-TAMPER TECHNOLOGY EXECUTIVE 50,066 50,066
 AGENCY.
 143 0605117F FOREIGN MATERIEL ACQUISITION AND 80,338 80,338
 EXPLOITATION.
 144 0605278F HC/MC-130 RECAP RDT&E............. 47,994 17,994
 .................................. Program decrease.............. [-30,000]
 145 0606018F NC3 INTEGRATION................... 23,559 23,559
 147 0101113F B-52 SQUADRONS.................... 770,313 689,313
 .................................. Program decrease.............. [-81,000]
 148 0101122F AIR-LAUNCHED CRUISE MISSILE (ALCM) 571 571
 149 0101126F B-1B SQUADRONS.................... 13,144 30,144
 .................................. Hypersonic Integration [17,000]
 Validation Testing.
 150 0101127F B-2 SQUADRONS..................... 111,990 111,990
 151 0101213F MINUTEMAN SQUADRONS............... 69,650 69,650
 152 0101316F WORLDWIDE JOINT STRATEGIC 22,725 22,725
 COMMUNICATIONS.
 153 0101324F INTEGRATED STRATEGIC PLANNING & 3,180 3,180
 ANALYSIS NETWORK.
 154 0101328F ICBM REENTRY VEHICLES............. 118,616 118,616
 156 0102110F UH-1N REPLACEMENT PROGRAM......... 17,922 17,922
 157 0102326F REGION/SECTOR OPERATION CONTROL 451 31,951
 CENTER MODERNIZATION PROGRAM.
 .................................. Multi-Domain Operations [31,500]
 modernization development.
 158 0102412F NORTH WARNING SYSTEM (NWS)........ 76,910 76,910
 159 0102417F OVER-THE-HORIZON BACKSCATTER RADAR 12,210 17,210
 .................................. Ultra-wide band receiver...... [5,000]
 160 0202834F VEHICLES AND SUPPORT EQUIPMENT-- 14,483 14,483
 GENERAL.
 161 0205219F MQ-9 UAV.......................... 98,499 98,499
 162 0205671F JOINT COUNTER RCIED ELECTRONIC 1,747 1,747
 WARFARE.
 163 0207040F MULTI-PLATFORM ELECTRONIC WARFARE 23,195 30,195
 EQUIPMENT.
 .................................. AI for EW..................... [7,000]
 164 0207131F A-10 SQUADRONS.................... 72,393 72,393
 165 0207133F F-16 SQUADRONS.................... 244,696 244,696
 166 0207134F F-15E SQUADRONS................... 213,272 213,272
 167 0207136F MANNED DESTRUCTIVE SUPPRESSION.... 16,695 16,695
 168 0207138F F-22A SQUADRONS................... 559,709 559,709
 169 0207142F F-35 SQUADRONS.................... 70,730 70,730
 170 0207146F F-15EX............................ 83,830 83,830
 171 0207161F TACTICAL AIM MISSILES............. 34,536 34,536
 172 0207163F ADVANCED MEDIUM RANGE AIR-TO-AIR 52,704 52,704
 MISSILE (AMRAAM).
 173 0207227F COMBAT RESCUE--PARARESCUE......... 863 863
 174 0207247F AF TENCAP......................... 23,309 23,309
 175 0207249F PRECISION ATTACK SYSTEMS 12,722 12,722
 PROCUREMENT.
 176 0207253F COMPASS CALL...................... 49,054 49,054
 177 0207268F AIRCRAFT ENGINE COMPONENT 116,087 116,087
 IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM.
 178 0207325F JOINT AIR-TO-SURFACE STANDOFF 117,198 129,198
 MISSILE (JASSM).
 .................................. Software Update............... [12,000]
 179 0207327F SMALL DIAMETER BOMB (SDB)......... 27,713 77,713
 .................................. Technology refresh & [50,000]
 improvement--Air Force UPL.
 181 0207412F CONTROL AND REPORTING CENTER (CRC) 6,615 12,815
 .................................. Combat Air Intelligence [6,200]
 Systems.
 182 0207417F AIRBORNE WARNING AND CONTROL 239,658 237,658
 SYSTEM (AWACS).
 .................................. Early to need--communication [-2,000]
 network upgrade.
 183 0207418F AFSPECWAR--TACP................... 5,982 5,982
 185 0207431F COMBAT AIR INTELLIGENCE SYSTEM 23,504 23,504
 ACTIVITIES.
 186 0207438F THEATER BATTLE MANAGEMENT (TBM) 5,851 5,851
 C4I.
 187 0207439F ELECTRONIC WARFARE INTEGRATED 15,990 15,990
 REPROGRAMMING (EWIR).
 188 0207444F TACTICAL AIR CONTROL PARTY-MOD.... 10,315 10,315
 189 0207452F DCAPES............................ 8,049 8,049
 190 0207521F AIR FORCE CALIBRATION PROGRAMS.... 2,123 2,123
 192 0207573F NATIONAL TECHNICAL NUCLEAR 2,039 2,039
 FORENSICS.
 193 0207590F SEEK EAGLE........................ 32,853 32,853
 194 0207601F USAF MODELING AND SIMULATION...... 19,341 19,341
 195 0207605F WARGAMING AND SIMULATION CENTERS.. 7,004 7,004
 197 0207697F DISTRIBUTED TRAINING AND EXERCISES 4,628 4,628
 198 0208006F MISSION PLANNING SYSTEMS.......... 99,214 99,214
 199 0208007F TACTICAL DECEPTION................ 17,074 17,074
 200 0208064F OPERATIONAL HQ--CYBER............. 2,347 2,347
 201 0208087F DISTRIBUTED CYBER WARFARE 76,592 113,892
 OPERATIONS.
 .................................. Joint Cyber Warfighting [37,300]
 Architecture--CYBERCOM UPL.
 202 0208088F AF DEFENSIVE CYBERSPACE OPERATIONS 8,367 8,367
 203 0208097F JOINT CYBER COMMAND AND CONTROL 80,740 80,740
 (JCC2).
 204 0208099F UNIFIED PLATFORM (UP)............. 107,548 107,548
 208 0208288F INTEL DATA APPLICATIONS........... 1,065 1,065
 209 0301025F GEOBASE........................... 2,928 2,928
 211 0301113F CYBER SECURITY INTELLIGENCE 8,972 8,972
 SUPPORT.
 218 0301401F AIR FORCE SPACE AND CYBER NON- 3,069 3,069
 TRADITIONAL ISR FOR BATTLESPACE
 AWARENESS.
 219 0302015F E-4B NATIONAL AIRBORNE OPERATIONS 25,701 25,701
 CENTER (NAOC).
 220 0303131F MINIMUM ESSENTIAL EMERGENCY 41,171 41,171
 COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK (MEECN).
 221 0303140F INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY 70,582 70,582
 PROGRAM.
 224 0303260F JOINT MILITARY DECEPTION 2,588 2,588
 INITIATIVE.
 226 0304260F AIRBORNE SIGINT ENTERPRISE........ 108,528 115,528
 .................................. Special Mission Airborne [7,000]
 SIGINT Enterprise Technology.
 227 0304310F COMMERCIAL ECONOMIC ANALYSIS...... 4,542 4,542
 230 0305015F C2 AIR OPERATIONS SUITE--C2 INFO 8,097 8,097
 SERVICES.
 231 0305020F CCMD INTELLIGENCE INFORMATION 1,751 1,751
 TECHNOLOGY.
 232 0305022F ISR MODERNIZATION & AUTOMATION 13,138 33,138
 DVMT (IMAD).
 .................................. All-domain multi-sensor and [10,000]
 multi-intelligence data fusion.
 .................................. Operationalize foreign [10,000]
 language exploitation
 capabilities.
 233 0305099F GLOBAL AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 4,895 4,895
 (GATM).
 234 0305103F CYBER SECURITY INITIATIVE......... 91 91
 235 0305111F WEATHER SERVICE................... 11,716 21,716
 .................................. Commercial weather data pilot. [10,000]
 236 0305114F AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL, APPROACH, AND 8,511 8,511
 LANDING SYSTEM (ATCALS).
 237 0305116F AERIAL TARGETS.................... 1,365 1,365
 240 0305128F SECURITY AND INVESTIGATIVE 223 223
 ACTIVITIES.
 241 0305146F DEFENSE JOINT COUNTERINTELLIGENCE 8,328 8,328
 ACTIVITIES.
 243 0305179F INTEGRATED BROADCAST SERVICE (IBS) 22,123 22,123
 244 0305202F DRAGON U-2........................ 20,170 20,170
 245 0305206F AIRBORNE RECONNAISSANCE SYSTEMS... 55,048 80,048
 .................................. Sensor Open Systems [20,000]
 Architecture.
 .................................. Wide Area Motion Imagery...... [5,000]
 246 0305207F MANNED RECONNAISSANCE SYSTEMS..... 14,590 14,590
 247 0305208F DISTRIBUTED COMMON GROUND/SURFACE 26,901 26,901
 SYSTEMS.
 248 0305220F RQ-4 UAV.......................... 68,801 68,801
 249 0305221F NETWORK-CENTRIC COLLABORATIVE 17,564 17,564
 TARGETING.
 250 0305238F NATO AGS.......................... 826 826
 251 0305240F SUPPORT TO DCGS ENTERPRISE........ 28,774 28,774
 252 0305600F INTERNATIONAL INTELLIGENCE 15,036 15,036
 TECHNOLOGY AND ARCHITECTURES.
 253 0305881F RAPID CYBER ACQUISITION........... 3,739 3,739
 254 0305984F PERSONNEL RECOVERY COMMAND & CTRL 2,702 2,702
 (PRC2).
 255 0307577F INTELLIGENCE MISSION DATA (IMD)... 6,332 6,332
 256 0401115F C-130 AIRLIFT SQUADRON............ 407 407
 257 0401119F C-5 AIRLIFT SQUADRONS (IF)........ 6,100 6,100
 258 0401130F C-17 AIRCRAFT (IF)................ 25,387 31,887
 .................................. IR Suppression................ [6,500]
 259 0401132F C-130J PROGRAM.................... 11,060 21,060
 .................................. Winglets...................... [10,000]
 260 0401134F LARGE AIRCRAFT IR COUNTERMEASURES 2,909 2,909
 (LAIRCM).
 261 0401218F KC-135S........................... 12,955 12,955
 262 0401318F CV-22............................. 10,121 10,121
 263 0408011F SPECIAL TACTICS / COMBAT CONTROL.. 6,297 6,297
 264 0708055F MAINTENANCE, REPAIR & OVERHAUL 19,892 23,892
 SYSTEM.
 .................................. CPF--Aviation Training Academy [4,000]
 of the Future.
 265 0708610F LOGISTICS INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 5,271 5,271
 (LOGIT).
 267 0804743F OTHER FLIGHT TRAINING............. 2,214 2,214
 269 0901202F JOINT PERSONNEL RECOVERY AGENCY... 2,164 2,164
 270 0901218F CIVILIAN COMPENSATION PROGRAM..... 4,098 4,098
 271 0901220F PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION.......... 3,191 3,191
 272 0901226F AIR FORCE STUDIES AND ANALYSIS 899 899
 AGENCY.
 273 0901538F FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION 5,421 5,421
 SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT.
 276 1202140F SERVICE SUPPORT TO SPACECOM 13,766 13,766
 ACTIVITIES.
 276A 9999999999 CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS............... 17,240,641 17,271,641
 .................................. Program increase.............. [31,000]
 .................................. SUBTOTAL OPERATIONAL SYSTEMS 23,090,569 23,252,069
 DEVELOPMENT.
 ..................................
 .................................. SOFTWARE AND DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
 PILOT PROGRAMS
 278 0608158F STRATEGIC MISSION PLANNING AND 100,167 100,167
 EXECUTION SYSTEM--SOFTWARE PILOT
 PROGRAM.
 279 0608410F AIR & SPACE OPERATIONS CENTER 177,827 177,827
 (AOC)--SOFTWARE PILOT PROGRAM.
 280 0608920F DEFENSE ENTERPRISE ACCOUNTING AND 136,202 136,202
 MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (DEAMS)--
 SOFTWARE PILOT PRO.
 281 0208087F DISTRIBUTED CYBER WARFARE 37,346 0
 OPERATIONS.
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [-37,346]
 282 0308605F AIR FORCE DEFENSIVE CYBER SYSTEMS 240,926 240,926
 (AFDCS)--SOFTWARE PILOT PROGRAM.
 283 0308606F ALL DOMAIN COMMON PLATFORM (ADCP)-- 190,112 190,112
 SOFTWARE PILOT PROGRAM.
 284 0308607F AIR FORCE WEATHER PROGRAMS-- 58,063 58,063
 SOFTWARE PILOT PROGRAM.
 285 0308608F ELECTRONIC WARFARE INTEGRATED 5,794 5,794
 REPROGRAMMING (EWIR)--SOFTWARE
 PILOT PROGRAM.
 .................................. SUBTOTAL SOFTWARE AND DIGITAL 946,437 909,091
 TECHNOLOGY PILOT PROGRAMS.
 ..................................
 .................................. TOTAL RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, 44,134,301 44,832,005
 TEST & EVAL, AF.
 ..................................
 .................................. RDTE, SPACE FORCE
 .................................. APPLIED RESEARCH
 002 1206601SF SPACE TECHNOLOGY.................. 243,737 278,892
 .................................. Advanced Analog [6,800]
 Microelectronics.
 .................................. AI for space technology....... [5,000]
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [8,355]
 .................................. University Consortia for Space [15,000]
 Technology.
 .................................. SUBTOTAL APPLIED RESEARCH...... 243,737 278,892
 ..................................
 .................................. ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
 003 1206310SF SPACE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 460,820 526,820
 RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT.
 .................................. Defense in depth as mission [20,000]
 assurance for spacecraft.
 .................................. Multilevel, Secure, Autonomous [20,000]
 Mission Operations at AFRL.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [26,000]
 004 1206616SF SPACE ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY 103,395 80,168
 DEVELOPMENT/DEMO.
 .................................. Reduce follow-on tranches..... [-26,000]
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [2,773]
 .................................. SUBTOTAL ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY 564,215 606,988
 DEVELOPMENT.
 ..................................
 .................................. ADVANCED COMPONENT DEVELOPMENT &
 PROTOTYPES
 005 0604002SF SPACE FORCE WEATHER SERVICES 816 816
 RESEARCH.
 006 1203164SF NAVSTAR GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEM 382,594 382,594
 (USER EQUIPMENT) (SPACE).
 007 1203622SF SPACE WARFIGHTING ANALYSIS........ 44,791 44,791
 008 1203710SF EO/IR WEATHER SYSTEMS............. 96,519 96,519
 010 1206410SF SPACE TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT AND 986,822 990,822
 PROTOTYPING.
 .................................. C2BMC integration............. [4,000]
 012 1206425SF SPACE SITUATION AWARENESS SYSTEMS. 230,621 230,621
 013 1206427SF SPACE SYSTEMS PROTOTYPE 106,252 106,252
 TRANSITIONS (SSPT).
 014 1206438SF SPACE CONTROL TECHNOLOGY.......... 57,953 69,953
 .................................. Program increase.............. [12,000]
 016 1206730SF SPACE SECURITY AND DEFENSE PROGRAM 59,169 59,169
 017 1206760SF PROTECTED TACTICAL ENTERPRISE 121,069 121,069
 SERVICE (PTES).
 018 1206761SF PROTECTED TACTICAL SERVICE (PTS).. 294,828 294,828
 019 1206855SF EVOLVED STRATEGIC SATCOM (ESS).... 565,597 565,597
 020 1206857SF SPACE RAPID CAPABILITIES OFFICE... 45,427 45,427
 .................................. SUBTOTAL ADVANCED COMPONENT 2,992,458 3,008,458
 DEVELOPMENT & PROTOTYPES.
 ..................................
 .................................. SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT & DEMONSTRATION
 021 1203269SF GPS III FOLLOW-ON (GPS IIIF)...... 325,927 325,927
 022 1203940SF SPACE SITUATION AWARENESS 49,628 49,628
 OPERATIONS.
 023 1206421SF COUNTERSPACE SYSTEMS.............. 21,848 21,848
 024 1206422SF WEATHER SYSTEM FOLLOW-ON.......... 48,870 48,870
 025 1206425SF SPACE SITUATION AWARENESS SYSTEMS. 105,140 105,140
 026 1206431SF ADVANCED EHF MILSATCOM (SPACE).... 11,701 11,701
 027 1206432SF POLAR MILSATCOM (SPACE)........... 67,465 67,465
 028 1206433SF WIDEBAND GLOBAL SATCOM (SPACE).... 48,438 48,438
 029 1206440SF NEXT-GEN OPIR--GROUND............. 612,529
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [612,529]
 030 1206442SF NEXT GENERATION OPIR.............. 3,479,459 253,801
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [-3,225,658]
 031 1206443SF NEXT-GEN OPIR--GEO................ 1,713,933
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [1,713,933]
 032 1206444SF NEXT-GEN OPIR--POLAR.............. 899,196
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [899,196]
 033 1206445SF COMMERCIAL SATCOM (COMSATCOM) 23,513 23,513
 INTEGRATION.
 034 1206446SF RESILIENT MISSILE WARNING MISSILE 499,840 525,637
 TRACKING--LOW EARTH ORBIT (LEO).
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [25,797]
 035 1206447SF RESILIENT MISSILE WARNING MISSILE 139,131 303,930
 TRACKING--MEDIUM EARTH ORBIT
 (MEO).
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [164,799]
 036 1206448SF RESILIENT MISSILE WARNING MISSILE 390,596 0
 TRACKING--INTEGRATED GROUND
 SEGMENT.
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [-390,596]
 037 1206853SF NATIONAL SECURITY SPACE LAUNCH 124,103 154,103
 PROGRAM (SPACE)--EMD.
 .................................. Increase EMD for NSSL Phase 3 [30,000]
 and beyond activities.
 .................................. SUBTOTAL SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT & 5,335,659 5,165,659
 DEMONSTRATION.
 ..................................
 .................................. MANAGEMENT SUPPORT
 039 1206116SF SPACE TEST AND TRAINING RANGE 21,453 21,453
 DEVELOPMENT.
 040 1206392SF ACQ WORKFORCE--SPACE & MISSILE 253,716 253,716
 SYSTEMS.
 041 1206398SF SPACE & MISSILE SYSTEMS CENTER-- 13,962 20,962
 MHA.
 .................................. Spacelift Range System [7,000]
 improvements.
 042 1206616SF SPACE ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY 2,773 0
 DEVELOPMENT/DEMO.
 .................................. Technical realignment......... [-2,773]
 043 1206759SF MAJOR T&E INVESTMENT--SPACE....... 89,751 89,751
 044 1206860SF ROCKET SYSTEMS LAUNCH PROGRAM 17,922 17,922
 (SPACE).
 045 1206862SF TACTICALLY RESPONSIVE LAUNCH...... 100,000
 .................................. Continue Tactically Responsive [75,000]
 Space.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [25,000]
 046 1206864SF SPACE TEST PROGRAM (STP).......... 25,366 25,366
 .................................. SUBTOTAL MANAGEMENT SUPPORT.... 424,943 529,170
 ..................................
 .................................. OPERATIONAL SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT
 048 1201017SF GLOBAL SENSOR INTEGRATED ON 5,321 5,321
 NETWORK (GSIN).
 049 1203001SF FAMILY OF ADVANCED BLOS TERMINALS 128,243 128,243
 (FAB-T).
 050 1203040SF DCO-SPACE......................... 28,162 28,162
 051 1203109SF NARROWBAND SATELLITE 165,892 165,892
 COMMUNICATIONS.
 052 1203110SF SATELLITE CONTROL NETWORK (SPACE). 42,199 42,199
 053 1203165SF NAVSTAR GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEM 2,062 2,062
 (SPACE AND CONTROL SEGMENTS).
 054 1203173SF SPACE AND MISSILE TEST AND 4,157 4,157
 EVALUATION CENTER.
 055 1203174SF SPACE INNOVATION, INTEGRATION AND 38,103 38,103
 RAPID TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT.
 056 1203182SF SPACELIFT RANGE SYSTEM (SPACE).... 11,658 11,658
 057 1203265SF GPS III SPACE SEGMENT............. 1,626 1,626
 058 1203330SF SPACE SUPERIORITY ISR............. 29,128 29,128
 059 1203620SF NATIONAL SPACE DEFENSE CENTER..... 2,856 2,856
 060 1203873SF BALLISTIC MISSILE DEFENSE RADARS.. 18,615 18,615
 061 1203906SF NCMC--TW/AA SYSTEM................ 7,274 7,274
 062 1203913SF NUDET DETECTION SYSTEM (SPACE).... 80,429 80,429
 063 1203940SF SPACE SITUATION AWARENESS 80,903 85,903
 OPERATIONS.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [5,000]
 064 1206423SF GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEM III-- 359,720 359,720
 OPERATIONAL CONTROL SEGMENT.
 068 1206770SF ENTERPRISE GROUND SERVICES........ 123,601 123,601
 068A 9999999999 CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS............... 4,973,358 4,927,058
 .................................. Funding early to need......... [-379,300]
 .................................. INDOPACOM Space Control....... [308,000]
 .................................. Program adjustment............ [25,000]
 .................................. SUBTOTAL OPERATIONAL SYSTEM 6,103,307 6,062,007
 DEVELOPMENT.
 ..................................
 .................................. SOFTWARE & DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
 PILOT PROGRAMS
 070 1208248SF SPACE COMMAND & CONTROL--SOFTWARE 155,053 155,053
 PILOT PROGRAM.
 .................................. SUBTOTAL SOFTWARE & DIGITAL 155,053 155,053
 TECHNOLOGY PILOT PROGRAMS.
 ..................................
 .................................. TOTAL RDTE, SPACE FORCE...... 15,819,372 15,806,227
 ..................................
 .................................. RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST &
 EVAL, DW
 .................................. BASIC RESEARCH
 001 0601000BR DTRA BASIC RESEARCH............... 11,584 11,584
 002 0601101E DEFENSE RESEARCH SCIENCES......... 401,870 495,444
 .................................. AI for supply chain........... [4,100]
 .................................. Math and Computer Science..... [5,000]
 .................................. Program increase.............. [84,474]
 003 0601108D8Z HIGH ENERGY LASER RESEARCH 16,257 16,257
 INITIATIVES.
 004 0601110D8Z BASIC RESEARCH INITIATIVES........ 62,386 184,686
 .................................. CPF--FIU/SOUTHCOM Security [1,300]
 Research Hub / Enhanced Domain
 Awareness (EDA) Initiative.
 .................................. CPF--HBCU Training for the [1,000]
 Future of Aerospace.
 .................................. Future G...................... [100,000]
 .................................. MINERVA....................... [20,000]
 005 0601117E BASIC OPERATIONAL MEDICAL RESEARCH 80,874 80,874
 SCIENCE.
 006 0601120D8Z NATIONAL DEFENSE EDUCATION PROGRAM 132,347 168,347
 .................................. Community colleges............ [5,000]
 .................................. CPF--Florida Memorial Avionics [1,000]
 Smart Scholars.
 .................................. SMART......................... [30,000]
 007 0601228D8Z HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES AND 33,288 111,711
 UNIVERSITIES/MINORITY
 INSTITUTIONS.
 .................................. CPF--Augmenting Quantum [1,111]
 Sensing Research, Education
 and Training in DoD CoE at DSU.
 .................................. CPF--Florida Memorial [600]
 University Department of
 Natural Sciences STEM
 Equipment.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [76,712]
 008 0601384BP CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL DEFENSE 34,734 34,734
 PROGRAM.
 .................................. SUBTOTAL BASIC RESEARCH........ 773,340 1,103,637
 ..................................
 .................................. APPLIED RESEARCH
 010 0602000D8Z JOINT MUNITIONS TECHNOLOGY........ 18,961 18,961
 011 0602115E BIOMEDICAL TECHNOLOGY............. 106,958 114,658
 .................................. Next-Generation Combat [7,700]
 Casualty Care.
 012 0602128D8Z PROMOTION AND PROTECTION 3,275 3,275
 STRATEGIES.
 014 0602230D8Z DEFENSE TECHNOLOGY INNOVATION..... 20,634 20,634
 015 0602234D8Z LINCOLN LABORATORY RESEARCH 46,159 46,159
 PROGRAM.
 016 0602251D8Z APPLIED RESEARCH FOR THE 67,666 67,666
 ADVANCEMENT OF S&T PRIORITIES.
 017 0602303E INFORMATION & COMMUNICATIONS 388,270 418,270
 TECHNOLOGY.
 .................................. Artificial Intelligence and [5,000]
 Human-Machine Symbiosis.
 .................................. Cyber security................ [5,000]
 .................................. Underexplored Systems for [20,000]
 Utility-Scale Quantum
 Computing.
 018 0602383E BIOLOGICAL WARFARE DEFENSE........ 23,059 23,059
 019 0602384BP CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL DEFENSE 256,197 334,697
 PROGRAM.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [78,500]
 020 0602668D8Z CYBER SECURITY RESEARCH........... 17,264 17,264
 021 0602675D8Z SOCIAL SCIENCES FOR ENVIRONMENTAL 4,000 4,000
 SECURITY.
 022 0602702E TACTICAL TECHNOLOGY............... 221,883 261,883
 .................................. Information Analytics [5,000]
 Technology.
 .................................. MAD-FIRES..................... [35,000]
 023 0602715E MATERIALS AND BIOLOGICAL 352,976 355,276
 TECHNOLOGY.
 .................................. Expanding Human Resiliency.... [2,300]
 024 0602716E ELECTRONICS TECHNOLOGY............ 557,745 557,745
 025 0602718BR COUNTER WEAPONS OF MASS 192,162 192,162
 DESTRUCTION APPLIED RESEARCH.
 026 0602751D8Z SOFTWARE ENGINEERING INSTITUTE 11,030 11,030
 (SEI) APPLIED RESEARCH.
 027 0602890D8Z HIGH ENERGY LASER RESEARCH........ 48,587 68,587
 .................................. Program increase.............. [20,000]
 028 1160401BB SOF TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT........ 49,174 49,174
 .................................. SUBTOTAL APPLIED RESEARCH...... 2,386,000 2,564,500
 ..................................
 .................................. ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
 029 0603000D8Z JOINT MUNITIONS ADVANCED 34,065 84,065
 TECHNOLOGY.
 .................................. Munitions technology [50,000]
 development.
 030 0603121D8Z SO/LIC ADVANCED DEVELOPMENT....... 4,919 4,919
 031 0603122D8Z COMBATING TERRORISM TECHNOLOGY 72,614 92,614
 SUPPORT.
 .................................. United States-Israel [15,000]
 Cooperation to Counter
 Unmanned Aerial Systems.
 .................................. VTOL Loitering Munition (ROC- [5,000]
 X).
 032 0603133D8Z FOREIGN COMPARATIVE TESTING....... 26,802 26,802
 034 0603160BR COUNTER WEAPONS OF MASS 395,721 395,721
 DESTRUCTION ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY
 DEVELOPMENT.
 035 0603176BR ADVANCED CONCEPTS AND PERFORMANCE 6,505 6,505
 ASSESSMENT.
 036 0603176C ADVANCED CONCEPTS AND PERFORMANCE 16,737 31,737
 ASSESSMENT.
 .................................. IAMD/OSG AIS F-35 Event [10,000]
 Preparation.
 .................................. Kill Chain Performance [5,000]
 Assessment Capability.
 037 0603180C ADVANCED RESEARCH................. 22,023 50,023
 .................................. Benzoxazine High-Mach System [4,000]
 Thermal Protection.
 .................................. High Temperature Nickel Based [4,000]
 Alloy research.
 .................................. Sounding Rocket Testbed [20,000]
 Technology Maturation Tests.
 038 0603183D8Z JOINT HYPERSONIC TECHNOLOGY 52,156 72,156
 DEVELOPMENT &TRANSITION.
 .................................. Accelerate co-development of [20,000]
 key partner programs.
 039 0603225D8Z JOINT DOD-DOE MUNITIONS TECHNOLOGY 18,898 18,898
 DEVELOPMENT.
 040 0603286E ADVANCED AEROSPACE SYSTEMS........ 253,135 410,435
 .................................. GlideBreaker.................. [20,000]
 .................................. MoHAWC........................ [60,000]
 .................................. OpFires....................... [42,300]
 .................................. Tactical Boost Glide (TBG).... [35,000]
 041 0603287E SPACE PROGRAMS AND TECHNOLOGY..... 81,888 81,888
 042 0603288D8Z ANALYTIC ASSESSMENTS.............. 24,052 24,052
 043 0603289D8Z ADVANCED INNOVATIVE ANALYSIS AND 53,890 68,890
 CONCEPTS.
 .................................. Emerging opportunities........ [15,000]
 046 0603338D8Z DEFENSE MODERNIZATION AND 141,561 176,561
 PROTOTYPING.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [35,000]
 047 0603342D8Z DEFENSE INNOVATION UNIT (DIU)..... 42,925 106,002
 .................................. AI for small unit maneuver.... [2,500]
 .................................. Hybrid space architecture..... [5,577]
 .................................. Joint programs................ [10,000]
 .................................. National Security Innovation [15,000]
 Capital.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [25,000]
 .................................. Small craft electric [5,000]
 propulsion.
 048 0603375D8Z TECHNOLOGY INNOVATION............. 109,535 469,535
 .................................. Accelerating quantum [200,000]
 applications.
 .................................. AHI........................... [30,000]
 .................................. Domestic Supply Chain for [100,000]
 Microelectronics Critical
 Element Production.
 .................................. Future G Open Edge Computing [30,000]
 Challenge.
 049 0603384BP CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL DEFENSE 238,407 253,407
 PROGRAM--ADVANCED DEVELOPMENT.
 .................................. Biological Defense Vaccines [15,000]
 and Advanced Therapeutics.
 050 0603527D8Z RETRACT LARCH..................... 79,493 79,493
 051 0603618D8Z JOINT ELECTRONIC ADVANCED 19,218 19,218
 TECHNOLOGY.
 052 0603648D8Z JOINT CAPABILITY TECHNOLOGY 114,100 114,100
 DEMONSTRATIONS.
 053 0603662D8Z NETWORKED COMMUNICATIONS 3,168 3,168
 CAPABILITIES.
 054 0603680D8Z DEFENSE-WIDE MANUFACTURING SCIENCE 256,142 1,268,142
 AND TECHNOLOGY PROGRAM.
 .................................. Advanced textiles............. [10,000]
 .................................. Biotechnology Manufacturing [500,000]
 Institutes.
 .................................. CPF--Future Nano and Micro- [4,000]
 Fabrication - Advanced
 Materials Engineering Research
 Institute.
 .................................. CPF--Manufacturing of Advanced [4,000]
 Composites for Hypersonics -
 Aided by Digital Engineering.
 .................................. CPF--Scalable comprehensive [4,000]
 workforce readiness
 initiatives in bioindustrial
 manufacturing that lead to
 regional bioeconomic
 transformation and growth.
 .................................. HPC-enabled advanced [30,000]
 manufacturing.
 .................................. Increase Production Capacity [25,000]
 for Hypersonics.
 .................................. Munitions technology [50,000]
 development.
 .................................. Munitions technology [200,000]
 development (Acquisition &
 Sustainment).
 .................................. Munitions technology [100,000]
 development (Research &
 Engineering).
 .................................. New bioproducts............... [10,000]
 .................................. Silicon carbide matrix [50,000]
 materials for hypersonics.
 .................................. Silicon-based lasers.......... [10,000]
 .................................. Tools and methods to improve [15,000]
 biomanufacturing.
 055 0603680S MANUFACTURING TECHNOLOGY PROGRAM.. 46,166 51,166
 .................................. AI-based market research...... [5,000]
 056 0603712S GENERIC LOGISTICS R&D TECHNOLOGY 13,663 13,663
 DEMONSTRATIONS.
 057 0603716D8Z STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH 58,411 63,411
 PROGRAM.
 .................................. SERDP- PFAS remediation [5,000]
 technologies.
 058 0603720S MICROELECTRONICS TECHNOLOGY 139,833 139,833
 DEVELOPMENT AND SUPPORT.
 059 0603727D8Z JOINT WARFIGHTING PROGRAM......... 2,411 2,411
 060 0603739E ADVANCED ELECTRONICS TECHNOLOGIES. 250,917 260,917
 .................................. Low SWAP INU development...... [10,000]
 061 0603760E COMMAND, CONTROL AND 305,050 315,050
 COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS.
 .................................. Composable Logistics and [10,000]
 Information Omniscience.
 062 0603766E NETWORK-CENTRIC WARFARE TECHNOLOGY 678,562 758,562
 .................................. ABII.......................... [50,000]
 .................................. Classified Program............ [15,000]
 .................................. Ocean of Things Phase 3....... [15,000]
 063 0603767E SENSOR TECHNOLOGY................. 314,502 314,502
 064 0603769D8Z DISTRIBUTED LEARNING ADVANCED 201 201
 TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT.
 065 0603781D8Z SOFTWARE ENGINEERING INSTITUTE.... 13,417 13,417
 066 0603924D8Z HIGH ENERGY LASER ADVANCED 111,149 166,149
 TECHNOLOGY PROGRAM.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [30,000]
 .................................. Short pulse laser research.... [25,000]
 067 0603941D8Z TEST & EVALUATION SCIENCE & 315,090 350,090
 TECHNOLOGY.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [35,000]
 068 0603950D8Z NATIONAL SECURITY INNOVATION 22,028 74,028
 NETWORK.
 .................................. High energy laser power [7,000]
 beaming.
 .................................. Mission acceleration centers.. [20,000]
 .................................. Program increase.............. [15,000]
 .................................. TRISO advanced nuclear fuel... [10,000]
 069 0604055D8Z OPERATIONAL ENERGY CAPABILITY 180,170 195,170
 IMPROVEMENT.
 .................................. Operational Energy Capability [15,000]
 Improvement.
 072 1160402BB SOF ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY 118,877 125,877
 DEVELOPMENT.
 .................................. Next Generation ISR SOF [7,000]
 Enhancement/ Technical Support
 Systems.
 .................................. SUBTOTAL ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY 4,638,401 6,702,778
 DEVELOPMENT.
 ..................................
 .................................. ADVANCED COMPONENT DEVELOPMENT &
 PROTOTYPES
 074 0603161D8Z NUCLEAR AND CONVENTIONAL PHYSICAL 41,507 41,507
 SECURITY EQUIPMENT RDT&E ADC&P.
 075 0603600D8Z WALKOFF........................... 133,795 133,795
 076 0603851D8Z ENVIRONMENTAL SECURITY TECHNICAL 84,638 95,638
 CERTIFICATION PROGRAM.
 .................................. ESTCP--3D printed [5,000]
 infrastructure.
 .................................. ESTCP--PFAS Disposal.......... [5,000]
 .................................. ESTCP--PFAS free fire fighting [1,000]
 turnout gear.
 077 0603881C BALLISTIC MISSILE DEFENSE TERMINAL 190,216 190,216
 DEFENSE SEGMENT.
 078 0603882C BALLISTIC MISSILE DEFENSE 667,524 667,524
 MIDCOURSE DEFENSE SEGMENT.
 079 0603884BP CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL DEFENSE 291,364 291,364
 PROGRAM--DEM/VAL.
 080 0603884C BALLISTIC MISSILE DEFENSE SENSORS. 231,134 242,334
 .................................. BMDS Radars Modeling and [4,200]
 Simulation.
 .................................. HEMP Hardening................ [7,000]
 081 0603890C BMD ENABLING PROGRAMS............. 591,847 717,847
 .................................. Digital Engineering to Support [17,000]
 NGI Transition.
 .................................. Elevated Fire control Sensor.. [27,000]
 .................................. Kill Chain Demonstration...... [51,000]
 .................................. NGI Modeling and Threat [21,000]
 Scenarios.
 .................................. Support Equipment for FTX-26 [10,000]
 and NGI Testing.
 082 0603891C SPECIAL PROGRAMS--MDA............. 316,977 387,977
 .................................. Classified program increase-- [71,000]
 UPL.
 083 0603892C AEGIS BMD......................... 600,072 600,072
 084 0603896C BALLISTIC MISSILE DEFENSE COMMAND 589,374 648,624
 AND CONTROL, BATTLE MANAGEMENT
 AND COMMUNICATI.
 .................................. Classified program increase-- [50,000]
 UPL.
 .................................. Network Refresh............... [6,500]
 .................................. SATCOM Link Security--PAAWNS [2,750]
 TRANSEC Module.
 085 0603898C BALLISTIC MISSILE DEFENSE JOINT 50,269 50,269
 WARFIGHTER SUPPORT.
 086 0603904C MISSILE DEFENSE INTEGRATION & 49,367 49,367
 OPERATIONS CENTER (MDIOC).
 087 0603906C REGARDING TRENCH.................. 12,146 12,146
 088 0603907C SEA BASED X-BAND RADAR (SBX)...... 164,668 164,668
 089 0603913C ISRAELI COOPERATIVE PROGRAMS...... 300,000 300,000
 090 0603914C BALLISTIC MISSILE DEFENSE TEST.... 367,824 367,824
 091 0603915C BALLISTIC MISSILE DEFENSE TARGETS. 559,513 729,513
 .................................. Advanced Reactive Target [20,000]
 Simulation Development.
 .................................. Hypersonic Maneuvering [150,000]
 Extended Range (HMER) Target
 System.
 092 0603923D8Z COALITION WARFARE................. 11,154 11,154
 093 0604011D8Z NEXT GENERATION INFORMATION 249,591 284,591
 COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (5G).
 .................................. Next Generation Information [35,000]
 (5G).
 094 0604016D8Z DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE CORROSION 3,166 3,166
 PROGRAM.
 095 0604102C GUAM DEFENSE DEVELOPMENT.......... 397,936 397,936
 096 0604115C TECHNOLOGY MATURATION INITIATIVES. 35,000
 .................................. Continue Diode Pumped Alkali [25,000]
 Laser Development.
 .................................. Program increase.............. [10,000]
 097 0604124D8Z CHIEF DIGITAL AND ARTIFICIAL 33,950 33,950
 INTELLIGENCE OFFICER (CDAO)--MIP.
 099 0604181C HYPERSONIC DEFENSE................ 225,477 542,977
 .................................. Accelerate Glide Phase [292,500]
 Interceptor program.
 .................................. Disruptive Technologies....... [25,000]
 100 0604250D8Z ADVANCED INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGIES.. 1,145,358 1,274,858
 .................................. Powered Quickstrike Mines (Sea [30,000]
 Urchin).
 .................................. Program increase.............. [80,000]
 .................................. Service Tactical SIGINT [9,500]
 Upgrades--INDOPACOM UPL.
 .................................. Short Pulse Laser Directed [10,000]
 Energy Demonstration.
 101 0604294D8Z TRUSTED & ASSURED MICROELECTRONICS 647,226 652,226
 .................................. Trusted & Assured [5,000]
 Microelectronics.
 102 0604331D8Z RAPID PROTOTYPING PROGRAM......... 179,189 204,189
 .................................. Energetics.................... [5,000]
 .................................. Program increase.............. [20,000]
 103 0604341D8Z DEFENSE INNOVATION UNIT (DIU) 24,402 37,402
 PROTOTYPING.
 .................................. AI/ML-enabled OSINT for [4,000]
 information effects.
 .................................. Assured Defense Avionics...... [5,000]
 .................................. Information environment....... [4,000]
 104 0604400D8Z DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (DOD) 2,691 2,691
 UNMANNED SYSTEM COMMON
 DEVELOPMENT.
 105 0604551BR CATAPULT.......................... 7,130 27,130
 .................................. Radiation-Hardened Fully- [20,000]
 Depleted Silicon-on-Insulator
 Microelectronics.
 106 0604555D8Z OPERATIONAL ENERGY CAPABILITY 45,779 50,779
 IMPROVEMENT--NON S&T.
 .................................. Operational Energy Capability [5,000]
 Improvement- Prototyping.
 108 0604682D8Z WARGAMING AND SUPPORT FOR 3,229 3,229
 STRATEGIC ANALYSIS (SSA).
 109 0604826J JOINT C5 CAPABILITY DEVELOPMENT, 40,699 40,699
 INTEGRATION AND INTEROPERABILITY
 ASSESSMENTS.
 110 0604873C LONG RANGE DISCRIMINATION RADAR 75,120 75,120
 (LRDR).
 111 0604874C IMPROVED HOMELAND DEFENSE 1,833,357 1,833,357
 INTERCEPTORS.
 112 0604876C BALLISTIC MISSILE DEFENSE TERMINAL 69,762 69,762
 DEFENSE SEGMENT TEST.
 113 0604878C AEGIS BMD TEST.................... 182,776 192,776
 .................................. Continued participation in ASD- [10,000]
 23.
 114 0604879C BALLISTIC MISSILE DEFENSE SENSOR 88,326 88,326
 TEST.
 115 0604880C LAND-BASED SM-3 (LBSM3)........... 27,678 27,678
 116 0604887C BALLISTIC MISSILE DEFENSE 84,075 84,075
 MIDCOURSE SEGMENT TEST.
 117 0202057C SAFETY PROGRAM MANAGEMENT......... 2,417 2,417
 118 0300206R ENTERPRISE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 2,664 2,664
 SYSTEMS.
 120 0305103C CYBER SECURITY INITIATIVE......... 1,165 33,165
 .................................. Mobile nuclear microreactors.. [12,000]
 .................................. Program increase.............. [20,000]
 123 1206895C BALLISTIC MISSILE DEFENSE SYSTEM 129,957 305,957
 SPACE PROGRAMS.
 .................................. HBTSS Payload Continued [166,000]
 Development beyond Phase IIb.
 .................................. MDSEA DEVSECOPS............... [10,000]
 .................................. SUBTOTAL ADVANCED COMPONENT 10,756,509 12,007,959
 DEVELOPMENT & PROTOTYPES.
 ..................................
 .................................. SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT & DEMONSTRATION
 124 0604123D8Z CHIEF DIGITAL AND ARTIFICIAL 273,340 368,340
 INTELLIGENCE OFFICER (CDAO)--DEM/
 VAL ACTIVITIES.
 .................................. CDAO.......................... [50,000]
 .................................. Software integration.......... [45,000]
 125 0604161D8Z NUCLEAR AND CONVENTIONAL PHYSICAL 6,482 6,482
 SECURITY EQUIPMENT RDT&E SDD.
 127 0604384BP CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL DEFENSE 312,148 312,148
 PROGRAM--EMD.
 128 0604771D8Z JOINT TACTICAL INFORMATION 9,120 9,120
 DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM (JTIDS).
 129 0605000BR COUNTER WEAPONS OF MASS 14,403 14,403
 DESTRUCTION SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT.
 130 0605013BL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT 1,244 1,244
 131 0605021SE HOMELAND PERSONNEL SECURITY 6,191 6,191
 INITIATIVE.
 132 0605022D8Z DEFENSE EXPORTABILITY PROGRAM..... 10,145 10,145
 133 0605027D8Z OUSD(C) IT DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVES 5,938 5,938
 136 0605080S DEFENSE AGENCY INITIATIVES (DAI)-- 23,171 23,171
 FINANCIAL SYSTEM.
 137 0605141BR MISSION ASSURANCE RISK MANAGEMENT 14,093 14,093
 SYSTEM (MARMS).
 138 0605210D8Z DEFENSE-WIDE ELECTRONIC 6,949 6,949
 PROCUREMENT CAPABILITIES.
 139 0605294D8Z TRUSTED & ASSURED MICROELECTRONICS 302,963 302,963
 140 0605772D8Z NUCLEAR COMMAND, CONTROL, & 3,758 3,758
 COMMUNICATIONS.
 141 0305304D8Z DOD ENTERPRISE ENERGY INFORMATION 8,121 8,121
 MANAGEMENT (EEIM).
 142 0305310D8Z CWMD SYSTEMS: SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT 16,048 16,048
 AND DEMONSTRATION.
 .................................. SUBTOTAL SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT & 1,014,114 1,109,114
 DEMONSTRATION.
 ..................................
 .................................. MANAGEMENT SUPPORT
 143 0603829J JOINT CAPABILITY EXPERIMENTATION.. 12,452 12,452
 144 0604774D8Z DEFENSE READINESS REPORTING SYSTEM 8,902 8,902
 (DRRS).
 145 0604875D8Z JOINT SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE 6,610 6,610
 DEVELOPMENT.
 146 0604940D8Z CENTRAL TEST AND EVALUATION 819,358 1,094,358
 INVESTMENT DEVELOPMENT (CTEIP).
 .................................. Program increase.............. [275,000]
 147 0604942D8Z ASSESSMENTS AND EVALUATIONS....... 4,607 4,607
 148 0605001E MISSION SUPPORT................... 86,869 86,869
 149 0605100D8Z JOINT MISSION ENVIRONMENT TEST 126,079 151,079
 CAPABILITY (JMETC).
 .................................. Joint Mission Environment..... [25,000]
 150 0605126J JOINT INTEGRATED AIR AND MISSILE 53,278 53,278
 DEFENSE ORGANIZATION (JIAMDO).
 152 0605142D8Z SYSTEMS ENGINEERING............... 39,009 39,009
 153 0605151D8Z STUDIES AND ANALYSIS SUPPORT--OSD. 5,716 5,716
 154 0605161D8Z NUCLEAR MATTERS-PHYSICAL SECURITY. 15,379 15,379
 155 0605170D8Z SUPPORT TO NETWORKS AND 9,449 9,449
 INFORMATION INTEGRATION.
 156 0605200D8Z GENERAL SUPPORT TO 6,112 6,112
 OUSD(INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY).
 157 0605384BP CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL DEFENSE 124,475 124,475
 PROGRAM.
 158 0605502BP SMALL BUSINESS INNOVATIVE 5,100
 RESEARCH--CHEMICAL BIOLOGICAL DEF.
 .................................. Operational Rapid Multi- [5,100]
 Pathogen Diagnostic Tool.
 165 0605790D8Z SMALL BUSINESS INNOVATION RESEARCH 3,820 6,820
 (SBIR)/ SMALL BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY
 TRANSFER.
 .................................. Small Business Tech Transfer.. [3,000]
 166 0605797D8Z MAINTAINING TECHNOLOGY ADVANTAGE.. 35,414 35,414
 167 0605798D8Z DEFENSE TECHNOLOGY ANALYSIS....... 56,114 56,114
 168 0605801KA DEFENSE TECHNICAL INFORMATION 63,184 63,184
 CENTER (DTIC).
 169 0605803SE R&D IN SUPPORT OF DOD ENLISTMENT, 23,757 23,757
 TESTING AND EVALUATION.
 170 0605804D8Z DEVELOPMENT TEST AND EVALUATION... 26,652 26,652
 171 0605898E MANAGEMENT HQ--R&D................ 14,636 14,636
 172 0605998KA MANAGEMENT HQ--DEFENSE TECHNICAL 3,518 3,518
 INFORMATION CENTER (DTIC).
 173 0606100D8Z BUDGET AND PROGRAM ASSESSMENTS.... 15,244 15,244
 174 0606114D8Z ANALYSIS WORKING GROUP (AWG) 4,700 4,700
 SUPPORT.
 175 0606135D8Z CHIEF DIGITAL AND ARTIFICIAL 13,132 13,132
 INTELLIGENCE OFFICER (CDAO)
 ACTIVITIES.
 176 0606225D8Z ODNA TECHNOLOGY AND RESOURCE 3,323 3,323
 ANALYSIS.
 177 0606300D8Z DEFENSE SCIENCE BOARD............. 2,532 2,532
 179 0606771D8Z CYBER RESILIENCY AND CYBERSECURITY 32,306 32,306
 POLICY.
 180 0606853BR MANAGEMENT, TECHNICAL & 12,354 22,354
 INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT.
 .................................. Joint Programs................ [10,000]
 181 0203345D8Z DEFENSE OPERATIONS SECURITY 3,034 3,034
 INITIATIVE (DOSI).
 182 0204571J JOINT STAFF ANALYTICAL SUPPORT.... 4,332 4,332
 183 0208045K C4I INTEROPERABILITY.............. 69,698 69,698
 189 0305172K COMBINED ADVANCED APPLICATIONS.... 16,171 16,171
 191 0305208K DISTRIBUTED COMMON GROUND/SURFACE 3,072 3,072
 SYSTEMS.
 192 0804768J COCOM EXERCISE ENGAGEMENT AND 37,852 37,852
 TRAINING TRANSFORMATION (CE2T2)--
 NON-MHA.
 193 0808709SE DEFENSE EQUAL OPPORTUNITY 716 716
 MANAGEMENT INSTITUTE (DEOMI).
 194 0901598C MANAGEMENT HQ--MDA................ 25,259 25,259
 195 0903235K JOINT SERVICE PROVIDER (JSP)...... 3,141 3,141
 195A 9999999999 CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS............... 37,841 37,841
 .................................. SUBTOTAL MANAGEMENT SUPPORT.... 1,830,097 2,148,197
 ..................................
 .................................. OPERATIONAL SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT
 200 0607210D8Z INDUSTRIAL BASE ANALYSIS AND 588,094 649,903
 SUSTAINMENT SUPPORT.
 .................................. Advanced machining............ [20,000]
 .................................. Carbon/carbon industrial base [10,000]
 enhancement.
 .................................. CPF--Critical Non-Destructive [2,000]
 Inspection and Training for
 Key U.S. National Defense
 Interests through College of
 the Canyons Advanced
 Technology Center.
 .................................. CPF--Partnerships for [4,000]
 Manufacturing Training
 Innovation.
 .................................. Integrated circuit substrates. [3,000]
 .................................. Precision optics manufacturing [14,809]
 .................................. RF microelectronics supply [8,000]
 chain.
 201 0607310D8Z CWMD SYSTEMS: OPERATIONAL SYSTEMS 15,427 15,427
 DEVELOPMENT.
 202 0607327T GLOBAL THEATER SECURITY 8,317 8,317
 COOPERATION MANAGEMENT
 INFORMATION SYSTEMS (G-TSCMIS).
 203 0607384BP CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL DEFENSE 68,030 68,030
 (OPERATIONAL SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT).
 204 0208043J PLANNING AND DECISION AID SYSTEM 16,600
 (PDAS).
 .................................. 2.5/3D heterogeneous.......... [16,600]
 209 0302019K DEFENSE INFO INFRASTRUCTURE 19,145 19,145
 ENGINEERING AND INTEGRATION.
 210 0303126K LONG-HAUL COMMUNICATIONS--DCS..... 13,195 13,195
 211 0303131K MINIMUM ESSENTIAL EMERGENCY 5,746 5,746
 COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK (MEECN).
 212 0303136G KEY MANAGEMENT INFRASTRUCTURE 92,018 92,018
 (KMI).
 213 0303140D8Z INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY 43,135 47,135
 PROGRAM.
 .................................. ISSP, NWC and NPS............. [4,000]
 214 0303140G INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY 593,831 593,831
 PROGRAM.
 215 0303140K INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY 7,005 7,005
 PROGRAM.
 216 0303150K GLOBAL COMMAND AND CONTROL SYSTEM. 10,020 10,020
 217 0303153K DEFENSE SPECTRUM ORGANIZATION..... 19,708 19,708
 221 0303430V FEDERAL INVESTIGATIVE SERVICES 5,197 5,197
 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY.
 226 0305104D8Z DEFENSE INDUSTRIAL BASE (DIB) 10,000 10,000
 CYBER SECURITY INITIATIVE.
 229 0305128V SECURITY AND INVESTIGATIVE 450 450
 ACTIVITIES.
 230 0305133V INDUSTRIAL SECURITY ACTIVITIES.... 1,800 1,800
 233 0305146V DEFENSE JOINT COUNTERINTELLIGENCE 4,622 4,622
 ACTIVITIES.
 234 0305172D8Z COMBINED ADVANCED APPLICATIONS.... 49,380 49,380
 237 0305186D8Z POLICY R&D PROGRAMS............... 6,214 6,214
 238 0305199D8Z NET CENTRICITY.................... 17,917 17,917
 240 0305208BB DISTRIBUTED COMMON GROUND/SURFACE 6,095 6,095
 SYSTEMS.
 246 0305245D8Z INTELLIGENCE CAPABILITIES AND 4,575 4,575
 INNOVATION INVESTMENTS.
 247 0305251K CYBERSPACE OPERATIONS FORCES AND 2,497 2,497
 FORCE SUPPORT.
 248 0305327V INSIDER THREAT.................... 9,403 9,403
 249 0305387D8Z HOMELAND DEFENSE TECHNOLOGY 1,864 1,864
 TRANSFER PROGRAM.
 257 0708012K LOGISTICS SUPPORT ACTIVITIES...... 1,620 1,620
 258 0708012S PACIFIC DISASTER CENTERS.......... 1,875 1,875
 259 0708047S DEFENSE PROPERTY ACCOUNTABILITY 3,264 3,264
 SYSTEM.
 261 1105219BB MQ-9 UAV.......................... 14,000 29,870
 .................................. MQ-9 Mallett reprogramming.... [5,870]
 .................................. Speed Loader Agile POD........ [10,000]
 263 1160403BB AVIATION SYSTEMS.................. 179,499 179,499
 264 1160405BB INTELLIGENCE SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT.. 75,136 85,136
 .................................. Intelligence Systems [10,000]
 Development.
 265 1160408BB OPERATIONAL ENHANCEMENTS.......... 142,900 168,810
 .................................. Artificial intelligence for [15,000]
 Small Unit Maneuver (AISUM).
 .................................. CPF--Intercept, Collect, [2,300]
 Analyze, and Disrupt (ICAD)
 Application.
 .................................. Precision Strike Munition [8,610]
 Shipboard Safety &
 Certification Testing.
 266 1160431BB WARRIOR SYSTEMS................... 129,133 155,860
 .................................. Counter Unmanned Systems [5,400]
 (CUxS) Procurement
 Acceleration.
 .................................. Ground Organic Precision [9,930]
 Strike Systems (GOPSS)
 Loitering Munitions.
 .................................. Identity and Signature [9,000]
 Management Modernization.
 .................................. Maritime Scalable Effects [2,397]
 (MSE) Electronic Warfare
 System Acceleration.
 267 1160432BB SPECIAL PROGRAMS.................. 518 518
 268 1160434BB UNMANNED ISR...................... 3,354 3,354
 269 1160480BB SOF TACTICAL VEHICLES............. 13,594 13,594
 270 1160483BB MARITIME SYSTEMS.................. 82,645 112,645
 .................................. Dry Combat Submersible (DCS) [30,000]
 Next Acceleration.
 272 1160490BB OPERATIONAL ENHANCEMENTS 7,583 8,528
 INTELLIGENCE.
 .................................. Low Visibility Vanishing [945]
 Technology (LVVT).
 273 1203610K TELEPORT PROGRAM.................. 1,270 1,270
 273A 9999999999 CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS............... 7,854,604 7,878,304
 .................................. JWICS modernization........... [1,500]
 .................................. MARS Advanced Capabilities.... [22,200]
 .................................. SUBTOTAL OPERATIONAL SYSTEMS 10,114,680 10,330,241
 DEVELOPMENT.
 ..................................
 .................................. SOFTWARE AND DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
 PILOT PROGRAMS
 274 0608197V NATIONAL BACKGROUND INVESTIGATION 132,524 132,524
 SERVICES--SOFTWARE PILOT PROGRAM.
 275 0608648D8Z ACQUISITION VISIBILITY--SOFTWARE 17,123 17,123
 PILOT PROGRAM.
 276 0608775D8Z ACCELERATE THE PROCUREMENT AND 100,000 0
 FIELDING OF INNOVATIVE
 TECHNOLOGIES (APFIT).
 .................................. OSD requested transfer to new [-100,000]
 PE.
 276A 0604795D8Z ACCELERATE THE PROCUREMENT AND 100,000
 FIELDING OF INNOVATIVE
 TECHNOLOGIES (APFIT).
 .................................. OSD requested transfer from [100,000]
 erroneous PE.
 277 0303150K GLOBAL COMMAND AND CONTROL SYSTEM. 34,987 34,987
 282 0308609V NATIONAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY 14,749 14,749
 SYSTEMS (NISS)--SOFTWARE PILOT
 PROGRAM.
 282A 9999999999 CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS............... 265,028 265,028
 .................................. SUBTOTAL SOFTWARE AND DIGITAL 564,411 564,411
 TECHNOLOGY PILOT PROGRAMS.
 ..................................
 .................................. TOTAL RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, 32,077,552 36,530,837
 TEST & EVAL, DW.
 ..................................
 .................................. MISSION-BASED RAPID ACQUISITION
 ACCOUNT
 001 9999999999 MISSION-BASED RAPID ACQUISITION... 30,000
 .................................. Mission-Based Rapid [30,000]
 Acquisition.
 .................................. SUBTOTAL MISSION-BASED RAPID 30,000
 ACQUISITION.
 ..................................
 .................................. TOTAL MISSION-BASED RAPID 30,000
 ACQUISITION ACCOUNT.
 ..................................
 .................................. OPERATIONAL TEST & EVAL, DEFENSE
 .................................. MANAGEMENT SUPPORT
 001 0605118OTE OPERATIONAL TEST AND EVALUATION... 119,529 119,529
 002 0605131OTE LIVE FIRE TEST AND EVALUATION..... 99,947 99,947
 003 0605814OTE OPERATIONAL TEST ACTIVITIES AND 57,718 57,718
 ANALYSES.
 .................................. SUBTOTAL MANAGEMENT SUPPORT.... 277,194 277,194
 ..................................
 .................................. TOTAL OPERATIONAL TEST & 277,194 277,194
 EVAL, DEFENSE.
 ..................................
 .................................. TOTAL RDT&E.................. 130,097,410 138,641,449
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 TITLE XLIII--OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE

SEC. 4301. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 SEC. 4301. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE (In Thousands of Dollars)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 FY 2023 House
 Line Item Request Authorized
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, ARMY
 OPERATING FORCES
 010 MANEUVER UNITS.................................................... 4,506,811 4,356,811
 Program decrease.............................................. [-150,000]
 020 MODULAR SUPPORT BRIGADES.......................................... 177,136 177,136
 030 ECHELONS ABOVE BRIGADE............................................ 894,629 894,629
 040 THEATER LEVEL ASSETS.............................................. 2,570,949 2,450,949
 Program decrease.............................................. [-120,000]
 050 LAND FORCES OPERATIONS SUPPORT.................................... 1,184,230 1,144,230
 Program decrease.............................................. [-40,000]
 060 AVIATION ASSETS................................................... 2,220,817 2,220,817
 070 FORCE READINESS OPERATIONS SUPPORT................................ 7,366,299 7,616,738
 Advanced Bomb Suit II......................................... [12,940]
 Arctic OCIE for Alaska bases, Fort Drum and Fort Carson....... [65,050]
 Extended Cold Weather Clothing System (ECWCS) Layer 1 & 2 for [8,999]
 Initial Entry Training Soldiers...............................
 Female/Small Stature Body Armor............................... [66,750]
 Operation Pathways (OP)....................................... [100,000]
 Program decrease.............................................. [-60,000]
 Service Tactical SIGINT Upgrades--INDOPACOM UPL............... [3,400]
 Theater Intelligence (ISR-PED)................................ [53,300]
 080 LAND FORCES SYSTEMS READINESS..................................... 483,683 483,683
 090 LAND FORCES DEPOT MAINTENANCE..................................... 1,399,173 1,399,173
 100 MEDICAL READINESS................................................. 897,522 897,522
 110 BASE OPERATIONS SUPPORT........................................... 9,330,325 9,276,325
 Base Operating Support for AFFF Replacement, mobile assets and [6,000]
 Disposal......................................................
 Program decrease.............................................. [-60,000]
 120 FACILITIES SUSTAINMENT, RESTORATION & MODERNIZATION............... 4,666,658 5,192,598
 FSRM--AFFF Replacement Facilities............................. [65,000]
 OIB Projects.................................................. [100,000]
 Program increase.............................................. [360,940]
 130 MANAGEMENT AND OPERATIONAL HEADQUARTERS........................... 284,483 254,483
 Program decrease.............................................. [-30,000]
 140 ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES............................................. 450,348 420,348
 Program decrease.............................................. [-30,000]
 160 RESET............................................................. 383,360 383,360
 170 US AFRICA COMMAND................................................. 385,685 543,835
 Commercial Satellite Communications (COMSATCOM)............... [16,750]
 Counter UAS--AFRICOM HQ....................................... [8,100]
 Counter Unmanned Aircraft Systems--AFRICOM UPL................ [8,500]
 Force Protection Systems--AFRICOM HQ.......................... [8,100]
 High Risk ISR--Processing, Exploitation and Dissemination [4,600]
 (PED).........................................................
 High Risk ISR--Security Programs - Aircraft Contract.......... [110,000]
 High Risk ISR--Security Programs - SATCOM Support............. [2,100]
 180 US EUROPEAN COMMAND............................................... 359,602 359,602
 190 US SOUTHERN COMMAND............................................... 204,336 204,336
 200 US FORCES KOREA................................................... 67,756 67,756
 210 CYBERSPACE ACTIVITIES--CYBERSPACE OPERATIONS...................... 495,066 495,066
 220 CYBERSPACE ACTIVITIES--CYBERSECURITY.............................. 673,701 683,701
 Certified remote access to enterprise applications............ [10,000]
 230 JOINT CYBER MISSION FORCES........................................ 178,033 178,033
 SUBTOTAL OPERATING FORCES..................................... 39,180,602 39,701,131

 MOBILIZATION
 240 STRATEGIC MOBILITY................................................ 434,423 498,423
 INDOPACOM Theater Campaigning................................. [104,000]
 Program decrease.............................................. [-40,000]
 250 ARMY PREPOSITIONED STOCKS......................................... 378,494 392,638
 APS 3/4....................................................... [14,144]
 260 INDUSTRIAL PREPAREDNESS........................................... 4,001 4,001
 SUBTOTAL MOBILIZATION......................................... 816,918 895,062

 TRAINING AND RECRUITING
 270 OFFICER ACQUISITION............................................... 173,439 173,439
 280 RECRUIT TRAINING.................................................. 78,826 78,826
 290 ONE STATION UNIT TRAINING......................................... 128,117 128,117
 300 SENIOR RESERVE OFFICERS TRAINING CORPS............................ 554,992 554,992
 310 SPECIALIZED SKILL TRAINING........................................ 1,115,045 1,115,045
 320 FLIGHT TRAINING................................................... 1,396,392 1,396,392
 330 PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT EDUCATION................................ 221,960 221,960
 340 TRAINING SUPPORT.................................................. 717,318 717,318
 350 RECRUITING AND ADVERTISING........................................ 691,053 691,053
 360 EXAMINING......................................................... 192,832 192,832
 370 OFF-DUTY AND VOLUNTARY EDUCATION.................................. 235,340 235,340
 380 CIVILIAN EDUCATION AND TRAINING................................... 251,378 251,378
 390 JUNIOR RESERVE OFFICER TRAINING CORPS............................. 196,088 196,088
 SUBTOTAL TRAINING AND RECRUITING.............................. 5,952,780 5,952,780

 ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES
 410 SERVICEWIDE TRANSPORTATION........................................ 662,083 622,083
 Program decrease.............................................. [-40,000]
 420 CENTRAL SUPPLY ACTIVITIES......................................... 822,018 812,018
 Program decrease.............................................. [-10,000]
 430 LOGISTIC SUPPORT ACTIVITIES....................................... 806,861 776,861
 Program decrease.............................................. [-30,000]
 440 AMMUNITION MANAGEMENT............................................. 483,187 483,187
 450 ADMINISTRATION.................................................... 486,154 436,154
 Program decrease.............................................. [-50,000]
 460 SERVICEWIDE COMMUNICATIONS........................................ 1,871,173 1,831,173
 Army Enterprise Service Management Program.................... [20,000]
 Program decrease.............................................. [-60,000]
 470 MANPOWER MANAGEMENT............................................... 344,668 344,668
 480 OTHER PERSONNEL SUPPORT........................................... 811,999 791,999
 Program decrease.............................................. [-20,000]
 490 OTHER SERVICE SUPPORT............................................. 2,267,280 2,272,280
 Advanced planning for infrastructure to support presence on [35,000]
 NATO's Eastern Flank..........................................
 Program decrease.............................................. [-30,000]
 500 ARMY CLAIMS ACTIVITIES............................................ 191,912 191,912
 510 REAL ESTATE MANAGEMENT............................................ 288,942 288,942
 520 FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND AUDIT READINESS.......................... 410,983 410,983
 530 DEF ACQUISITION WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT ACCOUNT..................... 38,714 38,714
 540 INTERNATIONAL MILITARY HEADQUARTERS............................... 532,377 532,377
 550 MISC. SUPPORT OF OTHER NATIONS.................................... 35,709 35,709
 590A CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS............................................... 2,113,196 2,138,296
 High Altitude Balloon......................................... [10,200]
 Hyperspectral Imagery (HSI) Sensor............................ [14,900]
 Program decrease.............................................. [-32,000]
 Program increase.............................................. [32,000]
 SUBTOTAL ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES........... 12,167,256 12,007,356

 TOTAL OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, ARMY.......................... 58,117,556 58,556,329

 OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, ARMY RES
 OPERATING FORCES
 010 MODULAR SUPPORT BRIGADES.......................................... 14,404 14,404
 020 ECHELONS ABOVE BRIGADE............................................ 662,104 662,104
 030 THEATER LEVEL ASSETS.............................................. 133,599 133,599
 040 LAND FORCES OPERATIONS SUPPORT.................................... 646,693 646,693
 050 AVIATION ASSETS................................................... 128,883 128,883
 060 FORCE READINESS OPERATIONS SUPPORT................................ 409,994 409,994
 070 LAND FORCES SYSTEMS READINESS..................................... 90,595 90,595
 080 LAND FORCES DEPOT MAINTENANCE..................................... 44,453 44,453
 090 BASE OPERATIONS SUPPORT........................................... 567,170 567,170
 100 FACILITIES SUSTAINMENT, RESTORATION & MODERNIZATION............... 358,772 390,192
 Program increase.............................................. [31,420]
 110 MANAGEMENT AND OPERATIONAL HEADQUARTERS........................... 22,112 22,112
 120 CYBERSPACE ACTIVITIES--CYBERSPACE OPERATIONS...................... 2,929 2,929
 130 CYBERSPACE ACTIVITIES--CYBERSECURITY.............................. 7,382 7,382
 SUBTOTAL OPERATING FORCES..................................... 3,089,090 3,120,510

 ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES
 140 SERVICEWIDE TRANSPORTATION........................................ 18,994 18,994
 150 ADMINISTRATION.................................................... 20,670 20,670
 160 SERVICEWIDE COMMUNICATIONS........................................ 31,652 31,652
 170 MANPOWER MANAGEMENT............................................... 6,852 6,852
 180 RECRUITING AND ADVERTISING........................................ 61,246 61,246
 SUBTOTAL ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES........... 139,414 139,414

 TOTAL OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, ARMY RES...................... 3,228,504 3,259,924

 OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, ARNG
 OPERATING FORCES
 010 MANEUVER UNITS.................................................... 964,237 987,237
 Northern Strike............................................... [23,000]
 020 MODULAR SUPPORT BRIGADES.......................................... 214,191 214,191
 030 ECHELONS ABOVE BRIGADE............................................ 820,752 820,752
 040 THEATER LEVEL ASSETS.............................................. 97,184 97,184
 050 LAND FORCES OPERATIONS SUPPORT.................................... 54,595 54,595
 060 AVIATION ASSETS................................................... 1,169,826 1,169,826
 070 FORCE READINESS OPERATIONS SUPPORT................................ 722,788 722,788
 080 LAND FORCES SYSTEMS READINESS..................................... 46,580 46,580
 090 LAND FORCES DEPOT MAINTENANCE..................................... 259,765 259,765
 100 BASE OPERATIONS SUPPORT........................................... 1,151,215 1,151,215
 110 FACILITIES SUSTAINMENT, RESTORATION & MODERNIZATION............... 1,053,996 1,141,385
 Program increase.............................................. [87,389]
 120 MANAGEMENT AND OPERATIONAL HEADQUARTERS........................... 1,148,286 1,148,286
 130 CYBERSPACE ACTIVITIES--CYBERSPACE OPERATIONS...................... 8,715 8,715
 140 CYBERSPACE ACTIVITIES--CYBERSECURITY.............................. 8,307 8,307
 SUBTOTAL OPERATING FORCES..................................... 7,720,437 7,830,826

 ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES
 150 SERVICEWIDE TRANSPORTATION........................................ 6,961 6,961
 160 ADMINISTRATION.................................................... 73,641 79,441
 State Partnership Program..................................... [5,800]
 170 SERVICEWIDE COMMUNICATIONS........................................ 100,389 100,389
 180 MANPOWER MANAGEMENT............................................... 9,231 9,231
 190 OTHER PERSONNEL SUPPORT........................................... 243,491 243,491
 200 REAL ESTATE MANAGEMENT............................................ 3,087 3,087
 SUBTOTAL ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES........... 436,800 442,600

 TOTAL OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, ARNG.......................... 8,157,237 8,273,426

 COUNTER ISIS TRAIN AND EQUIP FUND (CTEF)
 COUNTER ISIS TRAIN AND EQUIP FUND (CTEF)
 010 IRAQ.............................................................. 358,015 358,015
 020 SYRIA............................................................. 183,677 183,677
 SUBTOTAL COUNTER ISIS TRAIN AND EQUIP FUND (CTEF)............. 541,692 541,692

 TOTAL COUNTER ISIS TRAIN AND EQUIP FUND (CTEF)............... 541,692 541,692

 OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, NAVY
 OPERATING FORCES
 010 MISSION AND OTHER FLIGHT OPERATIONS............................... 7,334,452 7,393,452
 Costs associated with restoring 5 LCS......................... [6,000]
 PDI training requirements..................................... [57,000]
 Program decrease.............................................. [-4,000]
 020 FLEET AIR TRAINING................................................ 2,793,739 2,793,739
 030 AVIATION TECHNICAL DATA & ENGINEERING SERVICES.................... 65,248 65,248
 040 AIR OPERATIONS AND SAFETY SUPPORT................................. 214,767 214,767
 050 AIR SYSTEMS SUPPORT............................................... 1,075,365 1,075,365
 060 AIRCRAFT DEPOT MAINTENANCE........................................ 1,751,737 1,859,137
 Aircraft Depot Maintenance Events (Multiple Type/Model/Series) [107,100]
 Costs associated with restoring 5 LCS......................... [300]
 070 AIRCRAFT DEPOT OPERATIONS SUPPORT................................. 70,319 70,319
 080 AVIATION LOGISTICS................................................ 1,679,193 1,604,193
 Historical underexecution..................................... [-75,000]
 090 MISSION AND OTHER SHIP OPERATIONS................................. 6,454,952 6,524,952
 Costs associated with restoring 5 LCS......................... [10,400]
 Restore USS Ashland........................................... [14,400]
 Restore USS Germantown........................................ [14,400]
 Restore USS Gunston Hall...................................... [15,400]
 Restore USS Tortuga........................................... [15,400]
 100 SHIP OPERATIONS SUPPORT & TRAINING................................ 1,183,237 1,183,237
 110 SHIP DEPOT MAINTENANCE............................................ 10,038,261 10,321,061
 Costs associated with restoring 5 LCS......................... [90,000]
 Public Shipyard Tools, Test Equipment, and Machinery.......... [127,000]
 Restore USS Ashland........................................... [12,500]
 Restore USS Germantown........................................ [21,400]
 Restore USS Gunston Hall...................................... [12,700]
 Restore USS Tortuga........................................... [12,600]
 Restore USS Vicksburg......................................... [6,600]
 120 SHIP DEPOT OPERATIONS SUPPORT..................................... 2,422,095 2,841,595
 Restore USS Ashland........................................... [100,000]
 Restore USS Germantown........................................ [100,000]
 Restore USS Gunston Hall...................................... [100,000]
 Restore USS Tortuga........................................... [67,500]
 Restore USS Vicksburg......................................... [28,900]
 Ship Support--USFFC/CPF Berthing & Messing Shortfall.......... [23,100]
 130 COMBAT COMMUNICATIONS AND ELECTRONIC WARFARE...................... 1,632,824 1,568,324
 Historical underexecution..................................... [-65,000]
 Service Tactical SIGINT Upgrades--INDOPACOM UPL............... [500]
 140 SPACE SYSTEMS AND SURVEILLANCE.................................... 339,103 339,103
 150 WARFARE TACTICS................................................... 881,999 881,999
 160 OPERATIONAL METEOROLOGY AND OCEANOGRAPHY.......................... 444,150 444,150
 170 COMBAT SUPPORT FORCES............................................. 2,274,710 2,302,810
 Expeditionary VLS Reload System--Navy UPL..................... [100]
 Historical underexecution..................................... [-65,000]
 INDOPACOM Theater Campaigning................................. [100,000]
 Program decrease.............................................. [-7,000]
 180 EQUIPMENT MAINTENANCE AND DEPOT OPERATIONS SUPPORT................ 194,346 194,346
 190 CYBER MISSION FORCES.............................................. 101,049 101,049
 200 COMBATANT COMMANDERS CORE OPERATIONS.............................. 65,893 76,193
 Asia Pacific Regional Initiative.............................. [10,300]
 210 COMBATANT COMMANDERS DIRECT MISSION SUPPORT....................... 282,742 417,342
 Fusion Center................................................. [3,300]
 INDOPACOM Critical Manpower Positions......................... [2,700]
 INDOPACOM Theater Campaigning................................. [50,000]
 Joint Electro-Magnetic Spectrum Office (JEMSO)................ [5,400]
 Mission Partner Environment (MPE) Battlefield Information [5,300]
 Collection & Exploitation System-Extended (BICES-X)...........
 MSV--Carolyn Chouest.......................................... [12,500]
 Pacific Movement Coordination Center (PMCC)................... [2,400]
 Pacific Multi-Domain Training and Experimentation Capability [19,000]
 (PMTEC).......................................................
 Program increase.............................................. [12,000]
 STORMBREAKER.................................................. [22,000]
 230 CYBERSPACE ACTIVITIES............................................. 477,540 477,540
 240 FLEET BALLISTIC MISSILE........................................... 1,664,076 1,724,076
 Historical underexecution..................................... [-15,000]
 MQ-9B COCO.................................................... [75,000]
 250 WEAPONS MAINTENANCE............................................... 1,495,783 1,505,983
 Costs associated with restoring 5 LCS......................... [7,200]
 Historical underexecution..................................... [-20,000]
 SM-6 Expansion of Combat Usable Asset Inventory--Navy UPL..... [23,000]
 260 OTHER WEAPON SYSTEMS SUPPORT...................................... 649,371 634,371
 Historical underexecution..................................... [-15,000]
 270 ENTERPRISE INFORMATION............................................ 1,647,834 1,647,834
 280 SUSTAINMENT, RESTORATION AND MODERNIZATION........................ 3,549,311 3,974,311
 FSRM--AFFF Replacement Facilities............................. [34,000]
 FSRM--Red Hill................................................ [100,000]
 Program increase.............................................. [291,000]
 290 BASE OPERATING SUPPORT............................................ 5,503,088 5,501,088
 Base Operating Support for AFFF Replacement, mobile assets and [18,000]
 Disposal......................................................
 Historical underexecution..................................... [-20,000]
 SUBTOTAL OPERATING FORCES..................................... 56,287,184 57,737,584

 MOBILIZATION
 300 SHIP PREPOSITIONING AND SURGE..................................... 467,648 526,248
 ESD--restore 2 ships.......................................... [58,600]
 310 READY RESERVE FORCE............................................... 683,932 683,932
 320 SHIP ACTIVATIONS/INACTIVATIONS.................................... 364,096 356,596
 Costs associated with restoring 5 LCS......................... [7,500]
 Historical underexecution..................................... [-15,000]
 330 EXPEDITIONARY HEALTH SERVICES SYSTEMS............................. 133,780 133,780
 340 COAST GUARD SUPPORT............................................... 21,196 21,196
 SUBTOTAL MOBILIZATION......................................... 1,670,652 1,721,752

 TRAINING AND RECRUITING
 350 OFFICER ACQUISITION............................................... 190,578 190,578
 360 RECRUIT TRAINING.................................................. 14,679 14,679
 370 RESERVE OFFICERS TRAINING CORPS................................... 170,845 170,845
 380 SPECIALIZED SKILL TRAINING........................................ 1,133,889 1,118,889
 Historical underexecution..................................... [-15,000]
 390 PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT EDUCATION................................ 334,844 339,144
 Navy O&M Training and Recruiting (Sea Cadets)................. [4,300]
 400 TRAINING SUPPORT.................................................. 356,670 356,670
 410 RECRUITING AND ADVERTISING........................................ 204,498 204,498
 420 OFF-DUTY AND VOLUNTARY EDUCATION.................................. 89,971 89,971
 430 CIVILIAN EDUCATION AND TRAINING................................... 69,798 69,798
 440 JUNIOR ROTC....................................................... 55,194 55,194
 SUBTOTAL TRAINING AND RECRUITING.............................. 2,620,966 2,610,266

 ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES
 450 ADMINISTRATION.................................................... 1,349,966 1,279,966
 Historical underexecution..................................... [-60,000]
 Program decrease.............................................. [-10,000]
 460 CIVILIAN MANPOWER AND PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT........................ 227,772 227,772
 470 MILITARY MANPOWER AND PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT........................ 667,627 667,627
 480 MEDICAL ACTIVITIES................................................ 284,962 284,962
 490 DEF ACQUISITION WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT ACCOUNT..................... 62,824 62,824
 500 SERVICEWIDE TRANSPORTATION........................................ 207,501 207,501
 520 PLANNING, ENGINEERING, AND PROGRAM SUPPORT........................ 554,265 639,265
 Historical underexecution..................................... [-15,000]
 Red Hill Fuel Distribution Advanced Planning, Engineering, [100,000]
 Program Support...............................................
 530 ACQUISITION, LOGISTICS, AND OVERSIGHT............................. 798,473 783,473
 Historical underexecution..................................... [-15,000]
 540 INVESTIGATIVE AND SECURITY SERVICES............................... 791,059 791,059
 720A CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS............................................... 628,700 629,900
 Navy SCI Communications Modernization (Maritime Surveillance [1,200]
 Project)......................................................
 SUBTOTAL ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES........... 5,573,149 5,574,349

 TOTAL OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, NAVY.......................... 66,151,951 67,643,951

 OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, MARINE CORPS
 OPERATING FORCES
 010 OPERATIONAL FORCES................................................ 1,740,491 1,818,491
 INDOPACOM Theater Campaigning................................. [78,000]
 020 FIELD LOGISTICS................................................... 1,699,425 1,699,425
 030 DEPOT MAINTENANCE................................................. 221,886 221,886
 040 MARITIME PREPOSITIONING........................................... 139,518 139,518
 050 CYBER MISSION FORCES.............................................. 94,199 94,199
 060 CYBERSPACE ACTIVITIES............................................. 194,904 194,904
 070 SUSTAINMENT, RESTORATION & MODERNIZATION.......................... 1,292,219 1,667,219
 Program increase.............................................. [375,000]
 080 BASE OPERATING SUPPORT............................................ 2,699,487 2,680,487
 Historical underexecution..................................... [-15,000]
 Program decrease.............................................. [-4,000]
 SUBTOTAL OPERATING FORCES..................................... 8,082,129 8,516,129

 TRAINING AND RECRUITING
 090 RECRUIT TRAINING.................................................. 23,217 23,217
 100 OFFICER ACQUISITION............................................... 1,268 1,268
 110 SPECIALIZED SKILL TRAINING........................................ 118,638 118,638
 120 PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT EDUCATION................................ 64,626 64,626
 130 TRAINING SUPPORT.................................................. 523,603 523,603
 140 RECRUITING AND ADVERTISING........................................ 225,759 225,759
 150 OFF-DUTY AND VOLUNTARY EDUCATION.................................. 51,882 51,882
 160 JUNIOR ROTC....................................................... 27,660 27,660
 SUBTOTAL TRAINING AND RECRUITING.............................. 1,036,653 1,036,653

 ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES
 170 SERVICEWIDE TRANSPORTATION........................................ 78,542 78,542
 180 ADMINISTRATION.................................................... 401,030 401,030
 220A CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS............................................... 62,590 62,590
 SUBTOTAL ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES........... 542,162 542,162

 TOTAL OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, MARINE CORPS.................. 9,660,944 10,094,944

 OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, NAVY RES
 OPERATING FORCES
 010 MISSION AND OTHER FLIGHT OPERATIONS............................... 669,533 671,993
 Costs associated with restoring HSC-85 aircraft squadron...... [2,460]
 020 INTERMEDIATE MAINTENANCE.......................................... 11,134 11,134
 030 AIRCRAFT DEPOT MAINTENANCE........................................ 164,892 164,892
 040 AIRCRAFT DEPOT OPERATIONS SUPPORT................................. 494 494
 050 AVIATION LOGISTICS................................................ 25,843 25,843
 060 COMBAT COMMUNICATIONS............................................. 20,135 20,135
 070 COMBAT SUPPORT FORCES............................................. 131,104 131,104
 080 CYBERSPACE ACTIVITIES............................................. 289 289
 090 ENTERPRISE INFORMATION............................................ 27,189 27,189
 100 SUSTAINMENT, RESTORATION AND MODERNIZATION........................ 44,784 73,784
 Program increase.............................................. [29,000]
 110 BASE OPERATING SUPPORT............................................ 116,374 116,374
 SUBTOTAL OPERATING FORCES..................................... 1,211,771 1,243,231

 ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES
 120 ADMINISTRATION.................................................... 1,986 1,986
 130 MILITARY MANPOWER AND PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT........................ 12,550 12,550
 140 ACQUISITION AND PROGRAM MANAGEMENT................................ 1,993 1,993
 SUBTOTAL ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES........... 16,529 16,529

 TOTAL OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, NAVY RES...................... 1,228,300 1,259,760

 OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, MC RESERVE
 OPERATING FORCES
 010 OPERATING FORCES.................................................. 109,045 109,045
 020 DEPOT MAINTENANCE................................................. 19,361 19,361
 030 SUSTAINMENT, RESTORATION AND MODERNIZATION........................ 45,430 48,811
 Program increase.............................................. [3,381]
 040 BASE OPERATING SUPPORT............................................ 118,364 118,364
 SUBTOTAL OPERATING FORCES..................................... 292,200 295,581

 ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES
 050 ADMINISTRATION.................................................... 12,033 12,033
 SUBTOTAL ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES........... 12,033 12,033

 TOTAL OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, MC RESERVE.................... 304,233 307,614

 OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, AIR FORCE
 OPERATING FORCES
 010 PRIMARY COMBAT FORCES............................................. 936,731 846,731
 Historical underexecution..................................... [-150,000]
 Technical realignment......................................... [60,000]
 020 COMBAT ENHANCEMENT FORCES......................................... 2,657,865 2,587,865
 Program decrease.............................................. [-10,000]
 Technical realignment......................................... [-60,000]
 030 AIR OPERATIONS TRAINING (OJT, MAINTAIN SKILLS).................... 1,467,518 1,477,518
 Contract Adversary Air........................................ [10,000]
 040 DEPOT PURCHASE EQUIPMENT MAINTENANCE.............................. 4,341,794 4,700,594
 Historical underexecution..................................... [-20,000]
 Increase for Weapon System Sustainment........................ [378,800]
 050 FACILITIES SUSTAINMENT, RESTORATION & MODERNIZATION............... 4,091,088 4,479,488
 FSRM--AFFF Replacement Facilities/ assets..................... [75,000]
 Historical underexecution..................................... [-55,000]
 Program increase.............................................. [368,400]
 060 CYBERSPACE SUSTAINMENT............................................ 130,754 140,754
 PACAF cyber operations for base resilient architecture........ [10,000]
 070 CONTRACTOR LOGISTICS SUPPORT AND SYSTEM SUPPORT................... 8,782,940 8,712,940
 Historical underexecution..................................... [-70,000]
 080 FLYING HOUR PROGRAM............................................... 5,871,718 5,882,618
 Blk 20 F-22................................................... [10,900]
 090 BASE SUPPORT...................................................... 10,638,741 10,648,741
 Base Operating Support for AFFF Replacement, mobile assets, [10,000]
 and Disposal..................................................
 100 GLOBAL C3I AND EARLY WARNING...................................... 1,035,043 1,042,174
 Technical realignment......................................... [7,131]
 110 OTHER COMBAT OPS SPT PROGRAMS..................................... 1,436,329 1,350,129
 Engaging on Western Hemisphere Challenges and Interoperability [3,800]
 with Partner Nations..........................................
 Historical underexecution..................................... [-90,000]
 120 CYBERSPACE ACTIVITIES............................................. 716,931 736,931
 Command and control of the information environment............ [20,000]
 140 LAUNCH FACILITIES................................................. 690 690
 160 US NORTHCOM/NORAD................................................. 197,210 197,210
 170 US STRATCOM....................................................... 503,419 503,419
 180 US CYBERCOM....................................................... 436,807 580,107
 CMF Operational Support--CYBERCOM UPL......................... [148,300]
 Technical realignment......................................... [-5,000]
 190 US CENTCOM........................................................ 331,162 331,162
 200 US SOCOM.......................................................... 27,318 27,318
 220 CENTCOM CYBERSPACE SUSTAINMENT.................................... 1,367 1,367
 230 USSPACECOM........................................................ 329,543 338,043
 National Space Defense Center Interim Facility................ [8,500]
 240 JOINT CYBER MISSION FORCE PROGRAMS................................ 186,759 191,759
 Technical realignment......................................... [5,000]
 240A CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS............................................... 1,705,801 1,705,801
 SUBTOTAL OPERATING FORCES..................................... 45,827,528 46,483,359

 MOBILIZATION
 250 AIRLIFT OPERATIONS................................................ 2,780,616 2,885,316
 INDOPACOM Theater Campaigning................................. [104,700]
 260 MOBILIZATION PREPAREDNESS......................................... 721,172 671,172
 Historical underexecution..................................... [-50,000]
 SUBTOTAL MOBILIZATION......................................... 3,501,788 3,556,488

 TRAINING AND RECRUITING
 270 OFFICER ACQUISITION............................................... 189,721 189,721
 280 RECRUIT TRAINING.................................................. 26,684 26,684
 290 RESERVE OFFICERS TRAINING CORPS (ROTC)............................ 135,515 135,515
 300 SPECIALIZED SKILL TRAINING........................................ 541,511 541,511
 310 FLIGHT TRAINING................................................... 779,625 866,777
 Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS) training.......... [87,152]
 320 PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT EDUCATION................................ 313,556 313,556
 330 TRAINING SUPPORT.................................................. 171,087 171,087
 340 RECRUITING AND ADVERTISING........................................ 197,956 197,956
 350 EXAMINING......................................................... 8,282 8,282
 360 OFF-DUTY AND VOLUNTARY EDUCATION.................................. 254,907 254,907
 370 CIVILIAN EDUCATION AND TRAINING................................... 355,375 355,375
 380 JUNIOR ROTC....................................................... 69,964 69,964
 SUBTOTAL TRAINING AND RECRUITING.............................. 3,044,183 3,131,335

 ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES
 390 LOGISTICS OPERATIONS.............................................. 1,058,129 1,058,129
 400 TECHNICAL SUPPORT ACTIVITIES...................................... 139,428 139,428
 410 ADMINISTRATION.................................................... 1,283,066 1,195,915
 Program decrease.............................................. [-87,152]
 420 SERVICEWIDE COMMUNICATIONS........................................ 33,222 33,222
 430 OTHER SERVICEWIDE ACTIVITIES...................................... 1,790,985 1,810,985
 Advanced planning for infrastructure to support presence on [20,000]
 NATO's Eastern Flank..........................................
 440 CIVIL AIR PATROL.................................................. 30,526 30,526
 460 DEF ACQUISITION WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT ACCOUNT..................... 42,558 42,558
 480 INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT............................................. 102,065 102,065
 480A CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS............................................... 1,427,764 1,427,764
 SUBTOTAL ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES........... 5,907,743 5,840,592

 TOTAL OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, AIR FORCE..................... 58,281,242 59,011,773

 OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, SPACE FORCE
 OPERATING FORCES
 010 GLOBAL C3I & EARLY WARNING........................................ 472,484 472,484
 020 SPACE LAUNCH OPERATIONS........................................... 187,832 187,832
 030 SPACE OPERATIONS.................................................. 695,228 702,228
 Digital Mission Operations Platform for the Space Force....... [7,000]
 040 EDUCATION & TRAINING.............................................. 153,135 153,135
 060 DEPOT MAINTENANCE................................................. 285,863 285,863
 070 FACILITIES SUSTAINMENT, RESTORATION & MODERNIZATION............... 235,253 260,653
 Program increase.............................................. [25,400]
 080 CONTRACTOR LOGISTICS AND SYSTEM SUPPORT........................... 1,358,565 1,328,565
 Program decrease.............................................. [-30,000]
 090 SPACE OPERATIONS -BOS............................................. 144,937 144,937
 090A CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS............................................... 272,941 272,941
 SUBTOTAL OPERATING FORCES..................................... 3,806,238 3,808,638

 ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES
 100 ADMINISTRATION.................................................... 228,420 194,687
 Technical realignment......................................... [-33,733]
 110 LOGISTICS OPERATIONS.............................................. 33,733
 Technical realignment......................................... [33,733]
 SUBTOTAL ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES........... 228,420 228,420

 TOTAL OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, SPACE FORCE................... 4,034,658 4,037,058

 OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, AF RESERVE
 OPERATING FORCES
 010 PRIMARY COMBAT FORCES............................................. 1,743,908 1,743,908
 020 MISSION SUPPORT OPERATIONS........................................ 193,568 193,568
 030 DEPOT PURCHASE EQUIPMENT MAINTENANCE.............................. 493,664 493,664
 040 FACILITIES SUSTAINMENT, RESTORATION & MODERNIZATION............... 133,782 145,282
 Program increase.............................................. [11,500]
 050 CONTRACTOR LOGISTICS SUPPORT AND SYSTEM SUPPORT................... 341,724 341,724
 060 BASE SUPPORT...................................................... 522,195 522,195
 070 CYBERSPACE ACTIVITIES............................................. 1,706 1,706
 SUBTOTAL OPERATING FORCES..................................... 3,430,547 3,442,047

 ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES
 080 ADMINISTRATION.................................................... 102,038 102,038
 090 RECRUITING AND ADVERTISING........................................ 9,057 9,057
 100 MILITARY MANPOWER AND PERS MGMT (ARPC)............................ 14,896 14,896
 110 OTHER PERS SUPPORT (DISABILITY COMP).............................. 7,544 7,544
 120 AUDIOVISUAL....................................................... 462 462
 SUBTOTAL ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES........... 133,997 133,997

 TOTAL OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, AF RESERVE.................... 3,564,544 3,576,044

 OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, ANG
 OPERATING FORCES
 010 AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS............................................... 2,301,784 2,301,784
 020 MISSION SUPPORT OPERATIONS........................................ 587,793 587,793
 030 DEPOT PURCHASE EQUIPMENT MAINTENANCE.............................. 1,193,699 1,193,699
 040 FACILITIES SUSTAINMENT, RESTORATION & MODERNIZATION............... 437,042 474,142
 Program increase.............................................. [37,100]
 050 CONTRACTOR LOGISTICS SUPPORT AND SYSTEM SUPPORT................... 1,284,264 1,284,264
 060 BASE SUPPORT...................................................... 967,169 967,169
 070 CYBERSPACE SUSTAINMENT............................................ 12,661 80,161
 Information Technology and JWICS capacity..................... [67,500]
 080 CYBERSPACE ACTIVITIES............................................. 15,886 15,886
 SUBTOTAL OPERATING FORCES..................................... 6,800,298 6,904,898

 ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES
 090 ADMINISTRATION.................................................... 52,075 54,375
 State Partnership Program..................................... [2,300]
 100 RECRUITING AND ADVERTISING........................................ 48,306 48,306
 SUBTOTAL ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES........... 100,381 102,681

 TOTAL OPERATION & MAINTENANCE, ANG........................... 6,900,679 7,007,579

 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, DEFENSE-WIDE
 OPERATING FORCES
 010 JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF............................................. 445,366 325,366
 Program decrease.............................................. [-120,000]
 020 JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF--CYBER...................................... 9,887 9,887
 030 JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF--JTEEP...................................... 679,336 479,336
 Program decrease.............................................. [-200,000]
 040 OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE--MISO.......................... 246,259 273,759
 United States Indo-Pacific Command-MISO....................... [27,500]
 050 SPECIAL OPERATIONS COMMAND COMBAT DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES.......... 2,056,291 2,056,606
 Low Visibility Vanishing Technology (LVVT).................... [315]
 060 SPECIAL OPERATIONS COMMAND CYBERSPACE ACTIVITIES.................. 39,178 39,178
 070 SPECIAL OPERATIONS COMMAND INTELLIGENCE........................... 1,513,025 1,534,325
 Counter Unmanned Systems (CUxS) Procurement Acceleration...... [10,400]
 Identity and Signature Management Modernization............... [10,900]
 Restore PB (U-28)............................................. [3,000]
 U-28A......................................................... [-3,000]
 080 SPECIAL OPERATIONS COMMAND MAINTENANCE............................ 1,207,842 1,236,195
 Advanced Engine Performance and Restoration Program (Nucleated [3,000]
 Foam).........................................................
 C-130J Power by the Hour (PBTH) CLS........................... [21,620]
 Combatant Craft Medium (CCM) Loss Refurbishment............... [4,250]
 Counter Unmanned Systems (CUxS) Procurement Acceleration...... [5,353]
 Maintenance................................................... [-5,000]
 MQ-9 Mallett reprogramming.................................... [-5,870]
 Program increase.............................................. [5,000]
 090 SPECIAL OPERATIONS COMMAND MANAGEMENT/OPERATIONAL HEADQUARTERS.... 196,271 196,271
 100 SPECIAL OPERATIONS COMMAND OPERATIONAL SUPPORT.................... 1,299,309 1,340,409
 Advana Authoritative Data Management and Analytics............ [8,000]
 ARSOF Information Advantage Acceleration...................... [11,500]
 Enterprise Data Stewardship Program........................... [18,000]
 Identity and Signature Management Modernization............... [3,600]
 Operational Support........................................... [-7,000]
 Program increase.............................................. [7,000]
 110 SPECIAL OPERATIONS COMMAND THEATER FORCES......................... 3,314,770 3,348,481
 Combat Aviation Advisor mission support....................... [18,000]
 Non-Traditional ISR........................................... [10,000]
 Tactical Mission Network Digital Force Protection............. [5,711]
 SUBTOTAL OPERATING FORCES..................................... 11,007,534 10,839,813

 TRAINING AND RECRUITING
 120 DEFENSE ACQUISITION UNIVERSITY.................................... 176,454 176,454
 130 JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF............................................. 101,492 101,492
 140 SPECIAL OPERATIONS COMMAND/PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT EDUCATION..... 35,279 35,279
 SUBTOTAL TRAINING AND RECRUITING.............................. 313,225 313,225

 ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES
 150 CIVIL MILITARY PROGRAMS........................................... 139,656 273,156
 National Guard Youth Challenge................................ [83,500]
 STARBASE...................................................... [50,000]
 170 DEFENSE CONTRACT AUDIT AGENCY..................................... 646,072 636,072
 Program decrease.............................................. [-10,000]
 180 DEFENSE CONTRACT AUDIT AGENCY--CYBER.............................. 4,107 4,107
 190 DEFENSE CONTRACT MANAGEMENT AGENCY................................ 1,506,300 1,474,300
 Program decrease.............................................. [-32,000]
 200 DEFENSE CONTRACT MANAGEMENT AGENCY--CYBER......................... 29,127 24,127
 Early to need................................................. [-5,000]
 210 DEFENSE COUNTERINTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY AGENCY................... 983,133 983,133
 230 DEFENSE COUNTERINTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY AGENCY--CYBER............ 10,245 10,245
 240 DEFENSE HUMAN RESOURCES ACTIVITY.................................. 935,241 791,241
 National Language Fellowship Add.............................. [6,000]
 Program decrease.............................................. [-150,000]
 250 DEFENSE HUMAN RESOURCES ACTIVITY--CYBER........................... 26,113 26,113
 260 DEFENSE INFORMATION SYSTEMS AGENCY................................ 2,266,729 2,266,729
 270 DEFENSE INFORMATION SYSTEMS AGENCY--CYBER......................... 643,643 663,643
 Internet Operations Management................................ [20,000]
 300 DEFENSE LEGAL SERVICES AGENCY..................................... 233,687 223,687
 Program decrease.............................................. [-10,000]
 310 DEFENSE LOGISTICS AGENCY.......................................... 429,060 429,060
 320 DEFENSE MEDIA ACTIVITY............................................ 243,631 198,631
 Program decrease.............................................. [-50,000]
 Web Enterprise Business....................................... [5,000]
 330 DEFENSE POW/MIA OFFICE............................................ 150,021 150,021
 340 DEFENSE SECURITY COOPERATION AGENCY............................... 2,445,669 2,282,669
 Baltic Security Initiative.................................... [225,000]
 International Security Cooperation Programs................... [100,000]
 Offset for Baltic Security Initiative......................... [-225,000]
 Program increase.............................................. [37,000]
 Transfer to Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative............ [-300,000]
 350 DEFENSE TECHNOLOGY SECURITY ADMINISTRATION........................ 40,063 40,063
 360 DEFENSE THREAT REDUCTION AGENCY................................... 941,763 741,763
 Program decrease.............................................. [-200,000]
 380 DEFENSE THREAT REDUCTION AGENCY--CYBER............................ 56,052 56,052
 390 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE EDUCATION ACTIVITY.......................... 3,276,276 3,351,276
 Department of Defense Education Activity (Impact Aid Students [22,000]
 with Disabilities)............................................
 Department of Defense Education Activity (Impact Aid)......... [53,000]
 400 MISSILE DEFENSE AGENCY............................................ 541,787 541,787
 430 OFFICE OF THE LOCAL DEFENSE COMMUNITY COOPERATION................. 108,697 128,697
 Defense Community Infrastructure Program...................... [20,000]
 440 OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE................................ 2,239,072 1,328,008
 Afghanistan War Commission.................................... [2,500]
 AHI cross-functional team..................................... [10,000]
 Center for Excellence in Civilian Harm Mitigation............. [5,000]
 Commission on Civilian Harm................................... [4,000]
 Commission on Professional Military Education................. [5,000]
 Commission on the National Defense Strategy................... [2,900]
 Congressional Commission on the Strategic Posture of the [2,800]
 United States.................................................
 Dellums Scholarship program................................... [5,000]
 Executive Education on Emerging Technologies for Civilian and [3,500]
 Military Leaders..............................................
 Information Assurance Scholarship Program..................... [25,000]
 National Commission on the Future of the Navy................. [4,000]
 National Security Commission on Emerging Biotechnology........ [5,600]
 Office of the Secretary of Defense- ASD EI+E Personnel........ [1,000]
 Pilot Program on Financial Assistance for Victims of Domestic [5,000]
 Violence......................................................
 PPBE Commission............................................... [3,800]
 Program decrease.............................................. [-774,675]
 Readiness Environmental Protection Integration Program........ [6,000]
 Red teams..................................................... [1,000]
 Unjustified growth............................................ [-228,489]
 450 OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE--CYBER......................... 55,255 55,255
 500 WASHINGTON HEADQUARTERS SERVICES.................................. 369,943 347,943
 Program decrease.............................................. [-22,000]
 500A CLASSIFIED PROGRAMS............................................... 18,764,415 18,814,215
 Classified adjustment......................................... [12,100]
 Defense Cover Program......................................... [10,000]
 ICASS humint mission support.................................. [9,000]
 Joint Worldwide Intelligence Communications System (JWICS) [12,000]
 Modernization.................................................
 MARS Advanced Capabilities.................................... [1,300]
 TORCH--Enterprise IT.......................................... [5,400]
 SUBTOTAL ADMINISTRATION AND SERVICE-WIDE ACTIVITIES........... 37,085,757 35,841,993

 UNDISTRIBUTED
 510 UNDISTRIBUTED..................................................... -760,000
 Civilian Personnel inflation pay.............................. [60,000]
 Foreign currency fluctuations................................. [-450,000]
 Historical unobligated balances............................... [-370,000]
 SUBTOTAL UNDISTRIBUTED........................................ -760,000

 TOTAL OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE, DEFENSE-WIDE................ 48,406,516 46,235,031

 UKRAINE SECURITY ASSISTANCE
 010 UKRAINE SECURITY ASSISTANCE INITIATIVE............................ 1,000,000
 Program increase.............................................. [700,000]
 Transfer from Defense Security Cooperation Agency............. [300,000]
 SUBTOTAL UKRAINE SECURITY ASSISTANCE.......................... 1,000,000

 TOTAL UKRAINE SECURITY ASSISTANCE............................ 1,000,000

 SEIZE THE INITIATIVE FUND
 010 SEIZE THE INITIATIVE FUND......................................... 1,000,000
 Program increase.............................................. [1,000,000]
 SUBTOTAL SEIZE THE INITIATIVE FUND............................ 1,000,000

 TOTAL SEIZE THE INITIATIVE FUND.............................. 1,000,000

 US COURT OF APPEALS FOR ARMED FORCES, DEF
 ADMINISTRATION AND ASSOCIATED ACTIVITIES
 010 US COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE ARMED FORCES, DEFENSE................. 16,003 16,003
 SUBTOTAL ADMINISTRATION AND ASSOCIATED ACTIVITIES............. 16,003 16,003

 TOTAL US COURT OF APPEALS FOR ARMED FORCES, DEF.............. 16,003 16,003

 DOD ACQUISITION WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT FUND
 ACQUISITION WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT
 010 ACQ WORKFORCE DEV FD.............................................. 53,791 53,791
 SUBTOTAL ACQUISITION WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT.................... 53,791 53,791

 TOTAL DOD ACQUISITION WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT FUND............. 53,791 53,791

 OVERSEAS HUMANITARIAN, DISASTER, AND CIVIC AID
 HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE
 010 OVERSEAS HUMANITARIAN, DISASTER AND CIVIC AID..................... 112,800 152,800
 Program increase.............................................. [40,000]
 SUBTOTAL HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE.............................. 112,800 152,800

 TOTAL OVERSEAS HUMANITARIAN, DISASTER, AND CIVIC AID......... 112,800 152,800

 COOPERATIVE THREAT REDUCTION ACCOUNT
 010 COOPERATIVE THREAT REDUCTION...................................... 341,598 341,598
 SUBTOTAL COOPERATIVE THREAT REDUCTION......................... 341,598 341,598

 TOTAL COOPERATIVE THREAT REDUCTION ACCOUNT................... 341,598 341,598

 ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION, ARMY
 DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
 050 ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION, ARMY................................... 196,244 196,244
 SUBTOTAL DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY............................... 196,244 196,244

 TOTAL ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION, ARMY........................ 196,244 196,244

 ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION, NAVY
 DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY
 060 ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION, NAVY................................... 359,348 1,089,348
 Program increase.............................................. [30,000]
 Red Hill...................................................... [700,000]
 SUBTOTAL DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY............................... 359,348 1,089,348

 TOTAL ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION, NAVY........................ 359,348 1,089,348

 ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION, AIR FORCE
 DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE
 070 ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION, AIR FORCE.............................. 314,474 344,474
 Program increase.............................................. [30,000]
 SUBTOTAL DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE.......................... 314,474 344,474

 TOTAL ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION, AIR FORCE................... 314,474 344,474

 ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION, DEFENSE
 DEFENSE-WIDE
 080 ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION, DEFENSE................................ 8,924 33,924
 FUDS--Military Munitions Response Program..................... [25,000]
 SUBTOTAL DEFENSE-WIDE......................................... 8,924 33,924

 TOTAL ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION, DEFENSE..................... 8,924 33,924

 ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION FORMERLY USED SITES
 DEFENSE-WIDE
 090 ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION FORMERLY USED SITES..................... 227,262 227,262
 SUBTOTAL DEFENSE-WIDE......................................... 227,262 227,262

 TOTAL ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION FORMERLY USED SITES.......... 227,262 227,262

 SUPPORT FOR INTERNATIONAL SPORTING COMPETITIONS , DEFENSE
 OPERATIONS SUPPORT
 100 SUPPORT OF INTERNATIONAL SPORTING COMPETITIONS, DEFENSE........... 10,377 10,377
 SUBTOTAL OPERATIONS SUPPORT................................... 10,377 10,377

 TOTAL SUPPORT FOR INTERNATIONAL SPORTING COMPETITIONS , 10,377 10,377
 DEFENSE......................................................

 RED HILL RECOVERY FUND
 010 RED HILL RECOVERY FUND............................................ 1,000,000 0
 Realignment to execution accounts............................. [-1,000,000]
 SUBTOTAL RED HILL RECOVERY FUND............................... 1,000,000 0

 TOTAL RED HILL RECOVERY FUND................................. 1,000,000 0

 TOTAL OPERATION & MAINTENANCE................................ 271,218,877 274,270,946
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 TITLE XLIV--MILITARY PERSONNEL

SEC. 4401. MILITARY PERSONNEL.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
 SEC. 4401. MILITARY PERSONNEL (In Thousands of Dollars)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 FY 2023 House
 Item Request Authorized
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Military Personnel.................... 164,139,628 164,792,801
 Inflation bonus pay.............. [800,000]
 BAH Absorption Restoration (1%).. [244,000]
 Additional BAH Absorption [250,000]
 Restoration (2%).................
 Military Personnel, Navy--Restore [190,000]
 Navy Force Structure Cuts
 (Manpower).......................
 Military Personnel, Navy--Restore [19,173]
 Personnel for HSC-85 Aircraft
 (Manpower).......................
 Military personnel historical [-700,000]
 underexecution...................
 Foreign currency fluctuations.... [-150,000]
MERHCF................................ 9,743,704 9,743,704
------------------------------------------------------------------------

 TITLE XLV--OTHER AUTHORIZATIONS

SEC. 4501. OTHER AUTHORIZATIONS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
 SEC. 4501. OTHER AUTHORIZATIONS (In Thousands of Dollars)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 FY 2023 House
 Item Request Authorized
------------------------------------------------------------------------
NATIONAL DEFENSE STOCKPILE TRANSACTION
 FUND
DEFENSE STOCKPILE....................... 253,500 253,500
 TOTAL NATIONAL DEFENSE STOCKPILE 253,500 253,500
 TRANSACTION FUND.....................

WORKING CAPITAL FUND, ARMY
ARMY ARSENALS INITIATIVE................ 28,448 28,448
ARMY SUPPLY MANAGEMENT.................. 1,489 1,489
 TOTAL WORKING CAPITAL FUND, ARMY..... 29,937 29,937

WORKING CAPITAL FUND, AIR FORCE
TRANSPORTATION
SUPPLIES AND MATERIALS.................. 80,448 80,448
 TOTAL WORKING CAPITAL FUND, AIR FORCE 80,448 80,448

WORKING CAPITAL FUND, DEFENSE-WIDE
DEFENSE AUTOMATION & PRODUCTION SERVICES 2 2
WORKING CAPITAL FUND SUPPORT............ 8,300 2,508,300
 Fuel inflation..................... [2,500,000]
 TOTAL WORKING CAPITAL FUND, DEFENSE- 8,302 2,508,302
 WIDE.................................

WORKING CAPITAL FUND, DECA
WORKING CAPITAL FUND SUPPORT............ 1,211,208 1,961,208
 Program increase................... [750,000]
 TOTAL WORKING CAPITAL FUND, DECA..... 1,211,208 1,961,208

CHEM AGENTS & MUNITIONS DESTRUCTION
CHEM DEMILITARIZATION--O&M.............. 84,612 84,612
CHEM DEMILITARIZATION--RDT&E............ 975,206 975,206
 TOTAL CHEM AGENTS & MUNITIONS 1,059,818 1,059,818
 DESTRUCTION..........................

DRUG INTERDICTION & CTR-DRUG ACTIVITIES,
 DEF
COUNTER-NARCOTICS SUPPORT............... 619,474 627,716
 JIATF-W............................ [8,242]
DRUG DEMAND REDUCTION PROGRAM........... 130,060 134,060
 Young Marines Program.............. [4,000]
NATIONAL GUARD COUNTER-DRUG PROGRAM..... 100,316 100,316
NATIONAL GUARD COUNTER-DRUG SCHOOLS..... 5,878 5,878
 TOTAL DRUG INTERDICTION & CTR-DRUG 855,728 867,970
 ACTIVITIES, DEF......................

OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL
OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL--O&M.... 474,650 474,650
OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL--CYBER.. 1,321 1,321
OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL--RDT&E.. 1,864 1,864
OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL-- 1,524 1,524
 PROCUREMENT............................
 TOTAL OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL 479,359 479,359

DEFENSE HEALTH PROGRAM
IN-HOUSE CARE........................... 9,906,943 10,006,943
 TRICARE Dental for Selected Reserve [100,000]
PRIVATE SECTOR CARE..................... 18,455,209 18,455,209
CONSOLIDATED HEALTH SUPPORT............. 1,916,366 1,916,366
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT.................. 2,251,151 2,251,151
MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES................... 338,678 338,678
EDUCATION AND TRAINING.................. 334,845 341,845
 TriService Nursing Research Program [7,000]
BASE OPERATIONS/COMMUNICATIONS.......... 2,111,558 2,111,558
R&D RESEARCH............................ 39,568 39,568
R&D EXPLORATRY DEVELOPMENT.............. 175,477 175,477
R&D ADVANCED DEVELOPMENT................ 320,862 320,862
R&D DEMONSTRATION/VALIDATION............ 166,960 166,960
R&D ENGINEERING DEVELOPMENT............. 103,970 103,970
R&D MANAGEMENT AND SUPPORT.............. 85,186 85,186
R&D CAPABILITIES ENHANCEMENT............ 17,971 47,971
 National Disaster Medical Surge [20,000]
 Pilot and Implementation...........
 Warfighting Brain Initiative....... [10,000]
PROC INITIAL OUTFITTING................. 21,625 21,625
PROC REPLACEMENT & MODERNIZATION........ 234,157 234,157
PROC JOINT OPERATIONAL MEDICINE 1,467 1,467
 INFORMATION SYSTEM.....................
PROC MILITARY HEALTH SYSTEM--DESKTOP TO 72,601 72,601
 DATACENTER.............................
PROC DOD HEALTHCARE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 240,224 240,224
 MODERNIZATION..........................
SOFTWARE & DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY PILOT 137,356 137,356
 PROGRAMS...............................
 TOTAL DEFENSE HEALTH PROGRAM......... 36,932,174 37,069,174

 TOTAL OTHER AUTHORIZATIONS........... 40,910,474 44,309,716
------------------------------------------------------------------------

 TITLE XLVI--MILITARY CONSTRUCTION

SEC. 4601. MILITARY CONSTRUCTION.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 SEC. 4601. MILITARY CONSTRUCTION (In Thousands of Dollars)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 State/Country and FY 2023 House
 Account Installation Project Title Request Agreement
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Alabama
Army Anniston Army Depot General Purpose Warehouse. 0 2,400
Army Redstone Arsenal Physics Lab............... 0 44,000
 California
Army Air Force Training Planning and Design 0 650
 Center Edwards Munitions Igloo--East.
 Colorado
Army Fort Carson Fire Station Support 14,200 14,200
 Building.
 Germany
Army East Camp Grafenwoehr EDI: Battalion Trng Cplx1 104,000 104,000
 (Brks/Veh Maint).
Army East Camp Grafenwoehr EDI: Battalion Trng Cplx2 64,000 64,000
 (OPS/Veh Maint).
 Hawaii
Army Tripler Army Medical Water System Upgrades..... 0 2,000
 Center
Army Fort Shafter Water System Upgrades..... 0 2,000
 Kwajalein
Army Kwajalein Atoll Medical Clinic............ 69,000 69,000
 Louisiana
Army Fort Polk, Louisiana Child Development Center.. 32,000 32,000
Army Fort Polk, Louisiana Joint Operations Center... 0 61,000
 Maryland
Army Aberdeen Proving Test Maintenance 0 85,000
 Ground Fabrication Facility.
Army Aberdeen Proving Test Maintenance 0 7,600
 Ground Fabrication Facility Cost
 to Complete.
 Mississippi
Army Vicksburg General Purpose Lab and 0 20,000
 Test Building.
 New Jersey
Army Picatinny Arsenal Igloo Storage Installation 0 12,000
Army Picatinny Arsenal Precision Munitions Test 0 3,654
 Tower.
 New York
Army U.S. Military Academy Engineering Center........ 39,800 39,800
Army Fort Drum Automated Record Fire Plus 0 2,400
 Range.
 North Carolina
Army Fort Bragg Multipurpose Training 34,000 34,000
 Range.
 Pennsylvania
Army Letterkenny Army Depot Shipping and Receiving 38,000 38,000
 Building.
 Texas
Army Fort Hood Barracks.................. 0 19,000
Army Fort Hood Automated Infantry Platoon 0 1,220
 Battle Course.
Army Fort Hood Automated Machine Gun 0 1,240
 Range.
Army Fort Hood Infantry Squad Battle 0 600
 Course.
Army Corpus Christi Army Powertrain Facility 103,000 83,000
 Depot (Engine Assembly).
Army Fort Bliss Fire Station.............. 15,000 15,000
 Washington
Army Joint Base Lewis- Barracks.................. 49,000 49,000
 McChord
 Worldwide Unspecified
Army Unspecified Worldwide Host Nation Support....... 26,000 26,000
 Locations
Army Unspecified Worldwide Planning and Design....... 167,151 167,151
 Locations
Army Unspecified Worldwide Unspecified Minor 90,414 90,414
 Locations Construction.
Army Various Worldwide Cost to Complete- 0 502,900
 Locations Inflation Adjustment.
 ........................
 Military Construction, Army Total 845,565 1,593,229
 ......................
 Alabama
Navy Redstone Arsenal Building 6231............. 0 6,000
 Australia
Navy Royal Australian Air PDI: Aircraft Parking 72,446 72,446
 Force Base Darwin Apron (Inc).
 California
Navy Corona Performance Assessment 0 15,000
 Communications Laboratory.
Navy Corona Planning and Design Data 0 2,845
 Science Analytics and
 Innovation.
Navy Marine Corps Base Camp Basilone Road Realignment. 85,210 85,210
 Pendleton
Navy Naval Air Station F-35C Aircraft Maintenance 201,261 43,261
 Lemoore Hangar & Airfield Pave.
Navy Naval Base Point Loma Child Development Center.. 56,450 56,450
 Annex
Navy Naval Base San Diego Pier 6 Replacement (Inc).. 15,565 15,565
Navy Marine Corps Air Range Simulation Training 120,382 11,382
 Ground Combat Center & Operations Fac..
 Twentynine Palms
 Connecticut
Navy Naval Submarine Base Relocate Underwater 15,514 15,514
 New London Electromagnetic Measure..
 Florida
Navy Naval Air Station Engine Test Cells 86,232 86,232
 Jacksonville Modifications.
Navy Marine Corps Support Communications 0 5,291
 Facility Blount Infrastructure
 Island Modernization Design.
Navy Naval Air Station AHTS Aircraft Flight 57,789 57,789
 Whiting Field Simulator Facility.
 Georgia
Navy Naval Submarine Base Nuclear Regional 213,796 213,796
 Kings Bay Maintenance Facility.
Navy Naval Submarine Base Trident Training Fac. 65,375 65,375
 Kings Bay Columbia Trainer Expan..
 Guam
Navy Marine Corps Base Camp PDI: 9th Eng Supp 131,590 48,590
 Blaz Battalion Equip & Main
 Fac.
Navy Marine Corps Base Camp PDI: 9th Engineer Support 35,188 35,188
 Blaz Battalion Ops. Fac..
Navy Marine Corps Base Camp PDI: Brown Tree Snake 14,497 14,497
 Blaz Exclusion Barrier South.
Navy Marine Corps Base Camp PDI: Ground Combat Element 149,314 79,314
 Blaz Infantry Battalion 1 & 2
 Facility.
 Hawaii
Navy Marine Corps Base Bachelor Enslisted 0 87,930
 Kaneohe Bay Quarters (P-973).
Navy Joint Base Pearl Dry Dock 3 Replacement 621,185 621,185
 Harbor-Hickam (Inc).
 Idaho
Navy Carderock Planning and Design ARD 0 706
 Range Craft Berthing
 Facility.
 Japan
Navy Kadena Air Base PDI: Marine Corps Bachelor 94,100 34,100
 Enlisted Quarters.
Navy Kadena Air Base PDI: Marine Corps Barracks 101,300 101,300
 Complex, Kadena.
 Maine
Navy Kittery Multi-Mission Drydock #1 503,282 503,282
 Extension (Inc).
 Maryland
Navy Carderock SFOMF Storage Laboratory.. 0 2,073
Navy Carderock Planning and Design Ship 0 2,650
 Systems Integration and
 Design Facility.
Navy Indian Head EOD Explosive Testing 0 2,039
 Range 2 Expansion at SN,
 Building 2107.
Navy Indian Head New Combustion Laboratory. 0 6,000
Navy Indian Head Planning and Design 0 5,650
 Contained Burn Facility.
Navy Naval Surface Warfare Contained Burn Facility... 0 4,750
 Center Indian Head
 Nevada
Navy Naval Air Station F-35C Aircraft Maintenance 97,865 37,865
 Fallon Hangar.
 North Carolina
Navy Marine Corps Base Camp Regional Communications 47,475 47,475
 Lejeune Station, Hadnot Point.
Navy Marine Corps Air Aircraft Maintenance 106,000 91,000
 Station Cherry Point Hangar (Inc).
Navy Marine Corps Air CH-53K Gearbox Repair and 38,415 38,415
 Station Cherry Point Test Facility.
Navy Marine Corps Air F-35 Flightline Util. 58,000 58,000
 Station Cherry Point Modern. Ph 2 (Inc).
 Pennsylvania
Navy Philadelphia Machinery Control 0 86,610
 Developmental Center.
 Virginia
Navy Dahlgren Upgrade Electrical 0 2,503
 Substation 1.
Navy Dahlgren Planning and Design 0 1,237
 Weapons Integration and
 Test Campus.
Navy Naval Station Norfolk Submarine Logistics 16,863 16,863
 Support Facilities.
Navy Naval Station Norfolk Submarine Pier 3 (Inc).... 155,000 155,000
Navy Portsmouth Naval Dry Dock Saltwater System 47,718 47,718
 Shipyard for CVN-78 (Inc).
 Washington
Navy Naval Air Station E/A-18G Aircraft Flt. 37,461 37,461
 Whidbey Island Read. Squad. Train. Fac.
 Worldwide Unspecified
Navy Unspecified Worldwide MCON Planning and Funds... 397,124 397,124
 Locations
Navy Unspecified Worldwide Unspecified Minor 109,994 109,994
 Locations Construction.
Navy Unspecified Worldwide Red Hill.................. 0 23,184
 Locations
Navy Various Worldwide Cost to Complete- 0 1,198,000
 Locations Inflation Adjustment.
 ........................
 Military Construction, Navy Total 3,752,391 4,649,859
 ......................
 Alabama
AF Maxwell Air Force Base Commercial Vehicle 0 15,000
 Inspection Gate.
 Alaska
AF Clear Air Force LRDR Dormitory............ 68,000 68,000
 Station
AF Joint Base Elmendorf- Extend Runway 16/34, Inc.. 100,000 100,000
 Richardson
 California
AF Vandenberg Air Force GBSD Consolidated 89,000 89,000
 Base Maintenance Facility.
AF Travis Air Force Base KC-46 ADAL Simulator 0 7,500
 Facility, B179.
 Florida
AF Patrick Space Force Consolidated 0 75,680
 Base Communications Facility.
AF Air Force Research Planning and Design Shock 0 530
 Lab--Eglin Air Force and Applied Impact
 Base Laboratory (SAIL).
AF Eglin Air Force Base F-35A ADAL Development 0 2,500
 Test.
AF Eglin Air Force Base F-35A Developmental Test 2- 0 4,100
 Bay MXS Hangar.
AF Eglin Air Force Base F-35A Developmental Test 2- 0 3,700
 Bay Test Hangar.
 Hawaii
AF Kirtland Air Force Secure Integration Support 0 89,000
 Base, Maui Lab With Land Acquisition.
 Experimental Site #1
 Hungary
AF Papa Air Base EDI: DABS-FEV Storage..... 71,000 71,000
 Iceland
AF Keflavik EDI: DABS-FEV Storage..... 94,000 94,000
 Italy
AF Aviano Air Base Combat Rescue Helicopter 15,500 15,500
 Simulator Facility.
AF Aviano Air Base EDI: RADR Storage Facility 31,000 31,000
 Japan
AF Kadena Air Base Helicopter Rescue OPS 71,000 71,000
 Maintenance Hangar, Inc.
AF Kadena Air Base PDI: Theater A/C Corrosion 77,000 77,000
 Control Ctr, Inc.
 Jordan
AF Azraq Air Base Bulk Petroleum/Oil/ 32,000 32,000
 Lubricants Storage.
AF Azraq Air Base Fuel Cell and Phase 18,000 18,000
 Maintenance Hangars.
 Louisiana
AF Barksdale Air Force Weapons Generation 125,000 125,000
 Base Facility, Inc.
 Mariana Islands
AF Tinian PDI: Airfield Development 58,000 58,000
 Phase 1, Inc.
AF Tinian PDI: Fuel Tanks W/Pipeln & 92,000 92,000
 Hydrant Sys, Inc.
AF Tinian PDI: Parking Apron, Inc... 41,000 41,000
 Massachusetts
AF Hanscom Air Force Base MIT-Lincoln Lab (West Lab 30,200 30,200
 CSL/MIF), Inc.
 New Mexico
AF Kirtland Air Force JNWC Headquarters......... 0 4,700
 Base
AF Kirtland Air Force Space Rapid Capabilities 0 4,400
 Base Office (SPRCO)
 Headquarters Facility.
 New York
AF Air Force Research Lab Construct HF Antennas, 0 4,200
 Rome Newport and Stockbridge
 Annexes.
 Norway
AF Rygge EDI: Base Perimeter 8,200 8,200
 Security Fence.
 Ohio
AF Wright-Patterson Air Child Development Center/ 0 29,000
 Force Base School Age Center.
 Oklahoma
AF Tinker Air Force Base Facility and Land 30,000 30,000
 Acquisition (MROTC).
AF Tinker Air Force Base KC-46A 3-Bay Depot 49,000 49,000
 Maintenance Hangar, Inc.
AF Tinker Air Force Base KC-46A Fuel POL 13,600 13,600
 Infrastructure.
AF Altus Air Force Base South Gate................ 0 4,750
 South Carolina
AF Shaw Air Force Base RAPCON Facility........... 10,000 10,000
 South Dakota
AF Ellsworth Air Force B-21 2-Bay LO Restoration 91,000 76,000
 Base Facility, Inc.
AF Ellsworth Air Force B-21 Radio Frequency 77,000 77,000
 Base Facility.
AF Ellsworth Air Force B-21 Weapons Generation 50,000 50,000
 Base Facility, Inc.
 Spain
AF Moron Air Base EDI: RADR Storage Facility 29,000 29,000
 Tennessee
AF Arnold Air Force Base Arc Heater Test Facility 38,000 38,000
 Dragon Fire.
 Texas
AF Joint Base San Antonio BMT Recruit Dormitory 8, 0 5,400
 Inc 3 CTC.
AF Joint Base San Antonio BMT Recruit Dormitory 7, 90,000 45,000
 Inc.
AF Joint Base San Antonio Randolph AFB Child 0 29,000
 Development Center.
 Utah
AF Hill Air Force Base GBSD Organic Software 95,000 95,000
 Sustain Ctr, Inc.
AF Hill Air Force Base GBSD Technology and 84,000 84,000
 Collaboration Center.
 Worldwide Unspecified
AF Unspecified Worldwide Planning & Design......... 11,722 11,722
 Locations
AF Unspecified Worldwide Planning & Design......... 12,424 12,424
 Locations
AF Unspecified Worldwide Planning & Design......... 111,648 111,648
 Locations
AF Unspecified Worldwide Varlocs Cost to Complete.. 0 89,000
 Locations
AF Various Worldwide Unspecified Minor Military 66,162 66,162
 Locations Construction.
AF Various Worldwide Natural Disaster Response- 0 360,000
 Locations Cost to Complete.
AF Various Worldwide Cost to Complete- 0 746,000
 Locations Inflation Adjustment.
 Wyoming
AF F.E. Warren Air Force GBSD Integrated Command 95,000 95,000
 Base Center Wing a.
AF F.E. Warren Air Force GBSD Land Acquisition..... 34,000 34,000
 Base
AF F.E. Warren Air Force GBSD Missile Handling 47,000 47,000
 Base Complex Wing a.
 ........................
 Military Construction, Air Force Total 2,055,456 3,469,916
 ......................
 Alabama
Def-Wide Missile and Space Backup Power Generation... 0 10,700
 Intelligence Center,
 Redstone Arsenal
 California
Def-Wide Naval Base Ventura Ground Mounted Solar 0 13,360
 County, Point Mugu Photovoltaic System.
Def-Wide Marine Corps Mountain Microgrid and Backup Power 0 25,560
 Warfare Training
 Center Bridgeport
Def-Wide Coronado SOF Operations Support 75,712 75,712
 Facility.
 Djibouti
Def-Wide Camp Lemonnier Enhanced Energy Security 0 24,000
 and Control Systems.
 Florida
Def-Wide Naval Air Station Facility Energy Operations 0 2,400
 Jacksonville Center Renovation.
Def-Wide Patrick Space Force Underground Electric 0 8,400
 Base Distribution System.
Def-Wide Patrick Space Force Water Distribution Loop... 0 7,300
 Base
Def-Wide Hurlburt Field SOF Human Performance 9,100 9,100
 Training Center.
Def-Wide MacDill Air Force Base SOF Operations Integration 0 50,000
 Facility.
Def-Wide MacDill Air Force Base SOF Joint MISO Web- 0 8,730
 Operations Facility.
 Georgia
Def-Wide Fort Stewart-Hunter Power Generation and 0 25,400
 Army Airfield Microgrid.
Def-Wide Naval Submarine Base SCADA Modernization....... 0 11,200
 Kings Bay
 Germany
Def-Wide Baumholder Baumholder Elementary 71,000 71,000
 School.
Def-Wide Baumholder SOF Battalion Annex....... 22,468 22,468
Def-Wide Baumholder SOF Communications Annex.. 9,885 9,885
Def-Wide Baumholder SOF Operations Annex...... 23,768 23,768
Def-Wide Baumholder SOF Support Annex......... 21,902 21,902
Def-Wide Rhine Ordnance Medical Center Replacement 299,790 99,790
 Barracks Inc 10.
Def-Wide Weisbaden Clay Kaserne Elementary 60,000 60,000
 School.
 Guam
Def-Wide Naval Base Guam Electrical Distribution 0 34,360
 System.
 Hawaii
Def-Wide Joint Base Pearl Primary Electrical 0 25,000
 Harbor-Hickham Distribution.
 Japan
Def-Wide Kadena Lighting Upgrades......... 0 780
Def-Wide Iwakuni PDI: Bulk Storage Tanks Ph 85,000 85,000
 1.
Def-Wide Yokosuka Kinnick High School Inc... 20,000 20,000
Def-Wide Yokota Air Base PDI: Bulk Storage Tanks Ph 44,000 44,000
 I (Inc).
Def-Wide Yokota Air Base PDI: Operations and 72,154 72,154
 Warehouse Facilities.
 Kansas
Def-Wide Fort Riley Power Generation and 0 25,780
 Microgrid.
 Kuwait
Def-Wide Camp Arifjan Power Generation and 0 26,850
 Microgrid.
 Maryland
Def-Wide Fort Meade Reclaimed Water 0 23,310
 Infrastructure Expansion.
Def-Wide Bethesda Naval MEDCEN Addition / 75,500 75,500
 Hospital Alteration Inc 6.
Def-Wide Fort Meade NSAW Mission OPS and 140,000 140,000
 Records Center (Inc).
Def-Wide Fort Meade NSAW Recap Building 4 378,000 378,000
 (Inc).
 North Carolina
Def-Wide Fort Bragg SOF Operations Building... 18,870 18,870
Def-Wide Fort Bragg SOF Supply Support 15,600 15,600
 Activity.
 Texas
Def-Wide Fort Hood Power Generation and 0 31,500
 Microgrid.
Def-Wide U.S. Army Reserve Power Generation and 0 9,600
 Center, Conroe Microgrid.
Def-Wide Joint Base San Antonio Ambulatory Care Center 58,600 58,600
 Replacement (Dental).
 Virginia
Def-Wide Naval Support Activity Backup Power Generation... 0 3,400
 Hampton Roads
Def-Wide NCE Springfield, Fort Chilled Water Redundancy.. 0 1,100
 Belvoir
Def-Wide Naval Support Activity Primary Distribution 0 19,000
 Hampton Roads Substation.
Def-Wide Dam Neck SOF Operations Building 26,600 26,600
 Addition.
Def-Wide Pentagon Commercial Vehicle 18,000 18,000
 Inspection Facility.
 Worldwide Unspecified
Def-Wide Unspecified Worldwide Energy Resilience and 329,000 0
 Locations Conserv. Invest. Prog..
Def-Wide Unspecified Worldwide ERCIP Design.............. 224,250 224,250
 Locations
Def-Wide Unspecified Worldwide Exercise Related Minor 18,644 18,644
 Locations Construction.
Def-Wide Unspecified Worldwide INDOPACOM................. 0 47,600
 Locations
Def-Wide Unspecified Worldwide INDOPACOM--Red Hill Fuel 0 75,000
 Locations Distribution.
Def-Wide Unspecified Worldwide Planning and Design--Defw. 26,689 26,689
 Locations
Def-Wide Unspecified Worldwide Planning and Design--DHA.. 33,227 33,227
 Locations
Def-Wide Unspecified Worldwide Planning and Design--DLA.. 30,000 30,000
 Locations
Def-Wide Unspecified Worldwide Planning and Design--DODEA 20,086 20,086
 Locations
Def-Wide Unspecified Worldwide Planning and Design--MDA.. 47,063 47,063
 Locations
Def-Wide Unspecified Worldwide Planning and Design--NSA.. 9,618 9,618
 Locations
Def-Wide Unspecified Worldwide Planning and Design--SOCOM 26,978 26,978
 Locations
Def-Wide Unspecified Worldwide Planning and Design--TJS.. 2,360 2,360
 Locations
Def-Wide Unspecified Worldwide Planning and Design--WHS.. 2,106 2,106
 Locations
Def-Wide Unspecified Worldwide Unspecified Minor 3,000 3,000
 Locations Construction--Defw.
Def-Wide Unspecified Worldwide Unspecified Minor 15,000 15,000
 Locations Construction--DHA.
Def-Wide Unspecified Worldwide Unspecified Minor 8,000 8,000
 Locations Construction--DODEA.
Def-Wide Unspecified Worldwide Unspecified Minor 6,000 6,000
 Locations Construction--NSA.
Def-Wide Unspecified Worldwide Unspecified Minor 36,726 36,726
 Locations Construction--SOCOM.
Def-Wide Unspecified Worldwide Unspecified Minor 31,702 31,702
 Locations Construction--DLA.
Def-Wide Various Worldwide Cost to Complete- 0 688,000
 Locations Inflation Adjustment.
Def-Wide Various Worldwide EUCOM--Infrastructure to 0 50,000
 Locations Support Presence on
 Nato's Eastern Flank
 (Planning and Design).
 INDOPACOM
Def-Wide INDOPACOM Exercise Related Minor 0 16,130
 Construction.
 ........................
 Military Construction, Defense-Wide Total 2,416,398 3,151,858
 ......................
 Worldwide Unspecified
NATO NATO Security NATO Security Investment 210,139 210,139
 Investment Program Program.
 ........................
 NATO Security Investment Program Total 210,139 210,139
 ......................
 Delaware
Army NG New Castle National Guard Readiness 16,000 16,000
 Center.
 Florida
Army NG Palm Coast National Guard Vehicle 12,000 12,000
 Maintenance Shop.
Army NG Camp Blanding Automated Multipurpose 0 8,500
 Machine Gun (MPMG) Range.
Army NG Camp Blanding Scout Recce Gunnery 0 16,200
 Complex.
 Hawaii
Army NG Kapolei National Guard Readiness 29,000 29,000
 Center Addition.
 Indiana
Army NG Atlanta National Guard Readiness 20,000 20,000
 Center.
 Iowa
Army NG West Des Moines National Guard Readiness 15,000 15,000
 Center.
 Louisiana
Army NG Camp Beauregard Energy Resilience 0 765
 Conservation Investment
 Program Project.
Army NG Louisiana National Munitions Administrative 0 1,650
 Guard New Orleans Facility.
Army NG Abbeville National Guard Readiness 0 1,650
 Center Planning and
 Design.
 Michigan
Army NG Camo Grayling National Guard Readiness 16,000 16,000
 Center.
 Minnesota
Army NG New Ulm National Guard Readiness 17,000 17,000
 Center.
 Nevada
Army NG Reno National Guard Readiness 18,000 18,000
 Center Add/Alt.
 New York
Army NG Troy National Guard Vehicle 17,000 17,000
 Maintenance Shop.
 North Carolina
Army NG Mcleansville National Guard Vehicle 15,000 15,000
 Maintenance Shop.
 Puerto Rico
Army NG Camp Santiago Engineering/Housing 14,500 14,500
 Maintenance Shops (DPW).
 Vermont
Army NG Bennington National Guard Readiness 14,800 14,800
 Center.
 West Virginia
Army NG Buckhannon National Guard Readiness 14,000 14,000
 Center Add/Alt.
 Worldwide Unspecified
Army NG Unspecified Worldwide Planning and Design....... 28,245 28,245
 Locations
Army NG Unspecified Worldwide Unspecified Minor 35,933 35,933
 Locations Construction.
Army NG Unspecified Worldwide Unspecified Minor 0 4,346
 Locations Construction.
Army NG Various Worldwide Cost to Complete- 0 138,600
 Locations Inflation Adjustment.
 Wyoming
Army NG Sheridan National Guard Vehicle 14,800 14,800
 Maintenance Shop.
 ........................
 Military Construction, Army National Guard Total 297,278 468,989
 ......................
 Florida
Army Res Perrine Army Reserve Center/AMSA.. 46,000 46,000
 Puerto Rico
Army Res Fort Buchanan Army Reserve Center....... 24,000 24,000
 Worldwide Unspecified
Army Res Unspecified Worldwide Planning and Design....... 9,829 9,829
 Locations
Army Res Unspecified Worldwide Unspecified Minor 20,049 20,049
 Locations Construction.
Army Res Various Worldwide Cost to Complete- 0 37,300
 Locations Inflation Adjustment.
 ........................
 Military Construction, Army Reserve Total 99,878 137,178
 ......................
 Worldwide Unspecified
N/MC Res Unspecified Worldwide MCNR Unspecified Minor 27,747 18,747
 Locations Construction.
N/MC Res Unspecified Worldwide USMCR Planning and Design. 2,590 2,590
 Locations
N/MC Res Various Worldwide Cost to Complete- 0 19,500
 Locations Inflation Adjustment.
 ........................
 Military Construction, Naval Reserve Total 30,337 40,837
 ......................
 Alabama
Air NG Birmingham Security and Services 7,500 7,500
 International Airport Training Facility.
Air NG Montgomery F-35 Weapons Load Crew 0 6,800
 Training Facility.
 Arizona
Air NG Morris Air National Base Entry Complex........ 12,000
 Guard Base
Air NG Tucson International Land Acquisition.......... 10,000 10,000
 Airport
 Florida
Air NG Jacksonville Air F-35 Construct Munitions 0 730
 National Guard Base Storage Area Admin-
 Jacksonville IAP Design.
Air NG Jacksonville Air F-35 Munitions Maintenance 0 530
 National Guard Base and Inspection Facility
 Design.
Air NG Jacksonville F-35 Construct Flight 22,200 22,200
 International Airport Simulator Facility.
 Indiana
Air NG Fort Wayne Munitions Maintenance & 12,800 12,800
 International Airport Storage Complex.
 Tennessee
Air NG McGhee-Tyson Airport KC-135 Maintenance Shops.. 23,800 23,800
 Worldwide Unspecified
Air NG Unspecified Worldwide Planning and Design....... 28,412 28,412
 Locations
Air NG Unspecified Worldwide Unspecified Minor 44,171 44,171
 Locations Construction.
Air NG Various Worldwide Cost to Complete- 0 122,900
 Locations Inflation Adjustment.
 ........................
 Military Construction, Air National Guard Total 148,883 291,843
 ......................
 California
AF Res Beale Air Force Base 940 ARW Squad OPS/AMU..... 33,000 33,000
 Virginia
AF Res Joint Base Langley- Reserve Intelligence Group 0 10,500
 Eustis Facility.
 Worldwide Unspecified
AF Res Unspecified Worldwide Planning & Design......... 11,773 11,773
 Locations
AF Res Unspecified Worldwide Unspecified Minor Military 11,850 11,850
 Locations Construction.
AF Res Various Worldwide Cost to Complete- 0 46,600
 Locations Inflation Adjustment.
 ........................
 Military Construction, Air Force Reserve Total 56,623 113,723
 ......................
 Germany
FH Con Army Baumholder Family Housing Replacement 57,000 57,000
 Construction.
 Italy
FH Con Army Vicenza Family Housing New 95,000 95,000
 Construction.
 Worldwide Unspecified
FH Con Army Unspecified Worldwide Family Housing P & D...... 17,339 17,339
 Locations
 ........................
 Family Housing Construction, Army Total 169,339 169,339
 ......................
 Worldwide Unspecified
FH Ops Army Unspecified Worldwide Furnishings............... 22,911 22,911
 Locations
FH Ops Army Unspecified Worldwide Housing Privatization 65,740 65,740
 Locations Support.
FH Ops Army Unspecified Worldwide Leasing................... 127,499 127,499
 Locations
FH Ops Army Unspecified Worldwide Maintenance............... 117,555 117,555
 Locations
FH Ops Army Unspecified Worldwide Management................ 45,718 45,718
 Locations
FH Ops Army Unspecified Worldwide Miscellaneous............. 559 559
 Locations
FH Ops Army Unspecified Worldwide Services.................. 9,580 9,580
 Locations
FH Ops Army Unspecified Worldwide Utilities................. 46,849 46,849
 Locations
 ........................
 Family Housing Operation And Maintenance, Army Total 436,411 436,411
 ......................
 Guam
FH Con Navy Joint Region Marianas Replace Andersen Housing 68,985 68,985
 Ph VI.
 Mariana Islands
FH Con Navy Guam Replace Andersen Housing 86,390 86,390
 Ph IV.
FH Con Navy Guam Replace Andersen Housing 93,259 93,259
 Ph V.
 Worldwide Unspecified
FH Con Navy Unspecified Worldwide Design, Washington DC..... 7,043 7,043
 Locations
FH Con Navy Unspecified Worldwide Improvements, USMC HQ 74,540 74,540
 Locations Washington DC.
FH Con Navy Unspecified Worldwide USMC DPRI/Guam Planning 7,080 7,080
 Locations and Design.
 ........................
 Family Housing Construction, Navy And Marine Corps Total 337,297 337,297
 ......................
 Worldwide Unspecified
FH Ops Navy Unspecified Worldwide Furnishings............... 16,182 16,182
 Locations
FH Ops Navy Unspecified Worldwide Housing Privatization 61,605 61,605
 Locations Support.
FH Ops Navy Unspecified Worldwide Leasing................... 66,333 66,333
 Locations
FH Ops Navy Unspecified Worldwide Maintenance............... 105,470 105,470
 Locations
FH Ops Navy Unspecified Worldwide Management................ 59,312 59,312
 Locations
FH Ops Navy Unspecified Worldwide Miscellaneous............. 411 411
 Locations
FH Ops Navy Unspecified Worldwide Services.................. 16,494 16,494
 Locations
FH Ops Navy Unspecified Worldwide Utilities................. 42,417 42,417
 Locations
 ........................
 Family Housing Operation And Maintenance, Navy And Marine Corps Total 368,224 368,224
 ......................
 Delaware
FH Con AF Dover AFB Dover MHPI Restructure.... 25,492 25,492
 Florida
FH Con AF Tyndall AFB AETC Restructuring........ 150,685 150,685
 Illinois
FH Con AF Scott AFB Scott MHPI Restructure.... 52,003 52,003
 Maryland
FH Con AF Andrews AFB MHPI Equity Contribution 1,878 1,878
 CMSSF House.
 Worldwide Unspecified
FH Con AF Unspecified Worldwide Planning & Design......... 2,730 2,730
 Locations
 ........................
 Family Housing Construction, Air Force Total 232,788 232,788
 ......................
 Worldwide Unspecified
FH Ops AF Unspecified Worldwide Furnishings............... 27,379 27,379
 Locations
FH Ops AF Unspecified Worldwide Housing Privatization..... 33,517 33,517
 Locations
FH Ops AF Unspecified Worldwide Leasing................... 7,882 7,882
 Locations
FH Ops AF Unspecified Worldwide Maintenance............... 150,375 150,375
 Locations
FH Ops AF Unspecified Worldwide Management................ 77,042 77,042
 Locations
FH Ops AF Unspecified Worldwide Miscellaneous............. 2,240 2,240
 Locations
FH Ops AF Unspecified Worldwide Services.................. 10,570 10,570
 Locations
FH Ops AF Unspecified Worldwide Utilities................. 46,217 46,217
 Locations
 ........................
 Family Housing Operation And Maintenance, Air Force Total 355,222 355,222
 ......................
 Worldwide Unspecified
FH Ops DW Unspecified Worldwide Furnishings--DIA.......... 656 656
 Locations
FH Ops DW Unspecified Worldwide Furnishings--NSA.......... 87 87
 Locations
FH Ops DW Unspecified Worldwide Leasing--DIA.............. 31,849 31,849
 Locations
FH Ops DW Unspecified Worldwide Leasing--NSA.............. 13,306 13,306
 Locations
FH Ops DW Unspecified Worldwide Maintenance--NSA.......... 34 34
 Locations
FH Ops DW Unspecified Worldwide Utilities--DIA............ 4,166 4,166
 Locations
FH Ops DW Unspecified Worldwide Utilities--NSA............ 15 15
 Locations
 ........................
 Family Housing Operation And Maintenance, Defense-Wide Total 50,113 50,113
 ......................
 Worldwide Unspecified
FHIF Unspecified Worldwide Administrative Expenses-- 6,442 6,442
 Locations FHIF.
 ........................
 DOD Family Housing Improvement Fund Total 6,442 6,442
 ......................
 Worldwide Unspecified
UHIF Unspecified Worldwide Administrative Expenses-- 494 494
 Locations UHIF.
 ........................
 Unaccompanied Housing Improvement Fund Total 494 494
 ......................
 Worldwide Unspecified
BRAC Base Realignment & Base Realignment and 67,706 117,706
 Closure, Army Closure.
 ........................
 Base Realignment and Closure--Army Total 67,706 117,706
 ......................
 Worldwide Unspecified
BRAC Unspecified Worldwide Base Realignment & Closure 106,664 156,664
 Locations
 ........................
 Base Realignment and Closure--Navy Total 106,664 156,664
 ......................
 Worldwide Unspecified
BRAC Unspecified Worldwide DOD BRAC Activities--Air 107,311 107,311
 Locations Force.
 ........................
 Base Realignment and Closure--Air Force Total 107,311 107,311
 ......................
 Worldwide Unspecified
BRAC Unspecified Worldwide Int-4: DLA Activities..... 3,006 3,006
 Locations
 ........................
 Base Realignment and Closure--Defense-wide Total 3,006 3,006
 ......................
 Total, Military Construction 12,153,965 16,468,588
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 TITLE XLVII--DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY NATIONAL SECURITY PROGRAMS

SEC. 4701. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY NATIONAL SECURITY PROGRAMS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
SEC. 4701. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY NATIONAL SECURITY PROGRAMS (In Thousands
 of Dollars)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 FY 2023 House
 Program Request Authorized
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Discretionary Summary By Appropriation
 Energy And Water Development, And Related
 Agencies
 Appropriation Summary:
 Energy Programs
 Nuclear Energy........................ 156,600 156,600

 Atomic Energy Defense Activities
 National nuclear security
 administration:
 Weapons activities.................. 16,486,298 17,210,798
 Defense nuclear nonproliferation.... 2,346,257 2,348,257
 Naval reactors...................... 2,081,445 2,081,445
 Federal salaries and expenses....... 496,400 496,400
 Total, National Nuclear Security 21,410,400 22,136,900
 Administration...........................

 Environmental and other defense
 activities:
 Defense environmental cleanup....... 6,914,532 7,229,203
 Other defense activities............ 978,351 978,351
 Total, Environmental & other defense 7,892,883 8,207,554
 activities...............................
 Total, Atomic Energy Defense Activities... 29,303,283 30,344,454
 Total, Discretionary Funding.............. 29,459,883 30,501,054

Nuclear Energy
 Idaho sitewide safeguards and security.... 156,600 156,600
 Total, Nuclear Energy..................... 156,600 156,600

 Stockpile Management
 Stockpile Major Modernization
 B61-12 Life Extension Program......... 672,019 672,019
 W88 Alteration Program................ 162,057 162,057
 W80-4 Life Extension Program.......... 1,122,451 1,117,451
 W80-4 ALT SLCM........................ 0 20,000
 Research and development for a [20,000]
 nuclear warhead for a nuclear-
 capable sea-launched cruise missile
 W87-1 Modification Program............ 680,127 680,127
 W93 Program........................... 240,509 240,509
 Total, Stockpile Major Modernization...... 2,877,163 2,892,163

 Stockpile services
 Stockpile Sustainment............... 1,321,139 1,321,139
 Weapons Dismantlement and 50,966 50,966
 Disposition........................
 Production Operations............... 630,894 630,894
 Nuclear Enterprise Assurance........ 48,911 48,911
 Subtotal, Stockpile Services.............. 2,051,910 2,051,910
 Total, Stockpile Management............... 4,929,073 4,944,073

Weapons Activities
 Production Modernization
 Primary Capability Modernization
 Plutonium Modernization
 Los Alamos Plutonium Modernization
 Los Alamos Plutonium Operations... 767,412 767,412
 21-D-512 Plutonium Pit Production 588,234 588,234
 Project, LANL....................
 15-D-302 TA-55 Reinvestments 30,002 30,002
 Project, Phase 3, LANL...........
 07-D-220-04 Transuranic Liquid 24,759 24,759
 Waste Facility, LANL.............
 04-D-125 Chemistry and Metallurgy 162,012 162,012
 Research Replacement Project,
 LANL.............................
 Subtotal, Los Alamos Plutonium 1,572,419 1,572,419
 Modernization............................
 Savannah River Plutonium
 Modernization
 Savannah River Plutonium 58,300 58,300
 Operations.......................
 21-D-511 Savannah River Plutonium 700,000 1,075,000
 Processing Facility, SRS.........
 NNSA unfunded priority.......... [375,000]
 Subtotal, Savannah River Plutonium 758,300 1,133,300
 Modernization............................
 Enterprise Plutonium Support........ 88,993 88,993
 Total, Plutonium Modernization............ 2,419,712 2,794,712
 High Explosives and Energetics
 High Explosives & Energetics...... 101,380 101,380
 HESE OPCs......................... 0 0
 23-D-516 Energetic Materials 19,000 19,000
 Characterization Facility, LANL..
 21-D-510 HE Synthesis, 108,000 133,000
 Formulation, and Production, PX..
 Project risk reduction.......... [25,000]
 15-D-301 HE Science & Engineering 20,000 30,000
 Facility, PX.....................
 Project risk reduction.......... [10,000]
 Total, High Explosives and Energetics..... 248,380 283,380
 Total, Primary Capability Modernization... 2,668,092 3,078,092

 Secondary Capability Modernization
 Uranium Modernization................. 297,531 297,531
 Depleted Uranium Modernization........ 170,171 170,171
 Lithium Modernization................. 68,661 68,661
 18-D-690 Lithium Processing Facility, 216,886 216,886
 Y-12.................................
 06-D-141 Uranium Processing Facility, 362,000 362,000
 Y-12.................................
 Total, Secondary Capability Modernization. 1,115,249 1,115,249

 Tritium and Domestic Uranium Enrichment
 Tritium Sustainment and Modernization. 361,797 361,797
 Domestic Uranium Enrichment........... 144,852 144,852
 18-D-650 Tritium Finishing Facility, 73,300 73,300
 SRS..................................
 Total, Tritium and Domestic Uranium 579,949 579,949
 Enrichment...............................

 Non-Nuclear Capability Modernization.... 123,084 123,084
 Capability Based Investments............ 154,220 154,220
 Total, Production Modernization........... 4,640,594 5,050,594

 Stockpile Research, Technology, and
 Engineering
 Assessment Science...................... 854,798 914,798
 Enhanced Capability for Subcritical [70,000]
 Experiments (ECSE) and Hydrodynamic
 and Subcritical Experiment Execution
 Support..............................
 Program decrease...................... [-10,000]
 Engineering and Integrated Assessments.. 366,455 366,455
 Inertial Confinement Fusion............. 544,095 624,095
 Advanced Simulation and Computing....... 742,646 842,146
 Weapon Technology and Manufacturing 286,165 296,165
 Maturation.............................
 Academic Programs....................... 100,499 100,499
 Total, Stockpile Research, Technology, and 2,894,658 3,144,158
 Engineering..............................

 Infrastructure and Operations
 Operations of facilities................ 1,038,000 1,038,000
 Safety and environmental operations..... 162,000 162,000
 Maintenance and repair of facilities.... 680,000 730,000
 Deferred maintenance.................. [50,000]
 Recapitalization:
 Infrastructure and safety............. 561,663 561,663
 Total, Recapitalization................... 561,663 561,663

 Construction:
 23-D-519 Special Materials Facility, Y- 49,500 49,500
 12...................................
 23-D-518 Plutonium Modernization 48,500 48,500
 Operations & Waste Management Office
 Building, LANL.......................
 23-D-517 Electrical Power Capacity 24,000 24,000
 Upgrade, LANL........................
 22-D-514 Digital Infrastructure 67,300 67,300
 Capability Expansion, LLNL...........
 Total, Construction....................... 189,300 189,300
 Total, Infrastructure and operations...... 2,630,963 2,680,963

 Secure transportation asset
 Operations and equipment................ 214,367 214,367
 Program direction....................... 130,070 130,070
 Total, Secure transportation asset........ 344,437 344,437

 Defense Nuclear Security
 Operations and Maintenance.............. 878,363 878,363
 Construction:........................... 0
 17-D-710 West end protected area 3,928 3,928
 reduction project, Y-12..............
 Total, Defense nuclear security........... 882,291 882,291

 Information technology and cybersecurity.. 445,654 445,654
 Legacy contractor pensions................ 114,632 114,632
 Use of Prior Year Balances................ -396,004 -396,004
 Total, Weapons Activities................. 16,486,298 17,210,798

Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation
 Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation Programs
 Global material security
 International nuclear security........ 81,155 83,155
 NA-82 Counterproliferation [2,000]
 classified program increase........
 Radiological security................. 244,827 244,827
 Nuclear smuggling detection and 178,095 188,095
 deterrence...........................
 Total, Global material security........... 504,077 516,077

 Material management and minimization
 Conversion............................ 153,260 153,260
 Nuclear material removal.............. 41,600 41,600
 Material disposition.................. 256,025 256,025
 Total, Material management & minimization. 450,885 450,885

 Nonproliferation and arms control....... 207,656 207,656

 Defense nuclear nonproliferation R&D
 Proliferation Detection............... 287,283 287,283
 Nuclear Detonation Detection.......... 279,205 289,205
 Forensics R&D......................... 44,414 44,414
 Nonproliferation Stewardship Program.. 109,343 109,343
 Total, Defense nuclear nonproliferation 720,245 730,245
 R&D......................................

 NNSA Bioassurance Program............... 20,000 0

 Nonproliferation Construction:
 18-D-150 Surplus Plutonium Disposition 71,764 71,764
 Project, SRS.........................
 Total, Nonproliferation construction...... 71,764 71,764
 Total, Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation 1,974,627 1,976,627
 Programs.................................

 Legacy contractor pensions................ 55,708 55,708
 Nuclear counterterrorism and incident 438,970 438,970
 response program.........................
 Use of prior-year balances................ -123,048 -123,048
 Total, Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation... 2,346,257 2,348,257

Naval Reactors
 Naval reactors development................ 798,590 798,590
 Columbia-Class reactor systems development 53,900 53,900
 S8G Prototype refueling................... 20,000 20,000
 Naval reactors operations and 695,165 695,165
 infrastructure...........................
 Construction:
 23-D-533 BL Component Test Complex...... 57,420 57,420
 14-D-901 Spent Fuel Handling 397,845 397,845
 Recapitalization Project, NRF..........
 Total, Construction....................... 455,265 455,265
 Program direction......................... 58,525 58,525
 Total, Naval Reactors..................... 2,081,445 2,081,445

Federal Salaries And Expenses
 Program direction......................... 513,200 513,200
 Use of Prior Year Balances................ -16,800 -16,800
 Total, Office Of The Administrator........ 496,400 496,400

Defense Environmental Cleanup
 Closure sites:
 Closure sites administration............ 4,067 4,067

 Richland:
 River corridor and other cleanup 135,000 221,000
 operations.............................
 Central plateau remediation............. 650,240 672,240
 Richland community and regulatory 10,013 10,013
 support................................
 Construction:
 18-D-404 Modification of Waste 3,100 3,100
 Encapsulation and Storage Facility...
 22-D-401 L-888, 400 Area Fire Station. 3,100 3,100
 22-D-402 L-897, 200 Area Water 8,900 8,900
 Treatment Facility...................
 23-D-404 181D Export Water System 6,770 6,770
 Reconfiguration and Upgrade..........
 23-D-405 181B Export Water System 480 480
 Reconfiguration and Upgrade..........
 Total, Construction....................... 22,350 22,350
 Total, Hanford site....................... 817,603 925,603

 Office of River Protection:
 Waste Treatment Immobilization Plant 462,700 462,700
 Commissioning..........................
 Rad liquid tank waste stabilization and 801,100 801,100
 disposition............................
 Construction:
 23-D-403, Hanford 200 West Area Tank 4,408 45,000
 Farms Risk Management Project........
 01-D-16D High-Level Waste Facility.... 316,200 358,939
 01-D-16E Pretreatment Facility........ 20,000 20,000
 Total, Construction....................... 340,608 423,939

 Total, Office of River Protection......... 1,604,408 1,687,739

 Idaho National Laboratory:
 Idaho cleanup and waste disposition..... 350,658 350,658
 Idaho community and regulatory support.. 2,705 2,705
 Construction:
 22-D-403 Idaho Spent Nuclear Fuel 8,000 8,000
 Staging Facility...................
 22-D-404 Additional ICDF Landfill 8,000 8,000
 Disposal Cell and Evaporation Ponds
 Project............................
 23-D-402--Calcine Construction...... 10,000 10,000
 Total, Construction....................... 26,000 26,000
 Total, Idaho National Laboratory.......... 379,363 379,363

 NNSA sites and Nevada off-sites
 Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.. 1,842 1,842
 LLNL Excess Facilities D&D.............. 12,004 12,004
 Nuclear facility D & D
 Separations Process Research Unit..... 15,300 15,300
 Nevada Site........................... 62,652 62,652
 Sandia National Laboratories.......... 4,003 4,003
 Los Alamos National Laboratory........ 286,316 286,316
 Los Alamos Excess Facilities D&D...... 40,519 40,519
 Total, NNSA sites and Nevada off-sites.... 422,636 422,636

 Oak Ridge Reservation:
 OR Nuclear facility D & D............... 334,221 334,221
 Total, OR Nuclear facility D & D.......... 334,221 334,221

 U233 Disposition Program................ 47,628 47,628
 OR cleanup and disposition.............. 62,000 62,000
 Construction:
 17-D-401 On-site waste disposal 35,000 35,000
 facility...........................
 Total, Construction....................... 35,000 35,000
 Total, OR cleanup and waste disposition... 144,628 144,628

 OR community & regulatory support....... 5,300 5,300
 OR technology development and deployment 3,000 3,000
 Total, Oak Ridge Reservation.............. 487,149 487,149

 Savannah River Sites:
 Savannah River risk management 416,317 460,317
 operations.............................
 Construction:
 18-D-402 Emergency Operations Center 25,568 25,568
 Replacement, SR....................
 19-D-701 SR Security Systems 5,000 5,000
 Replacement........................
 Total, risk management operations......... 30,568 30,568

 Savannah River Legacy Pensions.......... 132,294 132,294
 Savannah River National Laboratory O&M.. 41,000 41,000
 SR community and regulatory support..... 12,137 12,137
 Radioactive liquid tank waste 851,660 931,000
 stabilization and disposition..........
 Construction:
 20-D-401 Saltstone Disposal Unit 37,668 37,668
 #10, 11, 12........................
 18-D-402 Saltstone disposal unit #8/ 49,832 49,832
 9..................................
 Total, Construction....................... 87,500 87,500
 Total, Savannah River site................ 1,571,476 1,694,816

 Waste Isolation Pilot Plant
 Waste Isolation Pilot Plant............. 371,943 371,943
 Construction:
 15-D-411 Safety significant 59,073 59,073
 confinement ventilation system, WIPP.
 15-D-412 Exhaust Shaft, WIPP.......... 25,000 25,000
 Total, Construction....................... 84,073 84,073
 Total, Waste Isolation Pilot Plant........ 456,016 456,016

 Program Direction......................... 317,002 317,002
 Program Support........................... 103,239 103,239
 Safeguards and Security................... 309,573 309,573
 Technology Development and Deployment..... 25,000 25,000
 Federal Contribution to the Uranium 417,000 417,000
 Enrichment D&D Fund......................
 Total, Defense Environmental Cleanup...... 6,914,532 7,229,203

Other Defense Activities
 Environment, health, safety and security
 Environment, health, safety and security 138,854 138,854
 Program direction....................... 76,685 76,685
 Total, Environment, Health, safety and 215,539 215,539
 security.................................

 Independent enterprise assessments
 Independent enterprise assessments...... 27,486 27,486
 Program direction....................... 57,941 57,941
 Total, Independent enterprise assessments. 85,427 85,427

 Specialized security activities........... 306,067 306,067

 Office of Legacy Management
 Legacy management....................... 174,163 174,163
 Program direction....................... 21,983 21,983
 Total, Office of Legacy Management........ 196,146 196,146

 Defense related administrative support.... 170,695 170,695

 Office of hearings and appeals............ 4,477 4,477
 Subtotal, Other defense activities........ 978,351 978,351
 Total, Other Defense Activities........... 978,351 978,351
------------------------------------------------------------------------

 DIVISION E--NON-DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE MATTERS

 TITLE LI--VETERANS AFFAIRS MATTERS

SEC. 5101. MAXIMUM RATE OF INTEREST ON DEBTS INCURRED BEFORE MILITARY 
 SERVICE APPLICABLE TO MILITARY DEPENDENTS.

 Section 207 of the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act (50 U.S.C. 3937) 
is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``or the 
 servicemember and the servicemember's spouse jointly'' 
 and inserting ``a dependent of the servicemember, or 
 such a dependent and the servicemember jointly''; and
 (B) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``or a dependent 
 of the servicemember'' after ``due from a 
 servicemember''; and
 (2) in subsection (b)(1)--
 (A) in the paragraph heading, by inserting ``and 
 dependency'' after ``military service'';
 (B) in subparagraph (A)--
 (i) by striking ``of the servicemember'';
 (ii) by striking clause (i) and inserting 
 the following:
 ``(i) military orders indicating the 
 current, future, or past military duty status 
 of the servicemember; or''; and
 (iii) in clause (ii), by inserting ``or a 
 certificate from the Defense Manpower Data 
 Center'' before the period at the end;
 (C) by redesignating subparagraph (B) as 
 subparagraph (C); and
 (D) by inserting the following after subparagraph 
 (A):
 ``(B) Dependents.--In addition to providing proof 
 of military service under subparagraph (A), dependents 
 of servicemembers shall provide documentation that 
 indicates the dependency status of the dependent at the 
 time the debt or obligation was incurred and continuing 
 until the servicemember entered military service. Such 
 documentation may include a marriage certificate, birth 
 certificate, or any other appropriate indicator of 
 dependency status.''; and
 (3) in subsection (c), by inserting ``, dependent, or both, 
 as the case may be,'' after ``ability of the servicemember''.

SEC. 5102. REPORT ON HANDLING OF CERTAIN RECORDS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF 
 VETERANS AFFAIRS.

 (a) Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Inspector General of the Department of 
Veterans Affairs, in coordination with the Secretary of Defense, shall 
submit to Congress a report on how the procedures outlined in M21-1 
III.ii.2.F.1. of the Adjudication Procedures Manual of the Department 
of Veterans Affairs are followed in assisting veterans obtain or 
reconstruct service records and medical information damaged or 
destroyed in the July 1973 fire at the National Processing Records 
Center.
 (b) Elements.--The report under subsection (a) shall include the 
following elements:
 (1) The determination of the Inspector General whether 
 employees of the Department of Veterans Affairs receive 
 sufficient training on such procedures.
 (2) The determination of the Inspector General whether 
 veterans are informed of actions necessary to adhere to such 
 procedures.
 (3) The percentage of cases regarding such service records 
 and medical information in which employees of the Department of 
 Veterans Affairs follow such procedures.
 (4) The average time it takes to resolve an issue using 
 such procedures.
 (5) Recommendations to improve the implementation of such 
 procedures.

SEC. 5103. SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING WOMEN WHO SERVED AS CADET NURSES 
 DURING WORLD WAR II.

 (a) Findings.--Congress makes the following findings:
 (1) In June of 1943, Congress enacted the Bolton Act, 
 establishing the United States Cadet Nurse Corps as a uniformed 
 service of the Public Health Administration. Through the Corps, 
 women received free, expedited nursing education in exchange 
 for ``service in essential nursing for the duration of the 
 war''.
 (2) During World War II, the Nation faced a severe shortage 
 of qualified nurses, threatening the ability of the United 
 States to meet domestic and military medical needs.
 (3) In total, 124,065 women graduated from training under 
 the Cadet Nurse program, going on to serve in military 
 hospitals, Veterans Administration hospitals, Marine hospitals, 
 private hospitals, public health agencies, and public hospitals 
 until the program ended in 1948.
 (4) In 1944, the Federal Security Agency identified 
 ``national recognition for rendering a vital war service'' as a 
 privilege of service in the Corps.
 (5) By 1945, Cadet Nurses accounted for 80 percent of the 
 domestic nursing workforce.
 (6) The Cadet Nurse Corps has been credited with preventing 
 the collapse of the domestic nursing workforce.
 (b) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that women who 
served in the Cadet Nurse Corps honorably stepped up for their country 
during its time of need in World War II, significantly contributing to 
the war effort and the safety and security of the Nation.
 (c) Expression of Gratitude.--Congress hereby expresses deep 
gratitude for the women who answered the call to duty and served in the 
Cadet Nurse Corps.

SEC. 5104. SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING KOREAN AND KOREAN-AMERICAN 
 VIETNAM WAR VETERANS.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) Korean and Korean-American Vietnam War veterans served 
 honorably throughout the conflict, fighting valiantly both in 
 and alongside the United States Armed Forces, often making the 
 ultimate sacrifice, with many later becoming United States 
 citizens.
 (2) Military cooperation in the Vietnam War is one of 
 several examples that demonstrate the robust alliance of the 
 United States and Republic of Korea, under shared commitment to 
 democratic principles.
 (3) During the Vietnam conflict, more than 3,000,000 
 members of the United States Armed Forces fought bravely to 
 preserve and defend these ideals, among them many Korean 
 Americans who earned citations for their heroism and honorable 
 service.
 (4) The Republic of Korea joined the Vietnam conflict to 
 support the United States Armed Forces and the cause of freedom 
 at the request of the United States.
 (5) From 1964 until the last soldier left Saigon on March 
 23, 1973, 325,517 members of the Republic of Korea's Armed 
 Forces served in Vietnam, the largest contribution of troops 
 sent by an ally of the United States.
 (6) Republic of Korea forces fought bravely throughout the 
 theater and were known for their dedication, tenacity, and 
 effectiveness on the battlefield.
 (7) More than 17,000 Korean soldiers were injured, and over 
 4,400 Korean soldiers made the ultimate sacrifice in defense of 
 United States friends and allies.
 (8) There are approximately 3,000 naturalized Korean 
 Americans who served in the Vietnam War currently living in the 
 United States, many of whom suffer from significant injuries 
 due to their service in Vietnam, including post-traumatic 
 stress disorder, total disability, and the effects of the toxic 
 defoliant Agent Orange.
 (9) Korean-American veterans of the Vietnam conflict upheld 
 the highest ideals of the United States through their dedicated 
 service and considerable sacrifices, with many continuing to 
 carry the visible and invisible wounds of war to this day.
 (b) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that Korean and 
Korean-American Vietnam War veterans who served alongside the United 
States Armed Forces in the Vietnam conflict fought with honor and 
valor.

SEC. 5105. USE OF VETERANS WITH MEDICAL OCCUPATIONS IN RESPONSE TO 
 NATIONAL EMERGENCIES.

 (a) Update of Web Portal to Identify Veterans Who Had Medical 
Occupations as Members of the Armed Forces.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall update existing web 
 portals of the Department to allow the identification of 
 veterans who had a medical occupation as a member of the Armed 
 Forces.
 (2) Information in portal.--
 (A) In general.--An update to a portal under 
 paragraph (1) shall allow a veteran to elect to provide 
 the following information:
 (i) Contact information for the veteran.
 (ii) A history of the medical experience 
 and trained competencies of the veteran.
 (B) Inclusions in history.--To the extent 
 practicable, histories provided under subparagraph 
 (A)(ii) shall include individual critical task lists 
 specific to military occupational specialties that 
 align with existing standard occupational codes 
 maintained by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
 (b) Program on Provision to States of Information on Veterans With 
Medical Skills Obtained During Service in the Armed Forces.--For 
purposes of facilitating civilian medical credentialing and hiring 
opportunities for veterans seeking to respond to a national emergency, 
including a public health emergency declared by the Secretary of Health 
and Human Services under section 319 of the Public Health Service Act 
(42 U.S.C. 247d), the Secretary, in coordination with the Secretary of 
Defense and the Secretary of Labor, shall establish a program to share 
information specified in section 3(b) with the following:
 (1) State departments of veterans affairs.
 (2) Veterans service organizations.
 (3) State credentialing bodies.
 (4) State homes.
 (5) Other stakeholders involved in State-level 
 credentialing, as determined appropriate by the Secretary.
 (c) Program on Training of Intermediate Care Technicians of 
Department of Veterans Affairs.--
 (1) Establishment.--The Secretary shall implement a program 
 to train covered veterans to work as intermediate care 
 technicians of the Department.
 (2) Locations.--The Secretary may place an intermediate 
 care technician trained under the program under paragraph (1) 
 at any medical center of the Department, giving priority to a 
 location with a significant staffing shortage.
 (3) Inclusion of information in transition assistance 
 program.--As part of the Transition Assistance Program under 
 sections 1142 and 1144 of title 10, United States Code, the 
 Secretary shall prepare a communications campaign to convey 
 opportunities for training, certification, and employment under 
 the program under paragraph (1) to appropriate members of the 
 Armed Forces separating from active duty.
 (4) Report on expansion of program.--Not later than 180 
 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary 
 shall submit to Congress a report on whether the program under 
 this section could be replicated for other medical positions 
 within the Department.
 (5) Covered veteran defined.--In this subsection, the term 
 ``covered veteran'' means a veteran whom the Secretary 
 determines served as a basic health care technician while 
 serving in the Armed Forces.
 (d) Notification of Opportunities for Veterans.--The Secretary 
shall notify veterans service organizations and, in coordination with 
the Secretary of Defense, members of the reserve components of the 
Armed Forces of opportunities for veterans under this section.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Department; secretary; veteran.--The terms 
 ``Department'', ``Secretary'', ``State home'', and ``veteran'' 
 have the meanings given those terms in section 101 of title 38, 
 United States Code.
 (2) Veterans service organization.--The term ``veterans 
 service organization'' means an organization that provides 
 services to veterans, including organizations recognized by the 
 Secretary of Veterans Affairs under section 5902 of title 38, 
 United States Code.

SEC. 5106. PILOT PROGRAM TO EMPLOY VETERANS IN POSITIONS RELATING TO 
 CONSERVATION AND RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES.

 (a) Establishment.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the 
Secretaries concerned shall jointly establish a pilot program under 
which veterans are employed by the Federal Government in positions that 
relate to the conservation and resource management activities of the 
Department of the Interior and the Department of Agriculture.
 (b) Administration.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall 
administer the pilot program under subsection (a).
 (c) Positions.--The Secretaries concerned shall--
 (1) identify vacant positions in the respective Departments 
 of the Secretaries that are appropriate to fill using the pilot 
 program under subsection (a); and
 (2) to the extent practicable, fill such positions using 
 the pilot program.
 (d) Application of Civil Service Laws.--A veteran employed under 
the pilot program under subsection (a) shall be treated as an employee 
as defined in section 2105 of title 5, United States Code.
 (e) Best Practices for Other Departments.--The Secretary of 
Veterans Affairs shall establish guidelines containing best practices 
for departments and agencies of the Federal Government that carry out 
programs to employ veterans who are transitioning from service in the 
Armed Forces. Such guidelines shall include--
 (1) lessons learned under the Warrior Training Advancement 
 Course of the Department of Veterans Affairs; and
 (2) methods to realize cost savings based on such lessons 
 learned.
 (f) Partnership.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs, the 
Secretaries concerned, and the Secretary of Defense may enter into a 
partnership to include the pilot program under subsection (a) as part 
of the Skillbridge program under section 1143 of title 10, United 
States Code.
 (g) Reports.--
 (1) Initial report.--Not later than 60 days after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs 
 and the Secretaries concerned shall jointly submit to the 
 appropriate congressional committees a report on the pilot 
 program under subsection (a), including a description of how 
 the pilot program will be carried out in a manner to reduce the 
 unemployment of veterans.
 (2) Implementation.--Not later than one year after the date 
 on which the pilot program under subsection (a) commences, the 
 Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretaries concerned 
 shall jointly submit to the appropriate congressional 
 committees a report on the implementation of the pilot program.
 (3) Final report.--Not later than one year after the date 
 on which the pilot program under subsection (a) is completed, 
 the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretaries concerned 
 shall jointly submit to the appropriate congressional 
 committees a report on the pilot program that includes the 
 following:
 (A) The number of veterans who applied to 
 participate in the pilot program.
 (B) The number of such veterans employed under the 
 pilot program.
 (C) The number of veterans identified in 
 subparagraph (B) who transitioned to full-time 
 positions with the Federal Government after 
 participating in the pilot program.
 (D) Any other information the Secretaries determine 
 appropriate with respect to measuring the effectiveness 
 of the pilot program.
 (h) Duration.--The authority to carry out the pilot program under 
subsection (a) shall terminate on the date that is two years after the 
date on which the pilot program commences.
 (i) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the Committee on Veterans' Affairs, the 
 Committee on Agriculture, and the Committee on Natural 
 Resources of the House of Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Veterans' Affairs, the 
 Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry, and 
 the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the 
 Senate.
 (2) The term ``resource management'' means approved 
 conservation practices which, when properly planned and 
 applied, work in tandem to provide environmental conservation 
 and protection for soil, water, air, plant, and animal 
 resources.
 (3) The term ``Secretary concerned'' means--
 (A) the Secretary of Agriculture with respect to 
 matters regarding the National Forest System and the 
 Department of Agriculture; and
 (B) the Secretary of the Interior with respect to 
 matters regarding the National Park System and the 
 Department of the Interior.

SEC. 5107. ELIMINATION OF ASSET AND INFRASTRUCTURE REVIEW COMMISSION OF 
 DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS.

 The VA Asset and Infrastructure Review Act of 2018 (subtitle A of 
title II of Public Law 115-182; 38 U.S.C. 8122 note) is amended by 
striking each section other than sections 204(b) and 207.

SEC. 5108. ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR REIMBURSEMENT FOR EMERGENCY 
 TREATMENT FURNISHED TO VETERANS.

 (a) Eligibility Requirements.--Section 1725(b)(2)(B) of title 38, 
United States Code, is amended by inserting ``, unless such emergency 
treatment was furnished during the 60-day period following the date on 
which the veteran enrolled in the health care system specified in 
subparagraph (A), in which case no requirement for prior receipt of 
care shall apply'' before the period.
 (b) Applicability.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply with respect to emergency treatment furnished on or after the 
date that is one year after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 5109. IMPROVING PROCESSING BY THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS 
 OF DISABILITY CLAIMS FOR POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER.

 (a) Training for Claims Processors Who Handle Claims Relating to 
Post-traumatic Stress Disorder.--
 (1) Update training programs.--Not later than 180 days 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of 
 Veterans Affairs (in this section referred to as the 
 ``Secretary'') shall, acting through the Under Secretary for 
 Benefits (in this section referred to as the ``Under 
 Secretary''), update an ongoing, national training program for 
 claims processors who review claims for compensation for 
 service-connected post-traumatic stress disorder.
 (2) Participation required.--Beginning on the date that is 
 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
 Secretary shall require that each claims processor described in 
 paragraph (1) participates in the training established under 
 paragraph (1) at least once each year beginning in the second 
 year in which the claims processor carries out the duties of 
 the claims processor for the Department.
 (3) Required elements.--The training established under 
 paragraph (1) shall include instruction on stressor development 
 and verification.
 (b) Standardization of Training at Regional Offices.--Not later 
than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
Secretary, acting through the Under Secretary, shall standardize the 
training provided at regional offices of the Veterans Benefits 
Administration to the employees of such regional offices.
 (c) Formal Process for Conduct of Annual Analysis of Trends.--Not 
later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
Secretary, acting through the Under Secretary, shall establish a formal 
process to analyze, on an annual basis, training needs based on 
identified processing error trends.
 (d) Formal Process for Conduct of Annual Studies.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary, acting through the 
 Under Secretary, shall establish a formal process to conduct, 
 on an annual basis, studies to help guide the national training 
 program established under subsection (a)(1).
 (2) Elements.--Each study conducted under paragraph (1) 
 shall cover the following:
 (A) Military post-traumatic stress disorder 
 stressors.
 (B) Decision-making claims for claims processors.
 (e) Annual Updates to Post-traumatic Stress Disorder Procedural 
Guidance.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of 
this Act and not less frequently than once each year thereafter, the 
Secretary, acting through the Under Secretary, shall evaluate the 
guidance relating to post-traumatic stress disorder to determine if 
updates are warranted to provide claims processors of the Department 
with better resources regarding best practices for claims processing, 
including specific guidance regarding development of claims involving 
compensation for service-connected post-traumatic stress disorder.

SEC. 5110. REGISTRY OF INDIVIDUALS EXPOSED TO PER- AND POLYFLUOROALKYL 
 SUBSTANCES ON MILITARY INSTALLATIONS.

 (a) Establishment of Registry.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than one year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs 
 shall--
 (A) establish and maintain a registry for eligible 
 individuals who may have been exposed to per- and 
 polyfluoroalkyl substances (in this section referred to 
 as ``PFAS'') due to the environmental release of 
 aqueous film-forming foam (in this section referred to 
 as ``AFFF'') on military installations to meet the 
 requirements of military specification MIL-F-24385F;
 (B) include any information in such registry that 
 the Secretary of Veterans Affairs determines necessary 
 to ascertain and monitor the health effects of the 
 exposure of members of the Armed Forces to PFAS 
 associated with AFFF;
 (C) develop a public information campaign to inform 
 eligible individuals about the registry, including how 
 to register and the benefits of registering; and
 (D) periodically notify eligible individuals of 
 significant developments in the study and treatment of 
 conditions associated with exposure to PFAS.
 (2) Coordination.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall 
 coordinate with the Secretary of Defense in carrying out 
 paragraph (1).
 (b) Reports.--
 (1) Initial report.--Not later than two years after the 
 date on which the registry under subsection (a) is established, 
 the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall submit to Congress an 
 initial report containing the following:
 (A) An assessment of the effectiveness of actions 
 taken by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the 
 Secretary of Defense to collect and maintain 
 information on the health effects of exposure to PFAS.
 (B) Recommendations to improve the collection and 
 maintenance of such information.
 (C) Using established and previously published 
 epidemiological studies, recommendations regarding the 
 most effective and prudent means of addressing the 
 medical needs of eligible individuals with respect to 
 exposure to PFAS.
 (2) Follow-up report.--Not later than five years after 
 submitting the initial report under paragraph (1), the 
 Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall submit to Congress a 
 follow-up report containing the following:
 (A) An update to the initial report submitted under 
 paragraph (1).
 (B) An assessment of whether and to what degree the 
 content of the registry established under subsection 
 (a) is current and scientifically up-to-date.
 (3) Independent scientific organization.--The Secretary of 
 Veterans Affairs shall enter into an agreement with an 
 independent scientific organization to prepare the reports 
 under paragraphs (1) and (2).
 (c) Recommendations for Additional Exposures to Be Included.--Not 
later than five years after the date of the enactment of this Act, and 
every five years thereafter, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, in 
consultation with the Secretary of Defense and the Administrator of the 
Environmental Protection Agency, shall submit to Congress 
recommendations for additional chemicals with respect to which 
individuals exposed to such chemicals should be included in the 
registry established under subsection (a).
 (d) Eligible Individual Defined.--In this section, the term 
``eligible individual'' means any individual who, on or after a date 
specified by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs through regulations, 
served or is serving in the Armed Forces at a military installation 
where AFFF was used or at another location of the Department of Defense 
where AFFF was used.

SEC. 5111. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON UNITED 
 STATES OUTLYING AREAS AND FREELY ASSOCIATED STATES.

 (a) Establishment of Advisory Committee.--
 (1) In general.--Subchapter III of chapter 5 of title 38, 
 United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new section:
``Sec. 548. Advisory Committee on United States Outlying Areas and 
 Freely Associated States
 ``(a) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish an advisory 
committee, to be known as the `Advisory Committee on United States 
Outlying Areas and Freely Associated States', to provide advice and 
guidance to the Secretary on matters relating to covered veterans.
 ``(b) Duties.--The duties of the Committee shall be the following:
 ``(1) To advise the Secretary on matters relating to 
 covered veterans, including how the Secretary can improve the 
 programs and services of the Department to better serve such 
 veterans.
 ``(2) To identify for the Secretary evolving issues of 
 relevance to covered veterans.
 ``(3) To propose clarifications, recommendations, and 
 solutions to address issues raised by covered veterans.
 ``(4) To provide a forum for covered veterans, veterans 
 service organizations serving covered veterans, and the 
 Department to discuss issues and proposals for changes to 
 regulations, policies, and procedures of the Department.
 ``(5) To identify priorities for and provide advice to the 
 Secretary on appropriate strategies for consultation with 
 veterans service organizations serving covered veterans.
 ``(6) To encourage the Secretary to work with other 
 departments and agencies of the Federal Government and Congress 
 to ensure covered veterans are provided the full benefits of 
 their status as covered veterans.
 ``(7) To highlight contributions of covered veterans in the 
 Armed Forces.
 ``(8) To conduct other duties as determined appropriate by 
 the Secretary.
 ``(c) Membership.--(1) The Committee shall be comprised of 15 
voting members appointed by the Secretary.
 ``(2) In appointing members pursuant to paragraph (1), the 
Secretary shall ensure the following:
 ``(A) At least one member is appointed to represent covered 
 veterans in each of the following areas:
 ``(i) American Samoa.
 ``(ii) Guam.
 ``(iii) Puerto Rico.
 ``(iv) The Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
 Islands.
 ``(v) The Virgin Islands of the United States.
 ``(vi) The Federated States of Micronesia.
 ``(vii) The Republic of the Marshall Islands.
 ``(viii) The Republic of Palau.
 ``(B) Not fewer than half of the members appointed are 
 covered veterans, unless the Secretary determines that an 
 insufficient number of qualified covered veterans are 
 available.
 ``(C) Each member appointed resides in an area specified in 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(3) In appointing members pursuant to paragraph (1), the 
Secretary may consult with any Member of Congress who represents an 
area specified in paragraph (2)(A).
 ``(d) Terms; Vacancies.--(1) A member of the Committee--
 ``(A) shall be appointed for a term of two years; and
 ``(B) may be reappointed to serve an additional 2-year 
 term.
 ``(2) Not later than 180 days after receiving notice of a vacancy 
in the Committee, the Secretary shall fill the vacancy in the same 
manner as the original appointment.
 ``(e) Meeting Format and Frequency.--(1) Except as provided in 
paragraph (2), the Committee shall meet in-person with the Secretary 
not less frequently than once each year and hold monthly conference 
calls as necessary.
 ``(2) Meetings held under paragraph (1) may be conducted virtually 
if determined necessary based on--
 ``(A) Department protocols; and
 ``(B) timing and budget considerations.
 ``(f) Additional Representation.--(1) Representatives of relevant 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government may attend meetings 
of the Committee and provide information to the Committee.
 ``(2) One representative of the Department shall attend each 
meeting of the Committee.
 ``(3) Representatives attending meetings under this subsection--
 ``(A) shall not be considered voting members of the 
 Committee; and
 ``(B) may not receive additional compensation for services 
 performed with respect to the Committee.
 ``(g) Subcommittees.--(1) The Committee may establish 
subcommittees.
 ``(2) The Secretary may, in consultation with the Committee, 
appoint a member to a subcommittee established under paragraph (1) who 
is not a member of the Committee.
 ``(3) A subcommittee established under paragraph (1) may enhance 
the function of the Committee, but may not supersede the authority of 
the Committee or provide direct advice or work products to the 
Secretary.
 ``(h) Reports.--(1) Not less frequently than once every 2 years, 
the Committee shall submit to the Secretary and the appropriate 
committees of Congress a report--
 ``(A) containing such recommendations as the Committee may 
 have for legislative or administrative action; and
 ``(B) describing the activities of the Committee during the 
 previous two years.
 ``(2) Not later than 120 days after the date on which the Secretary 
receives a report under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall submit to 
the appropriate committees of Congress a written response to the report 
after--
 ``(A) giving the Committee an opportunity to review such 
 written response; and
 ``(B) including in such written response any comments the 
 Committee considers appropriate.
 ``(3) The Secretary shall make publicly available on an internet 
website of the Department--
 ``(A) each report the Secretary receives under paragraph 
 (1);
 ``(B) each written response the Secretary submits under 
 paragraph (2); and
 ``(C) each report the Secretary receives under paragraph 
 (3).
 ``(i) Committee Personnel Matters.--A member of the Committee shall 
be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, 
at rates authorized for an employee of an agency under subchapter I of 
chapter 57 of title 5 while away from the home or regular place of 
business of the member in the performance of the duties of the 
Committee.
 ``(j) Consultation.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary 
shall consult with veterans service organizations serving covered 
veterans.
 ``(k) Termination.--The Committee shall terminate on the date that 
is 10 years after the date of the enactment of this section.
 ``(l) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) The term `appropriate committees of Congress' means--
 ``(A) the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the 
 House of Representatives; and
 ``(B) the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the 
 Senate.
 ``(2) The term `Committee' means the Advisory Committee on 
 United States Outlying Areas and Freely Associated States 
 established under subsection (a).
 ``(3) The term `covered veteran' means a veteran residing 
 in an area specified in subsection (c)(2)(A).
 ``(4) The term `veterans service organization serving 
 covered veterans' means any organization that--
 ``(A) serves the interests of covered veterans;
 ``(B) has covered veterans in substantive and 
 policymaking positions within the organization; and
 ``(C) has demonstrated experience working with 
 covered veterans.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the 
 beginning of chapter 5 of such title is amended by inserting 
 after the item relating to section 547 the following new item:

``548. Advisory Committee on United States Outlying Areas and Freely 
 Associated States.''.
 (b) Deadline for Establishment.--Not later than 180 days after the 
date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs 
shall establish the advisory committee required by section 548 of title 
38, United States Code, as added by subsection (a)(1) of this section.
 (c) Deadline for Initial Appointments.--Not later than 90 days 
after the date on which the Secretary establishes the advisory 
committee required by such section 548, the Secretary shall appoint the 
members of such advisory committee.
 (d) Initial Meeting.--Not later than 180 days after the date on 
which the Secretary establishes the advisory committee required by such 
section 548, such advisory committee shall hold its first meeting.

SEC. 5112. REPORT ON BARRIERS TO VETERAN PARTICIPATION IN FEDERAL 
 HOUSING PROGRAMS.

 Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, in coordination with the 
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, shall submit to Congress a 
report on the barriers veterans experience related to receiving 
benefits under Federal housing programs, including barriers faced by 
veterans based on their membership in one or more protected classes 
under the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601 et seq.), being part of a 
multi-generational household, and any other barriers as determined 
appropriate by the Secretary.

SEC. 5113. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS REPORT ON SUPPORTIVE SERVICES 
 AND HOUSING INSECURITY.

 Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, in coordination with the 
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and the Secretary of Labor, 
shall submit to Congress a report on how often and what type of 
supportive services (including career transition and mental health 
services and services for elderly veterans) are being offered to and 
used by veterans, and any correlation between a lack of supportive 
services programs and the likelihood of veterans falling back into 
housing insecurity. The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall ensure that 
any medical information included in the report is de-identified.

SEC. 5114. INCLUSION ON THE VIETNAM VETERANS MEMORIAL WALL OF THE NAMES 
 OF THE LOST CREW MEMBERS OF THE U.S.S. FRANK E. EVANS 
 KILLED ON JUNE 3, 1969.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 18 months after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall authorize the 
inclusion on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Wall in the District of 
Columbia of the names of the 74 crew members of the U.S.S. Frank E. 
Evans in service who were killed on June 3, 1969.
 (b) Required Consultation.--The Secretary of Defense shall consult 
with the Secretary of the Interior, the American Battlefield Monuments 
Commission, and other applicable authorities with respect to any 
adjustments to the nomenclature and placement of names pursuant to 
subsection (a) to address any space limitations on the placement of 
additional names on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Wall.
 (c) Nonapplicability of Commemorative Works Act.--Chapter 89 of 
title 40, United States Code (commonly known as the ``Commemorative 
Works Act''), shall not apply to any activities carried out under 
subsection (a) or (b).

SEC. 5115. PROVISION OF HEALTH CARE BENEFITS FOR CERTAIN INDIVIDUALS 
 WHO SERVED IN THE ARMED FORCES OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA.

 Section 109 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding 
at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(d)(1) Any person described in paragraph (2) shall be entitled to 
hospital and domiciliary care and medical services within the United 
States under chapter 17 of this title to the same extent as if the 
service described in such paragraph had been performed in the Armed 
Forces of the United States.
 ``(2) A person described in this paragraph is a person whom the 
Secretary determines meets the following criteria:
 ``(A) The person served in Vietnam as a member of the armed 
 forces of the Republic of Korea at any time during the period 
 beginning on January 9, 1962, and ending on May 7, 1975, or 
 such other period as determined appropriate by the Secretary 
 for purposes of this subsection.
 ``(B) The person became a citizen of the United States on 
 or after the date on which such service in the armed forces of 
 the Republic of Korea ended.''.

SEC. 5116. GRANTS FOR PROVISION OF TRANSITION ASSISTANCE TO MEMBERS AND 
 FORMER MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES AFTER SEPARATION, 
 RETIREMENT, OR DISCHARGE.

 (a) In General.--Commencing not later than 180 days after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Labor shall, in 
coordination with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, carry out a 
program to award grants to eligible organizations for the provision of 
assistance to covered individuals on the transition of a member or 
former member of the Armed Forces from service in the Armed Forces to 
civilian life.
 (b) Covered Individuals.--For purposes of this section, a covered 
individual is--
 (1) a member of the Armed Forces who is eligible for 
 preseparation counseling under sections 1142 and 1144 of title 
 10, United States Code;
 (2) a former member of the Armed Forces who is 
 transitioning from service in the Armed Forces to civilian 
 life; or
 (3) a spouse of a member described in paragraph (1) or a 
 former member described in paragraph (2).
 (c) Duration of Program.--The Secretary of Labor shall carry out 
the program during the 5-year period beginning on the date of the 
commencement of the program.
 (d) Grants.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Labor shall carry out the 
 program through the award of grants to eligible organizations 
 for the provision of assistance described in subsection (a).
 (2) Matching funds required.--A grant under this section 
 shall be in an amount that does not exceed 50 percent of the 
 amount required by the organization to provide the services 
 described in subsection (g).
 (e) Eligible Organizations.--For purposes of this section, an 
eligible organization is any nonprofit organization, including 
workforce boards or Veterans Service Organizations, that the Secretary 
of Labor determines, in consultation with the Secretary of Veterans 
Affairs, is suitable for receipt of a grant under the program pursuant 
to receipt by the Secretary of Labor of an application submitted under 
subsection (f)(1).
 (f) Selection of Grant Recipients.--
 (1) Applications.--An organization seeking a grant under 
 the program shall submit to the Secretary of Labor an 
 application therefor at such time, in such manner, and 
 containing such information and assurances as the Secretary, in 
 consultation with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, may 
 require.
 (2) Priority for hubs of services.--In awarding grants 
 under the program, the Secretary of Labor shall give priority 
 to an organization that provides multiple forms of services 
 described in subsection (g).
 (g) Use of Funds.--The recipient of a grant under the program shall 
use the grant to coordinate for covered individuals the following:
 (1) Career and training services, including the provision 
 of such services available through the workforce development 
 system.
 (2) Mental health services.
 (3) Legal assistance.
 (4) Supportive services.
 (5) Assistance with accessing benefits provided under laws 
 administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
 (6) Non-clinical case management.
 (7) Entrepreneurship training.
 (8) Such other services that may be related to the 
 assistance and services set forth in this subsection as the 
 Secretary of Labor determines may lead directly to successful 
 transition to civilian life.
 (h) Inclusion in Transition Assistance Program Counseling.--The 
Secretary concerned shall include in the information provided to a 
member of the Armed Forces during the Transition Assistance Program 
information regarding any recipient of a grant under this section that 
is located in the community in which that member will reside after 
separation, retirement, or discharge from the Armed Forces.
 (i) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated $10,000,000 to carry out this section.
 (j) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Except as otherwise provided, any term used in this Act 
 that is defined in section 3 of the Workforce Innovation and 
 Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3102) shall have the meaning given 
 to such term in such section.
 (2) The term ``nonprofit organization'' is an organization 
 that is described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986 and is exempt from taxation under section 501(a) 
 of such Code.
 (3) The term ``Secretary concerned'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 101 of title 10, United States Code.
 (4) The term ``Transition Assistance Program'' means the 
 Transition Assistance Program under sections 1142 and 1144 of 
 title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 5117. STUDY ON INCIDENCE AND MORTALITY OF CANCER AMONG FORMER 
 AIRCREW OF THE NAVY, AIR FORCE, AND MARINE CORPS.

 (a) Study.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall seek to enter into 
an agreement with the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
Medicine under which the National Academies shall conduct a study of 
the incidence and mortality of cancers among covered individuals.
 (b) Matters Included.--The study under subsection (a) shall include 
the following:
 (1) Identification of chemicals, compounds, agents, and 
 other phenomena that cause elevated cancer incidence and 
 mortality risks among covered individuals, including a nexus 
 study design to determine whether there is a scientifically 
 established causal link between such a chemical, compound, 
 agent, or other phenomena and such cancer incidence or 
 mortality risk.
 (2) An assessment of not fewer than 10 types of cancer that 
 are of the greatest concern with respect to exposure by covered 
 individuals to the chemicals, compounds, agents, and other 
 phenomena identified under paragraph (1), which may include 
 colon and rectum cancers, pancreatic cancer, melanoma skin 
 cancer, prostate cancer, testis cancer, urinary bladder cancer, 
 kidney cancer, brain cancer, thyroid cancer, lung cancer, and 
 non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
 (3) A review of all available sources of relevant data, 
 including health care databases of the Department of Veterans 
 Affairs and the Department of Defense and the national death 
 index, and the study conducted under section 750 of the William 
 M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for 
 Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283; 134 Stat. 3716).
 (c) Submission.--
 (1) Study.--Upon completion of the study under subsection 
 (a), the National Academies shall submit to the Secretary of 
 Veterans Affairs, the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of 
 the Navy, the Secretary of the Air Force, and the Committees on 
 Veterans' Affairs of the House of Representatives and the 
 Senate the study.
 (2) Report.--Not later than December 31, 2025, the 
 Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall submit to the Committees on 
 Veterans' Affairs of the House of Representatives and the 
 Senate a report on the study under subsection (a), including--
 (A) the specific actions the Secretary is taking to 
 ensure that the study informs the evaluation of 
 disability claims made to the Secretary, including with 
 respect to providing guidance to claims examiners and 
 revising the schedule of ratings for disabilities under 
 chapter 11 of title 38, United States Code; and
 (B) any recommendations of the Secretary.
 (3) Form.--The report under paragraph (2) shall be 
 submitted in unclassified form.
 (d) Covered Individual Defined.--In this section, the term 
``covered individual'' means an individual who served in the regular or 
reserve components of the Navy, Air Force, or Marine Corps, as an air 
crew member of a fixed-wing aircraft or personnel supporting generation 
of the aircraft, including pilots, navigators, weapons systems 
operators, aircraft system operators, personnel associated with 
aircraft maintenance, supply, logistics, fuels, or transportation, and 
any other crew member who regularly flew in an aircraft or was required 
to complete the mission of the aircraft.

SEC. 5118. FEASIBILITY STUDY ON INCLUSION ON THE VIETNAM VETERANS 
 MEMORIAL WALL OF THE NAMES OF THE LOST CREW MEMBERS OF 
 THE USS FRANK E. EVANS KILLED ON JUNE 3, 1969.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense shall conduct a study to 
determine the feasibility of including on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial 
Wall in the District of Columbia the names of the 74 crew members of 
the USS Frank E. Evans in service who were killed on June 3, 1969. Such 
study shall include a determination of--
 (1) the cost of including such names; and
 (2) whether there is sufficient space on the Wall for the 
 inclusion of such names.
 (b) Consultation.--In conducting the study required under 
subsection, the Secretary shall consult with members of the Frank E. 
Evans Association, as well as survivors and family members of the crew 
members who were killed.

SEC. 5119. LIMITATION ON COPAYMENTS FOR CONTRACEPTION.

 Section 1722A(a)(2) of title 38, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by striking ``to pay'' and all that follows through the 
 period and inserting ``to pay--''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraphs:
 ``(A) an amount in excess of the cost to the 
 Secretary for medication described in paragraph (1); or
 ``(B) an amount for any contraceptive item for 
 which coverage under health insurance coverage is 
 required without the imposition of any cost-sharing 
 requirement pursuant to section 2713(a)(4) of the 
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-
 13(a)(4)).''.

SEC. 5120. REQUIREMENT FOR TIMELY SCHEDULING OF APPOINTMENTS AT MEDICAL 
 FACILITIES OF DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS.

 (a) Requirement.--Chapter 17 of title 38, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) by redesignating section 1706A as section 1706B; and
 (2) by inserting after section 1706 the following new 
 section:
``Sec. 1706A. Management of health care: timely scheduling of 
 appointments at Department facilities
 ``(a) Requirement for Scheduling.--In managing the provision of 
hospital care and medical services at medical facilities of the 
Department of Veterans Affairs under this chapter, the Secretary shall 
ensure that whenever a covered veteran contacts the Department by 
telephone to request the scheduling of an appointment for care or 
services for the covered veteran at such a facility, the scheduling for 
the appointment occurs during that telephone call (regardless of the 
prospective date of the appointment being scheduled).
 ``(b) Covered Veteran Defined.--In this section, the term `covered 
veteran' means a veteran who is enrolled in the system of patient 
enrollment of the Department under section 1705(a) of this title.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
such chapter is amended by striking the item relating to section 1706A 
and inserting the following new items:

``1706A. Management of health care: timely scheduling of appointments 
 at Department facilities.
``1706B. Remediation of medical service lines.''.
 (c) Applicability.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall 
apply with respect to requests for appointment scheduling occurring on 
or after the date that is 120 days after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

SEC. 5121. PROVISION BY DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS HEALTH CARE 
 PROVIDERS OF RECOMMENDATIONS AND OPINIONS REGARDING 
 VETERAN PARTICIPATION IN STATE MARIJUANA PROGRAMS.

 (a) In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the 
Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall authorize physicians and other 
health care providers employed by the Department of Veterans Affairs 
to--
 (1) provide recommendations and opinions to veterans who 
 are residents of States with State marijuana programs regarding 
 the participation of veterans in such State marijuana programs; 
 and
 (2) complete forms reflecting such recommendations and 
 opinions.
 (b) State Defined.--In this section, the term ``State'' means each 
of the several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of 
Puerto Rico, any territory or possession of the United States, and each 
federally recognized Indian Tribe.

SEC. 5122. ANNUAL REPORT FROM THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON WOMEN VETERANS.

 Subsection (c)(1) of section 542 of title 38, United States Code, 
is amended by striking ``even-numbered year'' and inserting ``year''.

SEC. 5123. VA PAYMENTS OR ALLOWANCES FOR BENEFICIARY TRAVEL.

 Section 111(g) of title 38, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by striking ``(1) Beginning one year after the date of 
 the enactment of the Caregivers and Veterans Omnibus Health 
 Services Act of 2010, the Secretary may'' and inserting ``The 
 Secretary shall'';
 (2) by striking ``to be'' and inserting ``to be at least''; 
 and
 (3) by striking paragraph (2).

SEC. 5124. IMPROVEMENT OF VET CENTERS AT DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS 
 AFFAIRS.

 (a) Productivity Expectations for Readjustment Counselors of Vet 
Centers.--
 (1) Evaluation of productivity expectations.--Not later 
 than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
 Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall evaluate productivity 
 expectations for readjustment counselors of Vet Centers, 
 including by obtaining systematic feedback from counselors on 
 such expectations, including with respect to following:
 (A) Any potential effects of productivity 
 expectations, whether positive or negative, on client 
 care and the welfare of readjustment counselors.
 (B) Distances readjustment counselors may travel to 
 appointments, especially with respect to serving rural 
 veterans.
 (C) The possibility that some veterans may not want 
 to use nor benefit from telehealth or group counseling.
 (D) Availability and access of veteran populations 
 to broadband and telehealth.
 (E) Any effect of productivity expectations on 
 readjustment counselors, including with respect to 
 recruitment, retention, and welfare.
 (F) Whether productivity expectations provide 
 incentives or pressure to inaccurately report client 
 visits.
 (G) Whether directors and readjustment counselors 
 of Vet Centers need additional training or guidance on 
 how productivity expectations are calculated.
 (H) Such other criteria as the Secretary considers 
 appropriate.
 (2) Systematic feedback.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary shall--
 (i) make every effort to ensure that all 
 readjustment counselors of Vet Centers are 
 given the opportunity to fully provide 
 feedback, positive or negative, including 
 through a survey containing open- and close-
 ended questions, on all items under paragraph 
 (1);
 (ii) in obtaining feedback under paragraph 
 (1), ensure that the items under paragraph (1) 
 are adequately and completely addressed in a 
 way that permits responses to be relevant to 
 the evaluation of productivity expectations;
 (iii) collect and safely store the feedback 
 obtained under paragraph (1)--
 (I) in an electronic database that 
 cannot be altered by any party;
 (II) in an anonymized manner, in 
 order to protect the privacy of each 
 respondent; and
 (III) in a manner that allows for 
 evaluation by third parties of the 
 feedback, such as audit of the feedback 
 by the Government Accountability 
 Office; and
 (iv) provide the feedback obtained under 
 paragraph (1) in an anonymized manner to the 
 working group established under subsection (c).
 (B) Government accountability office audit.--Not 
 less frequently than once each year during the five-
 year period beginning on the date of the enactment of 
 this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States 
 shall audit the feedback obtained from readjustment 
 counselors of Vet Centers under paragraph (1).
 (3) Implementation of changes.--Not later than 90 days 
 after the date of the completion of the evaluation required by 
 paragraph (1), the Secretary shall implement any needed changes 
 to the productivity expectations described in such paragraph in 
 order to ensure--
 (A) quality of care and access to care for 
 veterans; and
 (B) the welfare of readjustment counselors.
 (4) Report to congress.--Not later than 180 days after the 
 date of the completion of the evaluation required by paragraph 
 (1), the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on--
 (A) the findings of the evaluation; and
 (B) any planned or implemented changes described in 
 paragraph (3).
 (5) Plan for reassessment and implementation.--
 (A) Plan.--Not later than one year after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall 
 develop and implement a plan for--
 (i) reassessing productivity expectations 
 for readjustment counselors of Vet Centers, in 
 consultation with such counselors; and
 (ii) implementing any needed changes to 
 such expectations, as the Secretary determines 
 appropriate.
 (B) Reassessments.--Under the plan required by 
 subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall conduct a 
 reassessment described in such paragraph not less 
 frequently than once each year.
 (b) Staffing Model for Vet Centers.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than one year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs 
 shall develop and implement a staffing model for Vet Centers 
 that incorporates key practices in the design of such staffing 
 model.
 (2) Elements.--In developing the staffing model under 
 paragraph (1), the Secretary shall--
 (A) involve key stakeholders, including 
 readjustment counselors, outreach specialists, and 
 directors of Vet Centers;
 (B) incorporate key work activities and the 
 frequency and time required to conduct such activities;
 (C) ensure the data used in the model is high 
 quality to provide assurance that staffing estimates 
 are reliable; and
 (D) incorporate--
 (i) risk factors, including case 
 complexity;
 (ii) geography;
 (iii) availability, advisability, and 
 willingness of veterans to use telehealth or 
 group counseling; and
 (iv) such other factors as the Secretary 
 considers appropriate.
 (3) Plan for assessments and updates.--Not later than one 
 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary 
 shall develop a plan for--
 (A) assessing and updating the staffing model 
 developed and implemented under paragraph (1) not less 
 frequently than once every four years; and
 (B) implementing any needed changes to such model, 
 as the Secretary determines appropriate.
 (c) Working Group of Readjustment Counselors, Outreach Specialists, 
and Directors of Vet Centers.--
 (1) In general.--In conducting the evaluation of 
 productivity expectations under subsection (a) (1) and 
 developing the staffing model for Vet Centers under subsection 
 (b)(1), the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall establish a 
 working group to assess--
 (A) the efficacy, impact, and composition of 
 performance metrics for such expectations with respect 
 to--
 (i) quality of care and access to care for 
 veterans; and
 (ii) the welfare of readjustment counselors 
 and other employees of Vet Centers; and
 (B) key considerations for the development of such 
 staffing model, including with respect to--
 (i) quality of care and access to care for 
 veterans and other individuals eligible for 
 care through Vet Centers; and
 (ii) recruitment, retention, and welfare of 
 employees of Vet Centers.
 (2) Membership.--The working group established under 
 paragraph (1) shall be composed of readjustment counselors, 
 outreach specialists, and directors of Vet Centers.
 (3) Feedback and recommendations.--The working group 
 established under paragraph (1) shall provide to the 
 Secretary--
 (A) feedback from readjustment counselors, outreach 
 specialists, and directors of Vet Centers; and
 (B) recommendations on how to improve--
 (i) quality of care and access to care for 
 veterans; and
 (ii) the welfare of readjustment counselors 
 and other employees of Vet Centers.
 (d) Improvements of Hiring Practices at Vet Centers.--
 (1) Standardization of position descriptions.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than one year after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of 
 Veterans Affairs shall standardize descriptions of 
 position responsibilities at Vet Centers.
 (B) Reporting requirement.--In each of the first 
 two annual reports submitted under section 7309(e) of 
 title 38, United States Code, after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall include a 
 description of the actions taken by the Secretary to 
 carry out subparagraph (A).
 (2) Expansion of reporting requirements on readjustment 
 counseling to include actions to reduce staffing vacancies and 
 time to hire.--Section 7309(e)(2) of title 38, United States 
 Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(D) A description of actions taken by the Secretary to 
 reduce--
 ``(i) vacancies in counselor positions in the 
 Readjustment Counseling Service; and
 ``(ii) the time it takes to hire such 
 counselors.''.
 (e) Report by Government Accountability Office on Vet Center 
Infrastructure and Future Investments.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than one year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the 
 United States shall submit to Congress a report on physical 
 infrastructure and future investments with respect to Vet 
 Centers.
 (2) Elements.--The report required by paragraph (1) shall 
 include the following:
 (A) An assessment of--
 (i) the condition of the physical 
 infrastructure of all assets of Vet Centers, 
 whether owned or leased by the Department of 
 Veterans Affairs; and
 (ii) the short-, medium-, and long-term 
 plans of the Department to maintain and upgrade 
 the physical infrastructure of Vet Centers to 
 address the operational needs of Vet Centers as 
 of the date of the submittal of the report and 
 future needs.
 (B) An assessment of management and strategic 
 planning for the physical infrastructure of Vet 
 Centers, including whether the Department should buy or 
 lease existing or additional locations in areas with 
 stable or growing populations of veterans.
 (C) An assessment of whether, as of the date of the 
 submittal of the report, Vet Center buildings, mobile 
 Vet Centers, community access points, and similar 
 infrastructure are sufficient to care for veterans or 
 if such infrastructure is negatively affecting care due 
 to limited space for veterans and Vet Center personnel 
 or other factors.
 (D) An assessment of the areas with the greatest 
 need for investments in--
 (i) improved physical infrastructure, 
 including upgraded Vet Centers; or
 (ii) additional physical infrastructure for 
 Vet Centers, including new Vet Centers owned or 
 leased by the Department.
 (E) A description of the authorities and resources 
 that may be required for the Secretary to make such 
 investments.
 (F) A review of all annual reports submitted under 
 7309(e) of title 38, United States Code, before the 
 date of the submittal of the report under paragraph 
 (1).
 (f) Pilot Program to Combat Food Insecurity Among Veterans and 
Family Members of Veterans.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 18 months after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs 
 shall establish a pilot program to award grants to eligible 
 entities to support partnerships that address food insecurity 
 among veterans and family members of veterans who receive 
 services through Vet Centers or other facilities of the 
 Department as determined by the Secretary.
 (2) Duration of pilot.--The Secretary shall carry out the 
 pilot program for a three-year period beginning on the date of 
 the establishment of the pilot program.
 (3) Training and technical assistance.--The Secretary may 
 provide eligible entities receiving grant funding under the 
 pilot program with training and technical assistance on the 
 provision of food insecurity assistance services to veterans 
 and family members of veterans.
 (4) Eligible entities.--For purposes of the pilot program, 
 an eligible entity is--
 (A) a nonprofit organization;
 (B) an organization recognized by the Secretary for 
 the representation of veterans under section 5902 of 
 title 38, United States Code;
 (C) a public agency;
 (D) a community-based organization; or
 (E) an institution of higher education.
 (5) Application.--An eligible entity seeking a grant under 
 the pilot program shall submit to the Secretary an application 
 therefor at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
 information and commitments as the Secretary may require.
 (6) Selection.--The Secretary shall select eligible 
 entities that submit applications under paragraph (5) for the 
 award of grants under the pilot program using a competitive 
 process that takes into account the following:
 (A) Capacity of the applicant entity to serve 
 veterans and family members of veterans.
 (B) Demonstrated need of the population the 
 applicant entity would serve.
 (C) Demonstrated need of the applicant entity for 
 assistance from the grant.
 (D) Such other criteria as the Secretary considers 
 appropriate.
 (7) Distribution.--The Secretary shall ensure, to the 
 extent practicable, an equitable geographic distribution of 
 grants awarded under this subsection.
 (8) Minimum program requirements.--Any grant awarded under 
 this subsection shall be used--
 (A) to coordinate with the Secretary with respect 
 to the provision of assistance to address food 
 insecurity among veterans and family members of 
 veterans described in paragraph (1);
 (B) to increase participation in nutrition 
 counseling programs and provide educational materials 
 and counseling to veterans and family members of 
 veterans to address food insecurity and healthy diets 
 among those individuals;
 (C) to increase access to and enrollment in Federal 
 assistance programs, including the supplemental 
 nutrition assistance program under the Food and 
 Nutrition Act of 2008 (7 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), the 
 special supplemental nutrition program for women, 
 infants, and children established by section 17 of the 
 Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786), the low-
 income home energy assistance program established under 
 the Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Act of 1981 (42 
 U.S.C. 8621 et seq.), and any other assistance program 
 that the Secretary considers advisable; and
 (D) to fulfill such other criteria as the Secretary 
 considers appropriate to further the purpose of the 
 grant and serve veterans.
 (9) Provision of information.--Each entity that receives a 
 grant under this subsection shall provide to the Secretary, at 
 least once each year during the duration of the grant term, 
 data on--
 (A) the number of veterans and family members of 
 veterans screened for, and enrolled in, programs 
 described in subparagraphs (B) and (C) of paragraph 
 (8);
 (B) other services provided by the entity to 
 veterans and family members of veterans using funds 
 from the grant; and
 (C) such other data as the Secretary may require.
 (10) Report on data collected.--For each year of operation 
 of the pilot program, the Secretary shall submit to the 
 appropriate committees of Congress a report on the data 
 collected under paragraph (9) during such year.
 (11) Government accountability office report.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than one year after the 
 date on which the pilot program terminates, the 
 Comptroller General of the United States shall submit 
 to Congress a report evaluating the effectiveness and 
 outcomes of the activities carried out under this 
 subsection in reducing food insecurity among veterans 
 and family members of veterans.
 (B) Elements.--The report required by subparagraph 
 (A) shall include the following:
 (i) A summary of the activities carried out 
 under this subsection.
 (ii) An assessment of the effectiveness and 
 outcomes of the grants awarded under this 
 subsection, including with respect to 
 eligibility screening contacts, application 
 assistance consultations, and changes in food 
 insecurity among the population served by the 
 grant.
 (iii) Best practices regarding the use of 
 partnerships to improve the effectiveness and 
 outcomes of public benefit programs to address 
 food insecurity among veterans and family 
 members of veterans.
 (iv) An assessment of the feasibility and 
 advisability of making the pilot program 
 permanent and expanding to other locations.
 (12) Authorization of appropriations.--
 (A) In general.--There is authorized to be 
 appropriated to carry out the pilot program established 
 under paragraph (1) $15,000,000 for each fiscal year in 
 which the program is carried out, beginning with the 
 fiscal year in which the program is established.
 (B) Administrative expenses.--Of the amounts 
 authorized to be appropriated under subparagraph (A), 
 not more than ten percent may be used for 
 administrative expenses of the Department of Veterans 
 Affairs associated with administering grants under this 
 subsection.
 (13) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) The term ``appropriate committees of Congress'' 
 means--
 (i) the Committee on Veterans' Affairs, the 
 Committee on Appropriations, and the Committee 
 on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the 
 Senate; and
 (ii) the Committee on Veterans' Affairs, 
 the Committee on Appropriations, and the 
 Committee on Agriculture of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (B) The term ``facilities of the Department'' has 
 the meaning given that term in section 1701(3) of title 
 38, United States Code.
 (C) The term ``institution of higher education'' 
 has the meaning given that term in section 101 of the 
 Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001).
 (D) The term ``public agency'' means a department, 
 agency, other unit, or instrumentality of Federal, 
 State, Tribal, or local government.
 (E) The term ``State'' has the meaning given that 
 term in section 101(20) of title 38, United States 
 Code.
 (F) The term ``veteran'' means an individual who 
 served in the Armed Forces, including an individual who 
 served in a reserve component of the Armed Forces, and 
 who was discharged or released therefrom, regardless of 
 the conditions of such discharge or release.
 (g) Definition of Vet Center.--In this section, the term ``Vet 
Center'' has the meaning given that term in section 1712A(h) of title 
38, United States Code.

SEC. 5125. SECRETARY OF VETERANS AFFAIRS STUDY ON VA HOME LOAN BENEFIT.

 (a) Study.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall conduct a study 
to identify the means by which the Secretary informs lenders and 
veterans about the availability of a loan guaranteed by the Department 
of Veterans Affairs under chapter 37 of title 38, United States Code, 
for any purpose described in section 3710(a) of such title.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall submit 
to the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and the Committee 
on Veterans' Affairs of the House of Representatives a report on the 
results of the study conducted under subsection (a), and shall publish 
such report on the website of the Department of Veterans Affairs.

SEC. 5126. GAO STUDY ON POST-MARKET SURVEILLANCE OF MEDICAL DEVICES BY 
 DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS.

 (a) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall 
conduct a study on the efforts of the Under Secretary of Veterans 
Affairs for Health relating to post-market surveillance of implantable 
medical devices.
 (b) Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall submit to the 
Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the House of Representatives and the 
Senate a report on the findings of the study under subsection (a). Such 
report shall include the following:
 (1) A description of the process used by the Veterans 
 Health Administration for documenting implantable medical 
 devices issued to patients.
 (2) An evaluation of the capability of the Veterans Health 
 Administration to identify, in a timely manner, adverse events 
 and safety issues relating to implantable medical devices.
 (3) An evaluation of the process for, and potential 
 barriers to, the Under Secretary of Veterans Affairs for Health 
 notifying patients of an implantable medical device recall.
 (4) An evaluation of the accessibility of the adverse event 
 reporting systems of the Veterans Health Administration for 
 patients with disabilities.
 (5) Recommendations to address gaps in such adverse event 
 reporting systems, to better identify adverse events and safety 
 issues from implantable medical devices.

SEC. 5127. COMPETITIVE PAY FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS OF THE DEPARTMENT 
 OF VETERANS AFFAIRS.

 Section 7451(c) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by 
adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4)(A) The director of each medical center of the 
 Department of Veterans Affairs shall submit to the Secretary of 
 Veterans Affairs an annual locality pay survey and rates of 
 basic pay for covered positions at such medical center to 
 ensure that pay rates remain competitive in the local labor 
 market.
 ``(B) Not less than once per fiscal year, the Secretary 
 shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the 
 Senate and House of Representatives a report on rates of basic 
 pay for covered positions at medical centers of the 
 Department.''.

SEC. 5128. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS PROGRAM TO PROVIDE GRANTS FOR 
 CERTAIN VETERANS SERVICE ORGANIZATIONS AFFECTED BY THE 
 COVID-19 PANDEMIC.

 (a) Grant Program.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall carry 
out a program under which the Secretary shall make grants to eligible 
organizations to offset costs relating to the COVID-19 pandemic 
incurred during the covered 2020 period.
 (b) Eligible Organizations.--To be eligible to receive a grant 
under the program, an organization shall be a veterans service 
organization that--
 (1) as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, experienced a 
 loss of 50 percent or greater gross revenue during the covered 
 2020 period (compared to the gross revenue collected during the 
 covered 2019 period); and
 (2) submits to the Secretary an application in such form, 
 at such time, and containing such information as the Secretary 
 determines appropriate, including--
 (A) information demonstrating the loss specified in 
 paragraph (1); and
 (B) a plan for the use of such grant.
 (c) Use of Grant Amounts.--A veterans service organization that 
receives a grant under this section may only use the grant in 
accordance with the plan referred to in subsection (b)(2)(B) for the 
following expenses of the organization:
 (1) Rent.
 (2) Utilities.
 (3) Scheduled mortgage payments.
 (4) Scheduled debt payments.
 (5) Other ordinary and necessary business expenses, 
 including maintenance costs, administrative costs (including 
 fees and licensing), State and local taxes and fees, operating 
 leases, and insurance payments.
 (d) Amount of Grant.--A grant made to a veterans service 
organization under the program shall be in an amount equal to the 
aggregate cost of the activities specified in the plan referred to in 
subsection (b)(2)(B), except that any such grant may not exceed 
$50,000.
 (e) Regulations.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall prescribe regulations to 
carry out the grant program.
 (f) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered 2019 period'' means the period 
 beginning on April 1, 2019, and ending on December 31, 2019.
 (2) The term ``covered 2020 period'' means the period 
 beginning on April 1, 2020, and ending on December 31, 2020.
 (3) The term ``veterans service organization'' means an 
 organization that is chartered under part B of subtitle II of 
 title 36, United States Code, and includes any local or area 
 chapter, post, or other unit.
 (g) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $25,000,000, to remain available 
until expended.

SEC. 5129. INCLUSION OF VETERANS IN HOUSING PLANNING.

 (a) Public Housing Agency Plans.--Section 5A(d)(1) of the United 
States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437c-1(d)(1)) is amended by 
striking ``and disabled families'' and inserting ``, disabled families, 
and veterans (as such term is defined in section 101 of title 38, 
United States Code)''.
 (b) Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategies.--
 (1) In general.--Section 105 of the Cranston-Gonzalez 
 National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 12705) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (b)(1), by inserting ``veterans 
 (as such term is defined in section 101 of title 38, 
 United States Code),'' after ``acquired 
 immunodeficiency syndrome,'';
 (B) in subsection (b)(20), by striking ``and 
 service'' and inserting ``veterans service, and other 
 service''; and
 (C) in subsection (e)(1), by inserting ``veterans 
 (as such term is defined in section 101 of title 38, 
 United States Code),'' after ``homeless persons,''.
 (2) Consolidated plans.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban 
 Development shall revise the regulations relating to submission 
 of consolidated plans (part 91 of title 24, Code of Federal 
 Regulations) in accordance with the amendments made by 
 paragraph (1) of this subsection to require inclusion of 
 appropriate information relating to veterans and veterans 
 service agencies in all such plans.

SEC. 5130. ANNUAL REPORT ON HOUSING ASSISTANCE TO VETERANS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than December 31 of each year, the 
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall submit a report on the 
activities of the Department of Housing and Urban Development relating 
to veterans during such year to the following:
 (1) The Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of 
 the Senate.
 (2) The Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate.
 (3) The Committee on Appropriations of the Senate.
 (4) The Committee on Financial Services of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (5) The Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (6) The Committee on Appropriations of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (7) The Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
 (b) Contents.--Each report required under subsection (a) shall 
include the following information with respect to the year for which 
the report is submitted:
 (1) The number of homeless veterans provided assistance 
 under the program of housing choice vouchers for homeless 
 veterans under section 8(o)(19) of the United States Housing 
 Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437f(o)(19)), the socioeconomic 
 characteristics and racial characteristics of such homeless 
 veterans, and the number, types, and locations of entities 
 contracted under such section to administer the vouchers.
 (2) The number of homeless veterans provided assistance 
 under the Tribal HUD-VA Supportive Housing Program (HUD-VASH) 
 authorized by the Consolidated and Further Continuing 
 Appropriations Act, 2015 (Pub. L. 113-235; 128 Stat. 2733), the 
 socioeconomic characteristics and racial characteristics of 
 such homeless veterans, and the number, types, and locations of 
 entities contracted under such section to administer the 
 vouchers.
 (3) A summary description of the special considerations 
 made for veterans under public housing agency plans submitted 
 pursuant to section 5A of the United States Housing Act of 1937 
 (42 U.S.C. 1437c-1) and under comprehensive housing 
 affordability strategies submitted pursuant to section 105 of 
 the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 
 U.S.C. 12705).
 (4) A description of the activities of the Special 
 Assistant for Veterans Affairs.
 (5) A description of the efforts of the Department of 
 Housing and Urban Development to coordinate the delivery of 
 housing and services to veterans with other Federal departments 
 and agencies, including the Department of Defense, Department 
 of Justice, Department of Labor, Department of Health and Human 
 Services, Department of Veterans Affairs, and the Interagency 
 Council on Homelessness.
 (6) The cost to the Department of Housing and Urban 
 Development of administering the programs and activities 
 relating to veterans.
 (7) Any other information that the Secretary considers 
 relevant in assessing the programs and activities of the 
 Department of Housing and Urban Development relating to 
 veterans.
 (c) Assessment of Housing Needs of Very Low-Income Veteran 
Families.--
 (1) In general.--For the first report submitted pursuant to 
 subsection (a) and every fifth report thereafter, the Secretary 
 of Housing and Urban Development shall--
 (A) conduct an assessment of the housing needs of 
 very low-income veteran families (as such term is 
 defined in paragraph 5); and
 (B) shall include in each such report findings 
 regarding such assessment.
 (2) Content.--Each assessment under this subsection shall 
 include--
 (A) conducting a survey of, and direct interviews 
 with, a representative sample of very low-income 
 veteran families (as such term is defined in paragraph 
 5) to determine past and current--
 (i) socioeconomic characteristics of such 
 veteran families;
 (ii) barriers to such veteran families 
 obtaining safe, quality, and affordable 
 housing;
 (iii) levels of homelessness among such 
 veteran families; and
 (iv) levels and circumstances of, and 
 barriers to, receipt by such veteran families 
 of rental housing and homeownership assistance; 
 and
 (B) such other information that the Secretary 
 determines, in consultation with the Secretary of 
 Veterans Affairs and national nongovernmental 
 organizations concerned with veterans, homelessness, 
 and very low-income housing, may be useful to the 
 assessment.
 (3) Conduct.--If the Secretary contracts with an entity 
 other than the Department of Housing and Urban Development to 
 conduct the assessment under this subsection, such entity shall 
 be a nongovernmental organization determined by the Secretary 
 to have appropriate expertise in quantitative and qualitative 
 social science research.
 (4) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized 
 to be appropriated to the Secretary of Housing and Urban 
 Development, to be available until expended to carry out this 
 subsection, $1,000,000.
 (5) Very low-income veteran family.--The term ``very low-
 income veteran family'' means a veteran family whose income 
 does not exceed 50 percent of the median income for the area, 
 as determined by the Secretary with adjustments for smaller and 
 larger families, except that the Secretary may establish an 
 income ceiling higher or lower than 50 percent of the median 
 for the area on the basis of the Secretary's findings that such 
 variations are necessary because of prevailing levels of 
 construction costs or fair market rents (as determined under 
 section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 
 1437f)).

SEC. 5131. PAYMENTS TO INDIVIDUALS WHO SERVED DURING WORLD WAR II IN 
 THE UNITED STATES MERCHANT MARINE.

 (a) Establishment of Compensation Fund.--Subchapter II of chapter 5 
of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the 
following new section:
``Sec. 534. Merchant Mariner Equity Compensation Fund
 ``(a) Compensation Fund.--(1) There is in the general fund of the 
Treasury a fund to be known as the `Merchant Mariner Equity 
Compensation Fund' (in this section referred to as the `compensation 
fund').
 ``(2) Subject to the availability of appropriations provided in 
advance in a appropriations Act specifically for the purpose of 
carrying out this section, and no other funding source, amounts in the 
compensation fund shall be available to the Secretary without fiscal 
year limitation to make payments to eligible individuals in accordance 
with this section.
 ``(b) Eligible Individuals.--(1) An eligible individual is an 
individual who--
 ``(A) during the one-year period beginning on the date of 
 the enactment of this section, submits to the Secretary an 
 application containing such information and assurances as the 
 Secretary may require;
 ``(B) has not received benefits under the Servicemen's 
 Readjustment Act of 1944 (Public Law 78-346); and
 ``(C) has engaged in qualified service.
 ``(2) For purposes of paragraph (1), a person has engaged in 
qualified service if, between December 7, 1941, and December 31, 1946, 
the person--
 ``(A) was a member of the United States merchant marine 
 (including the Army Transport Service and the Naval Transport 
 Service) serving as a crewmember of a vessel that was--
 ``(i) operated by the War Shipping Administration 
 or the Office of Defense Transportation (or an agent of 
 the Administration or Office);
 ``(ii) operated in waters other than inland waters, 
 the Great Lakes, and other lakes, bays, and harbors of 
 the United States;
 ``(iii) under contract or charter to, or property 
 of, the Government of the United States; and
 ``(iv) serving the Armed Forces; and
 ``(B) while so serving, was licensed or otherwise 
 documented for service as a crewmember of such a vessel by an 
 officer or employee of the United States authorized to license 
 or document the person for such service.
 ``(3) In determining the information and assurances required in the 
application pursuant to paragraph (1)(A), the Secretary shall accept a 
DD-214 form as proof of qualified service.
 ``(c) Amount of Payment.--The Secretary shall make one payment out 
of the compensation fund in the amount of $25,000 to an eligible 
individual. The Secretary shall make such a payment to eligible 
individuals in the order in which the Secretary receives the 
applications of the eligible individuals. Payments may only be made 
subject to the availability of funds provided in advance in an 
appropriations Act for this purpose.
 ``(d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated for fiscal year 2022 $125,000,000 for the compensation 
fund. Such amount shall remain available until expended.
 ``(e) Reports.--The Secretary shall include, in documents submitted 
to Congress by the Secretary in support of the President's budget for 
each fiscal year, detailed information on the operation of the 
compensation fund, including the number of applicants, the number of 
eligible individuals receiving benefits, the amounts paid out of the 
compensation fund, the administration of the compensation fund, and an 
estimate of the amounts necessary to fully fund the compensation fund 
for that fiscal year and each of the three subsequent fiscal years.
 ``(f) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe regulations to 
carry out this section.''.
 (b) Regulations.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall prescribe the regulations 
required under section 534(f) of title 38, United States Code, as added 
by subsection (a).
 (c) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
such chapter is amended by inserting after the item related to section 
532 the following new item:

``534. Merchant Mariner Equity Compensation Fund.''.

SEC. 5132. EXPANSION OF ELIGIBILITY FOR HOSPITAL CARE, MEDICAL 
 SERVICES, AND NURSING HOME CARE FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF 
 VETERANS AFFAIRS TO INCLUDE VETERANS OF WORLD WAR II.

 Section 1710(a)(2)(E) of title 38, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by striking ``of the Mexican border period or of World 
 War I;'' and inserting ``of--''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new clauses:
 ``(i) the Mexican border period;
 ``(ii) World War I; or
 ``(iii) World War II;''.

SEC. 5133. PILOT PROGRAM ON CYBERSECURITY TRAINING FOR VETERANS AND 
 MILITARY SPOUSES.

 (a) Establishment.--Not later than 3 years after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security, in 
consultation with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, shall establish a 
pilot program under which the Secretary of Homeland Security shall 
provide cybersecurity training to eligible individuals at no cost to 
such individuals.
 (b) Elements.--The cybersecurity training provided under the pilot 
program shall include--
 (1) coursework and training that, if applicable, qualifies 
 for postsecondary credit toward an associate or baccalaureate 
 degree at an institution of higher education;
 (2) virtual learning opportunities;
 (3) hands-on learning and performance-based assessments;
 (4) Federal work-based learning opportunities and programs; 
 and
 (5) the provision of recognized postsecondary credentials 
 to eligible individuals who complete the pilot program.
 (c) Eligibility.--
 (1) In general.--To be eligible for the pilot program under 
 this section an individual shall be--
 (A) a veteran who is entitled to educational 
 assistance under chapter 30, 32, 33, 34, or 35 of title 
 38, United States Code, or chapter 1606 of title 10, 
 United States Code;
 (B) a member of an active or a reserve component of 
 the Armed Forces who the Secretary determines will 
 become an eligible individual under paragraph (1) 
 within 180 days of the date of such determination; or
 (C) an eligible spouse described in section 
 1784a(b) of title 10, United States Code.
 (2) No charge to entitlement.--In the case of an individual 
 described in paragraph (1)(A), training under this section 
 shall be provided to the individual without charge to the 
 entitlement of the individual to educational assistance under 
 the laws administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
 (d) Alignment With NICE Workforce Framework for Cybersecurity.--In 
carrying out the pilot program, the Secretary shall ensure alignment 
with the taxonomy, including work roles and competencies and the 
associated tasks, knowledge, and skills, from the National Initiative 
for Cybersecurity Education Workforce Framework for Cybersecurity (NIST 
Special Publication 800-181, Revision 1), or successor framework.
 (e) Coordination.--
 (1) Training, platforms, and frameworks.--In developing the 
 pilot program, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall 
 coordinate with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, the 
 Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Labor, the Director of 
 the National Institute of Standards and Technology, and the 
 Director of the Office of Personnel Management to evaluate and, 
 where possible, leverage existing training, platforms, and 
 frameworks of the Federal Government for providing 
 cybersecurity education and training to prevent duplication of 
 efforts.
 (2) Federal work-based learning opportunities and 
 programs.--In developing the Federal work-based learning 
 opportunities and programs required under subsection (b)(4), 
 the Secretary of Homeland Security shall coordinate with the 
 Secretary of Veterans Affairs, the Secretary of Defense, the 
 Secretary of Labor, the Director of the Office of Personnel 
 Management, and the heads of other appropriate Federal agencies 
 to identify or create, as necessary, interagency opportunities 
 to provide participants in the pilot program with--
 (A) opportunities to acquire and demonstrate 
 competencies; and
 (B) the capabilities necessary to qualify for 
 Federal employment.
 (f) Resources.--
 (1) In general.--In any case in which the pilot program--
 (A) uses training, platforms, and frameworks 
 described in subsection (e)(1), the Secretary of 
 Homeland Security, in consultation with the Secretary 
 of Veterans Affairs, shall ensure that the trainings, 
 platforms, and frameworks are expanded and resourced to 
 accommodate usage by eligible individuals participating 
 in the pilot program; or
 (B) does not use training, platforms, and 
 frameworks described in subsection (e)(1), the 
 Secretary of Homeland Security, in consultation with 
 the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, shall develop or 
 procure training, platforms, and frameworks necessary 
 to carry out the requirements of subsection (b) and 
 accommodate the usage by eligible individuals 
 participating in the pilot program.
 (2) Actions.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the Secretary 
 of Homeland Security may provide additional funding, staff, or 
 other resources to--
 (A) recruit and retain women, underrepresented 
 minorities, and individuals from other underrepresented 
 communities;
 (B) provide administrative support for basic 
 functions of the pilot program;
 (C) ensure the success and ongoing engagement of 
 eligible individuals participating in the pilot 
 program;
 (D) connect participants who complete the pilot 
 program to job opportunities within the Federal 
 Government; and
 (E) allocate dedicated positions for term 
 employment to enable Federal work-based learning 
 opportunities and programs, as required under 
 subsection (b)(4), for participants to gain the 
 competencies necessary to pursue permanent Federal 
 employment.
 (g) Reports.--
 (1) Secretary.--Not later than 2 years after the date on 
 which the pilot program is established, and annually 
 thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on 
 the pilot program. Such report shall include--
 (A) a description of--
 (i) any activity carried out by the 
 Department of Homeland Security under this 
 section; and
 (ii) the existing training, platforms, and 
 frameworks of the Federal Government leveraged 
 in accordance with subsection (e)(1); and
 (B) an assessment of the results achieved by the 
 pilot program, including--
 (i) the admittance rate into the pilot 
 program;
 (ii) the demographics of participants in 
 the program, including representation of women, 
 underrepresented minorities, and individuals 
 from other underrepresented communities;
 (iii) the completion rate for the pilot 
 program, including if there are any 
 identifiable patterns with respect to 
 participants who do not complete the pilot 
 program;
 (iv) as applicable, the transfer rates to 
 other academic or vocational programs, and 
 certifications and licensure exam passage 
 rates;
 (v) the rate of continued employment within 
 a Federal agency for participants after 
 completing the pilot program;
 (vi) the rate of continued employment for 
 participants after completing the pilot 
 program; and
 (vii) the median annual salary of 
 participants who completed the pilot program 
 and were subsequently employed.
 (2) Comptroller general.--Not later than 4 years after the 
 date on which the pilot program is established, the Comptroller 
 General of the United States shall submit to Congress a report 
 on the pilot program, including the recommendation of the 
 Comptroller General with respect to whether the pilot program 
 should be extended.
 (h) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``institution of higher education'' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 101 of the Higher Education 
 Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1001).
 (2) The term ``recognized postsecondary credential'' has 
 the meaning given the term in section 3 of the Workforce 
 Innovation and Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3102).
 (3) The term ``veteran'' has the meaning given the term in 
 section 101 of title 38, United States Code.
 (4) The term ``work-based learning'' has the meaning given 
 the term in section 3 of the Carl D. Perkins Career and 
 Technical Education Act of 2006 (20 U.S.C. 2302).
 (i) Termination.--The authority to carry out the pilot program 
under this section shall terminate on the date that is 5 years after 
the date on which the Secretary establishes the pilot program under 
this section.
 (j) Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Assessment Extension.--Section 
304(a) of the Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Assessment Act of 2015 (5 
U.S.C. 301 note) is amended, in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by 
striking ``2022'' and inserting ``2025''.

SEC. 5134. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS AWARENESS CAMPAIGN ON 
 FERTILITY SERVICES.

 (a) Awareness Campaign.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall 
conduct an awareness campaign regarding the types of fertility 
treatments, procedures, and services covered under the medical benefits 
package of the Department of Veterans Affairs that are available to 
veterans experiencing issues with fertility.
 (b) Modes of Outreach.--In carrying out subsection (a), the 
Secretary shall ensure that a variety of modes of outreach are 
incorporated into the awareness campaign under such subsection, taking 
into consideration the age range of the veteran population.
 (c) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the appropriate 
congressional committees a report that includes a summary of the 
actions that have been taken to implement the awareness campaign under 
subsection (a) and how the Secretary plans to better engage women 
veterans, to ensure awareness of such veterans regarding covered 
fertility services available.
 (d) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committees on Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives and the Senate; and
 (2) the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives and the Senate.

 TITLE LII--HOMELAND SECURITY MATTERS

SEC. 5201. CHEMICAL SECURITY ANALYSIS CENTER.

 (a) In General.--Title III of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 
U.S.C. 181 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
section:

``SEC. 323. CHEMICAL SECURITY ANALYSIS CENTER.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Under 
Secretary for Science and Technology, shall designate the laboratory 
described in subsection (b) as an additional laboratory pursuant to the 
authority under section 308(c)(2). Such laboratory shall be used to 
conduct studies and analyses for assessing the threat and hazards 
associated with an accidental or intentional large-scale chemical event 
or chemical terrorism event.
 ``(b) Laboratory Described.--The laboratory described in this 
subsection is the laboratory known, as of the date of the enactment of 
this section, as the Chemical Security Analysis Center.
 ``(c) Laboratory Activities.--The Chemical Security Analysis Center 
shall--
 ``(1) identify and develop countermeasures to chemical 
 threats, including the development of comprehensive, research-
 based definable goals for such countermeasures;
 ``(2) provide an enduring science-based chemical threat and 
 hazard analysis capability;
 ``(3) provide expertise in risk and consequence modeling, 
 chemical sensing and detection, analytical chemistry, chemical 
 toxicology, synthetic chemistry and reaction characterization, 
 and nontraditional chemical agents and emerging chemical 
 threats;
 ``(4) staff and operate a technical assistance program that 
 provides operational support and subject matter expertise, 
 design and execute laboratory and field tests, and provide a 
 comprehensive knowledge repository of chemical threat 
 information that is continuously updated with data from 
 scientific, intelligence, operational, and private sector 
 sources; and
 ``(5) carry out such other activities as the Secretary 
 determines appropriate.
 ``(d) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section may be 
construed as affecting in any manner the authorities or 
responsibilities of the Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office 
of the Department.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of 
the Homeland Security Act of 2002 amended by inserting after the item 
relating to section 322 the following new item:

``Sec. 323. Chemical Security Analysis Center.''.

SEC. 5202. NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY PREPAREDNESS CONSORTIUM.

 The National Cybersecurity Preparedness Consortium Act of 2021 
(Public Law 117-122; 6 U.S.C. 652 note) is amended--
 (1) in subsections (a) and (b), by striking ``The Secretary 
 may work with one or more consortia'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``The Secretary shall work with not fewer than three 
 consortia'';
 (2) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by 
 striking ``In selecting a consortium'' and inserting 
 ``In selecting the consortia''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``Geographic 
 diversity of the members of any such consortium'' and 
 inserting ``Regional diversity of such consortia, and 
 geographic diversity of the members of such 
 consortia,''; and
 (3) in subsection (d), by striking ``If the Secretary works 
 with a consortium'' and inserting ``In working with the 
 consortia''.

SEC. 5203. REPORT ON CYBERSECURITY ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE 
 DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY.

 (a) In General.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security, in 
coordination with the Director of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure 
Security Agency of the Department of Homeland Security, shall submit to 
the Committee on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives and 
the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the 
Senate a report on the roles and responsibilities of the Department and 
its components relating to cyber incident response.
 (b) Contents.--The report required under subsection (a) shall 
include the following:
 (1) A review of how the cyber incident response plans under 
 section 2210(c) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 
 660(c)) are utilized in the Federal Government's response to a 
 cyber incident.
 (2) An explanation of the roles and responsibilities of the 
 Department of Homeland Security and its components with 
 responsibility for, or in support of, the Federal Government's 
 response to a cyber incident, including primary responsibility 
 for working with impacted private sector entities.
 (3) An explanation of which and how authorities of the 
 Department and its components are utilized in the Federal 
 Government's response to a cyber incident.
 (4) Recommendations to provide further clarity for roles 
 and responsibilities of the Department and its components 
 relating to cyber incident response.

SEC. 5204. EXEMPTION OF CERTAIN HOMELAND SECURITY FEES FOR CERTAIN 
 IMMEDIATE RELATIVES OF AN INDIVIDUAL WHO RECEIVED THE 
 PURPLE HEART.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall include 
on a certain application or petition an opportunity for certain 
immediate relatives of an individual who was awarded the Purple Heart 
to identify themselves as such an immediate relative.
 (b) Fee Exemption.--The Secretary shall exempt certain immediate 
relatives of an individual who was awarded the Purple Heart, who 
identifies as such an immediate relative on a certain application or 
petition, from a fee with respect to a certain application or petition 
and any associated fee for biometrics.
 (c) Pending Applications and Petitions.--The Secretary of Homeland 
Security may waive fees for a certain application or petition and any 
associated fee for biometrics for certain immediate relatives of an 
individual who was awarded the Purple Heart, if such application or 
petition is submitted not more than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Certain application or petition.--The term ``certain 
 application or petition'' means--
 (A) an application using Form-400, Application for 
 Naturalization (or any successor form); or
 (B) a petition using Form I-360, Petition for 
 Amerasian, Widow(er), or Special Immigrant (or any 
 successor form).
 (2) Certain immediate relatives of an individual who was 
 awarded the purple heart.--The term ``certain immediate 
 relatives of an individual who was awarded the Purple Heart'' 
 means an immediate relative of a living or deceased member of 
 the Armed Forces who was awarded the Purple Heart and who is 
 not a person ineligible for military honors pursuant to section 
 985(a) of title 10, United States Code.
 (3) Immediate relative.--The term ``immediate relative'' 
 has the meaning given such term in section 201(b) of the 
 Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1151(b)).

SEC. 5205. CLARIFICATIONS REGARDING SCOPE OF EMPLOYMENT AND 
 REEMPLOYMENT RIGHTS OF MEMBERS OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES.

 (a) Clarification Regarding Definition of Rights and Benefits.--
Section 4303(2) of title 38, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(A)'' before ``The term''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(B) Any procedural protections or provisions set forth in 
 this chapter shall also be considered a right or benefit 
 subject to the protection of this chapter.''.
 (b) Clarification Regarding Relation to Other Law and Plans for 
Agreements.--Section 4302 of such title is amended by adding at the end 
the following:
 ``(c)(1) Pursuant to this section and the procedural rights 
afforded by subchapter III of this chapter, any agreement to arbitrate 
a claim under this chapter is unenforceable, unless all parties consent 
to arbitration after a complaint on the specific claim has been filed 
in court or with the Merit Systems Protection Board and all parties 
knowingly and voluntarily consent to have that particular claim 
subjected to arbitration.
 ``(2) For purposes of this subsection, consent shall not be 
considered voluntary when a person is required to agree to arbitrate an 
action, complaint, or claim alleging a violation of this chapter as a 
condition of future or continued employment, advancement in employment, 
or receipt of any right or benefit of employment.''.

SEC. 5206. CRITICAL TECHNOLOGY SECURITY CENTERS.

 (a) Critical Technology Security Centers.--Title III of the 
Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 181 et seq.) is amended by 
adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 323. CRITICAL TECHNOLOGY SECURITY CENTERS.

 ``(a) Establishment.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this section, the Secretary, acting through the Under 
Secretary for Science and Technology, and in coordination with the 
Director, shall award grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements to 
covered entities for the establishment of not fewer than two 
cybersecurity-focused Critical Technology Security Centers to evaluate 
and test the security of critical technology.
 ``(b) Evaluation and Testing.--In carrying out the evaluation and 
testing of the security of critical technology pursuant to subsection 
(a), the Critical Technology Security Centers referred to in such 
subsection shall address the following technologies:
 ``(1) The security of information and communications 
 technology that underpins national critical functions related 
 to communications.
 ``(2) The security of networked industrial equipment, such 
 as connected programmable data logic controllers and 
 supervisory control and data acquisition servers.
 ``(3) The security of open source software that underpins 
 national critical functions.
 ``(4) The security of critical software used by the Federal 
 Government.
 ``(c) Addition or Termination of Centers.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Under Secretary for Science and 
 Technology may, in coordination with the Director, award or 
 terminate grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements to 
 covered entities for the establishment of additional or 
 termination of existing Critical Technology Security Centers to 
 address critical technologies.
 ``(2) Limitation.--The authority provided under paragraph 
 (1) may be exercised except if such exercise would result in 
 the operation at any time of fewer than two Critical Technology 
 Security Centers.
 ``(d) Selection of Critical Technologies.--
 ``(1) In general.--Before awarding a grant, contract, or 
 cooperative agreement to a covered entity to establish a 
 Critical Technology Security Center, the Under Secretary for 
 Science and Technology shall coordinate with the Director, who 
 shall provide the Under Secretary a list of critical 
 technologies or specific guidance on such technologies that 
 would be within the remit of any such Center.
 ``(2) Expansion and modification.--The Under Secretary for 
 Science and Technology, in coordination with the Director, is 
 authorized to expand or modify at any time the list of critical 
 technologies or specific guidance on technologies referred to 
 in paragraph (1) that is within the remit of a proposed or 
 established Critical Technology Security Center.
 ``(e) Responsibilities.--In carrying out the evaluation and testing 
of the security of critical technology pursuant to subsection (a), the 
Critical Technology Security Centers referred to in such subsection 
shall each have the following responsibilities:
 ``(1) Conducting rigorous security testing to identify 
 vulnerabilities in such technologies.
 ``(2) Utilizing the coordinated vulnerability disclosure 
 processes established under subsection (g) to report to the 
 developers of such technologies and, as appropriate, to the 
 Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, information 
 relating to vulnerabilities discovered and any information 
 necessary to reproduce such vulnerabilities.
 ``(3) Developing new capabilities for improving the 
 security of such technologies, including vulnerability 
 discovery, management, and mitigation.
 ``(4) Assessing the security of software, firmware, and 
 hardware that underpin national critical functions.
 ``(5) Supporting existing communities of interest, 
 including through grant making, in remediating vulnerabilities 
 discovered within such technologies.
 ``(6) Utilizing findings to inform and support the future 
 work of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency.
 ``(f) Risk Based Evaluations.--Unless otherwise directed pursuant 
to guidance issued by the Under Secretary or Director under subsection 
(d), to the greatest extent practicable activities carried out pursuant 
to the responsibilities specified in subsection (e) shall leverage 
risk-based evaluations to focus on activities that have the greatest 
effect practicable on the security of the critical technologies within 
each Critical Technology Security Center's remit, such as the 
following:
 ``(1) Developing capabilities that can detect or eliminate 
 entire classes of vulnerabilities.
 ``(2) Testing for vulnerabilities in the most widely used 
 technology or vulnerabilities that affect many such critical 
 technologies.
 ``(g) Coordinated Vulnerability Disclosure Processes.--Each 
Critical Technology Security Center shall establish, in coordination 
with the Director, coordinated vulnerability disclosure processes 
regarding the disclosure of vulnerabilities that--
 ``(1) are adhered to when a vulnerability is discovered or 
 disclosed by each such Center, consistent with international 
 standards and coordinated vulnerability disclosure best 
 practices; and
 ``(2) are published on the website of each such Center.
 ``(h) Application.--To be eligible for an award of a grant, 
contract, or cooperative agreement as a Critical Technology Security 
Center pursuant to subsection (a), a covered entity shall submit to the 
Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and including 
such information as the Secretary may require.
 ``(i) Public Reporting of Vulnerabilities.--The Under Secretary for 
Science and Technology shall ensure that vulnerabilities discovered by 
a Critical Technology Security Center are reported to the National 
Vulnerability Database of the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology, as appropriate and using the coordinated vulnerability 
disclosure processes established under subsection (g).
 ``(j) Additional Guidance.--The Under Secretary for Science and 
Technology, in coordination with the Director, shall develop, and 
periodically update, guidance, including eligibility and any additional 
requirements, relating to how Critical Technology Security Centers may 
award grants to communities of interest pursuant to subsection (e)(5) 
to remediate vulnerabilities and take other actions under such 
subsection and subsection (k).
 ``(k) Open Source Software Security Grants.--
 ``(1) In general.--Any Critical Technology Security Center 
 addressing open source software security may award grants, in 
 consultation with the Under Secretary for Science and 
 Technology and Director, to individual open source software 
 developers and maintainers, nonprofit organizations, and other 
 non-Federal entities as determined appropriate by any such 
 Center, to fund improvements to the security of the open source 
 software ecosystem.
 ``(2) Improvements.--A grant awarded under paragraph (1) 
 may include improvements such as the following:
 ``(A) Security audits.
 ``(B) Funding for developers to patch 
 vulnerabilities.
 ``(C) Addressing code, infrastructure, and 
 structural weaknesses, including rewrites of open 
 source software components in memory-safe programming 
 languages.
 ``(D) Research and tools to assess and improve the 
 overall security of the open source software ecosystem, 
 such as improved software fault isolation techniques.
 ``(E) Training and other tools to aid open source 
 software developers in the secure development of open 
 source software, including secure coding practices and 
 secure systems architecture.
 ``(3) Priority.--In awarding grants under paragraph (1), a 
 Critical Technology Security Center shall prioritize, to the 
 greatest extent practicable, the following:
 ``(A) Where applicable, open source software 
 components identified in guidance from the Director, or 
 if no such guidance is so provided, utilizing the risk-
 based evaluation described in subsection (f).
 ``(B) Activities that most promote the long-term 
 security of the open source software ecosystem.
 ``(l) Biennial Reports to Under Secretary.--Not later than one year 
after the date of the enactment of this section and every two years 
thereafter, each Critical Technology Security Center shall submit to 
the Under Secretary for Science and Technology and Director a report 
that includes the following:
 ``(1) A summary of the work performed by such Center.
 ``(2) Information relating to the allocation of Federal 
 funds at such Center.
 ``(3) A description of each vulnerability that has been 
 publicly disclosed pursuant to subsection (g), including 
 information relating to the corresponding software weakness.
 ``(4) An assessment of the criticality of each such 
 vulnerability.
 ``(5) A list of critical technologies studied by such 
 Center.
 ``(6) An overview of the methodologies used by such Center, 
 such as tactics, techniques, and procedures.
 ``(7) A description of such Center's development of 
 capabilities for vulnerability discovery, management, and 
 mitigation.
 ``(8) A summary of such Center's support to existing 
 communities of interest, including an accounting of dispersed 
 grant funds.
 ``(9) For such Center, if applicable, a summary of any 
 grants awarded during the period covered by the report that 
 includes the following:
 ``(A) An identification of the entity to which each 
 such grant was awarded.
 ``(B) The amount of each such grant.
 ``(C) The purpose of each such grant.
 ``(D) The expected impact of each such grant.
 ``(10) The coordinated vulnerability disclosure processes 
 established by such Center.
 ``(m) Reports to Congress.--Upon receiving the reports required 
under subsection (l), the Under Secretary for Science and Technology 
shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report that 
includes, with respect to each Critical Technology Security Center, the 
reports received in subsection (l). Where applicable, the Under 
Secretary shall include an explanation for any deviations from the list 
of critical technologies studied by a Center from the list of critical 
technologies or specific guidance relating to such technologies 
provided by the Director before the distribution of funding to such 
Center.
 ``(n) Consultation With Relevant Agencies.--In carrying out this 
section, the Under Secretary shall consult with the heads of other 
Federal agencies conducting cybersecurity research, including the 
following:
 ``(1) The National Institute of Standards and Technology.
 ``(2) The National Science Foundation.
 ``(3) Relevant agencies within the Department of Energy.
 ``(4) Relevant agencies within the Department of Defense.
 ``(o) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section the following:
 ``(1) $40,000,000 for fiscal year 2023.
 ``(2) $42,000,000 for fiscal year 2024.
 ``(3) $44,000,000 for fiscal year 2025.
 ``(4) $46,000,000 for fiscal year 2026.
 ``(5) $49,000,000 for fiscal year 2027.
 ``(p) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term 
 `appropriate congressional committees' means--
 ``(A) the Committee on Homeland Security of the 
 House of Representatives; and
 ``(B) the Committee on Homeland Security and 
 Governmental Affairs of the Senate.
 ``(2) Covered entity.--The term `covered entity' means a 
 university or federally-funded research and development center, 
 including a national laboratory, or a consortia thereof.
 ``(3) Critical technology.--The term `critical technology' 
 means technology that underpins one or more national critical 
 functions.
 ``(4) Critical software.--The term `critical software' has 
 the meaning given such term by the National Institute of 
 Standards and Technology pursuant to Executive Order 14028 or 
 any successor provision.
 ``(5) Open source software.--The term `open source 
 software' means software for which the human-readable source 
 code is made available to the public for use, study, re-use, 
 modification, enhancement, and redistribution.
 ``(6) Director.--The term `Director' means the Director of 
 the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency.''.
 (b) Identification of Certain Technology.--Paragraph (1) of section 
2202(e) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 603(e)) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(S) To identify the critical technologies (as 
 such term is defined in section 323) or develop 
 guidance relating to such technologies within the 
 remits of the Critical Technology Security Centers as 
 described in such section.''.
 (c) Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of 
the Homeland Security Act of 2002 is amended by inserting after the 
item relating to section 322 the following new item:

``Sec. 323. Critical Technology Security Centers.''.

SEC. 5207. SYSTEMICALLY IMPORTANT ENTITIES.

 (a) Identification of Systemically Important Entities.--Subtitle A 
of title XXII of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 651 et 
seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 2220D. PROCEDURE FOR DESIGNATION OF SYSTEMICALLY IMPORTANT 
 ENTITIES.

 ``(a) Establishment of Criteria and Procedures.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 12 months after the date 
 of the enactment of this section, the Secretary, acting through 
 the Director, in consultation with the National Cyber Director, 
 Sector Risk Management Agencies, the Critical Infrastructure 
 Partnership Advisory Council, and, as appropriate, other 
 government and nongovernmental entities, shall establish 
 criteria and procedures for identifying and designating certain 
 entities as systemically important entities for purposes of 
 this section.
 ``(2) Consideration.--In establishing the criteria for 
 designation under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall consider 
 the following:
 ``(A) The consequences that a disruption to a 
 system, asset, or facility under an entity's control 
 would have on one or more national critical functions.
 ``(B) The degree to which the entity has the 
 capacity to engage in operational collaboration with 
 the Agency, and the degree to which such operational 
 collaboration would benefit national security.
 ``(C) The entity's role and prominence within 
 critical supply chains or in the delivery of critical 
 functions.
 ``(D) Any other factors the Secretary determines 
 appropriate.
 ``(3) Elements.--The Secretary shall develop a mechanism 
 for owners and operators of critical infrastructure to submit 
 information to assist the Secretary in making designations 
 under this subsection.
 ``(b) Designation of Systemically Important Entities.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, using the criteria and 
 procedures established under subsection (a)(1) and any 
 supplementary information submitted under subsection (a)(3), 
 shall designate certain entities as systemically important 
 entities.
 ``(2) Notification of designation status.--The Secretary 
 shall notify designees within 30 days of designation or 
 dedesignation, with an explanation of the basis for such 
 determination.
 ``(3) Register.--The Secretary shall maintain and routinely 
 update a list, or register, of such entities, with contact 
 information.
 ``(4) Limitations.--
 ``(A) In general.--The number of designated 
 entities shall not exceed 200 in total.
 ``(B) Sunset.--Beginning on the date that is four 
 years after the date of the enactment of this section, 
 the Secretary, after consultation with the Director, 
 may increase the number of designated entities 
 provided--
 ``(i) such number does not exceed 150 
 percent of the prior maximum;
 ``(ii) the Secretary publishes such new 
 maximum number in the Federal Register; and
 ``(iii) such new maximum number has not 
 been changed in the immediately preceding four 
 years.
 ``(c) Redress.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary 
 shall develop a mechanism, consistent with subchapter II of 
 chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, for an entity 
 notified under subsection (b)(2) to present evidence that the 
 Secretary should reverse--
 ``(A) the designation of a facility, system, or 
 asset as systemically important critical 
 infrastructure;
 ``(B) the determination that a facility, system, or 
 asset no longer constitutes systemically important 
 critical infrastructure; or
 ``(C) a final judgment entered in a civil action 
 seeking judicial review brought in accordance with 
 paragraph (2).
 ``(2) Appeal to federal court.--A civil action seeking 
 judicial review of a final agency action taken under the 
 mechanism developed under paragraph (1) shall be filed in the 
 United States District Court for the District of Columbia.
 ``(d) Reporting for Systemically Important Entities.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than two years after the date 
 of the enactment of this section, the Secretary, acting through 
 the Director, in consultation with the National Cyber Director, 
 Sector Risk Management Agencies, the CISA Cybersecurity 
 Advisory Committee, and relevant government and nongovernment 
 entities, shall establish reporting requirements for 
 systemically important entities.
 ``(2) Requirements.--The requirements established under 
 subsection (a) shall directly support the Department's ability 
 to understand and prioritize mitigation of risks to national 
 critical functions and ensure that any information obtained by 
 a systemically important entity pursuant to this section is 
 properly secured.
 ``(3) Reported information.--The requirements under 
 paragraph (2) may include obligations for systemically 
 important entities to--
 ``(A) identify critical assets, systems, suppliers, 
 technologies, software, services, processes, or other 
 dependencies that would inform the Federal Government's 
 understanding of the risks to national critical 
 functions present in the entity's supply chain;
 ``(B) associate specific third-party entities with 
 the supply chain dependencies identified under 
 subparagraph (A);
 ``(C) detail the supply chain risk management 
 practices put in place by the systemically important 
 entity, including, where applicable, any known security 
 and assurance requirements for third-party entities 
 under subparagraph (B); and
 ``(D) identify any documented security controls or 
 risk management practices that third-party entities 
 have enacted to ensure the continued delivery of 
 critical services to the systemically important entity.
 ``(4) Duplicative requirements.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall coordinate 
 with the head of any Federal agency with responsibility 
 for regulating the security of a systemically important 
 entity to determine whether the reporting requirements 
 under this subsection may be fulfilled by any reporting 
 requirement in effect on the date of the enactment of 
 this section or subsequently enacted after such date.
 ``(B) Existing required reports.--If the Secretary 
 determines that an existing reporting requirement for a 
 systemically important entity substantially satisfies 
 the reporting requirements under this subsection, the 
 Secretary shall accept such report and may not require 
 a such entity to submit an alternate or modified 
 report.
 ``(C) Coordination.--The Secretary shall coordinate 
 with the head any Federal agency with responsibilities 
 for regulating the security of a systemically important 
 entity to eliminate any duplicate reporting or 
 compliance requirements relating to the security or 
 resiliency of such entities.
 ``(e) Intelligence Support to Systemically Important Entities.--
 ``(1) Identification of information needs.--Not later than 
 one year after the date of the enactment of this section, the 
 Secretary, acting through the Director, shall establish a 
 process to solicit and compile relevant information from Sector 
 Risk Management Agencies and any other relevant Federal agency 
 to inform and identify common information needs and 
 interdependencies across systemically important entities.
 ``(2) Interdependencies and risk identification.--In 
 establishing the process under paragraph (1), the Secretary, 
 acting through the Director, shall incorporate methods and 
 procedures--
 ``(A) to identify the types of information needed 
 to understand interdependence of systemically important 
 entities and areas where a nation-state adversary may 
 target to cause widespread compromise or disruption, 
 including--
 ``(i) common technologies, including 
 hardware, software, and services, used within 
 systemically important entities;
 ``(ii) critical lines of businesses, 
 services, processes, and functions on which 
 multiple systemically important entities are 
 dependent;
 ``(iii) specific technologies, components, 
 materials, or resources on which multiple 
 systemically important entities are dependent; 
 and
 ``(iv) Federal, State, local, Tribal, or 
 territorial government services, functions, and 
 processes on which multiple systemically 
 important entities are dependent; and
 ``(B) to associate specific systemically important 
 entities with the information identified under 
 subparagraph (A),
 ``(3) Information needs and indications and warning.--In 
 establishing the process under paragraph (1), the Secretary, 
 acting through the Director, in consultation with the Director 
 of National Intelligence, shall incorporate methods and 
 procedures to--
 ``(A) provide indications and warning to 
 systemically important entities regarding nation-state 
 adversary cyber operations relevant to information 
 identified under paragraph (2)(A); and
 ``(B) to identify information needs for the cyber 
 defense efforts of such entities.
 ``(4) Recurrent input.--Not later than 30 days after the 
 establishment of the process under paragraph (1) and no less 
 often than biennially thereafter, the Secretary, acting through 
 the Director, shall solicit information from systemically 
 important entities utilizing such process.
 ``(5) Intelligence sharing.--
 ``(A) In general.--Not later than five days after 
 discovery of information that indicates a credible 
 threat to an identifiable systemically important 
 entity, the Director of National Intelligence, in 
 coordination with the Secretary, shall share the 
 appropriate intelligence information with such entity.
 ``(B) Emergency notification.--The Director of 
 National Intelligence, in coordination with the 
 Secretary, shall share any intelligence information 
 related to a systemically important entity with such 
 entity not later than 24 hours after the Director of 
 National Intelligence determines that such information 
 indicates an imminent threat--
 ``(i) to such entity, or to a system, 
 asset, or facility such entity owns or 
 operates; or
 ``(ii) to national security, economic 
 security, or public health and safety relevant 
 to such entity.
 ``(C) National security exemptions.--
 Notwithstanding subparagraphs (A) or (B), the Director 
 of National Intelligence may withhold intelligence 
 information pertaining to a systemically important 
 entity if the Director of National Intelligence, with 
 the concurrence of the Secretary and the Director, 
 determines that withholding such information is in the 
 national security interest of the United States.
 ``(D) Report to congress.--Not later than three 
 years after the date of the enactment of this section 
 and annually thereafter, the Secretary, in coordination 
 with the National Cyber Director and the Director of 
 National Intelligence, shall submit to the Committee on 
 Homeland Security of the House of Representatives, the 
 Committee on Homeland Security and Government Affairs 
 of the Senate, the Permanent Select Committee on 
 Intelligence of the House of Representatives, and the 
 Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate, a 
 report that--
 ``(i) provides an overview of the 
 intelligence information shared with 
 systemically important entities; and
 ``(ii) evaluates the relevance and success 
 of the classified, actionable information the 
 intelligence community (as such term is defined 
 in section 3(4) of the National Security Act of 
 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3003(4)) provided to 
 systemically important entities.
 ``(E) Intelligence sharing.--Notwithstanding any 
 other provision of law, information or intelligence 
 shared with systemically important entities under the 
 processes established under this subsection shall not 
 constitute favoring one private entity over another.
 ``(f) Prioritization.--In allocating Department resources, the 
Secretary shall prioritize systemically important entities in the 
provision of voluntary services, and encourage participation in 
programs to provide technical assistance in the form of continuous 
monitoring and detection of cybersecurity risks.
 ``(g) Incident Response.--In the event that a systemically 
important entity experiences a serious cyber incident, the Secretary 
shall--
 ``(1) promptly establish contact with such entity to 
 acknowledge receipt of notification, obtain additional 
 information regarding such incident, and ascertain the need for 
 incident response or technical assistance;
 ``(2) maintain routine or continuous contact with such 
 entity to monitor developments related to such incident;
 ``(3) assist in incident response, mitigation, and recovery 
 efforts;
 ``(4) ascertain evolving needs of such entity; and
 ``(5) prioritize voluntary incident response and technical 
 assistance for such covered entity.
 ``(h) Operational Collaboration With Systemically Important 
Entities.--The head of the office for joint cyber planning established 
pursuant to section 2216, in carrying out the responsibilities of such 
office with respect to relevant cyber defense planning, joint cyber 
operations, cybersecurity exercises, and information-sharing practices, 
shall, to the extent practicable, prioritize the involvement of 
systemically important entities.
 ``(i) Emergency Planning.--In partnership with systemically 
important entities, the Secretary, in coordination with the Director, 
the heads of Sector Risk Management Agencies, and the heads of other 
Federal agencies with responsibilities for regulating critical 
infrastructure, shall regularly exercise response, recovery, and 
restoration plans to--
 ``(1) assess performance and improve the capabilities and 
 procedures of government and systemically important entities to 
 respond to a major cyber incident; and
 ``(2) clarify specific roles, responsibilities, and 
 authorities of government and systemically important entities 
 when responding to such an incident.
 ``(j) Interagency Council for Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity 
Coordination.--
 ``(1) Interagency council for critical infrastructure 
 cybersecurity coordination.--There is established an 
 Interagency Council for Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity 
 Coordination (in this section referred to as the `Council').
 ``(2) Chairs.--The Council shall be co-chaired by--
 ``(A) the Secretary, acting through the Director; 
 and
 ``(B) the National Cyber Director.
 ``(3) Membership.--The Council shall be comprised of 
 representatives from the following:
 ``(A) Appropriate Federal departments and agencies, 
 including independent regulatory agencies responsible 
 for regulating the security of critical infrastructure, 
 as determined by the Secretary and National Cyber 
 Director.
 ``(B) Sector Risk Management Agencies.
 ``(C) The National Institute of Standards and 
 Technology.
 ``(4) Functions.--The Council shall be responsible for the 
 following:
 ``(A) Reviewing existing regulatory authorities 
 that could be utilized to strengthen cybersecurity for 
 critical infrastructure, as well as potential 
 forthcoming regulatory requirements under 
 consideration, and coordinating to ensure that any new 
 or existing regulations are streamlined and harmonized 
 to the extent practicable, consistent with the 
 principles described in paragraph (5).
 ``(B) Developing cross-sector and sector-specific 
 cybersecurity performance goals that serve as clear 
 guidance for critical infrastructure owners and 
 operators about the cybersecurity practices and 
 postures that the American people can trust and should 
 expect for essential services.
 ``(C) Facilitating information sharing and, where 
 applicable, coordination on the development of 
 cybersecurity policy, rulemaking, examinations, 
 reporting requirements, enforcement actions, and 
 information sharing practices.
 ``(D) Recommending to members of the council 
 general supervisory priorities and principles 
 reflecting the outcome of discussions among such 
 members.
 ``(E) Identifying gaps in regulation that could 
 invite cybersecurity risks to critical infrastructure, 
 and as appropriate, developing legislative proposals to 
 resolve such regulatory gaps.
 ``(F) Providing a forum for discussion and analysis 
 of emerging cybersecurity developments and 
 cybersecurity regulatory issues.
 ``(5) Principles.--In carrying out the activities under 
 paragraph (4), the Council shall seek to harmonize regulations 
 in a way that--
 ``(A) avoids duplicative, overlapping, overly 
 burdensome, or conflicting regulatory requirements that 
 do not effectively or efficiently serve the interests 
 of national security, economic security, or public 
 health and safety;
 ``(B) is consistent with national cyber policy and 
 strategy, including the National Cyber Strategy;
 ``(C) recognizes and prioritizes the need for the 
 Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, as 
 the lead coordinator for the security and resilience of 
 critical infrastructure across all sectors, to have 
 visibility regarding cybersecurity threats and security 
 vulnerabilities across sectors, and leverages 
 regulatory authorities in a manner that supports such 
 cross-sector visibility and coordination, to the extent 
 practicable; and
 ``(D) recognizes and accounts for the variation 
 within and among critical infrastructure sectors with 
 respect to the level of cybersecurity maturity, the 
 nature of the infrastructure and assets, resources 
 available to deploy security measures, and other 
 factors.
 ``(6) Leveraging existing coordinating bodies.--The Council 
 shall, as appropriate in the determination of the Co-Chairs, 
 carry out its work in coordination with critical infrastructure 
 stakeholders, including sector coordinating councils and 
 information sharing and analysis organizations, and the Cyber 
 Incident Reporting Council established pursuant to section 
 2246.
 ``(7) Congressional oversight.--Not later than one year 
 after the date of the enactment of this section and annually 
 thereafter, the Council shall report to the Committee on 
 Homeland Security of the House of Representatives, the 
 Committee on Homeland Security and Government Affairs of the 
 Senate, and other relevant congressional committees, on the 
 activities of the Council, including efforts to harmonize 
 regulatory requirements, and close regulatory gaps, together 
 with legislative proposals, as appropriate.
 ``(k) Study on Performance Goals for Systemically Important 
Entities.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Council shall conduct a study to 
 develop policy options and recommendations regarding the 
 development of risk-based cybersecurity performance benchmarks 
 that, if met, would establish a common minimum level of 
 cybersecurity for systemically important entities.
 ``(2) Areas of interest.--The study required under 
 paragraph (1) shall evaluate how the performance benchmarks 
 referred to in such paragraph can be--
 ``(A) flexible, nonprescriptive, risk-based, and 
 outcome-focused;
 ``(B) designed to improve resilience and address 
 cybersecurity threats and security vulnerabilities 
 while also providing an appropriate amount of 
 discretion to operators in deciding which specific 
 technologies or solutions to deploy;
 ``(C) applicable and appropriate across critical 
 infrastructure sectors, but also adaptable and 
 augmentable to develop tailored, sector-specific 
 cybersecurity performance goals; and
 ``(D) reflective of existing industry best 
 practices, standards, and guidelines to the greatest 
 extent possible.
 ``(l) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Systemically important entity.--The term 
 `systemically important entity' means a critical infrastructure 
 entity the Secretary has designated as a systemically important 
 entity pursuant to subsection (b).
 ``(2) Director.--The term `Director' means the Director of 
 the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency.
 ``(3) Sector risk management agency.--The term `Sector Risk 
 Management Agency' has the meaning given such term is section 
 2201.
 ``(4) National critical functions.--The term `national 
 critical functions' means functions of government or private 
 sector so vital to the United States that the disruption, 
 corruption, or dysfunction of such functions would have a 
 debilitating effect on security, national economic security, 
 national public health or safety, or any combination 
 thereof.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of 
the Homeland Security Act is amended by inserting after the item 
relating to section 2220C the following new item:

``Sec. 2220D. Procedure for designation of covered systemically 
 important entities.''.

SEC. 5208. GAO REVIEW OF DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY EFFORTS 
 RELATED TO ESTABLISHING SPACE AS A CRITICAL 
 INFRASTRUCTURE SECTOR.

 Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct a 
review, and not later than 18 months after such date of enactment, 
submit to the Committee on Homeland Security, the Committee on 
Transportation and Infrastructure, and the Committee on Science, Space, 
and Technology of the House of Representatives and the Committee on 
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs and the Committee on 
Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate a report on the 
following:
 (1) The actions taken by the Department of Homeland 
 Security to evaluate the establishment of space as a critical 
 infrastructure sector, based on the decision-support framework 
 published in reports required pursuant to section 9002(b) of 
 the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization 
 Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (6 U.S.C. 652a(b)).
 (2) The status of efforts by the Department of Homeland 
 Security, if any, to establish space as a critical 
 infrastructure sector.
 (3) The extent to which the current 16 critical 
 infrastructure sectors, as set forth in PPD21, cover space 
 systems, services, and technology, and the extent to which such 
 sectors leave coverage gaps relating to such space systems, 
 services, and technology.

SEC. 5209. REPORT ON COMMERCIAL SATELLITE CYBERSECURITY; CISA 
 COMMERCIAL SATELLITE SYSTEM CYBERSECURITY CLEARINGHOUSE.

 (a) Study.--
 (1) In general.--The Comptroller General of the United 
 States shall conduct a study on the actions the Federal 
 Government has taken to support the cybersecurity of commercial 
 satellite systems, including as part of any action to address 
 the cybersecurity of critical infrastructure sectors.
 (2) Report.--Not later than two years after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United 
 States shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees 
 a report on the study conducted under paragraph (1), which 
 shall include information on--
 (A) efforts of the Federal Government to address or 
 improve the cybersecurity of commercial satellite 
 systems and support related efforts with international 
 entities or the private sector;
 (B) the resources made available to the public by 
 Federal agencies to address cybersecurity risks and 
 cybersecurity threats to commercial satellite systems;
 (C) the extent to which commercial satellite 
 systems and the cybersecurity threats to such systems 
 are integrated into critical infrastructure risk 
 analyses and protection plans of the Department of 
 Homeland Security; and
 (D) the extent to which Federal agencies coordinate 
 or duplicate authorities and take other actions focused 
 on the cybersecurity of commercial satellite systems.
 (3) Consultation.--In carrying out paragraphs (1) and (2), 
 the Comptroller General of the United States shall coordinate 
 with appropriate Federal agencies and organizations, 
 including--
 (A) the Department of Homeland Security;
 (B) the Department of Commerce;
 (C) the Department of Defense;
 (D) the Department of Transportation;
 (E) the Department of State;
 (F) the Federal Communications Commission;
 (G) the National Aeronautics and Space 
 Administration;
 (H) the National Executive Committee for Space-
 Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing; and
 (I) the National Space Council.
 (4) Briefing.--Not later than two years after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the 
 United States shall provide to the appropriate congressional 
 committees a briefing relating to carrying out paragraphs (1) 
 and (2).
 (5) Classification.--The report under paragraph (2) shall 
 be submitted in unclassified form, but may include a classified 
 annex.
 (b) CISA Commercial Satellite System Cybersecurity Clearinghouse.--
 (1) Establishment.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the Director shall 
 establish a commercial satellite system cybersecurity 
 clearinghouse.
 (B) Requirements.--The clearinghouse shall--
 (i) be publicly available online;
 (ii) contain current, relevant, and 
 publicly available commercial satellite system 
 cybersecurity resources, including the 
 recommendations consolidated under paragraph 
 (2), and any other appropriate materials for 
 reference by entities that develop commercial 
 satellite systems; and
 (iii) include materials specifically aimed 
 at assisting small business concerns with the 
 secure development, operation, and maintenance 
 of commercial satellite systems.
 (C) Existing platform or website.--The Director may 
 establish the clearinghouse on an online platform or a 
 website that is in existence as of the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.
 (2) Consolidation of commercial satellite system 
 cybersecurity recommendations.--
 (A) In general.--The Director shall consolidate 
 voluntary cybersecurity recommendations designed to 
 assist in the development, maintenance, and operation 
 of commercial satellite systems.
 (B) Requirements.--The recommendations consolidated 
 under subparagraph (A) shall include, to the greatest 
 extent practicable, materials addressing the following:
 (i) Risk-based, cybersecurity-informed 
 engineering, including continuous monitoring 
 and resiliency.
 (ii) Planning for retention or recovery of 
 positive control of commercial satellite 
 systems in the event of a cybersecurity 
 incident.
 (iii) Protection against unauthorized 
 access to vital commercial satellite system 
 functions.
 (iv) Physical protection measures designed 
 to reduce the vulnerabilities of a commercial 
 satellite system's command, control, or 
 telemetry receiver systems.
 (v) Protection against jamming or spoofing.
 (vi) Security against threats throughout a 
 commercial satellite system's mission lifetime.
 (vii) Management of supply chain risks that 
 affect the cybersecurity of commercial 
 satellite systems.
 (viii) As appropriate, and as applicable 
 pursuant to the requirement under paragraph 
 (1)(b)(ii) (relating to the clearinghouse 
 containing current, relevant, and publicly 
 available commercial satellite system 
 cybersecurity resources), the findings and 
 recommendations from the study conducted by the 
 Comptroller General of the United States under 
 subsection (a)(1).
 (ix) Risks of a strategic competitor 
 becoming dominant in the commercial satellite 
 sector.
 (x) Any other recommendations to ensure the 
 confidentiality, availability, and integrity of 
 data residing on or in transit through 
 commercial satellite systems.
 (3) Implementation.--In implementing this subsection, the 
 Director shall--
 (A) to the extent practicable, carry out such 
 implementation as a public-private partnership;
 (B) coordinate with the heads of appropriate 
 Federal agencies with expertise and experience in 
 satellite operations, including the entities described 
 in subsection (a)(3);
 (C) consult with non-Federal entities developing 
 commercial satellite systems or otherwise supporting 
 the cybersecurity of commercial satellite systems, 
 including private, consensus organizations that develop 
 relevant standards; and
 (D) consider entering into an agreement with a non-
 Federal organization to manage and operate the 
 clearinghouse.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the Committee on Homeland Security, the 
 Committee on Space, Science, and Technology, the 
 Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on Foreign 
 Affairs, and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of 
 the House of Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Homeland Security and 
 Governmental Affairs, the Committee on Armed Services, 
 the Committee on Foreign Relations, and the Committee 
 on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate.
 (2) The term ``clearinghouse'' means the commercial 
 satellite system cybersecurity clearinghouse required to be 
 developed and maintained under subsection (b)(1).
 (3) The term ``commercial satellite system'' means a system 
 of one or more satellites and any ground support 
 infrastructure, and all transmission links among and between 
 them that is owned, or operated by a non-Federal United States 
 entity.
 (4) The term ``critical infrastructure'' has the meaning 
 given such term in section 1016(e) of Public Law 107-56 (42 
 U.S.C. 5195c(e)).
 (5) The term ``cybersecurity risk'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 2209 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 
 (6 U.S.C. 659).
 (6) The term ``cybersecurity threat'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 102 of the Cybersecurity Information 
 Sharing Act of 2015 (6 U.S.C. 1501).
 (7) The term ``Director'' means the Director of the 
 Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency.
 (8) The term ``small business concern'' has the meaning 
 given the term in section 3 of the Small Business Act (15 
 U.S.C. 632).

SEC. 5210. REPORTS, EVALUATIONS, AND RESEARCH REGARDING DRUG 
 INTERDICTION AT AND BETWEEN PORTS OF ENTRY.

 (a) Research on Additional Technologies to Detect Fentanyl.--Not 
later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
Secretary of Homeland Security, in consultation with the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, the Federal Drug Administration, and 
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, shall research 
additional technological solutions to--
 (1) target and detect illicit fentanyl and its precursors, 
 including low-purity fentanyl, especially in counterfeit 
 pressed tablets, and illicit pill press molds;
 (2) enhance targeting of counterfeit pills through 
 nonintrusive, noninvasive, and other visual screening 
 technologies; and
 (3) enhance data-driven targeting to increase seizure rates 
 of fentanyl and its precursors.
 (b) Evaluation of Current Technologies and Strategies in Illicit 
Drug Interdiction and Procurement Decisions.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Homeland Security, in 
 consultation with the Administrator of the Drug Enforcement 
 Administration, the Director of the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation, the Director of the Centers for Disease Control 
 and Prevention, and the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, shall 
 establish a program to collect available data and develop 
 metrics to measure how technologies and strategies used by the 
 Department, U.S. Customs and Border Protection, and other 
 relevant Federal agencies have helped detect, deter, or address 
 illicit fentanyl and its precursors being trafficking into the 
 United States at and between land, air, and sea ports of entry. 
 Such data and metrics program may consider the rate of 
 detection at random secondary inspections at such ports of 
 entry, investigations and intelligence sharing into the origins 
 of illicit fentanyl later detected within the United States, 
 and other data or metrics considered appropriate by the 
 Secretary. The Secretary, as appropriate and in the 
 coordination with the officials specified in this paragraph, 
 may update such data and metrics program.
 (2) Reports.--
 (A) Secretary of homeland security.--Not later than 
 one year after the date of the enactment of this Act 
 and biennially thereafter, the Secretary of Homeland 
 Security, the Administrator of the Drug Enforcement 
 Administration, the Director of the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation, the Director of the Centers for Disease 
 Control and Prevention, the Commissioner of Food and 
 Drugs, and the Postmaster General shall, based on the 
 data collected and metrics developed pursuant to the 
 program established under paragraph (1), submit to the 
 Committee on Homeland Security of the House of 
 Representatives and the Committee on Homeland Security 
 and Governmental Affairs a report that--
 (i) examines and analyzes current 
 technologies deployed at land, air, and sea 
 ports of entry, including pilot technologies, 
 to assess how well such technologies detect, 
 deter, and address fentanyl and its precursors;
 (ii) contains a cost-benefit analysis of 
 technologies used in drug interdiction; and
 (iii) describes how such analysis may be 
 used when making procurement decisions relating 
 to such technologies.
 (B) GAO.--Not later than one year after each report 
 submitted pursuant to subparagraph (A), the Comptroller 
 General of the United States shall submit to the 
 Committee on Homeland Security of the House of 
 Representatives and the Committee on Homeland Security 
 and Governmental Affairs of the Senate a report that 
 evaluates and, as appropriate, makes recommendations to 
 improve, the data collected and metrics used in each 
 such report.

SEC. 5211. REPORT ON PUERTO RICO'S ELECTRIC GRID.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security and the 
Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), in 
consultation with the Secretary of the Department of Energy and the 
Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, shall 
submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report on Puerto 
Rico's progress toward rebuilding the electric grid and detailing the 
efforts the Federal Government is undertaking to expedite such 
rebuilding. The report shall contain the following:
 (1) An analysis of the state of Puerto Rico's electric 
 grid, including the following:
 (A) A list of projects in order of priority, 
 estimated cost, and estimated time necessary for 
 completion.
 (B) An analysis of the measures taken by the 
 Federal Government to expedite such rebuilding and the 
 effectiveness of such measures.
 (C) Information relating to the amount of funds 
 that have been allocated and the amount of funds that 
 have been disbursed.
 (D) An analysis of how the Federal Government can 
 provide further assistance in expediting such 
 rebuilding.
 (2) An analysis of the state of Puerto Rico's renewable 
 energy generation and storage capacities, including the 
 following:
 (A) A list of current and expected projects focused 
 on renewable energy generation and storage.
 (B) A report on the development of renewable energy 
 sources in Puerto Rico, including projections for 
 meeting renewable energy metrics established in the 
 Puerto Rico Energy Public Policy Act (Act 17).
 (C) An analysis of challenges for improving Puerto 
 Rico's renewable energy capacity and recommendations 
 for addressing such challenges.
 (D) An analysis of how the Federal Government can 
 provide further assistance, including funding and 
 legislative actions, in facilitating renewable energy 
 development and improving Puerto Rico's renewable 
 energy generation and storage capacities.
 (E) An analysis of the extent to which the 
 federally funded projects to rebuild the electric grid 
 will support an efficient transition from fossil fueled 
 generation sources to renewable sources, in a manner 
 that sustains reliable power supply during such 
 transition, preserves base and peak load capacity upon 
 completion of such transition, and prevents creation of 
 stranded assets.
 (3) Recommendations, as appropriate, for power companies 
 and governments to reduce the number of outages and blackouts.
 (4) Proposals, as appropriate, for legislative actions and 
 funding needed to improve the process of fund disbursement for 
 critical projects related to electric grids.
 (5) A plan for expediting such rebuilding by not later than 
 three months after the report is so submitted.
 (b) Definition.--In this section, the term ``appropriate 
congressional committees'' means the Committee on Homeland Security, 
the Committee on Natural Resources, the Committee on Energy and 
Commerce, and the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the 
House of Representatives and the Committee on Homeland Security and 
Governmental Affairs and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources 
of the Senate.

SEC. 5212. ACCESS TO MILITARY INSTALLATIONS FOR HOMELAND SECURITY 
 INVESTIGATIONS PERSONNEL IN GUAM.

 The commander of a military installation located in Guam shall 
grant to an officer or employee of Homeland Security Investigations the 
same access to such military installation (including the use of an APO 
or FPO box) such commander grants to an officer or employee of U.S. 
Customs and Border Protection or of the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation.

SEC. 5213. BUILDING CYBER RESILIENCE AFTER SOLARWINDS.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Critical infrastructure.--The term ``critical 
 infrastructure'' has the meaning given such term in section 
 1016(e) of Public Law 107-56 (42 U.S.C. 5195c(e)).
 (2) Director.--The term ``Director'' shall refer to the 
 Director of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security 
 Agency.
 (3) Information system.--The term ``information system'' 
 has the meaning given such term in section 2240 of the Homeland 
 Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 681).
 (4) Significant cyber incident.--The term ``significant 
 cyber incident'' has the meaning given such term in section 
 2240 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002.
 (5) Solarwinds incident.--The term ``SolarWinds incident'' 
 refers to the significant cyber incident that prompted the 
 establishment of a Unified Cyber Coordination Group, as 
 provided by section V(B)(2) of Presidential Policy Directive 
 41, in December 2020.
 (b) SolarWinds Investigation and Report.--
 (1) Investigation.--The Director, in consultation with the 
 National Cyber Director and the heads of other relevant Federal 
 departments and agencies, shall carry out an investigation to 
 evaluate the impact of the SolarWinds incident on information 
 systems owned and operated by Federal departments and agencies, 
 and, to the extent practicable, other critical infrastructure.
 (2) Elements.--In carrying out subsection (b), the Director 
 shall review the following:
 (A) The extent to which Federal information systems 
 were accessed, compromised, or otherwise impacted by 
 the SolarWinds incident, and any potential ongoing 
 security concerns or consequences arising from such 
 incident.
 (B) The extent to which information systems that 
 support other critical infrastructure were accessed, 
 compromised, or otherwise impacted by the SolarWinds 
 incident, where such information is available to the 
 Director.
 (C) Any ongoing security concerns or consequences 
 arising from the SolarWinds incident, including any 
 sensitive information that may have been accessed or 
 exploited in a manner that poses a threat to national 
 security.
 (D) Implementation of Executive Order 14028 
 (Improving the Nation's Cybersecurity (May 12, 2021)).
 (E) Efforts taken by the Director, the heads of 
 Federal departments and agencies, and critical 
 infrastructure owners and operators to address 
 cybersecurity vulnerabilities and mitigate risks 
 associated with the SolarWinds incident.
 (c) Report.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Director shall submit to the Committee on 
Homeland Security in the House of Representatives and Committee on 
Homeland Security and Government Affairs in the Senate a report that 
includes the following:
 (1) Findings for each of the elements specified in 
 subsection (b).
 (2) Recommendations to address security gaps, improve 
 incident response efforts, and prevent similar cyber incidents.
 (3) Any areas where the Director lacked the information 
 necessary to fully review and assessment such elements, the 
 reason the information necessary was unavailable, and 
 recommendations to close such informational gaps.
 (d) GAO Report on Cyber Safety Review Board.--Not later than one 
year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller 
General of the United States shall evaluate the activities of the Cyber 
Safety Review Board established pursuant to Executive Order 14028 
(Improving the Nation's Cybersecurity (May 12, 2021)), with a focus on 
the Board's inaugural review announced in February 2022, and assess 
whether the Board has the authorities, resources, and expertise 
necessary to carry out its mission of reviewing and assessing 
significant cyber incidents.

SEC. 5214. CISA DIRECTOR APPOINTMENT AND TERM.

 Subsection (b) of section 2202 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 
(6 U.S.C. 652) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by adding at the end the following 
 new sentence: ``The Director shall be appointed by the 
 President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.'';
 (2) by redesignating paragraphs (2) and (3) as paragraphs 
 (3) and (4), respectively; and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(2) Term.--Effective with respect to an individual 
 appointed pursuant to paragraph (1) after the date of the 
 enactment of this paragraph, the term of office of such an 
 individual so appointed shall be five years. The term of office 
 of the individual serving as the Director on the day before 
 such date of enactment shall be five years beginning from the 
 date on which such Director began serving.''.

SEC. 5215. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY REPORT RELATING TO 
 ESTABLISHMENT OF PRECLEARANCE FACILITY IN TAIWAN.

 (a) Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security, 
 in consultation with the Secretary of Commerce, shall submit to 
 the appropriate congressional committees a report that includes 
 an assessment of establishing a preclearance facility in 
 Taiwan.
 (2) Elements.--The assessment required under paragraph (1) 
 shall include the following:
 (A) An assessment with respect to the feasibility 
 and advisability of establishing a CBP Preclearance 
 facility in Taiwan.
 (B) An assessment with respect to the national 
 security, homeland security, and law enforcement 
 benefits of establishing a CBP Preclearance facility in 
 Taiwan.
 (C) An assessment of the impacts preclearance 
 operations in Taiwan will have with respect to--
 (i) trade and travel, including impacts on 
 passengers traveling to the United States; and
 (ii) CBP staffing.
 (D) Country-specific information relating to--
 (i) anticipated benefits to the United 
 States; and
 (ii) security vulnerabilities associated 
 with such preclearance operations.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section--
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the Committee on Homeland Security, the 
 Committee on Financial Services, and the Committee on 
 Ways and Means of the House of Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation, the Committee on Finance, and the Joint 
 Committee on Taxation of the Senate.
 (2) The term ``CBP'' means U.S. Customs and Border 
 Protection.

SEC. 5216. HUMAN TRAFFICKING TRAINING.

 (a) In General.--Subtitle H of title VIII of the Homeland Security 
Act of 2002 is amended by inserting after section 884 (6 U.S.C. 464) 
the following new section:

``SEC. 884A. HUMAN TRAFFICKING TRAINING.

 ``(a) In General.--The Director of the Federal Law Enforcement 
Training Centers (FLETC) is authorized, in accordance with this 
section, to establish a human trafficking awareness training program 
within the Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers.
 ``(b) Training Purposes.--The human trafficking awareness training 
program referred to in subsection (a), shall, if established, provide 
to State, local, Tribal, territorial, and educational institution law 
enforcement personnel training courses relating to the following:
 ``(1) An in-depth understanding of the definition of human 
 trafficking.
 ``(2) An ability to recognize indicators of human 
 trafficking.
 ``(3) Information on industries and common locations known 
 for human trafficking.
 ``(4) Human trafficking response measures, including a 
 victim-centered approach.
 ``(5) Human trafficking reporting protocols.
 ``(6) An overview of Federal statutes and applicable State 
 law related to human trafficking.
 ``(7) Additional resources to assist with suspected human 
 trafficking cases, as necessary.
 ``(c) Integration With Existing Programs.--To the extent 
practicable, human trafficking awareness training, including principles 
and learning objectives, should be integrated into other training 
programs operated by the Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers.
 ``(d) Coordination.--The Director of FLETC, or the designee of such 
Director, shall coordinate with the Director of the Department's Blue 
Campaign, or the designee of such Director, in the development and 
delivery of human trafficking awareness training programs.
 ``(e) Human Trafficking Defined.--In this section, the term `human 
trafficking' means an act or practice described in paragraph (11) or 
(12) of section 103 of the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000 
(22 U.S.C. 7102).
 ``(f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated $2,300,000 for each of fiscal years 2023 through 2028.''.
 (b) Technical Amendment.--Subsection (a) of section 434 of the 
Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 242) is amended by striking 
``paragraph (9) or (10)'' and inserting ``paragraph (11) or (12)''.
 (c) Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of 
the Homeland Security Act of 2002 is amended by inserting after the 
item relating to section 884 the following new item:

``Sec. 884A. Human trafficking training.''.

 TITLE LIII--TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE MATTERS

SEC. 5301. CALCULATION OF ACTIVE SERVICE.

 (a) In General.--Subchapter I of chapter 25 of title 14, United 
States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 2515. Calculation of active service
 ``Any service described, including service described prior to the 
date of enactment of the Don Young Coast Guard Authorization Act of 
2022, in writing, including by electronic communication, by a 
representative of the Coast Guard Personnel Service Center as service 
that counts toward total active service for regular retirement under 
section 2152 or section 2306 shall be considered by the President as 
active service for purposes of applying section 2152 or section 2306 
with respect to the determination of the retirement qualification for 
any officer or enlisted member to whom a description was provided.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 25 of title 14, 
United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to 
section 2515 the following:

``2515. Calculation of active service.''.
 (c) Rule of Construction.--The amendment made by subsection (a) 
shall apply to officers and enlisted members that--
 (1) have retired from the Coast Guard before the date of 
 enactment of this Act;
 (2) voluntarily separated from service before the date of 
 enactment of this Act; or
 (3) are serving in the Coast Guard on or after the date of 
 enactment of this Act.

SEC. 5302. ACQUISITION OF ICEBREAKER.

 (a) In General.--The Commandant of the Coast Guard may acquire or 
procure an available icebreaker.
 (b) Exemptions From Requirements.--Sections 1131, 1132, 1133, and 
1171 of title 14, United States Code, shall not apply to an acquisition 
or procurement under subsection (a).
 (c) Available Icebreaker Defined.--In this section, the term 
``available icebreaker'' means a vessel that--
 (1) is capable of--
 (A) supplementing United States Coast Guard polar 
 icebreaking capabilities;
 (B) projecting United States sovereignty;
 (C) carrying out the primary duty of the Coast 
 Guard described in section 103(7) of title 14, United 
 States Code; and
 (D) collecting hydrographic, environmental, and 
 climate data; and
 (2) is documented with a coastwise endorsement under 
 chapter 121 of title 46, United States Code.
 (d) Authorization of Appropriations.--Of the amounts authorized 
under section 4902 of title 14, United States Code, as amended by this 
Act, for fiscal year 2023 up to $150,000,000 is authorized for the 
acquisition or procurement of an available icebreaker.

SEC. 5303. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE CIVILIAN PILOTS.

 (a) Eligibility for Certain Ratings.--Not later than 18 months 
after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the 
Federal Aviation Administration shall revise section 61.73 of title 14, 
Code of Federal Regulations, to ensure that a Department of Defense 
civilian pilot is eligible for a rating based on qualifications earned 
as a Department of Defense pilot, pilot instructor, or pilot examiner 
in the same manner that a military pilot is eligible for such a rating 
based on qualifications earned as a military pilot, pilot instructor, 
or pilot examiner.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Department of defense civilian pilot.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``Department of Defense 
 civilian pilot'' means an individual, other than a 
 military pilot, who is employed as a pilot by the 
 Department of Defense.
 (B) Exclusion.--The term ``Department of Defense 
 civilian pilot'' does not include a contractor of the 
 Department of Defense.
 (2) Military pilot.--The term ``military pilot'' means a 
 military pilot, as such term is used in section 61.73 of title 
 14, Code of Federal Regulations (as in effect on the day before 
 the date of the enactment of this Act).

SEC. 5304. PILOT PROGRAM FOR SPACEFLIGHT RECOVERY OPERATIONS AT SEA.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the United States has the most advanced commercial 
 space industry in the world;
 (2) the United States domestic space sector creates jobs, 
 demonstrates American global technological leadership, and is 
 critical to the national defense; and
 (3) the reliable, safe, and secure at-sea recovery of 
 spaceflight components is necessary to sustain and further 
 develop the commercial space enterprise, which is of vital 
 importance to the national and economic security of the United 
 States.
 (b) Establishment.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 30 days after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall establish and 
 conduct a pilot program to oversee the operation and monitoring 
 of remotely-controlled or unmanned spaceflight recovery vessels 
 or platforms by eligible entities to--
 (A) better understand the complexities of such 
 operation and monitoring and potential risks to 
 navigation safety and maritime workers;
 (B) gather observational and performance data from 
 monitoring the use of remotely-controlled or unmanned 
 spaceflight recovery vessels and platforms; and
 (C) assess and evaluate regulatory alternatives to 
 guide the development of routine operation and 
 monitoring of remotely-controlled or unmanned 
 spaceflight recovery vessels and platforms.
 (2) Requirements.--In conducting the pilot program 
 established under this section, the Secretary shall--
 (A) ensure that authority provided under this 
 section is necessary to ensure the life and safety of 
 licensed and unlicensed maritime workers and other non-
 vessel operating personnel involved during operations 
 regulated under this section; and
 (B) consider experience and knowledge gained 
 pursuant to implementation of the pilot program 
 authorized under section 8343 of the Elijah E. Cummings 
 Coast Guard Authorization Act of 2020 (46 U.S.C. 70034 
 note).
 (c) Authorized Activities.--
 (1) In general.--In conducting the pilot program under this 
 section, the Secretary may allow an eligible entity to--
 (A) carry out remote over-the-horizon monitoring 
 operations related to the active recovery of 
 spaceflight components at sea on a remotely-controlled 
 or unmanned spaceflight recovery vessel or platform;
 (B) develop procedures for the operation and 
 monitoring of remotely-controlled or unmanned 
 spaceflight recovery vessels or platforms;
 (C) carry out unmanned spaceflight recovery vessel 
 transits and testing operations without a physical tow 
 line; and
 (D) carry out any other activities the Secretary 
 determines to be in the interest of furthering the 
 development of operations to recover spaceflight 
 components at sea, including the use of remotely-
 controlled or unmanned vessels specifically designed, 
 built, and used for domestic spaceflight recovery 
 operations.
 (2) Prohibition.--In conducting the pilot program under 
 this section, the Secretary may not allow an eligible entity to 
 operate a remotely-controlled or unmanned spaceflight recovery 
 vessel without a physical tow line within 12 nautical miles of 
 a port.
 (d) Interim Authority.--In recognition of potential risks to 
navigation safety and unique circumstances requiring the use of 
remotely operated or unmanned spaceflight recovery vessels or platforms 
for recovery of spaceflight components at sea, and in carrying out the 
pilot program under this section, the Secretary is authorized to--
 (1) allow such recovery operations to proceed consistent 
 with the authorities of the Secretary under navigation and 
 manning laws and regulations; and
 (2) modify applicable regulations and guidance as the 
 Secretary considers appropriate to--
 (A) allow the recovery of spaceflight components at 
 sea to occur while ensuring navigation safety in 
 recovery areas; and
 (B) ensure the reliable, safe, and secure operation 
 of remotely controlled or unmanned spaceflight recovery 
 vessels and platforms.
 (e) Duration.--The pilot program established under this section 
shall terminate on the day that is 5 years after the date on which the 
pilot program is established.
 (f) Prohibition on Rulemaking.--
 (1) In general.--During the covered period, and except as 
 provided in paragraph (2), the Secretary may not propose, 
 issue, or implement a rule regarding the integration of 
 automated and autonomous commercial vessels and vessel 
 technologies, including artificial intelligence, into the 
 United States maritime transportation system.
 (2) Non-application.--The prohibition authorized under 
 paragraph (1) shall not apply to a rule that is--
 (A) related to activities carried out under this 
 section; and
 (B) initiated due to a matter of national security, 
 an emergency, or to prevent the imminent loss of life 
 and property at sea.
 (3) Covered period defined.--In this subsection, the term 
 ``covered period'' means the period beginning on the date of 
 enactment of this Act and ending on the later of--
 (A) the date on which the International Maritime 
 Organization adopts a regulatory regime including 
 international standards to govern the use and operation 
 of automated and autonomous commercial vessels and 
 vessel technologies for commercial waterborne 
 transportation; or
 (B) the date on which the pilot program terminates 
 under subsection (e).
 (g) Briefings.--Upon the request of the Committee on Transportation 
and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives or the Committee on 
Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate, the Commandant of 
the Coast Guard shall brief either such committee on the pilot program 
established under this section.
 (h) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the termination of the 
pilot program under subsection (e), the Secretary shall submit to the 
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of 
Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation of the Senate a final report describing the execution of 
such pilot program and recommendations for maintaining navigation 
safety and the safety of maritime workers in spaceflight recovery 
areas.
 (i) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section may be construed 
to authorize the employment in the coastwise trade of a vessel or 
platform that does not meet the requirements of sections 12112, 55102, 
55103, or 55111 of title 46, United States Code.
 (j) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Eligible entity.--The term ``eligible entity'' means 
 any company engaged in the recovery of spaceflight components 
 at sea.
 (2) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of the department in which the Coast Guard is operating.

SEC. 5305. PORT INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT GRANTS.

 (a) In General.--From amounts appropriated for port infrastructure 
development grants under section 54301(a) of title 46, United States 
Code, after the date of enactment of this Act for each of fiscal years 
2023 through 2027, the Secretary of Transportation shall treat a 
project described in subsection (b) as an eligible project under 
section 54301(a)(3) of such title for purposes of making grants under 
section 54301(a) of such title.
 (b) Project Described.--A project described in this subsection is a 
project to provide shore power at a port that services passenger 
vessels described in section 3507(k) of title 46, United States Code.

SEC. 5306. PRELIMINARY DAMAGE ASSESSMENT.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) Preliminary damage assessments play a critical role in 
 assessing and validating the impact and magnitude of a 
 disaster.
 (2) Through the preliminary damage assessment process, 
 representatives from the Federal Emergency Management Agency 
 validate information gathered by State and local officials that 
 serves as the basis for disaster assistance requests.
 (3) Various factors can impact the duration of a 
 preliminary damage assessment and the corresponding submission 
 of a major disaster request, however, the average time between 
 when a disaster occurs, and the submission of a corresponding 
 disaster request has been found to be approximately twenty days 
 longer for flooding disasters.
 (4) With communities across the country facing increased 
 instances of catastrophic flooding and other extreme weather 
 events, accurate and efficient preliminary damage assessments 
 have become critically important to the relief process for 
 impacted States and municipalities.
 (b) Report to Congress.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Federal 
 Emergency Management Agency shall submit to Congress a report 
 describing the preliminary damage assessment process, as 
 supported by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the 5 
 years before the date of enactment of this Act.
 (2) Contents.--The report described in paragraph (1) shall 
 contain the following:
 (A) The process of the Federal Emergency Management 
 Agency for deploying personnel to support preliminary 
 damage assessments.
 (B) The number of Agency staff participating on 
 disaster assessment teams.
 (C) The training and experience of such staff 
 described in subparagraph (B).
 (D) A calculation of the average amount of time 
 disaster assessment teams described in subparagraph (A) 
 are deployed to a disaster area.
 (E) The efforts of the Agency to maintain a 
 consistent liaison between the Agency and State, local, 
 tribal, and territorial officials within a disaster 
 area.
 (c) Preliminary Damage Assessment.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 6 months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Federal 
 Emergency Management Agency shall convene an advisory panel 
 consisting of emergency management personnel employed by State, 
 local, territorial, or tribal authorities, and the 
 representative organizations of such personnel to assist the 
 Agency in improving critical components of the preliminary 
 damage assessment process.
 (2) Membership.--
 (A) In general.--This advisory panel shall consist 
 of at least 2 representatives from national emergency 
 management organizations and at least 1 representative 
 from each of the 10 regions of the Federal Emergency 
 Management Agency, selected from emergency management 
 personnel employed by State, local, territorial, or 
 tribal authorities within each region.
 (B) Inclusion on panel.--To the furthest extent 
 practicable, representation on the advisory panel shall 
 include emergency management personnel from both rural 
 and urban jurisdictions.
 (3) Considerations.--The advisory panel convened under 
 paragraph (1) shall--
 (A) consider--
 (i) establishing a training regime to 
 ensure preliminary damage assessments are 
 conducted and reviewed under consistent 
 guidelines;
 (ii) utilizing a common technological 
 platform to integrate data collected by State 
 and local governments with data collected by 
 the Agency; and
 (iii) assessing instruction materials 
 provided by the Agency for omissions of 
 pertinent information or language that 
 conflicts with other statutory requirements; 
 and
 (B) identify opportunities for streamlining the 
 consideration of preliminary damage assessments by the 
 Agency, including eliminating duplicative paperwork 
 requirements and ensuring consistent communication and 
 decision making among Agency staff.
 (4) Interim report.--Not later than 18 months after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall submit 
 to Congress a report regarding the findings of the advisory 
 panel, steps that will be undertaken by the Agency to implement 
 the findings of the advisory panel, and additional legislation 
 that may be necessary to implement the findings of the advisory 
 panel.
 (5) Rulemaking and final report.--Not later than 2 years 
 after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator 
 shall issue such regulations as are necessary to implement the 
 recommendations of the advisory panel and submit to Congress a 
 report discussing--
 (A) the implementation of recommendations from the 
 advisory panel;
 (B) the identification of any additional challenges 
 to the preliminary damage assessment process, including 
 whether specific disasters result in longer preliminary 
 damage assessments; and
 (C) any additional legislative recommendations 
 necessary to improve the preliminary damage assessment 
 process.

SEC. 5307. DESIGNATION OF SMALL STATE AND RURAL ADVOCATE.

 (a) In General.--Section 326(c) of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster 
Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5165d) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (2);
 (2) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (4); and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following:
 ``(3) assist States in the collection and presentation of 
 material in the disaster or emergency declaration request 
 relevant to demonstrate severe localized impacts within the 
 State for a specific incident, including--
 ``(A) the per capita personal income by local area, 
 as calculated by the Bureau of Economic Analysis;
 ``(B) the disaster impacted population profile, as 
 reported by the Bureau of the Census, including--
 ``(i) the percentage of the population for 
 whom poverty status is determined;
 ``(ii) the percentage of the population 
 already receiving Government assistance such as 
 Supplemental Security Income and Supplemental 
 Nutrition Assistance Program benefits;
 ``(iii) the pre-disaster unemployment rate;
 ``(iv) the percentage of the population 
 that is 65 years old and older;
 ``(v) the percentage of the population 18 
 years old and younger;
 ``(vi) the percentage of the population 
 with a disability;
 ``(vii) the percentage of the population 
 who speak a language other than English and 
 speak English less than `very well'; and
 ``(viii) any unique considerations 
 regarding American Indian and Alaskan Native 
 Tribal populations raised in the State's 
 request for a major disaster declaration that 
 may not be reflected in the data points 
 referenced in this subparagraph;
 ``(C) the impact to community infrastructure, 
 including--
 ``(i) disruptions to community life-saving 
 and life-sustaining services;
 ``(ii) disruptions or increased demand for 
 essential community services; and
 ``(iii) disruptions to transportation, 
 infrastructure, and utilities; and
 ``(D) any other information relevant to demonstrate 
 severe local impacts.''.
 (b) Gao Review of a Final Rule.--
 (1) In general.--The Comptroller General shall conduct a 
 review of the Federal Emergency Management Agency's 
 implementation of its final rule, published on March 21, 2019, 
 amending section 206.48(b) of title 44, Code of Federal 
 Regulations (regarding factors considered when evaluating a 
 Governor's request for a major disaster declaration), which 
 revised the factors that the Agency considers when evaluating a 
 Governor's request for a major disaster declaration authorizing 
 individual assistance under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster 
 Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5121 et seq).
 (2) Scope.--The review required under paragraph (1) shall 
 include the following:
 (A) An assessment of the criteria used by the 
 Agency to assess individual assistance requests 
 following a major disaster declaration authorizing 
 individual assistance.
 (B) An assessment of the consistency with which the 
 Agency uses the updated Individual Assistance 
 Declaration Factors when assessing the impact of 
 individual communities after a major disaster 
 declaration.
 (C) An assessment of the impact, if any, of using 
 the updated Individual Assistance Declaration Factors 
 has had on equity in disaster recovery outcomes.
 (D) Recommendations to improve the use of the 
 Individual Assistance Declaration Factors to increase 
 equity in disaster recovery outcomes.
 (3) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall submit to 
 the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House 
 of Representatives and the Committee on Homeland Security and 
 Governmental Affairs of the Senate a report on the review 
 required under this section.

SEC. 5308. FLEXIBILITY.

 (a) In General.--Section 1216(a) of the Disaster Recovery Reform 
Act of 2018 (42 U.S.C. 5174a(a)) is amended--
 (1) by amending paragraph (2)(A) to read as follows:
 ``(A) except as provided in subparagraph (B), 
 shall--
 ``(i) waive a debt owed to the United 
 States related to covered assistance provided 
 to an individual or household if the covered 
 assistance was distributed based on an error by 
 the Agency and such debt shall be construed as 
 a hardship; and
 ``(ii) waive a debt owed to the United 
 States related to covered assistance provided 
 to an individual or household if such 
 assistance is subject to a claim or legal 
 action, including in accordance with section 
 317 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief 
 and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5160); 
 and''; and
 (2) in paragraph (3)(B)--
 (A) by striking ``Removal of'' and inserting 
 ``Report on''; and
 (B) in clause (ii) by striking ``the authority of 
 the Administrator to waive debt under paragraph (2) 
 shall no longer be effective'' and inserting ``the 
 Administrator shall report to the Committee on 
 Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of 
 Representatives and the Committee on Homeland Security 
 and Governmental Affairs of the Senate actions that the 
 Administrator will take to reduce the error rate''.
 (b) Report to Congress.--The Administrator of the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency shall submit to the Committee on Transportation and 
Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and the Committee on 
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate a report 
containing a description of the internal processes used to make 
decisions regarding the distribution of covered assistance under 
section 1216 of the Disaster Recovery and Reform Act of 2018 (42 U.S.C. 
5174a) and any changes made to such processes.

SEC. 5309. MENSTRUAL PRODUCTS IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS.

 (a) Requirement.--Each appropriate authority shall ensure that 
menstrual products are stocked in, and available free of charge in, 
each covered restroom in each covered public building under the 
jurisdiction of such authority.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Appropriate authority.--The term ``appropriate 
 authority'' means the head of a Federal agency, the Architect 
 of the Capitol, or other official authority responsible for the 
 operation of a covered public building.
 (2) Covered public building.--The term ``covered public 
 building'' means a public building, as defined in section 3301 
 of title 40, United States Code, that is open to the public and 
 contains a public restroom, and includes a building listed in 
 section 6301 or 5101 of such title.
 (3) Covered restroom.--The term ``covered restroom'' means 
 a restroom in a covered public building, except for a restroom 
 designated solely for use by men.
 (4) Menstrual products.--The term ``menstrual products'' 
 means sanitary napkins and tampons that conform to applicable 
 industry standards.

SEC. 5310. FLY AMERICA ACT EXCEPTION.

 Section 40118 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding 
at the end the following:
 ``(h) Certain Transportation of Domestic Animals.--
 ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (c), 
 an appropriation to any department, agency, or instrumentality 
 of the United States Government may be used to pay for the 
 transportation of a Peace Corps volunteer or an officer, 
 employee, or member of the uniformed services of any such 
 department, agency, or instrumentality, a dependent of the 
 Peace Corps volunteer, officer, employee, or member, and in-
 cabin or accompanying checked baggage, by a foreign air carrier 
 when--
 ``(A) the transportation is from a place--
 ``(i) outside the United States to a place 
 in the United States;
 ``(ii) in the United States to a place 
 outside the United States; or
 ``(iii) outside the United States to 
 another place outside the United States; and
 ``(B) no air carrier holding a certificate under 
 section 41102 is willing and able to transport up to 
 three domestic animals accompanying such Peace Corps 
 volunteer, officer, employee, member, or dependent.
 ``(2) Limitation.--An amount paid pursuant to paragraph (1) 
 for transportation by a foreign carrier may not be greater than 
 the amount that would otherwise have been paid had the 
 transportation been on an air carrier holding a certificate 
 under section 41102 had that carrier been willing and able to 
 provide such transportation. If the amount that would otherwise 
 have been paid to such an air carrier is less than the cost of 
 transportation on the applicable foreign carrier, the Peace 
 Corps volunteer, officer, employee, member may pay the 
 difference of such amount.
 ``(3) Definition.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Domestic animal.--The term `domestic animal' 
 means a dog or a cat.
 ``(B) Peace corps volunteer.--The term `Peace Corps 
 volunteer' means an individual described in section 
 5(a) of the Peace Corps Act (22 U.S.C. 2504(a)).''.

SEC. 5311. AQUA ALERT NOTIFICATION SYSTEM PILOT PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Commandant of the Coast Guard shall, subject to the 
availability of appropriations, establish a pilot program to improve 
the issuance of alerts to facilitate cooperation with the public to 
render aid to distressed individuals under section 521 of title 14, 
United States Code.
 (b) Pilot Program Contents.--The pilot program established under 
subsection (a) shall, to the maximum extent possible--
 (1) include a voluntary opt-in program under which members 
 of the public may receive notifications on cellular devices 
 regarding Coast Guard activities to render aid to distressed 
 individuals under section 521 of title 14, United States Code;
 (2) cover areas located within the area of responsibility 
 of 3 different Coast Guard sectors in diverse geographic 
 regions; and
 (3) provide that the dissemination of an alert be limited 
 to the geographic areas most likely to facilitate the rendering 
 of aide to distressed individuals.
 (c) Consultation With Other Agencies, States, Territories, and 
Political Subdivisions.--In developing the pilot program under 
subsection (a), the Commandant shall consult any relevant Federal 
agency, State, Territory, Tribal government, possession, or political 
subdivision.
 (d) Report to Congress.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter through 2026, the 
Commandant shall submit to the Committee on Transportation and 
Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and the Committee on 
Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate, and make available 
to the public, a report on the implementation of this Act.
 (e) Authorization of Appropriations.--
 (1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated to 
 carry out this Act $3,000,000 to the Commandant for each of 
 fiscal years 2023 through 2026.
 (2) Availability of funds.--Amounts appropriated pursuant 
 to paragraph (1) shall remain available until expended.

SEC. 5312. RECOGNIZING FEMA SUPPORT.

 Congress finds the following:
 (1) The Federal Emergency Management Agency provides vital 
 support to communities and disaster survivors in the aftermath 
 of major disasters, including housing assistance for 
 individuals and families displaced from their homes.
 (2) The Federal Emergency Management Agency should be 
 encouraged to study the idea integrating collapsible shelters 
 for appropriate non-congregate sheltering needs into the 
 disaster preparedness stockpile.

SEC. 5313. DEFINITIONS.

 Section 101(a) of title 23, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (33), (34), (35), and (36) 
 as paragraphs (34), (35), (36), and (37), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (32) the following:
 ``(33) Transportation demand management.--The term 
 `transportation demand management' means the use of strategies 
 to inform and encourage travelers to maximize the efficiency of 
 a transportation system, leading to improved mobility, reduced 
 congestion, and lower vehicle emissions, including strategies 
 that use planning, programs, policies, marketing, 
 communications, incentives, pricing, data, and technology.''.

SEC. 5314. PERMITTING USE OF HIGHWAY TRUST FUND FOR CONSTRUCTION OF 
 CERTAIN NOISE BARRIERS.

 (a) In General.--Section 339(b) of the National Highway System 
Designation Act of 1995 (23 U.S.C. 109 note) is amended to read as 
follows:
 ``(1) General rule.--No funds made available out of the 
 Highway Trust Fund may be used to construct a Type II noise 
 barrier (as defined by section 772.5 of title 23, Code of 
 Federal Regulations) pursuant to subsections (h) and (i) of 
 section 109 of title 23, United States Code.
 ``(2) Exceptions.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to 
 construction or preservation of a Type II noise barrier if such 
 a barrier--
 ``(A) was not part of a project approved by the 
 Secretary before November 28, 1995;
 ``(B) is proposed along lands that were developed 
 or were under substantial construction before approval 
 of the acquisition of the rights-of-ways for, or 
 construction of, the existing highway; or
 ``(C) as determined and applied by the Secretary, 
 separates a highway or other noise corridor from a 
 group of structures of which the majority of such 
 structures closest to the highway or noise corridor--
 ``(i) are residential in nature; and
 ``(ii) are at least 10 years old as of the 
 date of the proposal of the barrier project.''.
 (b) Eligibility for Surface Transportation Block Grant Funds.--
Section 133 of title 23, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(25) Planning, design, preservation, or construction of a 
 Type II noise barrier (as described in section 772.5 of title 
 23, Code of Federal Regulations) and consistent with the 
 requirements of section 339(b) of the National Highway System 
 Designation Act of 1995 (23 U.S.C. 109 note).''; and
 (2) in subsection (c)(2) by striking ``and paragraph (23)'' 
 and inserting ``, paragraph (23), and paragraph (25)''.
 (c) Multipurpose Noise Barriers.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Transportation shall 
 ensure that a noise barrier constructed or preserved under 
 section 339(b) of the National Highway System Designation Act 
 of 1995 (23 U.S.C. 109 note) or with funds made available under 
 title 23, United States Code, may be a multipurpose noise 
 barrier.
 (2) State approval.--A State, on behalf of the Secretary, 
 may approve accommodation of a secondary beneficial use on a 
 noise barrier within a right-of-way on a Federal-aid highway.
 (3) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) Multipurpose noise barrier.--The term 
 ``multipurpose noise barrier'' means any noise barrier 
 that provides a secondary beneficial use, including a 
 barrier that hosts or accommodates renewable energy 
 generation facilities, electrical transmission and 
 distribution infrastructure, or broadband 
 infrastructure and conduit.
 (B) Secondary beneficial use.--The term ``secondary 
 beneficial use'' means an environmental, economic, or 
 social benefit in addition to highway noise mitigation.
 (d) Aesthetics.--A project sponsor constructing or preserving a 
noise barrier under section 339(b) of the National Highway System 
Designation Act of 1995 (23 U.S.C. 109 note) or with funds made 
available under title 23, United States Code, shall consider the 
aesthetics of the proposed noise barrier, consistent with latest 
version of the Noise Barrier Design Handbook published by the Federal 
Highway Administration of the Department of Transportation.

SEC. 5315. ESTABLISHMENT OF SOUTHERN NEW ENGLAND REGIONAL COMMISSION.

 (a) Establishment.--Section 15301(a) of title 40, United States 
Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) The Southern New England Regional Commission.''.
 (b) Designation of Region.--
 (1) In general.--Subchapter II of chapter 157 of such title 
 is amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 15734. Southern New England Regional Commission
 ``The region of the Southern New England Regional Commission shall 
include the following counties:
 ``(1) Rhode island.--Each county in the State of Rhode 
 Island.
 ``(2) Connecticut.--The counties of Hartford, New Haven, 
 Windham, Tolland, Middlesex, and New London in the State of 
 Connecticut.
 ``(3) Massachusetts.--The counties of Hampden, Plymouth, 
 Barnstable, Essex, Worcester, and Bristol in the State of 
 Massachusetts.''.
 (2) Technical and conforming amendment.--The analysis for 
 Subchapter II of chapter 157 of such title is amended by adding 
 at the end the following:

``15734. Southern New England Regional Commission.''.
 (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--The authorization of 
appropriations in section 15751 of title 40, United States Code, shall 
apply with respect to the Southern New England Regional Commission 
beginning with fiscal year 2023.

SEC. 5316. CRITICAL DOCUMENT FEE WAIVER.

 Section 1238(a) of the Disaster Recovery Reform Act of 2018 (42 
U.S.C. 5174b) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2), by striking ``applies regardless'' 
 and inserting ``and the requirement of the President to waive 
 fees under paragraph (4) apply regardless'';
 (2) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (5); and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following:
 ``(4) Mandatory automatic waiver.--The President, in 
 consultation with the Governor of a State, shall automatically 
 provide a fee waiver described in paragraph (1) to an 
 individual or household that has been adversely affected by a 
 major disaster declared under section 401 of the Robert T. 
 Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 
 U.S.C. 5170)--
 ``(A) for which the President provides assistance 
 to individuals and households under section 408 of that 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 5174); and
 ``(B) that destroyed a critical document described 
 in paragraph (1) of the individual or household.''.

SEC. 5317. DISADVANTAGED BUSINESS ENTERPRISES.

 Section 11101(e)(2)(A) of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs 
Act (Public Law 117-58) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(A) Small business concern.--The term `small 
 business concern' means a small business concern (as 
 the term is used in section 3 of the Small Business Act 
 (15 U.S.C. 632)).''.

SEC. 5318. SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE REPORT ON IMPROVING SUPPLY CHAIN 
 SHORTFALLS AND INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS AT WHOLESALE PRODUCE 
 MARKETS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall submit to the 
appropriate congressional committees a report on--
 (1) the 5 largest wholesale produce markets by annual sales 
 and volume over the preceding 4 calendar years; and
 (2) a representative sample of 8 wholesale produce markets 
 that are not among the largest wholesale produce markets.
 (b) Contents.--The report under subsection (a) shall contain the 
following:
 (1) An analysis of the supply chain shortfalls in each 
 wholesale produce market identified under subsection (a), which 
 shall include an analysis of the following:
 (A) State of repair of infrastructure, including 
 roads, food storage units, and refueling stations.
 (B) Sustainability infrastructure, including the 
 following:
 (i) Carbon emission reduction technology.
 (ii) On-site green refueling stations.
 (iii) Disaster preparedness.
 (C) Disaster preparedness, including with respect 
 to cyber attacks, weather events, and terrorist 
 attacks.
 (D) Disaster recovery systems, including 
 coordination with State and Federal agencies.
 (2) A description of any actions the Secretary recommends 
 be taken as a result of the analysis under paragraph (1).
 (3) Recommendations, as appropriate, for wholesale produce 
 market owners and operators, and State and local entities to 
 improve the supply chain shortfalls identified under paragraph 
 (1).
 (4) Proposals, as appropriate, for legislative actions and 
 funding needed to improve the supply chain shortfalls.
 (c) Consultation.--In completing the report under subsection (a), 
the Secretary of Agriculture shall consult with the Secretary of 
Transportation, the Secretary of Homeland Security, wholesale produce 
market owners and operators, State and local entities, and other 
agencies or stakeholders, as determined appropriate by the Secretary.
 (d) Appropriate Congressional Committees.--For the purposes of this 
section, the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the 
Committee on Agriculture, the Committee on Homeland Security, and the 
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of 
Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Technology, 
the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, and the 
Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate.

SEC. 5319. REPORT ON IMPROVING COUNTERTERRORISM SECURITY AT PASSENGER 
 RAIL STATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Secretary, in consultation with 
the Secretary of Transportation and State, local, Tribal, and 
territorial governments, passenger rail station owners and operators, 
State and local transportation entities, and other agencies or 
stakeholders as determined appropriate by the Secretary, shall submit 
to the appropriate congressional committees a report on the 5 largest 
passenger rail stations by annual ridership and a representative sample 
of 8 other-sized passenger rail stations that contains the following:
 (1) An analysis of the effectiveness of counterterrorism 
 measures implemented in each passenger rail station to include 
 prevention systems, including--
 (A) surveillance systems, including cameras, and 
 physical law enforcement presence;
 (B) response systems including--
 (i) evacuation systems to allow passengers 
 and workers to egress the stations, mezzanines, 
 and rail cars;
 (ii) fire safety measures, including 
 ventilation and fire suppression systems; and
 (iii) public alert systems; and
 (C) recovery systems, including coordination with 
 State and Federal agencies.
 (2) A description of any actions taken as a result of the 
 analysis conducted under paragraph (1).
 (3) Recommendations, as appropriate, for passenger rail 
 station owners and operators, and State and local 
 transportation entities to improve counterterrorism measures 
 outlined in paragraph (1).
 (4) Proposals, as appropriate, for legislative actions and 
 funding needed to improve counterterrorism measures.
 (b) Report Format.--The report described in subsection (a) shall be 
submitted in unclassified form, but information that is sensitive or 
classified shall be included as a classified annex.
 (c) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the Committee 
on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives, the Committee on 
Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives, the 
Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate, and 
the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the 
Senate.

SEC. 5320. EXTREME WEATHER EVENTS.

 (a) Definitions.--
 (1) In general.--Section 203 of the Robert T. Stafford 
 Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5133) 
 is amended--
 (A) by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
 ``(a) Definition of Underserved Community.--In this section, the 
term `underserved community' means a community, or a neighborhood 
within a community, that--
 ``(1) is classified as high risk according to census tract 
 risk ratings derived from a product that--
 ``(A) is maintained under a natural hazard 
 assessment program;
 ``(B) is available to the public;
 ``(C) defines natural hazard risk across the United 
 States;
 ``(D) reflects high levels of individual hazard 
 risk ratings;
 ``(E) reflects high social vulnerability ratings 
 and low community resilience ratings;
 ``(F) reflects the principal natural hazard risks 
 identified for the respective census tracts; and
 ``(G) any other elements determined by the 
 President.
 ``(2) is comprised of 50,000 or fewer individuals and is 
 economically disadvantaged, as determined by the State in which 
 the community is located and based on criteria established by 
 the President; or
 ``(3) is otherwise determined by the President based on 
 factors including, high housing cost burden and substandard 
 housing, percentage of homeless population, limited water and 
 sanitation access, demographic information such as race, age, 
 and disability, language composition, transportation access or 
 type, disproportionate environmental stressor burden, and 
 disproportionate impacts from climate change.'';
 (B) in subsection (g)(9) by striking ``small 
 impoverished communities'' and inserting ``underserved 
 communities''; and
 (C) in subsection (h)(2)--
 (i) in the heading by striking ``Small 
 impoverished communities'' and inserting 
 ``Underserved communities''; and
 (ii) by striking ``small impoverished 
 community'' and inserting ``underserved 
 community''.
 (2) Applicability.--The amendments made by subsection (a) 
 shall apply with respect to any amounts appropriated on or 
 after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (b) Guidance on Extreme Temperature Events.--Not later than 1 year 
after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the 
Federal Emergency Management Administration shall issue guidance 
related to extreme temperature events, including heat waves and 
freezes, and publish such guidance in the Federal Emergency Management 
Administration Public Assistance Program and Policy Guide.
 (c) Hazard Mitigation Plans.--Section 322 of the Robert T. Stafford 
Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5165) is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a) by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting ``, including--
 ``(1) identifying the extent to which resilience is or will 
 be incorporated into other planning processes, including 
 community land use, economic development, capital improvement 
 budgets and transportation planning processes;
 ``(2) goals and objectives related to increasing resilience 
 over a 5-year period, including benchmarks for future work and 
 an assessment of past progress;
 ``(3) the building codes in existence at the time the plan 
 is submitted and standards that are in use by the State for all 
 manner of planning or development purposes and how the State 
 has or will comply with the standards set forth in section 
 406(e)(1)(A);
 ``(4) the use of nature-based solutions or other mitigation 
 activities that conserve or restore natural features that can 
 serve to abate or lessen the impacts of future disasters;
 ``(5) integration of each local mitigation plan with the 
 State, Indian Tribe, or territory plan; and
 ``(6) the disparate impacts on underserved communities (as 
 such term is defined in section 203(a)) and plans to address 
 any disparities.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(f) Guidance.--The Administrator of the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency shall issue specific guidance on resilience goals and 
provide technical assistance for States, Indian Tribes, territories, 
and local governments to meet such goals.
 ``(g) Adequate Staffing.--The Administrator of the Federal 
Emergency Management Agency shall ensure that ample staff are available 
to develop the guidance and technical assistance under section 322, 
including hazard mitigation planning staff and personnel with expertise 
in community planning, land use development, and consensus based codes 
and hazard resistant designs at each regional office that specifically 
focus on providing financial and non-financial direct technical 
assistance to States, Indian Tribes, and territories.
 ``(h) Reporting.--Not less frequently than every 5 years, the 
Administrator shall submit to Congress a report on the progress of 
meeting the goals under this section.''.
 (d) Additional Uses of Funds.--Section 408 of the Robert T. 
Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5174) 
is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(k) Additional Uses of Funds.--For State and local governments 
that have exceeded, adopted, or are implementing the latest two 
published editions of relevant consensus-based codes, specifications, 
and standards that incorporate the latest hazard-resistant designs and 
establish minimum acceptable criteria for the design, construction, and 
maintenance of residential structures and facilities, a recipient of 
assistance provided under this paragraph may use such assistance in a 
manner consistent with the standards set forth in clauses (ii) and 
(iii) of section 406(e)(1)(A).''.
 (e) Collaboration With Other Agencies.--In awarding grants under 
the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 
U.S.C. 5121 et seq.), the Administrator of the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency may coordinate with other relevant agencies, 
including the Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of 
Energy, the Department of Transportation, the Corps of Engineers, the 
Department of Agriculture, and the Department of Housing and Urban 
Development, as necessary, to improve collaboration for eligible 
activities under the Act.
 (f) GAO Reports.--
 (1) Extreme temperature events.--Not later than 1 year 
 after the date of enactment of this Act, and every 5 years 
 thereafter, the Comptroller General of the United States shall 
 evaluate and issue to Congress and the Federal Emergency 
 Management Agency a report regarding the impacts of extreme 
 temperatures events on communities, the challenges posed to the 
 Federal Emergency Management Agency in addressing extreme 
 temperature events, and recommendations for the Federal 
 Emergency Management Agency to better provide assistance to 
 communities experiencing extreme temperature events. The report 
 may also include examples of specific mitigation and resilience 
 projects that communities may undertake, and the Federal 
 Emergency Management Agency may consider, to reduce the impacts 
 of extreme temperatures on and within building structures, 
 participatory processes that allow for public engagement in 
 determining and addressing local risks and vulnerabilities 
 related to extreme temperatures events, and community 
 infrastructure, including heating or cooling shelters.
 (2) Smoke and indoor air quality.--Not later than 1 year 
 after the date of enactment of this Act, and every 5 years 
 thereafter, the Comptroller General shall evaluate and issue to 
 Congress and the Federal Emergency Management Agency a report 
 regarding the impacts of wildfire smoke and poor indoor air 
 quality, the challenges posed to Federal Emergency Management 
 Agency in addressing wildfire smoke and indoor air quality, and 
 recommendations for the Federal Emergency Management Agency to 
 better provide assistance to communities and individuals in 
 dealing with wildfire smoke and indoor air quality.
 (g) Report Congress and Update of Cost Effectiveness Determinations 
and Declarations.--
 (1) Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Federal 
 Emergency Management Agency, in coordination with the Director 
 of the Office of Management and Budget, shall submit to 
 Congress a report regarding the challenges posed by the 
 Agency's requirements for declaring an incident or determining 
 the cost effectiveness of mitigation activities and 
 specifically how such requirements may disproportionately 
 burden small impoverished communities, or specific vulnerable 
 populations within communities.
 (2) Update of cost effectiveness determination.--Not later 
 than 5 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
 Administrator, to the extent practicable, shall update the 
 requirements for determining cost effectiveness and declaring 
 incidents, including selection of appropriate interest rates, 
 based on the findings made under subsection (a).

SEC. 5321. SAFETY STANDARDS.

 (a) In General.--Section 4502 of title 46, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (i)(4) by striking ``each of fiscal years 
 2018 through 2021'' and inserting ``fiscal year 2023''; and
 (2) in subsection (j)(4) by striking ``each of fiscal years 
 2018 through 2021'' and inserting ``fiscal year 2023''.
 (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 9 of the Maritime 
Debris Act (33 U.S.C. 1958) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a) by striking ``each of fiscal years 
 2018 through 2021'' and inserting ``fiscal year 2023''; and
 (2) in subsection (b) by striking ``2702(1)'' and inserting 
 ``4902(1)''.

SEC. 5322. EXTENSION.

 Section 1246 of the Disaster Recovery Reform Act of 2018 is 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``3 years'' and inserting ``4 \1/2\ 
 years''; and
 (2) by inserting ``and every 3 months thereafter,'' before 
 ``the Administrator shall submit''.

SEC. 5323. CENTERS OF EXCELLENCE FOR DOMESTIC MARITIME WORKFORCE 
 TRAINING AND EDUCATION.

 (a) In General.--Section 51706 of title 46, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) by striking subsection (a) and inserting the following:
 ``(a) Designation.--The Secretary of Transportation may designate a 
covered training entity as a center of excellence for domestic maritime 
workforce training and education.'';
 (2) by striking subsection (b) and inserting the following:
 ``(b) Grant Program.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may award maritime career 
 training grants to centers of excellence designated under 
 subsection (a) for the purpose of developing, offering, or 
 improving educational or career training programs for American 
 workers related to the United States maritime industry.
 ``(2) Required information.--To receive a grant under this 
 subsection, a center of excellence designated under subsection 
 (a) shall submit to the Secretary a grant proposal that 
 includes a detailed description of--
 ``(A) the specific project for which the grant 
 proposal is submitted, including the manner in which 
 the grant will be used to develop, offer, or improve an 
 educational or career training program that is suited 
 to United States maritime industry workers;
 ``(B) the extent to which the project for which the 
 grant proposal is submitted will meet the educational 
 or career training needs of United States maritime 
 industry workers;
 ``(C) any previous experience of the center of 
 excellence in providing United States maritime industry 
 educational or career training programs;
 ``(D) how the grant would address shortcomings in 
 existing educational and career training opportunities 
 available to United States maritime industry workers; 
 and
 ``(E) the extent to which employers, including 
 small and medium-sized firms, have demonstrated a 
 commitment to employing United States maritime industry 
 workers who would benefit from the project for which 
 the grant proposal is submitted.
 ``(3) Criteria for award of grants.--Subject to the 
 appropriation of funds, the Secretary shall award a grant under 
 this subsection based on--
 ``(A) a determination of the merits of the grant 
 proposal submitted by the center of excellence 
 designated under subsection (a) to develop, offer, or 
 improve educational or career training programs to be 
 made available to United States maritime industry 
 workers;
 ``(B) an evaluation of the likely employment 
 opportunities available to United States maritime 
 industry workers who complete a maritime educational or 
 career training program that the center of excellence 
 designated under subsection (a) proposes to develop, 
 offer, or improve; and
 ``(C) an evaluation of prior demand for training 
 programs by workers served by the centers of excellence 
 designated under subsection (a) as well as the 
 availability and capacity of existing maritime training 
 programs to meet future demand for training programs.
 ``(4) Competitive awards.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall award grants 
 under this subsection to a center of excellence 
 designated under subsection (a) on a competitive basis.
 ``(B) Timing of grant notice.--The Secretary shall 
 post a Notice of Funding Opportunity regarding grants 
 awarded under this subsection not more than 90 days 
 after the date of enactment of the appropriations Act 
 for the fiscal year concerned.
 ``(C) Timing of grants.--The Secretary shall award 
 grants under this subsection not later than 270 days 
 after the date of the enactment of the appropriations 
 Act for the fiscal year concerned.
 ``(D) Reuse of unexpended grant funds.--
 Notwithstanding subparagraph (C), amounts awarded as a 
 grant under this subsection that are not expended by 
 the grantee shall remain available to the Administrator 
 for use for grants under this subsection.
 ``(E) Administrative costs.--Not more than 3 
 percent of amounts made available to carry out this 
 subsection may be used for the necessary costs of grant 
 administration.
 ``(F) Prohibited use.--A center of excellence 
 designated under subsection (a) that has received funds 
 awarded under section 54101(a)(2) for training purposes 
 shall not be eligible for grants under this subsection 
 in the same fiscal year.
 ``(5) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection $30,000,000.''; 
 and
 (3) in subsection (c)--
 (A) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(1) Covered training entity.--The term `covered training 
 entity' means an entity that--
 ``(A) is located in a State that borders on the--
 ``(i) Gulf of Mexico;
 ``(ii) Atlantic Ocean;
 ``(iii) Long Island Sound;
 ``(iv) Pacific Ocean;
 ``(v) Great Lakes; or
 ``(vi) Mississippi River System; and
 ``(B) is--
 ``(i) a postsecondary educational 
 institution (as such term is defined in section 
 3 (39) of the Carl D. Perkins Career and 
 Technical Education Act of 2006 (20 U.S.C. 
 2302));
 ``(ii) a postsecondary vocational 
 institution (as such term is defined in section 
 102(c) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 1002(c));
 ``(iii) a public or private nonprofit 
 entity that offers 1 or more other structured 
 experiential learning training programs for 
 American workers in the United States maritime 
 industry, including a program that is offered 
 by a labor organization or conducted in 
 partnership with a nonprofit organization or 1 
 or more employers in the United States maritime 
 industry;
 ``(iv) an entity sponsoring an 
 apprenticeship program registered with the 
 Office of Apprenticeship of the Employment and 
 Training Administration of the Department of 
 Labor or a State apprenticeship agency 
 recognized by the Office of Apprenticeship 
 pursuant to the Act of August 16, 1937 
 (commonly known as the `National Apprenticeship 
 Act'; 50 Stat. 664, chapter 663; 29 U.S.C. 50 
 et seq.); or
 ``(v) a maritime training center designated 
 prior to the date of enactment of the National 
 Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
 2023.''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the Secretary 
 of Transportation.
 ``(4) United states maritime industry.--The term `United 
 States maritime industry' means the design, construction, 
 repair, operation, manning, and supply of vessels in all 
 segments of the maritime transportation system of the United 
 States, including--
 ``(A) the domestic and foreign trade;
 ``(B) the coastal, offshore, and inland trade, 
 including energy activities conducted under the Outer 
 Continental Shelf Lands Act(43 U.S.C. 1331 et seq.);
 ``(C) non-commercial maritime activities, 
 including--
 ``(i) recreational boating; and
 ``(ii) oceanographic and limnological 
 research as described in section 2101(24).''.
 (b) Public Report.--Not later than December 15 in each of calendar 
years 2022 through 2024, the Secretary of Transportation shall make 
available on a publicly available website a report and provide a 
briefing to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of 
the Senate and the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of 
the House of Representatives--
 (1) describing each grant awarded under this subsection 
 during the preceding fiscal year; and
 (2) assessing the impact of each award of a grant under 
 this subsection in a fiscal year preceding the fiscal year 
 referred to in subparagraph (A) on workers receiving training.
 (c) Guidelines.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary shall--
 (1) promulgate guidelines for the submission of grant 
 proposals under section 51706(b) of title 46, United States 
 Code (as amended by this section); and
 (2) publish and maintain such guidelines on the website of 
 the Department of Transportation.
 (d) Assistance for Small Shipyards.--Section 54101(e) of title 46, 
United States Code, is amended by striking paragraph (2) and inserting 
the following:
 ``(2) Allocation of funds.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Administrator may not award 
 more than 25 percent of the funds appropriated to carry 
 out this section for any fiscal year to any small 
 shipyard in one geographic location that has more than 
 600 employees.
 ``(B) Ineligibility.--A maritime training center 
 that has received funds awarded under this section 
 51706 of title 46, United States Code, shall not be 
 eligible for grants under this subsection for training 
 purposes in the same fiscal year.''.

SEC. 5324. DUPLICATION OF BENEFITS.

 Section 312(b)(4) of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and 
Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5155(b)(4)) is amended by adding at 
the end the following:
 ``(D) Limitation on use of income criteria.--In 
 carrying out subparagraph (A), the President may not 
 impose additional income criteria on a potential grant 
 recipient who has accepted a qualified disaster loan in 
 determining eligibility for duplications of benefit 
 relief.''.

SEC. 5325. FLIGHT INSTRUCTION OR TESTING.

 (a) In General.--An authorized flight instructor providing student 
instruction, flight instruction, or flight training shall not be deemed 
to be operating an aircraft carrying persons or property for 
compensation or hire.
 (b) Authorized Additional Pilots.--An individual acting as an 
authorized additional pilot during Phase I flight testing of aircraft 
holding an experimental airworthiness certificate, in accordance with 
section 21.191 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations, and meeting 
the requirements set forth in Federal Aviation Administration 
regulations and policy in effect as of the date of enactment of this 
section, shall not be deemed to be operating an aircraft carrying 
persons or property for compensation or hire.
 (c) Use of Aircraft.--An individual who uses, causes to use, or 
authorizes to use aircraft for flights conducted under subsection (a) 
or (b) shall not be deemed to be operating an aircraft carrying persons 
or property for compensation or hire.
 (d) Revision of Rules.--The requirements of this section shall 
become effective upon the date of enactment. The Administrator of the 
Federal Aviation Administration shall issue, revise, or repeal the 
rules, regulations, guidance, or procedures of the Federal Aviation 
Administration to conform to the requirements of this section.

SEC. 5326. HIGH-SPEED BROADBAND DEPLOYMENT INITIATIVE.

 (a) In General.--Title II of the Public Works and Economic 
Development Act of 1965 (42 U.S.C. 3141 et seq.) is amended by adding 
at the end the following:

``SEC. 219. HIGH-SPEED BROADBAND DEPLOYMENT INITIATIVE.

 ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Broadband project.--The term `broadband project' 
 means, for the purpose of providing, extending, expanding, or 
 improving high-speed broadband service to further the goals of 
 this Act--
 ``(A) planning, technical assistance, or training;
 ``(B) the acquisition or development of land; or
 ``(C) the acquisition, design and engineering, 
 construction, rehabilitation, alteration, expansion, or 
 improvement of facilities, including related machinery, 
 equipment, contractual rights, and intangible property.
 ``(2) Eligible recipient.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `eligible recipient' 
 means an eligible recipient.
 ``(B) Inclusions.--The term `eligible recipient' 
 includes--
 ``(i) a public-private partnership; and
 ``(ii) a consortium formed for the purpose 
 of providing, extending, expanding, or 
 improving high-speed broadband service between 
 1 or more eligible recipients and 1 or more 
 for-profit organizations.
 ``(3) High-speed broadband.--The term `high-speed 
 broadband' means the provision of 2-way data transmission with 
 sufficient downstream and upstream speeds to end users to 
 permit effective participation in the economy and to support 
 economic growth, as determined by the Secretary.
 ``(b) Broadband Projects.--
 ``(1) In general.--On the application of an eligible 
 recipient, the Secretary may make grants under this title for 
 broadband projects, which shall be subject to the provisions of 
 this section.
 ``(2) Considerations.--In reviewing applications submitted 
 under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall take into 
 consideration geographic diversity of grants allocated, 
 including consideration of underserved markets, in addition to 
 data requested in paragraph (3).
 ``(3) Data requested.--In reviewing an application 
 submitted under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall request from 
 the Federal Communications Commission, the Administrator of the 
 National Telecommunications and Information Administration, the 
 Secretary of Agriculture, and the Appalachian Regional 
 Commission data on--
 ``(A) the level and extent of broadband service 
 that exists in the area proposed to be served; and
 ``(B) the level and extent of broadband service 
 that will be deployed in the area proposed to be served 
 pursuant to another Federal program.
 ``(4) Interest in real or personal property.--For any 
 broadband project carried out by an eligible recipient that is 
 a public-private partnership or consortium, the Secretary shall 
 require that title to any real or personal property acquired or 
 improved with grant funds, or if the recipient will not acquire 
 title, another possessory interest acceptable to the Secretary, 
 be vested in a public partner or eligible nonprofit 
 organization or association for the useful life of the project, 
 after which title may be transferred to any member of the 
 public-private partnership or consortium in accordance with 
 regulations promulgated by the Secretary.
 ``(5) Procurement.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 law, no person or entity shall be disqualified from competing 
 to provide goods or services related to a broadband project on 
 the basis that the person or entity participated in the 
 development of the broadband project or in the drafting of 
 specifications, requirements, statements of work, or similar 
 documents related to the goods or services to be provided.
 ``(6) Broadband project property.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary may permit a 
 recipient of a grant for a broadband project to grant 
 an option to acquire real or personal property 
 (including contractual rights and intangible property) 
 related to that project to a third party on such terms 
 as the Secretary determines to be appropriate, subject 
 to the condition that the option may only be exercised 
 after the Secretary releases the Federal interest in 
 the property.
 ``(B) Treatment.--The grant or exercise of an 
 option described in subparagraph (A) shall not 
 constitute a redistribution of grant funds under 
 section 217.
 ``(c) Non-Federal Share.--In determining the amount of the non-
Federal share of the cost of a broadband project, the Secretary may 
provide credit toward the non-Federal share for the present value of 
allowable contributions over the useful life of the broadband project, 
subject to the condition that the Secretary may require such assurances 
of the value of the rights and of the commitment of the rights as the 
Secretary determines to be appropriate.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of 
the Public Works and Economic Development Act of 1965 (42 U.S.C. 3121 
note; Public Law 89-136) is amended by inserting after the item 
relating to section 218 the following:

``Sec. 219. High-speed broadband deployment initiative.''.

 TITLE LIV--FINANCIAL SERVICES MATTERS

 Subtitle A--In General

SEC. 5401. SERVICES THAT OPEN PORTALS TO DIRTY MONEY ACT.

 (a) Short Title.--This section may be cited as the ``Establishing 
New Authorities for Businesses Laundering and Enabling Risks to 
Security Act'' and the ``ENABLERS Act''.
 (b) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) Kleptocrats and other corrupt actors across the world 
 are increasingly relying on non-bank professional service 
 providers, including non-bank professional service providers 
 operating in the United States, to move, hide, and grow their 
 ill-gotten gains.
 (2) In 2003, the Financial Action Task Force, an 
 intergovernmental body formed by the United States and other 
 major industrial nations, determined that designated non-
 financial businesses and professions should be subject to the 
 same anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing 
 rules and regulations as financial institutions, including the 
 requirement to know your customer or client and to perform due 
 diligence, as well as to file suspicious transaction reports, 
 referred to as suspicious activity reports or ``SARs'' in the 
 United States.
 (3) In October 2021, the ``Pandora Papers'', the largest 
 expose of global financial data in history, revealed to a 
 global audience how the United States plays host to a highly 
 specialized group of ``enablers'' who help the world's elite 
 move, hide, and grow their money.
 (4) The Pandora Papers described how an adviser to the 
 former Prime Minister of Malaysia reportedly used affiliates of 
 a United States law firm to assemble and consult a network of 
 companies, despite the adviser fitting the ``textbook 
 definition'' of a high-risk client. The adviser went on to use 
 his companies to help steal $4.5 billion from Malaysia's public 
 investment fund in one of ``the world's biggest-ever financial 
 frauds'', known as 1MDB.
 (5) Russian oligarchs have used gatekeepers to move their 
 money into the United States. For example, a gatekeeper formed 
 a company in Delaware that reportedly owns a $15 million 
 mansion in Washington, D.C., that is linked to one of Vladimir 
 Putin's closest allies. Also, reportedly connected to the 
 oligarch is a $14 million townhouse in New York City owned by a 
 separate Delaware company.
 (6) The Pandora Papers uncovered over 200 United States-
 based trusts across 15 States that held assets of over $1 
 billion, ``including nearly 30 trusts that held assets linked 
 to people or companies accused of fraud, bribery, or human 
 rights abuses''. In particular, South Dakota, Nevada, Delaware, 
 Florida, Wyoming, and New Hampshire have emerged as global 
 hotspots for those seeking to hide their assets and minimize 
 their tax burdens.
 (7) In 2016, an investigator with the non-profit 
 organization Global Witness posed as an adviser to a corrupt 
 African official and set up meetings with 13 New York City law 
 firms to discuss how to move suspect funds into the United 
 States. Lawyers from all but one of the firms provided advice 
 to the faux adviser, including advice on how to utilize 
 anonymous companies to obscure the true owner of the assets. 
 Other suggestions included naming the lawyer as a trustee of an 
 offshore trust in order to open a bank account, and using the 
 law firm's escrow account to receive payments.
 (8) The autocratic Prime Minister of Iraqi Kurdistan, 
 reportedly known for torturing and killing journalists and 
 critics, allegedly purchased a retail store valued at over $18 
 million in Miami, Florida, with the assistance of a 
 Pennsylvania-based law firm.
 (9) Teodoro Obiang, the vice president of Equatorial Guinea 
 and son of the country's authoritarian president, embezzled 
 millions of dollars from his home country, which was then used 
 to purchase luxury assets in the United States. Obiang relied 
 on the assistance of two American lawyers to move millions of 
 dollars of suspect funds through U.S. banks. The lawyers 
 incorporated five shell companies in California and opened bank 
 accounts associated with the companies for Obiang's personal 
 use. The suspect funds were first wired to the lawyers' 
 attorney-client and firm accounts, then transferred to the 
 accounts of the shell companies.
 (10) An American consulting company reportedly made 
 millions of dollars working for companies owned or partly owned 
 by Isabel dos Santos, the eldest child of a former President of 
 Angola. This included working with Angola's state oil company 
 when it was run by Isabel dos Santos and helping to ``run a 
 failing jewelry business acquired with Angolan money''. In 
 2021, a Dutch tribunal found that Isabel dos Santos and her 
 husband obtained a $500 million stake in the oil company 
 through ``grand corruption''.
 (11) In December 2021, the United States Government issued 
 a first-ever ``United States Strategy on Countering 
 Corruption'', that includes ``Curbing Illicit Finance'' as a 
 strategic pillar. An express line of effort to advance this 
 strategic pillar states that: ``Deficiencies in the U.S. 
 regulatory framework mean various professionals and service 
 providers--including lawyers, accountants, trust and company 
 service providers, incorporators, and others willing to be 
 hired as registered agents or who act as nominees to open and 
 move funds through bank accounts--are not required to 
 understand the nature or source of income of their clients or 
 prospective clients. . .While U.S. law enforcement has 
 increased its focus on such facilitators, it is both difficult 
 to prove `intent and knowledge' that a facilitator was dealing 
 with illicit funds or bad actors, or that they should have 
 known the same. Cognizant of such constraints, the 
 Administration will consider additional authorities to cover 
 key gatekeepers, working with the Congress as necessary to 
 secure additional authorities''.
 (12) This section provides the authorities needed to 
 require that professional service providers who serve as key 
 gatekeepers to the U.S. financial system adopt anti-money 
 laundering procedures that can help detect and prevent the 
 laundering of corrupt and other criminal funds into the United 
 States. Absent such authorities, the United States Government 
 will be unable to adequately protect the U.S. financial system, 
 identify funds and assets that are the proceeds of corruption, 
 or support foreign states in their efforts to combat corruption 
 and promote good governance.
 (c) Requirements for Gatekeepers.--
 (1) In general.--Section 5312(a)(2) of title 31, United 
 States Code, as amended by the William M. (Mac) Thornberry 
 National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021, is 
 amended--
 (A) by redesignating subparagraphs (Z) and (AA) as 
 subparagraphs (AA) and (BB), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting after subparagraph (Y) the 
 following:
 ``(Z) any person, excluding any governmental 
 entity, employee, or agent, who engages in any activity 
 which the Secretary determines, by regulation pursuant 
 to section 5337(a), to be the provision, with or 
 without compensation, of--
 ``(i) corporate or other legal entity 
 arrangement, association, or formation 
 services;
 ``(ii) trust services;
 ``(iii) third party payment services; or
 ``(iv) legal or accounting services that--
 ``(I) involve financial activities 
 that facilitate--
 ``(aa) corporate or other 
 legal entity arrangement, 
 association, or formation 
 services;
 ``(bb) trust services; or
 ``(cc) third party payment 
 services; and
 ``(II) are not direct payments or 
 compensation for civil or criminal 
 defense matters.''.
 (2) Requirements for gatekeepers.--Subchapter II of chapter 
 53 of subtitle IV of title 31, United States Code, is amended 
 by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 5337. Requirements for gatekeepers.
 ``(a) In General.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall, not later than 1 
 year after the date of the enactment this section, issue a rule 
 to--
 ``(A) determine what persons fall within the class 
 of persons described in section 5312(a)(2)(Z); and
 ``(B) prescribe appropriate requirements for such 
 persons.
 ``(2) Sense of the congress.--It is the sense of the 
 Congress that when issuing a rule to determine what persons 
 fall within the class of persons described in section 
 5312(a)(2)(Z), the Secretary shall design such rule--
 ``(A) to minimizes burden of such rule and 
 maximizes the intended outcome of such rule, as 
 determined by the Secretary; and
 ``(B) avoid applying additional requirements for 
 persons that may fall within the class of persons 
 described in section 5312(a)(2)(Z) but whom are 
 already, as determined by the Secretary, appropriately 
 regulated under section 5312.
 ``(3) Identification of persons.--When determining what 
 persons fall within the class of persons described in section 
 5312(a)(2)(Z) the Secretary of the Treasury shall include--
 ``(A) any person involved in--
 ``(i) the formation or registration of a 
 corporation, limited liability company, trust, 
 foundation, limited liability partnership, 
 partnership, or other similar entity;
 ``(ii) the acquisition or disposition of an 
 interest in a corporation, limited liability 
 company, trust, foundation, limited liability 
 partnership, partnership, or other similar 
 entity;
 ``(iii) providing a registered office, 
 address or accommodation, correspondence or 
 administrative address for a corporation, 
 limited liability company, trust, foundation, 
 limited liability partnership, partnership, or 
 other similar entity;
 ``(iv) acting as, or arranging for another 
 person to act as, a nominee shareholder for 
 another person;
 ``(v) the managing, advising, or consulting 
 with respect to money or other assets;
 ``(vi) the processing of payments;
 ``(vii) the provision of cash vault 
 services;
 ``(viii) the wiring of money;
 ``(ix) the exchange of foreign currency, 
 digital currency, or digital assets; or
 ``(x) the sourcing, pooling, organization, 
 or management of capital in association with 
 the formation, operation, or management of, or 
 investment in, a corporation, limited liability 
 company, trust, foundation, limited liability 
 partnership, partnership, or other similar 
 entity;
 ``(B) any person who, in connection with filing any 
 return, directly or indirectly, on behalf of a foreign 
 individual, trust or fiduciary with respect to direct 
 or indirect, United States investment, transaction, 
 trade or business, or similar activities--
 ``(i) obtains or uses a preparer tax 
 identification number; or
 ``(ii) would be required to use or obtain a 
 preparer tax identification number, if such 
 person were compensated for services rendered;
 ``(C) any person acting as, or arranging for 
 another person to act as, a registered agent, trustee, 
 director, secretary, partner of a company, a partner of 
 a partnership, or similar position in relation to a 
 corporation, limited liability company, trust, 
 foundation, limited liability partnership, partnership, 
 or other similar entity; and
 ``(D) any person, wherever organized or doing 
 business, that is--
 ``(i) owned or controlled by a person 
 described in subparagraphs (A), (B), or (C);
 ``(ii) acts as an agent of a person 
 described in subparagraphs (A), (B), or (C); or
 ``(iii) is an instrumentality of a person 
 described in subparagraphs (A), (B), or (C).
 ``(b) Requirements.--The Secretary shall require persons described 
in section 5312(a)(3) to do 1 or more of the following--
 ``(1) identify and verify account holders and functional 
 equivalents as described in section 5318(l), including by 
 establishing and maintaining written procedures that are 
 reasonably designed to enable the person to identify and verify 
 beneficial owners (as such term is defined in section 5336(a)) 
 of clients;
 ``(2) maintain appropriate procedures, including the 
 collection and reporting of such information as the Secretary 
 may prescribe by regulation, to ensure compliance with this 
 subchapter and regulations prescribed thereunder or to guard 
 against corruption, money laundering, the financing of 
 terrorism, or other forms of illicit finance;
 ``(3) establish anti-money laundering programs as described 
 in section 5318(h);
 ``(4) report suspicious transactions as described in 
 section 5318(g)(1); and
 ``(5) establish due diligence policies, procedures, and 
 controls as described in section 5318(i).
 ``(c) Limitation on Exemptions.--The Secretary may not delay the 
application of any requirement described in this subchapter for any 
person described in section 5312(a)(2)(Z) or section 5337(a)(3).
 ``(d) Extraterritorial Jurisdiction.--Any person described in 
section 5312(a)(2)(Z) shall be subject to extraterritorial Federal 
jurisdiction with respect to the requirements of this subtitle.
 ``(e) Enforcement.--
 ``(1) Random audits.--Beginning on the date that is 1 year 
 after the date that the Secretary issues a rule to determine 
 what persons fall within the class of persons described in 
 section 5312(a)(2)(Z), and on an ongoing basis thereafter, the 
 Secretary shall conduct random audits of persons that fall 
 within the class of persons described in section 5312(a)(2)(Z), 
 in a manner that the Secretary determines appropriate, to 
 access compliance with this section.
 ``(2) Reports.--The Secretary shall, not later than 180 
 days after the conclusion of any calendar year that begins 
 after the date that is 1 year after the date that the Secretary 
 issues a rule pursuant to section 5337(a), submit a report to 
 the Committee on Financial Services of the House of 
 Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and 
 Urban Affairs of the Senate that--
 ``(A) describes the results of any random audits 
 conducted pursuant to paragraph (1) during such 
 calendar year; and
 ``(B) includes recommendations for improving the 
 effectiveness of the requirements imposed under this 
 section on persons described in section 
 5312(a)(2)(Z).''.
 (3) Effective date.--This section and the amendments made 
 by this section shall take effect on the date that the 
 Secretary of the Treasury issues a rule pursuant to section 
 5537 of title 31 of the United States Code, as added by this 
 section.
 (4) Conforming amendment.--The table of sections in chapter 
 53 of subtitle IV of title 31, United States Code, is amended 
 by inserting after the item relating to section 5336 the 
 following:

``5337. Requirements for gatekeepers.''.
 (5) Use of technology to increase efficiency and accuracy 
 of information.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury, 
 acting through the Director of the Financial Crimes 
 Enforcement Network, shall promote the integrity and 
 timely, efficient collection of information by persons 
 described in section 5312(a)(2)(Z) of title 31, United 
 States Code by exploring the use of technologies to--
 (i) effectuate the collection, 
 standardization, transmission, and sharing of 
 such information as required under section 5337 
 of title 31, United States Code; and
 (ii) minimize the burdens associated with 
 the collection, standardization, transmission, 
 and sharing of such information as required 
 under section 5337 of title 31, United States 
 Code.
 (B) Report.--Not later than 3 years after the date 
 of the enactment of this subsection, the Director of 
 the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network shall submit a 
 report to Committee on Financial Services of the House 
 of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, 
 Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate that--
 (i) describes any findings of the Director 
 of the Financial Crimes Enforcement with 
 respect to technologies that may effectuate the 
 collection, standardization, transmission, and 
 sharing of such information as required under 
 section 5337 of title 31, United States Code; 
 and
 (ii) makes recommendations for implementing 
 such technologies.
 (d) Gatekeepers Strategy.--Section 262 of the Countering America's 
Adversaries Through Sanctions Act is amended by inserting after 
paragraph (10) the following:
 ``(11) Gatekeeper strategy.--
 ``(A) In general.--A description of efforts to 
 impose sufficient anti-money laundering safeguards on 
 types of persons who serve as gatekeepers.
 ``(B) Update.--If the updates to the national 
 strategy required under section 261 have been submitted 
 to appropriate congressional committees before the date 
 of the enactment of this paragraph, the President shall 
 submit to the appropriate congressional committees an 
 additional update to the national strategy with respect 
 to the addition of this paragraph not later than 1 year 
 after the date of the enactment of this paragraph.''.
 (e) Agency Coordination and Collaboration.--The Secretary of the 
Treasury shall, to the greatest extent practicable--
 (1) establish relationships with State, local, territorial, 
 and Tribal governmental agencies; and
 (2) work collaboratively with such governmental agencies to 
 implement and enforce the regulations prescribed under this 
 section and the amendments made by this section, by--
 (A) using the domestic liaisons established in 
 section 310(f) of title 31, United States Code, to 
 share information regarding changes effectuated by this 
 section;
 (B) using the domestic liaisons established in 
 section 310(f) of title 31, United States Code, to 
 advise on necessary revisions to State, local, 
 territorial, and Tribal standards with respect to 
 relevant professional licensure;
 (C) engaging with various gatekeepers as 
 appropriate, including with respect to information 
 sharing and data sharing; and
 (D) working with State, local, territorial, and 
 Tribal governmental agencies to levy professional 
 sanctions on persons who facilitate corruption, money 
 laundering, the financing of terrorist activities, and 
 other related crimes.
 (f) Authorization of Appropriations.--In addition to amounts 
otherwise available for such purposes, there are authorized to be 
appropriated to the Secretary of the Treasury, without fiscal year 
limitation, $53,300,000 to remain available until expended, exclusively 
for the purpose of carrying out this section and the amendments made by 
the Act, including for--
 (1) the hiring of personnel;
 (2) the exploration and adoption of information technology 
 to effectively support enforcement activities or activities 
 described in subsection (c) of this section and the amendments 
 made by such subsection;
 (3) audit, investigatory, and review activities, including 
 those described in subsection (c) of this section and the 
 amendments made by such subsection;
 (4) agency coordination and collaboration efforts and 
 activities described in subsection (e) of this section;
 (5) for voluntary compliance programs;
 (6) for conducting the report in subsection (c)(5) of this 
 section; and
 (7) for allocating amounts to the State, local, 
 territorial, and Tribal jurisdictions to pay reasonable costs 
 relating to compliance with or enforcement of the requirements 
 of this section.
 (g) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section may be construed 
to be limited or impeded by any obligations under State, local, 
territorial, or Tribal laws or rules concerning privilege, ethics, 
confidentiality, privacy, or related matters.

SEC. 5402. REVIEW OF CYBER-RELATED MATTERS AT THE DEPARTMENT OF THE 
 TREASURY.

 (a) In General.--No later than 270 days after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury shall complete a 
comprehensive review of the Department of the Treasury's efforts 
dedicated to enhancing cybersecurity capability, readiness, and 
resilience of the financial services sector, specifically as it relates 
to--
 (1) Treasury's role as the sector risk management agency 
 for the financial services sector, as defined by section 9002 
 of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021; and
 (2) integration of operational resilience and cybersecurity 
 for the financial services sector across the Department of the 
 Treasury.
 (b) Elements.--The review required under subsection (a) shall 
include the following elements and considerations:
 (1) A comprehensive review of the components and offices 
 within the Departmental Offices of the Department of the 
 Treasury involved in efforts specified in subsection (a).
 (2) A review of activities by the Department of the 
 Treasury involved in efforts specified in subsection (a).
 (3) An assessment of the how each activity identified in 
 this subsection connects to the National Security Strategy and 
 other related documents of the Executive Branch.
 (4) An assessment of the Department of the Treasury's 
 ability to discharge fully its duties specified in subsection 
 (a) and identify any areas where it may need additional 
 resources, legislation or authority.
 (5) An evaluation of the partnerships with other executive 
 branch departments and agencies to support efforts specified in 
 subsection (a).
 (6) An evaluation of support to and from the Financial and 
 Banking Information Infrastructure Committee, and its member 
 agencies to enhance efforts specified in subsection (a).
 (7) A five-year plan for the Department of the Treasury 
 that defines an objectives and goals related to the efforts 
 specified in subsection (a).
 (c) Submission to Congress.--No later than 30 days after the 
completion of the review specified under subsection (a), the Secretary 
of the Treasury shall transmit the review to Committee on Financial 
Services of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, 
Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate.
 (d) Annual Update.--No later than February 1st of each year after 
the submission of the review until 2028, the Secretary shall provide an 
update on progress made in the preceding year in relation to the plan 
directed in subsection (b)(7) to the Committee on Financial Services of 
the House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and 
Urban Affairs of the Senate.

SEC. 5403. STRENGTHENING AWARENESS OF SANCTIONS.

 Section 312 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding 
at the end the following:
 ``(i) OFAC Exchange.--
 ``(1) Establishment.--The OFAC Exchange is hereby 
 established within OFAC.
 ``(2) Purpose.--The OFAC Exchange shall facilitate a 
 voluntary public-private information sharing partnership among 
 law enforcement agencies, national security agencies, financial 
 institutions, and OFAC to--
 ``(A) effectively and efficiently administer and 
 enforce economic and trade sanctions against targeted 
 foreign countries and regimes, terrorists, 
 international narcotics traffickers, those engaged in 
 activities related to the proliferation of weapons of 
 mass destruction, and other threats to the national 
 security, foreign policy, or economy of the United 
 States by promoting innovation and technical advances 
 in reporting--
 ``(i) under subchapter II of chapter 53 and 
 the regulations promulgated under that 
 subchapter; and
 ``(ii) with respect to other economic and 
 trade sanctions requirements;
 ``(B) protect the financial system from illicit 
 use, including evasions of existing economic and trade 
 sanctions programs; and
 ``(C) facilitate two-way information exchange 
 between OFAC and persons who are required to comply 
 with sanctions administered and enforced by OFAC, 
 including financial institutions, business sectors 
 frequently affected by sanctions programs, and non-
 government organizations and humanitarian groups 
 impacted by such sanctions programs.
 ``(3) Report.--
 ``(A) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 date of enactment of this subsection, and once every 2 
 years thereafter for the next 5 years, the Secretary of 
 the Treasury shall submit to the Committees on Banking, 
 Housing, and Urban Affairs and Foreign Relations of the 
 Senate and the Committees on Financial Services and 
 Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives a 
 report containing--
 ``(i) an analysis of the efforts undertaken 
 by the OFAC Exchange, which shall include an 
 analysis of--
 ``(I) the results of those efforts; 
 and
 ``(II) the extent and effectiveness 
 of those efforts, including the extent 
 and effectiveness of communication 
 between OFAC and persons who are 
 required to comply with sanctions 
 administered and enforced by OFAC;
 ``(ii) recommendations to improve 
 efficiency and effectiveness of targeting, 
 compliance, enforcement, and licensing 
 activities undertaken by OFAC; and
 ``(iii) any legislative, administrative, or 
 other recommendations the Secretary may have to 
 strengthen the efforts of the OFAC Exchange.
 ``(B) Classified annex.--Each report under 
 subparagraph (A) may include a classified annex.
 ``(4) Information sharing requirement.--Information shared 
 under this subsection shall be shared--
 ``(A) in compliance with all other applicable 
 Federal laws and regulations;
 ``(B) in such a manner as to ensure the appropriate 
 confidentiality of personal information; and
 ``(C) at the discretion of the Director, with the 
 appropriate Federal functional regulator, as defined in 
 section 6003 of the Anti-Money Laundering Act of 2020.
 ``(5) Protection of shared information.--
 ``(A) Regulations.--OFAC shall, as appropriate, 
 promulgate regulations that establish procedures for 
 the protection of information shared and exchanged 
 between OFAC and the private sector in accordance with 
 this section, consistent with the capacity, size, and 
 nature of the financial institution to which the 
 particular procedures apply.
 ``(B) Use of information.--Information received by 
 a financial institution pursuant to this section shall 
 not be used for any purpose other than identifying and 
 reporting on activities that may involve the financing 
 of terrorism, proliferation financing, narcotics 
 trafficking, or financing of sanctioned countries, 
 regimes, or persons.
 ``(6) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this subsection may 
 be construed to create new information sharing authorities or 
 requirements relating to the Bank Secrecy Act.''.

SEC. 5404. BRIEFING ON CHINESE SUPPORT FOR AFGHAN ILLICIT FINANCE.

 (a) Requirement.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Treasury shall brief the 
Committee on Financial Services and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of 
the House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and 
Urban Affairs and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and 
the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of 
Representatives and the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate 
on the financial activities of China and Chinese entities in connection 
with the finances of Afghanistan and the Taliban.
 (b) Matters Included.--The briefing under subsection (a) shall 
include the following:
 (1) An assessment of the activities undertaken by the 
 People's Republic of China and Chinese-registered companies to 
 support illicit financial networks in Afghanistan, particularly 
 such networks involved in narcotics trafficking, illicit 
 financial transactions, official corruption, natural resources 
 exploitation, and terrorist networks.
 (2) An assessment of financial, commercial, and economic 
 activities undertaken by China and Chinese companies in 
 Afghanistan, including the licit and illicit extraction of 
 critical minerals, to support Chinese policies counter to 
 American strategic interests.
 (3) Information relating to the impacts of existing United 
 States and multilateral laws, regulations, and sanctions, 
 including environmental and public health impacts of natural 
 resources exploitation.
 (4) Any recommendations to Congress regarding legislative 
 or regulatory improvements necessary to support the 
 identification and disruption of Chinese-supported illicit 
 financial networks in Afghanistan.

SEC. 5405. SUPPORT FOR INTERNATIONAL INITIATIVES TO PROVIDE DEBT 
 RESTRUCTURING OR RELIEF TO DEVELOPING COUNTRIES WITH 
 UNSUSTAINABLE LEVELS OF DEBT.

 (a) In General.--Title XVI of the International Financial 
Institutions Act (22 U.S.C. 262p et seq.) is amended by adding at the 
end the following:

``SEC. 1632. SUPPORT FOR INTERNATIONAL INITIATIVES TO PROVIDE DEBT 
 RESTRUCTURING OR RELIEF TO DEVELOPING COUNTRIES WITH 
 UNSUSTAINABLE LEVELS OF DEBT.

 ``(a) Debt Relief.--The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation 
with the Secretary of State, shall--
 ``(1) engage with international financial institutions, the 
 G20, and official and commercial creditors to advance support 
 for prompt and effective implementation and improvement of the 
 Common Framework for Debt Treatments beyond the DSSI (in this 
 section referred to as the `Common Framework'), or any 
 successor framework or similar coordinated international debt 
 treatment process in which the United States participates 
 through the establishment and publication of clear and 
 accountable--
 ``(A) debt treatment benchmarks designed to achieve 
 debt sustainability for each participating debtor;
 ``(B) standards for appropriate burden-sharing 
 among all creditors with material claims on each 
 participating debtor, without regard for their 
 official, private, or hybrid status;
 ``(C) robust debt disclosure by creditors, 
 including the People's Republic of China, and debtor 
 countries, including inter-creditor data-sharing and, 
 to the maximum extent practicable, public disclosure of 
 material terms and conditions of claims on 
 participating debtors;
 ``(D) expansion of Common Framework country 
 eligibility to lower middle-income countries who 
 otherwise meet the existing criteria;
 ``(E) improvements to the Common Framework process 
 with the aim of ensuring access to debt relief in a 
 timely manner for those countries eligible and who 
 request treatment; and
 ``(F) consistent enforcement and improvement of the 
 policies of multilateral institutions relating to 
 asset-based and revenue-based borrowing by 
 participating debtors, and coordinated standards on 
 restructuring collateralized debt;
 ``(2) engage with international financial institutions and 
 official and commercial creditors to advance support, as the 
 Secretary finds appropriate, for debt restructuring or debt 
 relief for each participating debtor, including, on a case-by-
 case basis, a debt standstill, if requested by the debtor 
 country through the Common Framework process from the time of 
 conclusion of a staff-level agreement with the International 
 Monetary Fund, and until the conclusion of a memorandum of 
 understanding with its creditor committee pursuant to the 
 Common Framework, or any successor framework or similar 
 coordinated international debt treatment process in which the 
 United States participates; and
 ``(3) instruct the United States Executive Director at the 
 International Monetary Fund and the United States Executive 
 Director at the World Bank to use the voice and vote of the 
 United States to advance the efforts described in paragraphs 
 (1) and (2).
 ``(b) Reporting Requirement.--Not later than 120 days after the 
date of the enactment of this section, and annually thereafter, the 
Secretary of the Treasury, in coordination with the Secretary of State, 
shall submit to the Committees on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs 
and Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committees on Financial 
Services and Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives a report 
that describes--
 ``(1) any actions that have been taken, in coordination 
 with international financial institutions, by official 
 creditors, including the government of, and state-owned 
 enterprises in, the People's Republic of China, and relevant 
 commercial creditor groups to advance debt restructuring or 
 relief for countries with unsustainable debt that have sought 
 restructuring or relief under the Common Framework, any 
 successor framework or mechanism, or under any other 
 coordinated international arrangement for sovereign debt 
 restructuring in which the United States participates;
 ``(2) any implementation challenges that hinder the ability 
 of the Common Framework to provide timely debt restructuring 
 for any country with unsustainable debt that seeks debt 
 restructuring or debt payment relief, including any refusal of 
 a creditor to participate in appropriate burden-sharing, 
 including failure to share (or publish, as appropriate) all 
 material information needed to assess debt sustainability; and
 ``(3) recommendations on how to address any challenges 
 identified in paragraph (2).''.
 (b) Sunset.--The amendment made by subsection (a) is repealed 
effective on the date that is 5 years after the effective date of this 
section.

SEC. 5406. PAYMENT CHOICE.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that every 
consumer has the right to use cash at retail businesses who accept in-
person payments.
 (b) Retail Businesses Prohibited From Refusing Cash Payments.--
 (1) In general.--Subchapter I of chapter 51 of title 31, 
 United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the 
 following:
``Sec. 5104. Retail businesses prohibited from refusing cash payments
 ``(a) In General.--Any person engaged in the business of selling or 
offering goods or services at retail to the public with a person 
accepting in-person payments at a physical location (including a person 
accepting payments for telephone, mail, or internet-based transactions 
who is accepting in-person payments at a physical location)--
 ``(1) shall accept cash as a form of payment for sales of 
 less than $2,000 (or, for loan payments, payments made on a 
 loan with an original principal amount of less than $2,000) 
 made at such physical location; and
 ``(2) may not charge cash-paying customers a higher price 
 compared to the price charged to customers not paying with 
 cash.
 ``(b) Exceptions.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to a 
 person if such person--
 ``(A) is unable to accept cash because of--
 ``(i) a sale system failure that 
 temporarily prevents the processing of cash 
 payments; or
 ``(ii) a temporary insufficiency in cash on 
 hand needed to provide change; or
 ``(B) provides customers with the means, on the 
 premises, to convert cash into a card that is either a 
 general-use prepaid card, a gift card, or an access 
 device for electronic fund transfers for which--
 ``(i) there is no fee for the use of the 
 card;
 ``(ii) there is not a minimum deposit 
 amount greater than 1 dollar;
 ``(iii) amounts loaded on the card do not 
 expire, except as permitted under paragraph 
 (2);
 ``(iv) there is no collection of any 
 personal identifying information from the 
 customer;
 ``(v) there is no fee to use the card; and
 ``(vi) there may be a limit to the number 
 of transactions.
 ``(2) Inactivity.--A person seeking exception from 
 subsection (a) may charge an inactivity fee in association with 
 a card offered by such person if--
 ``(A) there has been no activity with respect to 
 the card during the 12-month period ending on the date 
 on which the inactivity fee is imposed;
 ``(B) not more than 1 inactivity fee is imposed in 
 any 1-month period; and
 ``(C) it is clearly and conspicuously stated, on 
 the face of the mechanism that issues the card and on 
 the card--
 ``(i) that an inactivity fee or charge may 
 be imposed;
 ``(ii) the frequency at which such 
 inactivity fee may be imposed; and
 ``(iii) the amount of such inactivity fee.
 ``(c) Right to Not Accept Large Bills.--
 ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding subsection (a), for the 
 5-year period beginning on the date of enactment of this 
 section, this section shall not require a person to accept cash 
 payments in $50 bills or any larger bill.
 ``(2) Rulemaking.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury, 
 in this section referred to as the Secretary, shall 
 issue a rule on the date that is 5 years after the date 
 of the enactment of this section with respect to any 
 bills a person is not required to accept.
 ``(B) Requirement.--When issuing a rule under 
 subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall require persons 
 to accept $1, $5, $10, $20, and $50 bills.
 ``(d) Enforcement.--
 ``(1) Preventative relief.--Whenever any person has 
 engaged, or there are reasonable grounds to believe that any 
 person is about to engage, in any act or practice prohibited by 
 this section, a civil action for preventive relief, including 
 an application for a permanent or temporary injunction, 
 restraining order, or other order may be brought against such 
 person.
 ``(2) Civil penalties.--Any person who violates this 
 section shall--
 ``(A) be liable for actual damages;
 ``(B) be fined not more than $2,500 for a first 
 offense; and
 ``(C) be fined not more than $5,000 for a second or 
 subsequent offense.
 ``(3) Jurisdiction.--An action under this section may be 
 brought in any United States district court, or in any other 
 court of competent jurisdiction.
 ``(4) Intervention of attorney general.--Upon timely 
 application, a court may, in its discretion, permit the 
 Attorney General to intervene in a civil action brought under 
 this subsection, if the Attorney General certifies that the 
 action is of general public importance.
 ``(5) Authority to appoint court-paid attorney.--Upon 
 application by an individual and in such circumstances as the 
 court may determine just, the court may appoint an attorney for 
 such individual and may authorize the commencement of a civil 
 action under this subsection without the payment of fees, 
 costs, or security.
 ``(6) Attorney's fees.--In any action commenced pursuant to 
 this section, the court, in its discretion, may allow the 
 prevailing party, other than the United States, a reasonable 
 attorney's fee as part of the costs, and the United States 
 shall be liable for costs the same as a private person.
 ``(7) Requirements in certain states and local areas.--In 
 the case of an alleged act or practice prohibited by this 
 section which occurs in a State, or political subdivision of a 
 State, which has a State or local law prohibiting such act or 
 practice and establishing or authorizing a State or local 
 authority to grant or seek relief from such act or practice or 
 to institute criminal proceedings with respect thereto upon 
 receiving notice thereof, no civil action may be brought 
 hereunder before the expiration of 30 days after written notice 
 of such alleged act or practice has been given to the 
 appropriate State or local authority by registered mail or in 
 person, provided that the court may stay proceedings in such 
 civil action pending the termination of State or local 
 enforcement proceedings.
 ``(e) Greater Protection Under State Law.--This section shall not 
preempt any law of a State, the District of Columbia, a Tribal 
government, or a territory of the United States if the protections that 
such law affords to consumers are greater than the protections provided 
under this section.
 ``(f) Rulemaking.--The Secretary shall issue such rules as the 
Secretary determines are necessary to implement this section, which may 
prescribe additional exceptions to the application of the requirements 
described in subsection (a).''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of contents for chapter 
 51 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting 
 after the item relating to section 5103 the following:

``5104. Retail businesses prohibited from refusing cash payments.''.
 (3) Rule of construction.--The amendments made by this 
 section may not be construed to have any effect on section 5103 
 of title 31, United States Code.
 (c) Discretionary Surplus Fund.--
 (1) In general.--Subparagraph (A) of section 7(a)(3) of the 
 Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 289(a)(3)(A)) is amended by 
 reducing the dollar figure described in such subparagraph by 
 $15,000,000.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) 
 shall take effect on September 30, 2022.

SEC. 5407. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO CHINA-BASED HEDGE FUNDS 
 CAPITAL RAISING ACTIVITIES IN THE UNITED STATES THROUGH 
 CERTAIN EXEMPTED TRANSACTIONS.

 (a) Amendment.--The Securities Exchange Act of 1934 is amended by 
inserting after section 13A (15 U.S.C. 78m-1) the following:

``SEC. 13B. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO CERTAIN EXEMPTED 
 TRANSACTIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, in 
the case of an issuer that is domiciled in the People's Republic of 
China, including a China-based hedge fund or a China-based private 
equity fund, that conducts a covered exempted transaction, such issuer 
shall provide to the Commission, at such time and in such manner as the 
Commission may prescribe, the following:
 ``(1) The identity of the issuer.
 ``(2) The place of incorporation of the issuer.
 ``(3) The amount of the issuance involved in the covered 
 exempted transaction and the net proceeds to the issuer.
 ``(4) The principal beneficial owners of the issuer.
 ``(5) The intended use of the proceeds from such issuance, 
 including--
 ``(A) each country in which the issuer intends to 
 invest such proceeds; and
 ``(B) each industry in which the issuer intends to 
 invest such proceeds.
 ``(6) The exemption the issuer relies on with respect to 
 such covered exempted transaction.
 ``(b) Authority to Revise and Promulgate Rules, Regulations, and 
Forms.--The Commission shall, for the protection of investors and fair 
and orderly markets--
 ``(1) revise and promulgate such rules, regulations, and 
 forms as may be necessary to carry out this section; and
 ``(2) issue rules to set conditions for the use of covered 
 exempted transactions by an issuer who does not comply with the 
 requirements under subsection (a).
 ``(c) Covered Exempted Transaction.--In this section, the term 
`covered exempted transaction' means an issuance of a security that is 
exempt from registration under section 5 of the Securities Act of 1933 
(15 U.S.C. 77e) that--
 ``(1) is structured or intended to comply with--
 ``(A) Rule 506(b) of Regulation D, as promulgated 
 by the Commission;
 ``(B) Regulation S, as promulgated by the 
 Commission; or
 ``(C) Rule 144A, as promulgated by the Commission; 
 and
 ``(2) either--
 ``(A) has an issuance equal to $25,000,000 or 
 greater; or
 ``(B) with respect to any 1-year period, has, 
 together with all covered exempted transactions in that 
 period, an aggregate issuance of $50,000,000 or 
 greater.''.
 (b) Applicability.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply with respect to issuers of covered exempted transactions on the 
date that is 270 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (c) Report.--The Securities and Exchange Commission shall, each 
quarter, issue a report to the Committee on Financial Services of the 
House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and 
Urban Affairs of the Senate containing all information submitted by an 
issuer under section 13B of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as 
added by subsection (a), during the previous quarter.

SEC. 5408. RUSSIA AND BELARUS FINANCIAL SANCTIONS.

 (a) In General.--A United States financial institution shall take 
all actions necessary and available to cause any entity or person owned 
or controlled by the institution to comply with any provision of law 
described in subsection (b) to the same extent as required of a United 
States financial institution.
 (b) Provision of Law Described.--A provision of law described in 
this subsection is any prohibition or limitation described in a 
sanctions-related statute, regulation or order applicable to a United 
States financial institution concerning the Russian Federation or the 
Republic of Belarus, involving--
 (1) the conduct of transactions;
 (2) the acceptance of deposits;
 (3) the making, granting, transferring, holding, or 
 brokering of loans or credits;
 (4) the purchasing or selling of foreign exchange, 
 securities, commodity futures, or options;
 (5) the procuring of purchasers and sellers described under 
 paragraph (4) as principal or agent; or
 (6) any other good or service provided by a United States 
 financial institution.
 (c) Penalty.--A United States financial institution that violates 
subsection (a) shall be subject to the penalties described in the 
applicable statute, regulation or order applicable to a United States 
financial Institution.
 (d) United States Financial Institution Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``United States financial institution'' means any U.S. entity 
(including its foreign branches) that is engaged in the business of 
accepting deposits, making, granting, transferring, holding, or 
brokering loans or credits, or purchasing or selling foreign exchange, 
securities, futures or options, or procuring purchasers and sellers 
thereof, as principal or agent. It includes depository institutions, 
banks, savings banks, money services businesses, operators of credit 
card systems, trust companies, insurance companies, securities brokers 
and dealers, futures and options brokers and dealers, forward contract 
and foreign exchange merchants, securities and commodities exchanges, 
clearing corporations, investment companies, employee benefit plans, 
dealers in precious metals, stones, or jewels, and U.S. holding 
companies, U.S. affiliates, or U.S. subsidiaries of any of the 
foregoing. This term includes those branches, offices, and agencies of 
foreign financial institutions that are located in the United States, 
but not such institutions' foreign branches, offices, or agencies.

SEC. 5409. APPRAISAL STANDARDS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY HOUSING MORTGAGES.

 (a) Certification or Licensing.--Paragraph (5) of section 202(g) of 
the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1708(g)) is amended--
 (1) by striking subparagraph (A) and inserting the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(A)(i) in the case of an appraiser for a mortgage 
 for single-family housing, be certified or licensed by 
 the State in which the property to be appraised is 
 located; and
 ``(ii) in the case of an appraiser for a mortgage 
 for multifamily housing, be certified by the State in 
 which the property to be appraised is located; and''; 
 and
 (2) in subparagraph (B), by inserting before the period at 
 the end the following: ``, which, in the case of appraisers for 
 any mortgage for single-family housing, shall include 
 completion of a course or seminar that consists of not less 
 than 7 hours of training regarding such appraisal requirements 
 that is approved by the Course Approval Program of the 
 Appraiser Qualifications Board of the Appraisal Foundation or a 
 State appraiser certifying and licensing agency''.
 (b) Compliance With Verifiable Education Requirements; 
Grandfathering.--Effective beginning on the date of the effectiveness 
of the mortgagee letter or other guidance issued pursuant to subsection 
(c) of this section, notwithstanding any choice or approval of any 
appraiser made before such date of enactment, no appraiser may conduct 
an appraisal for any mortgage for single-family housing insured under 
title II of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1707 et seq.) unless 
such appraiser is, as of such date of effectiveness, in compliance 
with--
 (1) all of the requirements under section 202(g)(5) of such 
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1708(g)(5)), as amended by subsection (a) of 
 this section, including the requirement under subparagraph (B) 
 of such section 202(g)(5) (relating to demonstrated verifiable 
 education in appraisal requirements); or
 (2) all of the requirements under section 202(g)(5) of such 
 Act as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of 
 this Act.
 (c) Implementation.--Not later than the expiration of the 240-day 
period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall issue a mortgagee 
letter or other guidance that shall--
 (1) implement the amendments made by subsection (a) of this 
 section;
 (2) clearly set forth all of the specific requirements 
 under section 202(g)(5) of the National Housing Act (as amended 
 by subsection (a) of this section) for approval to conduct 
 appraisals under title II of such Act for mortgages for single-
 family housing, which shall include--
 (A) providing that the completion, prior to the 
 effective date of such mortgagee letter or guidance, of 
 training meeting the requirements under subparagraph 
 (B) of such section 202(g)(5) (as amended by subsection 
 (a) of this section) shall be considered to fulfill the 
 requirement under such subparagraph; and
 (B) providing a method for appraisers to 
 demonstrate such prior completion; and
 (3) take effect not later than the expiration of the 180-
 day period beginning upon issuance of such mortgagee letter or 
 guidance.

SEC. 5410. CHINA FINANCIAL THREAT MITIGATION.

 (a) Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation 
with the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, the Chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, the 
Chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, and the Secretary 
of State, shall conduct a study and issue a report on the exposure of 
the United States to the financial sector of the People's Republic of 
China that includes--
 (1) an assessment of the effects of reforms to the 
 financial sector of the People's Republic of China on the 
 United States and global financial systems;
 (2) a description of the policies the United States 
 Government is adopting to protect the interests of the United 
 States while the financial sector of the People's Republic of 
 China undergoes such reforms;
 (3) a description and analysis of any risks to the 
 financial stability of the United States and the global economy 
 emanating from the People's Republic of China; and
 (4) recommendations for additional actions the United 
 States Government, including United States representatives at 
 relevant international organizations, should take to strengthen 
 international cooperation to monitor and mitigate such 
 financial stability risks and protect United States interests.
 (b) Transmission of Report.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall 
transmit the report required under subsection (a) not later than one 
year after the date of enactment of this Act to the Committees on 
Financial Services and Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives, 
the Committees on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs and Foreign 
Relations of the Senate, and to the United States representatives at 
relevant international organizations, as appropriate.
 (c) Classification.--The report required under subsection (a) shall 
be unclassified, but may contain a classified annex.
 (d) Publication of Report.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall 
publish the report required under subsection (a) (other than any 
classified annex) on the website of the Department of the Treasury not 
later than one year after the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 5411. REVIEW OF FHA SMALL-DOLLAR MORTGAGE PRACTICES.

 (a) Congressional Findings.--The Congress finds that--
 (1) affordable homeownership opportunities are being 
 hindered due to the lack of financing available for home 
 purchases under $100,000;
 (2) according to the Urban Institute, small-dollar mortgage 
 loan applications in 2017 were denied by lenders at double the 
 rate of denial for large mortgage loans, and this difference in 
 denial rates cannot be fully explained by differences in the 
 applicants' credit profiles;
 (3) according to data compiled by Attom Data solutions, 
 small-dollar mortgage originations have decreased 38 percent 
 since 2009, while there has been a 65-percent increase in 
 origination of mortgages for more than $150,000;
 (4) the FHA's mission is to serve creditworthy borrowers 
 who are underserved and, according to the Urban Institute, the 
 FHA serves 24 percent of the overall market, but only 19 
 percent of the small-dollar mortgage market; and
 (5) the causes behind these variations are not fully 
 understood, but merit study that could assist in furthering the 
 Department of Housing and Urban Development's mission, 
 including meeting the housing needs of borrowers the program is 
 designed to serve and reducing barriers to homeownership, while 
 protecting the solvency of the Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund.
 (b) Review.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall 
conduct a review of its FHA single-family mortgage insurance policies, 
practices, and products to identify any barriers or impediments to 
supporting, facilitating, and making available mortgage insurance for 
small dollar mortgages, as defined by the Secretary. Not later than the 
expiration of the 12-month period beginning on the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit a report to the 
Congress describing the findings of such review and the actions that 
the Secretary will take, without adversely affecting the solvency of 
the Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund, to remove such barriers and 
impediments to providing mortgage insurance for such mortgages.

SEC. 5412. DISCLOSURE OF BUSINESSES TIES TO RUSSIA.

 (a) In General.--Section 13 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 
(15 U.S.C. 78m) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(s) Disclosure of Business Ties to Russia.--Any issuer required 
to file an annual or quarterly report under subsection (a) that--
 ``(1) does business in Russia, or with or through firms 
 domiciled in Russia, regardless of where that business activity 
 takes place, or
 ``(2) with the Russian government, or with any entity owned 
 by or affiliated with such government, regardless of where that 
 business activity takes place,
shall disclose in that report relevant facts and a description about 
the business activity.''.
 (b) The Securities and Exchange Commission shall within 270 days of 
enactment of this section define any necessary terms and amend its 
rules or forms, to carry out the requirements of the provision added by 
subsection (a).

SEC. 5413. SMALL BUSINESS LOAN DATA COLLECTION.

 (a) In General.--Section 704B of the Equal Credit Opportunity Act 
(15 U.S.C. 1691c-2) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``LGBTQ-owned,'' after ``minority-owned,'' 
 each place such term appears;
 (2) in subsection (e)(2)(G), by inserting ``, sexual 
 orientation, gender identity'' after ``sex''; and
 (3) in subsection (h), by adding at the end the following:
 ``(7) LGBTQ-owned business.--The term `LGBTQ-owned 
 business' means a business--
 ``(A) more than 50 percent of the ownership or 
 control of which is held by 1 or more individuals self-
 identifying as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, or 
 queer; and
 ``(B) more than 50 percent of the net profit or 
 loss of which accrues to 1 or more individuals self-
 identifying as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, or 
 queer.''.
 (b) Discretionary Surplus Fund.--
 (1) In general.--Subparagraph (A) of section 7(a)(3) of the 
 Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 289(a)(3)(A)) is amended by 
 reducing the dollar figure described in such subparagraph by 
 $500,000.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) 
 shall take effect on September 30, 2032.

SEC. 5414. NATIONWIDE EMERGENCY DECLARATION MEDICAL SUPPLIES 
 ENHANCEMENT.

 (a) Determination on Emergency Supplies and Other Public Health 
Emergencies.--For the purposes of section 101 of the Defense Production 
Act of 1950 (50 U.S.C. 4511), the following materials may be deemed by 
the President, during a nationwide emergency declaration period, to be 
scarce and critical materials essential to the national defense and 
otherwise meet the requirements of section 101(b) of such Act, and 
funds available to implement such Act may be used for the purchase, 
production (including the construction, repair, and retrofitting of 
government-owned facilities as necessary), or distribution of such 
materials:
 (1) Face masks and personal protective equipment, including 
 non-surgical isolation gowns, face shields, nitrile gloves, N-
 95 filtering facepiece respirators, and any other masks or 
 equipment (including durable medical equipment) determined by 
 the Secretary of Health and Human Services to be needed to 
 respond during a nationwide emergency declaration period, and 
 the materials, machinery, additional manufacturing lines or 
 facilities, or other technology necessary to produce such 
 equipment.
 (2) Drugs and devices (as those terms are defined in the 
 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.)) 
 and biological products (as that term is defined by section 351 
 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262)) that are 
 approved, cleared, licensed, or authorized for use during a 
 nationwide emergency, and any materials, manufacturing 
 machinery, additional manufacturing or fill-finish lines or 
 facilities, technology, or equipment (including durable medical 
 equipment) necessary to produce or use such drugs, biological 
 products, or devices (including syringes, vials, or other 
 supplies or equipment related to delivery, distribution, or 
 administration).
 (3) Any other medical equipment or supplies determined by 
 the Secretary of Health and Human Services or the Secretary of 
 Homeland Security to be scarce and critical materials essential 
 to the national defense for purposes of section 101 of the 
 Defense Production Act of 1950 (50 U.S.C. 4511).
 (b) Enhancement of Supply Chain Production.--In exercising 
authority under title III of the Defense Production Act of 1950 (50 
U.S.C. 4531 et seq.) with respect to materials described in subsection 
(a), the President shall seek to ensure that support is provided to 
companies that comprise the supply chains for reagents, components, raw 
materials, and other materials and items necessary to produce or use 
the materials described in subsection (a) to the extent necessary for 
the national defense during a nationwide emergency declaration and 
subsequent major disaster declarations under sections 501 and 401, 
respectively, of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency 
Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5191, 5170).
 (c) Enhanced Reporting During Nationwide Disaster Declarations.--
 (1) Report on exercising authorities under the defense 
 production act of 1950.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the President, in 
 consultation with the Administrator of the Federal 
 Emergency Management Agency, the Secretary of Defense, 
 and the Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall 
 submit to the appropriate congressional committees a 
 report on the exercise of authorities under titles I, 
 III, and VII of the Defense Production Act of 1950 (50 
 U.S.C. 4501 et seq.) prior to the date of such report 
 for the purposes of the nationwide emergency 
 declaration response.
 (B) Contents.--The report required under 
 subparagraph (A) and the update required under 
 subparagraph (C) shall include the following:
 (i) In general.--With respect to each 
 exercise of such authority--
 (I) an explanation of the purpose 
 of the applicable contract, purchase 
 order, or other exercise of authority 
 (including an allocation of materials, 
 services, and facilities under section 
 101(a)(2) of the Defense Production Act 
 of 1950 (50 U.S.C. 4511(a)(2));
 (II) the cost of such exercise of 
 authority; and
 (III) if applicable--
 (aa) the amount of goods 
 that were purchased or 
 allocated;
 (bb) an identification of 
 the entity awarded a contract 
 or purchase order or that was 
 the subject of the exercise of 
 authority; and
 (cc) an identification of 
 any entity that had shipments 
 delayed by the exercise of any 
 authority under the Defense 
 Production Act of 1950 (50 
 U.S.C. 4501 et seq.).
 (ii) Consultations.--A description of any 
 consultations conducted with relevant 
 stakeholders on the needs addressed by the 
 exercise of the authorities described in 
 subparagraph (A).
 (C) Update.--The President shall provide an 
 additional briefing to the appropriate congressional 
 committees on the matters described under subparagraph 
 (B) no later than four months after the submission of 
 the report.
 (2) Sunset.--The requirements of this section shall 
 terminate at the end of the nationwide emergency declaration 
 period.

SEC. 5415. SPECIAL MEASURES TO FIGHT MODERN THREATS.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) is 
 the Financial Intelligence Unit of the United States tasked 
 with safeguarding the financial system from illicit use, 
 combating money laundering and its related crimes including 
 terrorism, and promoting national security.
 (2) Per statute, FinCEN may require domestic financial 
 institutions and financial agencies to take certain ``special 
 measures'' against jurisdictions, institutions, classes of 
 transactions, or types of accounts determined to be of primary 
 money laundering concern, providing the Secretary with a range 
 of options, such as enhanced record-keeping, that can be 
 adapted to target specific money laundering and terrorist 
 financing and to bring pressure on those that pose money 
 laundering threats.
 (3) This special-measures authority was granted in 2001, 
 when most cross-border transactions occurred through 
 correspondent or payable-through accounts held with large 
 financial institutions which serve as intermediaries to 
 facilitate financial transactions on behalf of other banks.
 (4) Innovations in financial services have transformed and 
 expanded methods of cross-border transactions that could not 
 have been envisioned 20 years ago when FinCEN was given its 
 special-measures authority.
 (5) These innovations, particularly through digital assets 
 and informal value transfer systems, while useful to legitimate 
 consumers and law enforcement, can be tools abused by bad 
 actors like sanctions evaders, fraudsters, money launderers, 
 and those who commit ransomware attacks on victimized U.S. 
 companies and which abuse the financial system to move and 
 obscure the proceeds of their crimes.
 (6) Ransomware attacks on U.S. companies requiring payments 
 in cryptocurrencies have increased in recent years, with the 
 U.S. Treasury estimating that ransomware payments in the United 
 States reached $590 million in just the first half of 2021, 
 compared to a total of $416 million in 2020.
 (7) As ransomware attacks organized by Chinese and other 
 foreign bad actors continue to grow in size and scope, 
 modernizing FinCEN's special measure authorities will empower 
 FinCEN to adapt its existing tools, monitor and obstruct global 
 financial threats, and meet the challenges of combating 21st 
 century financial crime.
 (b) Prohibitions or Conditions on Certain Transmittals of Funds.--
Section 5318A of title 31, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(2)(C), by striking ``subsection 
 (b)(5)'' and inserting ``paragraphs (5) and (6) of subsection 
 (b)''; and
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (5), by striking ``for or on 
 behalf of a foreign banking institution''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(6) Prohibitions or conditions on certain transmittals of 
 funds.--If the Secretary finds a jurisdiction outside of the 
 United States, 1 or more financial institutions operating 
 outside of the United States, 1 or more types of accounts 
 within, or involving, a jurisdiction outside of the United 
 States, or 1 or more classes of transactions within, or 
 involving, a jurisdiction outside of the United States to be of 
 primary money laundering concern, the Secretary, in 
 consultation with the Secretary of State, the Attorney General, 
 and the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal 
 Reserve System, may prohibit, or impose conditions upon certain 
 transmittals of funds (as such term may be defined by the 
 Secretary in a special measure issuance, by regulation, or as 
 otherwise permitted by law), to or from any domestic financial 
 institution or domestic financial agency if such transmittal of 
 funds involves any such jurisdiction, institution, type of 
 account, or class of transaction.''.

SEC. 5416. SUBMISSION OF DATA RELATING TO DIVERSITY.

 Section 13 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78m) 
is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(s) Submission of Data Relating to Diversity.--
 ``(1) Definitions.--In this subsection--
 ``(A) the term `executive officer' has the meaning 
 given the term in section 230.501(f) of title 17, Code 
 of Federal Regulations, as in effect on the date of 
 enactment of this subsection; and
 ``(B) the term `veteran' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 101 of title 38, United States Code.
 ``(2) Submission of disclosure.--Each issuer required to 
 file an annual report under subsection (a) shall disclose in 
 any proxy statement and any information statement relating to 
 the election of directors filed with the Commission the 
 following:
 ``(A) Demographic data, based on voluntary self-
 identification, on the racial, ethnic, gender identity, 
 and sexual orientation composition of--
 ``(i) the board of directors of the issuer;
 ``(ii) nominees for the board of directors 
 of the issuer; and
 ``(iii) the executive officers of the 
 issuer.
 ``(B) The status of any member of the board of 
 directors of the issuer, any nominee for the board of 
 directors of the issuer, or any executive officer of 
 the issuer, based on voluntary self-identification, as 
 a veteran.
 ``(C) Whether the board of directors of the issuer, 
 or any committee of that board of directors, has, as of 
 the date on which the issuer makes a disclosure under 
 this paragraph, adopted any policy, plan, or strategy 
 to promote racial, ethnic, and gender diversity among--
 ``(i) the board of directors of the issuer;
 ``(ii) nominees for the board of directors 
 of the issuer; or
 ``(iii) the executive officers of the 
 issuer.
 ``(3) Alternative submission.--In any 1-year period in 
 which an issuer required to file an annual report under 
 subsection (a) does not file with the Commission a proxy 
 statement or an information statement relating to the election 
 of directors, the issuer shall disclose the information 
 required under paragraph (2) in the first annual report of 
 issuer that the issuer submits to the Commission after the end 
 of that 1-year period.
 ``(4) Annual report.--Not later than 18 months after the 
 date of enactment of this subsection, and annually thereafter, 
 the Commission shall submit to the Committee on Banking, 
 Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on 
 Financial Services of the House of Representatives, and publish 
 on the website of the Commission, a report that analyzes the 
 information disclosed under paragraphs (2) and (3) and 
 identifies any trends with respect to such information.
 ``(5) Best practices.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Director of the Office of 
 Minority and Women Inclusion of the Commission shall, 
 not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of 
 this subsection, and every 3 years thereafter, publish 
 best practices for compliance with this subsection.
 ``(B) Comments.--The Director of the Office of 
 Minority and Women Inclusion of the Commission may, 
 pursuant to subchapter II of chapter 5 of title 5, 
 United States Code, solicit public comments related to 
 the best practices published under subparagraph (A).''.

SEC. 5417. DIVERSITY ADVISORY GROUP.

 (a) Definitions.--For the purposes of this section:
 (1) Advisory group.--The term ``Advisory Group'' means the 
 Diversity Advisory Group established under subsection (b).
 (2) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the 
 Securities and Exchange Commission.
 (3) Issuer.--The term ``issuer'' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 3(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 
 U.S.C. 78c(a)).
 (b) Establishment.--The Commission shall establish a Diversity 
Advisory Group, which shall be composed of representatives from--
 (1) the Federal Government and State and local governments;
 (2) academia; and
 (3) the private sector.
 (c) Study and Recommendations.--The Advisory Group shall--
 (1) carry out a study that identifies strategies that can 
 be used to increase gender identity, racial, ethnic, and sexual 
 orientation diversity among members of boards of directors of 
 issuers; and
 (2) not later than 270 days after the date on which the 
 Advisory Group is established, submit to the Commission, the 
 Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate, 
 and the Committee on Financial Services of the House of 
 Representatives a report that--
 (A) describes any findings from the study conducted 
 under paragraph (1); and
 (B) makes recommendations regarding strategies that 
 issuers could use to increase gender identity, racial, 
 ethnic, and sexual orientation diversity among board 
 members.
 (d) Annual Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date on which 
the Advisory Group submits the report required under subsection (c)(2), 
and annually thereafter, the Commission shall submit to the Committee 
on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate and the Committee 
on Financial Services of the House of Representatives a report that 
describes the status of gender identity, racial, ethnic, and sexual 
orientation diversity among members of the boards of directors of 
issuers.
 (e) Public Availability of Reports.--The Commission shall make all 
reports of the Advisory Group available to issuers and the public, 
including on the website of the Commission.
 (f) Inapplicability of Federal Advisory Committee Act.--The Federal 
Advisory Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App.) shall not apply with respect to 
the Advisory Group or the activities of the Advisory Group.

SEC. 5418. DISCOUNT ON MORTGAGE INSURANCE PREMIUM PAYMENTS FOR FIRST-
 TIME HOMEBUYERS WHO COMPLETE FINANCIAL LITERACY HOUSING 
 COUNSELING PROGRAMS.

 The second sentence of subparagraph (A) of section 203(c)(2) of the 
National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. 1709(c)(2)(A)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting before the comma the following: ``and such 
 program is completed before the mortgagor has signed an 
 application for a mortgage to be insured under this title or a 
 sales agreement''; and
 (2) by striking ``not exceed 2.75 percent of the amount of 
 the original insured principal obligation of the mortgage'' and 
 inserting ``be 25 basis points lower than the premium payment 
 amount established by the Secretary under the first sentence of 
 this subparagraph''.

SEC. 5419. CAPACITY BUILDING FOR COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND AFFORDABLE 
 HOUSING.

 Section 4 of the HUD Demonstration Act of 1993 (42 U.S.C. 9816 
note) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``the National Community 
 Development Initiative, Local Initiatives Support Corporation, 
 The Enterprise Foundation, Habitat for Humanity, and Youthbuild 
 USA'' and inserting ``non-Federal entities, including nonprofit 
 organizations that can provide technical assistance activities 
 to community development corporations, community housing 
 development organizations, community land trusts, nonprofit 
 organizations in insular areas, and other mission-driven and 
 nonprofit organizations that target services to low-income and 
 socially disadvantaged populations, and provide services in 
 neighborhoods having high concentrations of minority, low-
 income, or socially disadvantaged populations,''; and
 (2) in subsection (b)(3), by striking ``National Community 
 Development Initiative, Local Initiatives Support Corporation, 
 The Enterprise Foundation, Habitat for Humanity, and Youthbuild 
 USA'' and inserting ``non-Federal entities through which 
 assistance is provided under this section,''.

SEC. 5420. AFFORDABLE HOUSING CONSTRUCTION AS ELIGIBLE ACTIVITY UNDER 
 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT PROGRAM.

 (a) Eligible Activity.--Subsection (a) of section 105 of the 
Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5305(a)) is 
amended--
 (1) in paragraph (25)(D), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in paragraph (26), by striking the period at the end 
 and inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(27) the new construction of affordable housing, within 
 the meaning given such term under section 215 of the Cranston-
 Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 12745).''.
 (b) Low and Moderate Income Requirement.--Paragraph (3) of section 
105(c) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 
5305(c)(3)) is amended by striking ``or rehabilitation'' and inserting 
``, rehabilitation, or new construction''.
 (c) Applicability.--The amendments made by this section shall apply 
with respect only to amounts appropriated after the date of the 
enactment of this Act.

SEC. 5421. CONSIDERATION OF SMALL HOME MORTGAGE LENDING UNDER COMMUNITY 
 REINVESTMENT ACT.

 (a) In General.-- Section 804 of the Community Reinvestment Act of 
1977 (12 U.S.C. 2903) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(e) Consideration of Small Home Mortgage Lending.--
 ``(1) In general.--As part of assessing a financial 
 institution under subsection (a), the appropriate Federal 
 financial supervisory agency shall evaluate the financial 
 institution's performance in facilitating home mortgage lending 
 targeted to low- and moderate-income borrowers in a safe and 
 sound manner, including--
 ``(A) mortgages of $100,000 or less in value that 
 facilitate a home purchase or help a borrower to 
 refinance an existing mortgage;
 ``(B) mortgages of $100,000 or less in value 
 originated in cooperation with a minority depository 
 institution, women's depository institution, low-income 
 credit union, or a community development financial 
 institution certified by the Secretary of the Treasury 
 (as defined under section 103 of the Riegle Community 
 Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994);
 ``(C) mortgages of $100,000 or less in value 
 originated to purchase or refinance a home as part of a 
 special purpose credit program (as defined under 
 section 1002.8(a) of title 12, Code of Federal 
 Regulations).
 ``(2) Data collection and reporting by large financial 
 institutions.--
 ``(A) In general.--Each large financial institution 
 shall collect, maintain, and report to the appropriate 
 Federal financial supervisory agency--
 ``(i) mortgage loan data needed to 
 calculate retail lending volume and 
 distribution metrics;
 ``(ii) information related to demographics 
 of borrowers, including the income, disability, 
 gender identity, race, and ethnicity of 
 mortgage applicants;
 ``(iii) the number of mortgage loans 
 originated with a value of $100,000 or less as 
 well as the demographics of borrowers, 
 including income, race, gender, and ethnicity; 
 and
 ``(iv) all mortgage loans for the purpose 
 of a home purchase and a refinance originated 
 by the bank through a special purpose credit 
 program, to focus on Black, Latinx, Native 
 American, Asian American, Pacific Islander 
 borrowers.
 ``(B) Template.--The appropriate Federal financial 
 supervisory agencies shall, jointly, issue rules to 
 establish a template that large financial institutions 
 shall use to collect information required to be 
 collected under this paragraph.
 ``(C) Large financial institution defined.--The 
 appropriate Federal financial supervisory agencies 
 shall, jointly, define the term `large financial 
 institution' for purposes of this paragraph.''.
 (b) Discretionary Surplus Fund.--
 (1) In general.--Subparagraph (A) of section 7(a)(3) of the 
 Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 289(a)(3)(A)) is amended by 
 reducing the dollar figure described in such subparagraph by 
 $3,000,000.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) 
 shall take effect on September 30, 2022.

SEC. 5422. PROHIBITION ON CONSUMER REPORTS CONTAINING ADVERSE 
 INFORMATION RELATED TO CERTAIN STUDENT LOANS.

 (a) Canceled or Forgiven Federal Student Loans.--Section 605(a) of 
the Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681c(a)) is amended by adding 
at the end the following:
 ``(9) Any adverse information related to any portion of a 
 loan made, insured, or guaranteed under part B or made under 
 part D of the Higher Education Act of 1965, to the extent the 
 loan was repaid, canceled, or otherwise forgiven by the 
 Secretary of Education.''.
 (b) Student Loans Related to Corinthian Colleges.--Section 605(a) 
of the Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681c(a)), as amended by 
subsection (a), is further amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(10) Any adverse information related to a private 
 education loan (as defined under section 140(a) of the Truth in 
 Lending Act) if such loan was provided to cover expenses 
 related to attending a school owned by Corinthian Colleges, 
 Inc.''.

SEC. 5423. EXTENSION OF THE CENTRAL LIQUIDITY FACILITY.

 (a) In General.--Section 4016(b) of the CARES Act (12 U.S.C. 1795a 
note) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Extension.--During the period beginning on the date 
 of enactment of this Act and ending on December 31, 2023, the 
 provisions of law amended by this subsection shall be applied 
 as such provisions were in effect on the day before the 
 effective date described under paragraph (2).''.
 (b) CLF Borrowing Authority.--Effective on the date of enactment of 
the CARES Act, section 307(a)(4)(A) of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 
U.S.C. 1795f(a)(4)(A)) is amended by striking ``twelve times the 
subscribed capital stock and surplus of the Facility, provided that, 
the total face value of such obligations shall not exceed 16 times the 
subscribed capital stock and surplus of the Facility for the period 
beginning on the date of enactment of the Coronavirus Economic 
Stabilization Act of 2020 and ending on December 31, 2021'' and 
inserting ``16 times the subscribed capital stock and surplus of the 
Facility''.

SEC. 5424. PROMOTING CAPITAL RAISING OPTIONS FOR TRADITIONALLY 
 UNDERREPRESENTED SMALL BUSINESSES.

 Section 4(j)(4) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 
78d(j)(4)) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (G), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in subparagraph (H), by striking the period at the end 
 and insert a semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(I) provide educational resources and host events 
 to raise awareness of capital raising options for--
 ``(i) underrepresented small businesses, 
 including women-owned and minority-owned small 
 businesses;
 ``(ii) businesses located in rural areas; 
 and
 ``(iii) small businesses affected by 
 hurricanes or other natural disasters; and
 ``(J) at least annually, meet with representatives 
 of State securities commissions to discuss 
 opportunities for collaboration and coordination with 
 respect to efforts to assist small businesses and small 
 business investors.''.

SEC. 5425. IMPROVEMENTS BY COUNTRIES IN COMBATING NARCOTICS-RELATED 
 MONEY LAUNDERING.

 Section 489(a)(7) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 
2291h(a)(7)) is amended--
 (1) in the matter before subparagraph (A), by striking 
 ``paragraph (3)(D)'' and inserting ``paragraph (3)(C)''; and
 (2) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following:
 ``(D) Where the information is available, examples 
 of improvements in each country related to the findings 
 described in each of clauses (i) through (viii) of 
 subparagraph (C), such as--
 ``(i) actions taken by the country due to 
 each country's adoption of law and regulations 
 considered essential to prevent narcotics-
 related money laundering;
 ``(ii) enhanced enforcement actions taken 
 by the country, such as regulatory penalties, 
 criminal prosecutions and convictions, and 
 asset seizures and forfeitures;
 ``(iii) status changes in international 
 financial crime-related evaluations;
 ``(iv) other descriptions that are 
 representative of efforts to enhance the 
 prevention of narcotics-related money 
 laundering; and
 ``(v) if applicable, bilateral, 
 multilateral, and regional initiatives which 
 have been undertaken to prevent narcotics-
 related money laundering.''.

SEC. 5426. STUDY ON THE ROLE OF ONLINE PLATFORMS AND TENANT SCREENING 
 COMPANIES IN THE HOUSING MARKET.

 (a) Study.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and the 
Director of the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection shall, jointly, 
carry out a study to--
 (1) assess the role of online platforms and tenant 
 screening companies in the housing market, including purchasing 
 homes and providing housing-related services to landlords and 
 consumers, including tenants, homeowners, and prospective 
 homebuyers;
 (2) assess how such entities currently comply with fair 
 housing, fair lending, and consumer financial protection laws 
 and regulations (including the Fair Housing Act, the Equal 
 Credit Opportunity Act, the Fair Credit Reporting Act, and 
 other relevant statutes and regulations determined relevant by 
 the Secretary and the Director), including in their digital 
 advertising, digital listing, and tenant screening practices;
 (3) assess how such entities are currently using artificial 
 intelligence, including machine learning, in their services, 
 and how these technologies are being assessed for compliance 
 with appropriate fair housing and fair lending laws; and
 (4) assess the impact of how such entities and their use of 
 artificial intelligence technologies, including machine 
 learning, affect low- and moderate-income communities and 
 communities of color in particular, including any impediments 
 to fair housing and fair lending.
 (b) Reports.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary and the Director shall, 
 jointly, issue an initial report to the Committee on Financial 
 Services of the House of Representatives and the Committee on 
 Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate not later 
 than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, and issue 
 a final report to such committees not later than 2 years after 
 the date of enactment of this Act, containing--
 (A) all findings and determinations made in 
 carrying out the study required under subsection (a); 
 and
 (B) any recommendations on how to improve 
 entities', as described under subsection (a)(1), 
 compliance with fair housing, fair lending, and 
 consumer financial protection laws and regulations, 
 including to affirmatively further fair housing, to 
 prevent algorithmic bias, and to promote greater 
 transparency, explainability, privacy, and fairness in 
 the development and implementation of artificial 
 intelligence technologies, including machine learning, 
 with respect to the products and services they offer.
 (2) Additional reports.--The Secretary and the Director 
 may, either individually or jointly, issue updates to the final 
 report described under paragraph (1), as the Secretary or the 
 Director determines necessary.

SEC. 5427. UNITED STATES OPPOSITION TO MULTILATERAL DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 PROJECTS THAT PROVIDE A PUBLIC SUBSIDY TO A PRIVATE 
 SECTOR FIRM UNLESS THE SUBSIDY IS AWARDED USING AN OPEN, 
 COMPETITIVE PROCESS OR ON AN OPEN-ACCESS BASIS.

 Title XV of the International Financial Institutions Act (22 U.S.C. 
262o-262o-4) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 1506. UNITED STATES OPPOSITION TO MULTILATERAL DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 PROJECTS THAT PROVIDE A PUBLIC SUBSIDY TO A PRIVATE 
 SECTOR FIRM UNLESS THE SUBSIDY IS AWARDED USING AN OPEN, 
 COMPETITIVE PROCESS OR ON AN OPEN-ACCESS BASIS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the 
United States Executive Director at each multilateral development 
bank--
 ``(1) to use voice, vote, and influence of the United 
 States to ensure that private sector subsidies provided by the 
 respective bank, including through the Private Sector Window of 
 the International Development Association, are provided in 
 accordance with the World Bank guidelines; and
 ``(2) to vote against any project at the respective bank, 
 including through the Private Sector Window of the 
 International Development Association, that provides a public 
 subsidy to a private sector firm unless--
 ``(A) the subsidy is awarded using an open, 
 competitive process;
 ``(B) the subsidy is awarded on an open access 
 basis; or
 ``(C) the United States Executive Director at the 
 respective bank determines that the subsidy falls 
 within an exception provided in the World Bank 
 guidelines for the use of direct contracting.
 ``(b) Publication of Determination.--Within 60 days after the 
United States Executive Director at any multilateral development bank 
makes a determination described in subsection (a)(2)(C), the Secretary 
of the Treasury shall cause to be posted on the website of the 
Department of the Treasury a justification for the determination.
 ``(c) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Multilateral development bank.--The term 
 `multilateral development bank' has the meaning given in 
 section 1701(c)(4).
 ``(2) World bank guidelines.--The term `World Bank 
 Guidelines' means the July 2014 revised edition of the 
 document, entitled `Procurement of Goods, Works, and Non-
 Consulting Services under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits & Grants 
 by World Bank Borrowers', published by the World Bank Group.''.

SEC. 5428. UNITED STATES CONTRIBUTION TO THE CATASTROPHE CONTAINMENT 
 AND RELIEF TRUST AT THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND.

 (a) Contribution Authority.--The Secretary of the Treasury may 
contribute $200,000,000 on behalf of the United States to the 
Catastrophe Containment and Relief Trust of the International Monetary 
Fund.
 (b) Limitations on Authorization of Appropriations.--For the 
contribution authorized by subsection (a), there are authorized to be 
appropriated, without fiscal year limitation, $200,000,000 for payment 
by the Secretary of the Treasury.

SEC. 5429. PUBLIC REPORTING OF UNITED STATES VOTES TO SUPPORT, OR 
 ABSTENTION FROM VOTING ON, MULTILATERAL DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 PROJECTS UNDER THE GUIDANCE ON FOSSIL FUEL ENERGY AT THE 
 MULTILATERAL DEVELOPMENT BANKS ISSUED BY THE DEPARTMENT 
 OF THE TREASURY ON AUGUST 16, 2021.

 Title XIII of the International Financial Institutions Act (22 
U.S.C. 262m-262m-8) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 1309. PUBLIC REPORTING OF UNITED STATES VOTES TO SUPPORT, OR 
 ABSTENTION FROM VOTING ON, MULTILATERAL DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 PROJECTS UNDER THE GUIDANCE ON FOSSIL FUEL ENERGY AT THE 
 MULTILATERAL DEVELOPMENT BANKS ISSUED BY THE DEPARTMENT 
 OF THE TREASURY ON AUGUST 16, 2021.

 ``Within 60 days after the United States votes to support, or 
abstains from voting on, a multilateral development bank (as defined in 
section 1701(c)(4)) project under the Guidance on Fossil Fuel Energy at 
the Multilateral Development Banks issued by the Department of the 
Treasury on August 16, 2021, the Secretary of Treasury shall cause to 
be posted on the website of the Department of the Treasury a detailed 
justification for the vote or abstention.''.

SEC. 5430. UNITED STATES POLICY ON INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 
 DISCLOSURE OF HIGH AND SUBSTANTIAL RISK SUB-PROJECTS OF 
 FINANCIAL INTERMEDIARY CLIENTS.

 Title XVI of the International Financial Institutions Act (22 
U.S.C. 262p et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 1632. UNITED STATES POLICY ON INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 
 DISCLOSURE OF HIGH AND SUBSTANTIAL RISK SUB-PROJECTS OF 
 FINANCIAL INTERMEDIARY CLIENTS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the 
United States Executive Director at the International Finance 
Corporation to use the voice, vote, and influence of the United States 
to seek the adoption at the institution of a policy to require each 
financial intermediary client to publicly disclose on the website of 
the International Finance Corporation, in searchable form, and updated 
annually, the following information about the Category A and B sub-
projects of the client, within 6 months after the date of the enactment 
of this section for existing clients and, for new clients, within 6 
months after the date of Board approval for new investments:
 ``(1) The name, city, and sector for all sub-projects.
 ``(2) The environmental and social risk assessments and 
 mitigation plans that have been completed for each sub-project.
 ``(3) A summary of the Environmental and Social Management 
 System of the client including a detailed description of 
 policies to appropriately identify, categorize, assess, and 
 address the environmental and social risks relevant to the 
 activities the client is financing.
 ``(4) A link to the full Environmental and Social 
 Management System policy on the website of the client.
 ``(b) Reporting Requirement.--Within 6 months after the date of the 
enactment of this section, the Secretary of the Treasury shall submit a 
report to the Committee on Financial Services of the House of 
Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate 
containing--
 ``(1) a description of the efforts by the Secretary to 
 achieve the policy outlined in subsection (a); and
 ``(2) a description of any opposition from management, 
 shareholders, and clients to the adoption of the policy.''.

SEC. 5431. UNITED STATES POLICY ON MULTILATERAL DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 DISCLOSURE OF BENEFICIAL OWNERSHIP INFORMATION.

 Title XV of the International Financial Institutions Act (22 U.S.C. 
262o-262o-4) is further amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 1507. UNITED STATES POLICY ON MULTILATERAL DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 DISCLOSURE OF BENEFICIAL OWNERSHIP INFORMATION.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the 
United States Executive Director at each multilateral development 
bank--
 ``(1) to use voice and vote of the United States to 
 advocate for the adoption of a policy at the respective 
 institution to collect, verify and publish beneficial ownership 
 information for any corporation or limited liability company, 
 other than a publicly listed company, that receives any 
 assistance from the bank; and
 ``(2) to vote against the provision of any assistance by 
 the bank to any corporation or limited liability company, other 
 than a publicly listed company, unless the bank collects, 
 verifies, and publishes beneficial ownership information for 
 the entity.
 ``(b) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Multilateral development bank.--The term 
 `multilateral development bank' has the meaning given in 
 section 1701(c)(4).
 ``(2) Beneficial owner.--The term `beneficial owner' has 
 the meaning given in section 5336(3) of title 31, United States 
 Code.''.

SEC. 5432. STRENGTHENING THE SEC'S WHISTLEBLOWER FUND.

 Section 21F(g)(3)(A) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 
U.S.C. 78u-6(g)(3)(A)) is amended--
 (1) in clause (i), by striking ``$300,000,000'' and 
 inserting ``$600,000,000 (as such amount is indexed for 
 inflation every 5 years by the Commission to reflect the change 
 in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers published 
 by the Bureau of Labor Statistics)''; and
 (2) in clause (ii)--
 (A) by striking ``$200,000,000'' and inserting 
 ``$600,000,000 (as such amount is indexed for inflation 
 every 5 years by the Commission to reflect the change 
 in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers 
 published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics)'';
 (B) by striking ``Fund'' and inserting ``fund''; 
 and
 (C) by striking ``balance of the disgorgement 
 fund'' and inserting ``balance of the Fund''.

SEC. 5433. UNITED STATES POLICY ON WORLD BANK GROUP AND ASIAN 
 DEVELOPMENT BANK ASSISTANCE TO THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF 
 CHINA.

 (a) In General.--Title XVI of the International Financial 
Institutions Act (22 U.S.C. 262p et seq.) is amended by adding at the 
end the following:

``SEC. 1632. UNITED STATES POLICY ON WORLD BANK GROUP AND ASIAN 
 DEVELOPMENT BANK ASSISTANCE TO THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF 
 CHINA.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the 
United States Executive Director at each international financial 
institution of the World Bank Group and at the Asian Development Bank 
to use the voice and vote of the United States at the respective 
institution to vote against the provision of any loan, extension of 
financial assistance, or technical assistance to the People's Republic 
of China unless the Secretary of the Treasury has certified to the 
appropriate congressional committees that--
 ``(1) the Government of the People's Republic of China and 
 any lender owned or controlled by the Government of the 
 People's Republic of China have demonstrated a commitment--
 ``(A) to the rules and principles of the Paris 
 Club, or of other similar coordinated multilateral 
 initiatives on debt relief and debt restructuring in 
 which the United States participates, including with 
 respect to debt transparency and appropriate burden-
 sharing among all creditors;
 ``(B) to the practice of presumptive public 
 disclosure of the terms and conditions on which they 
 extend credit to other governments (without regard to 
 the form of any such extension of credit);
 ``(C) not to enforce any agreement terms that may 
 impair their own or the borrowers' capacity fully to 
 implement any commitment described in subparagraph (A) 
 or (B); and
 ``(D) not to enter into any agreement containing 
 terms that may impair their own or the borrowers' 
 capacity fully to implement any commitment described in 
 subparagraph (A) or (B); or
 ``(2) the loan or assistance is important to the national 
 interest of the United States, as described in a detailed 
 explanation by the Secretary to accompany the certification.
 ``(b) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term 
 `appropriate congressional committees' means the Committee on 
 Financial Services of the House of Representatives and the 
 Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate.
 ``(2) World bank group defined.--The term `World Bank 
 Group' means the International Bank for Reconstruction and 
 Development, the International Development Association, the 
 International Finance Corporation, and the Multilateral 
 Investment Guarantee Agency.''.
 (b) Sunset.--The amendment made by subsection (a) is repealed 
effective on the date that is 7 years after the effective date of this 
section.

SEC. 5434. ADDITION OF UNITED KINGDOM AND AUSTRALIA AS DPA DOMESTIC 
 SOURCES.

 Section 702(7)(A) of the Defense Production Act of 1950 (50 U.S.C. 
4552(7)(A)) is amended by striking ``United States or Canada'' and 
inserting ``United States, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland, Australia, or Canada''.

SEC. 5435. SERVICEMEMBER PROTECTIONS FOR MEDICAL DEBT COLLECTIONS.

 (a) Amendments to the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act.--
 (1) Definition.--Section 803 of the Fair Debt Collection 
 Practices Act (15 U.S.C. 1692a) is amended by adding at the end 
 the following:
 ``(9) The term `medical debt' means a debt arising 
 from the receipt of medical services, products, or 
 devices.''.
 (2) Unfair practices.--Section 808 of the Fair Debt 
 Collection Practices Act (15 U.S.C. 1692f) is amended by adding 
 at the end the following:
 ``(9) Engaging in activities to collect or 
 attempting to collect a medical debt owed or due or 
 asserted to be owed or due by a consumer who was a 
 member of the Armed Forces at the time such debt was 
 incurred, before the end of the 2-year period beginning 
 on the date that the first payment with respect to such 
 medical debt is due.''.
 (b) Prohibition on Consumer Reporting Agencies Reporting Certain 
Medical Debt With Respect to Members of the Armed Forces.--
 (1) Definition.--Section 603 of the Fair Credit Reporting 
 Act (15 U.S.C. 1681a) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(bb) Medical Debt.--The term `medical debt' means a debt arising 
from the receipt of medical services, products, or devices.
 ``(cc) Medically Necessary Procedure.--The term `medically 
necessary procedure' means--
 ``(1) health care services or supplies needed to diagnose 
 or treat an illness, injury, condition, disease, or its 
 symptoms and that meet accepted standards of medicine; and
 ``(2) health care to prevent illness or detect illness at 
 an early stage, when treatment is likely to work best 
 (including preventive services such as pap tests, flu shots, 
 and screening mammograms).''.
 (2) In general.--Section 605(a) of the Fair Credit 
 Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681c(a)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (7), by adding at the end the 
 following: ``This paragraph shall not be subject to 
 section 625(b)(1)(E).'';
 (B) in paragraph (8), by adding at the end the 
 following: ``This paragraph shall not be subject to 
 section 625(b)(1)(E).''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraphs:
 ``(9) Any information related to a debt arising from a 
 medically necessary procedure that occurred when the consumer 
 was a member of the Armed Forces. This paragraph shall not be 
 subject to section 625(b)(1)(E).
 ``(10) Any information related to a medical debt of a 
 consumer that was incurred when the consumer was a member of 
 the Armed Forces, if the date on which such debt was placed for 
 collection, charged to profit or loss, or subjected to any 
 similar action antedates the report by less than 365 calendar 
 days. This paragraph shall not be subject to section 
 625(b)(1)(E).''.
 (c) Requirements for Furnishers of Medical Debt Information With 
Respect to Members of the Armed Forces.--
 (1) Additional notice requirements for medical debt of 
 members of the armed forces.--Section 623 of the Fair Credit 
 Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681s-2) is amended by adding at the 
 end the following:
 ``(f) Additional Notice Requirements for Medical Debt of Members of 
the Armed Forces.--Before furnishing information regarding a medical 
debt of a consumer that was incurred when the consumer was a member of 
the Armed Forces to a consumer reporting agency, the person furnishing 
the information shall send a statement to the consumer that includes 
the following:
 ``(1) A notification that the medical debt--
 ``(A) may not be included on a consumer report made 
 by a consumer reporting agency until the later of the 
 date that is 365 days after--
 ``(i) the date on which the person sends 
 the statement;
 ``(ii) with respect to the medical debt of 
 a borrower demonstrating hardship, a date 
 determined by the Director of the Bureau; or
 ``(iii) the date described under section 
 605(a)(10); and
 ``(B) may not ever be included on a consumer report 
 made by a consumer reporting agency, if the medical 
 debt arises from a medically necessary procedure.
 ``(2) A notification that, if the debt is settled or paid 
 by the consumer or an insurance company before the end of the 
 period described under paragraph (1)(A), the debt may not be 
 reported to a consumer reporting agency.
 ``(3) A notification that the consumer may--
 ``(A) communicate with an insurance company to 
 determine coverage for the debt; or
 ``(B) apply for financial assistance.''.
 (2) Furnishing of medical debt information with respect to 
 members of the armed forces.--Section 623 of the Fair Credit 
 Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681s-2), as amended by paragraph (1), 
 is further amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(g) Furnishing of Medical Debt Information With Respect to 
Members of the Armed Forces.--
 ``(1) Prohibition on reporting debt related to medically 
 necessary procedures.--No person shall furnish any information 
 to a consumer reporting agency regarding a debt arising from a 
 medically necessary procedure that occurred when the consumer 
 was a member of the Armed Forces.
 ``(2) Treatment of other medical debt information.--With 
 respect to a medical debt of a consumer that was incurred when 
 the consumer was a member of the Armed Forces and that is not 
 described under paragraph (1), no person shall furnish any 
 information to a consumer reporting agency regarding such debt 
 before the end of the 365-day period beginning on the later 
 of--
 ``(A) the date on which the person sends the 
 statement described under subsection (f) to the 
 consumer;
 ``(B) with respect to the medical debt of a 
 borrower demonstrating hardship, a date determined by 
 the Director of the Bureau; or
 ``(C) the date described in section 605(a)(10).
 ``(3) Treatment of settled or paid medical debt.--With 
 respect to a medical debt of a consumer that was incurred when 
 the consumer was a member of the Armed Forces and that is not 
 described under paragraph (1), no person shall furnish any 
 information to a consumer reporting agency regarding such debt 
 if the debt is settled or paid by the consumer or an insurance 
 company before the end of the 365-day period described under 
 paragraph (2).
 ``(4) Borrower demonstrating hardship defined.--In this 
 subsection, and with respect to a medical debt, the term 
 `borrower demonstrating hardship' means a borrower or a class 
 of borrowers who, as determined by the Director of the Bureau, 
 is facing or has experienced unusual extenuating life 
 circumstances or events that result in severe financial or 
 personal barriers such that the borrower or class of borrowers 
 does not have the capacity to repay the medical debt.''.
 (d) Effective Date.--Except as otherwise provided under subsection 
(e), this section and the amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on the date that is 180 days after the date of enactment of this 
Act.
 (e) Discretionary Surplus Funds.--
 (1) In general.--The dollar amount specified under section 
 7(a)(3)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 289(a)(3)(A)) 
 is reduced by $1,000,000.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) 
 shall take effect on September 30, 2032.

SEC. 5436. PROTECTIONS FOR ACTIVE DUTY UNIFORMED CONSUMER.

 (a) Definitions.--Section 603 of the Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 
U.S.C. 1681a) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (q), by amending paragraph (1) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(1) Uniformed consumer.--The term `uniformed consumer' 
 means a consumer who is--
 ``(A) a member of the--
 ``(i) uniformed services (as such term is 
 defined in section 101(a)(5) of title 10, 
 United States Code); or
 ``(ii) National Guard (as such term is 
 defined in section 101(c)(1) of title 10, 
 United States Code); and
 ``(B) in active service (as such term is defined in 
 section 101(d)(3) of title 10, United States Code), 
 including full-time duty in the commissioned corps of 
 the Public Health Service or the National Oceanic and 
 Atmospheric Administration.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(bb) Deployed Uniformed Consumer.--The term `deployed uniformed 
consumer' means an uniformed consumer who--
 ``(1) serves--
 ``(A) in a combat zone (as such term is defined in 
 section 112(c)(2) of title 26, United States Code); or
 ``(B) aboard a United States combatant, support, or 
 auxiliary vessel (as such terms are defined in section 
 231(f) of title 10, United States Code); or
 ``(C) in a deployment (as such term is defined in 
 section 991(b) of title 10, United States Code); and
 ``(2) is on active duty (as such term is defined in section 
 101(d)(2) of title 10, United States Code) for not less than 30 
 days during the type of service described in paragraph (1).''.
 (b) Prohibition on Including Certain Adverse Information in 
Consumer Reports.--Section 605 of the Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 
U.S.C. 1681c) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by adding at the end the following:
 ``(9) Any item of adverse information about a uniformed 
 consumer, if the action or inaction that gave rise to the item 
 occurred while the consumer was a deployed uniformed 
 consumer.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(i) Notice of Status as a Uniformed Consumer.--With respect to an 
item of adverse information about a consumer, if the action or inaction 
that gave rise to the item occurred while the consumer was a uniformed 
consumer, the consumer may provide appropriate proof, including 
official orders, to a consumer reporting agency that the consumer was a 
deployed uniformed consumer at the time such action or inaction 
occurred. The consumer reporting agency shall promptly delete that item 
of adverse information from the file of the uniformed consumer and 
notify the consumer and the furnisher of the information of the 
deletion.''.
 (c) Communications Between the Consumer and Consumer Reporting 
Agencies.--Section 605A of the Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 
1681c-1) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (c)--
 (A) by striking ``Upon'' and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(1) In general.--Upon'';
 (B) by redesignating paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) 
 as subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C), and moving such 
 redesignated subparagraphs 2 ems to the right; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) Negative information alert.--Any time a consumer 
 reporting agency receives an item of adverse information about 
 a consumer, if the consumer has provided appropriate proof that 
 the consumer is a uniformed consumer, the consumer reporting 
 agency shall promptly notify the consumer--
 ``(A) that the agency has received such item of 
 adverse information, along with a description of the 
 item; and
 ``(B) the method by which the consumer can dispute 
 the validity of the item.
 ``(3) Contact information for uniformed consumers.--With 
 respect to any consumer that has provided appropriate proof to 
 a consumer reporting agency that the consumer is a deployed 
 uniformed consumer, if the consumer provides the consumer 
 reporting agency with separate contact information to be used 
 when communicating with the consumer while the consumer is a 
 deployed uniformed consumer, the consumer reporting agency 
 shall use such contact information for all communications while 
 the consumer is a deployed uniformed consumer.''; and
 (2) in subsection (e), by amending paragraph (3) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(3) subparagraphs (A) and (B) of subsection (c)(1), in 
 the case of a referral under subsection (c)(1)(C).''.
 (d) Conforming Amendment.--The Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 
1681 et seq.) is amended by striking ``active duty military'' each 
place such term appears and inserting ``uniformed consumer''.
 (e) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that any person 
making use of a consumer report containing an item of adverse 
information should, if the action or inaction that gave rise to the 
item occurred while the consumer was a uniformed consumer, take such 
fact into account when evaluating the creditworthiness of the consumer.

SEC. 5437. FAIR DEBT COLLECTION PRACTICES FOR SERVICEMEMBERS.

 (a) Enhanced Protection Against Debt Collector Harassment of 
Servicemembers.--
 (1) Communication in connection with debt collection.--
 Section 805 of the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act (15 
 U.S.C. 1692c) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(e) Communications Concerning Servicemember Debts.--
 ``(1) Definition.--In this subsection, the term `covered 
 member' means--
 ``(A) a covered member or a dependent as defined in 
 section 987(i) of title 10, United States Code; and
 ``(B)(i) an individual who was separated, 
 discharged, or released from duty described in such 
 section 987(i)(1), but only during the 365-day period 
 beginning on the date of separation, discharge, or 
 release; or
 ``(ii) a person, with respect to an individual 
 described in clause (i), described in subparagraph (A), 
 (D), (E), or (I) of section 1072(2) of title 10, United 
 States Code.
 ``(2) Prohibitions.--A debt collector may not, in 
 connection with the collection of any debt of a covered 
 member--
 ``(A) threaten to have the covered member reduced 
 in rank;
 ``(B) threaten to have the covered member's 
 security clearance revoked; or
 ``(C) threaten to have the covered member 
 prosecuted under chapter 47 of title 10, United States 
 Code (the Uniform Code of Military Justice).''.
 (2) Unfair practices.--Section 808 of the Fair Debt 
 Collection Practices Act (15 U.S.C. 1692f) is amended by adding 
 at the end the following:
 ``(9) The representation to any covered member (as defined 
 under section 805(e)(1)) that failure to cooperate with a debt 
 collector will result in--
 ``(A) a reduction in rank of the covered member;
 ``(B) a revocation of the covered member's security 
 clearance; or
 ``(C) prosecution under chapter 47 of title 10, 
 United States Code (the Uniform Code of Military 
 Justice).''.
 (b) GAO Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall 
conduct a study and submit a report to Congress on the impact of this 
section on--
 (1) the timely delivery of information to a covered member 
 (as defined in section 805(e) of the Fair Debt Collection 
 Practices Act, as added by this section);
 (2) military readiness; and
 (3) national security, including the extent to which 
 covered members with security clearances would be impacted by 
 uncollected debt.
 (c) Determination of Budgetary Effects.--The budgetary effects of 
this section, for the purpose of complying with the Statutory Pay-As-
You-Go Act of 2010, shall be determined by reference to the latest 
statement titled ``Budgetary Effects of PAYGO Legislation'' for this 
section, submitted for printing in the Congressional Record by the 
Chairman of the House Budget Committee, provided that such statement 
has been submitted prior to the vote on passage.

SEC. 5438. FAIR HIRING IN BANKING.

 (a) Federal Deposit Insurance Act.--Section 19 of the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1829) is amended--
 (1) by inserting after subsection (b) the following:
 ``(c) Exceptions.--
 ``(1) Certain older offenses.--
 ``(A) In general.--With respect to an individual, 
 subsection (a) shall not apply to an offense if--
 ``(i) it has been 7 years or more since the 
 offense occurred; or
 ``(ii) the individual was incarcerated with 
 respect to the offense and it has been 5 years 
 or more since the individual was released from 
 incarceration.
 ``(B) Offenses committed by individuals 21 or 
 younger.--For individuals who committed an offense when 
 they were 21 years of age or younger, subsection (a) 
 shall not apply to the offense if it has been more than 
 30 months since the sentencing occurred.
 ``(C) Limitation.--This paragraph shall not apply 
 to an offense described under subsection (a)(2).
 ``(2) Expungement and sealing.--With respect to an 
 individual, subsection (a) shall not apply to an offense if--
 ``(A) there is an order of expungement, sealing, or 
 dismissal that has been issued in regard to the 
 conviction in connection with such offense; and
 ``(B) it is intended by the language in the order 
 itself, or in the legislative provisions under which 
 the order was issued, that the conviction shall be 
 destroyed or sealed from the individual's State or 
 Federal record, even if exceptions allow the record to 
 be considered for certain character and fitness 
 evaluation purposes.
 ``(3) De minimis exemption.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subsection (a) shall not apply 
 to such de minimis offenses as the Corporation 
 determines, by rule.
 ``(B) Confinement criteria.--In issuing rules under 
 subparagraph (A), the Corporation shall include a 
 requirement that the offense was punishable by a term 
 of three years or less confined in a correctional 
 facility, where such confinement--
 ``(i) is calculated based on the time an 
 individual spent incarcerated as a punishment 
 or a sanction, not as pretrial detention; and
 ``(ii) does not include probation or parole 
 where an individual was restricted to a 
 particular jurisdiction or was required to 
 report occasionally to an individual or a 
 specific location.
 ``(C) Bad check criteria.--In setting the criteria 
 for de minimis offenses under subparagraph (A), if the 
 Corporation establishes criteria with respect to 
 insufficient funds checks, the Corporation shall 
 require that the aggregate total face value of all 
 insufficient funds checks across all convictions or 
 program entries related to insufficient funds checks is 
 $2,000 or less.
 ``(D) Designated lesser offenses.--Subsection (a) 
 shall not apply to certain lesser offenses (including 
 the use of a fake ID, shoplifting, trespass, fare 
 evasion, driving with an expired license or tag, and 
 such other low-risk offenses as the Corporation may 
 designate) if 1 year or more has passed since the 
 applicable conviction or program entry.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(f) Consent Applications.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Corporation shall accept consent 
 applications from an individual and from an insured depository 
 institution or depository institution holding company on behalf 
 of an individual that are filed separately or contemporaneously 
 with a regional office of the Corporation.
 ``(2) Sponsored applications filed with regional offices.--
 Consent applications filed at a regional office of the 
 Corporation by an insured depository institution or depository 
 institution holding company on behalf of an individual--
 ``(A) shall be reviewed by such office;
 ``(B) may be approved or denied by such office, if 
 such authority has been delegated to such office by the 
 Corporation; and
 ``(C) may only be denied by such office if the 
 general counsel of the Corporation (or a designee) 
 certifies that the denial is consistent with this 
 section.
 ``(3) Individual applications filed with regional 
 offices.--Consent applications filed at a regional office by an 
 individual--
 ``(A) shall be reviewed by such office; and
 ``(B) may be approved or denied by such office, if 
 such authority has been delegated to such office by the 
 Corporation, except with respect to--
 ``(i) cases involving an offense described 
 under subsection (a)(2); and
 ``(ii) such other high-level security cases 
 as may be designated by the Corporation.
 ``(4) National office review.--The national office of the 
 Corporation shall--
 ``(A) review any consent application with respect 
 to which a regional office is not authorized to approve 
 or deny the application; and
 ``(B) review any consent application that is denied 
 by a regional office, if the individual requests a 
 review by the national office.
 ``(5) Forms and instructions.--
 ``(A) Availability.--The Corporation shall make all 
 forms and instructions related to consent applications 
 available to the public, including on the website of 
 the Corporation.
 ``(B) Contents.--The forms and instructions 
 described under subparagraph (A) shall provide a sample 
 cover letter and a comprehensive list of items that may 
 accompany the application, including clear guidance on 
 evidence that may support a finding of rehabilitation.
 ``(6) Consideration of criminal history.--
 ``(A) Regional office consideration.--In reviewing 
 a consent application, a regional office shall--
 ``(i) primarily rely on the criminal 
 history record of the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation; and
 ``(ii) provide such record to the applicant 
 to review for accuracy.
 ``(B) Certified copies.--The Corporation may not 
 require an applicant to provide certified copies of 
 criminal history records unless the Corporation 
 determines that there is a clear and compelling 
 justification to require additional information to 
 verify the accuracy of the criminal history record of 
 the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
 ``(7) Consideration of rehabilitation.--Consistent with 
 title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e et 
 seq.), the Corporation shall--
 ``(A) conduct an individualized assessment when 
 evaluating consent applications that takes into account 
 evidence of rehabilitation, the applicant's age at the 
 time of the conviction or program entry, the time that 
 has elapsed since conviction or program entry, and the 
 relationship of individual's offense to the 
 responsibilities of the applicable position;
 ``(B) consider the individual's employment history, 
 letters of recommendation, certificates documenting 
 participation in substance abuse programs, successful 
 participating in job preparation and educational 
 programs, and other relevant mitigating evidence; and
 ``(C) consider any additional information the 
 Corporation determines necessary for safety and 
 soundness.
 ``(8) Scope of employment.--With respect to an approved 
 consent application filed by an insured depository institution 
 or depository institution holding company on behalf of an 
 individual, if the Corporation determines it appropriate, such 
 approved consent application shall allow the individual to work 
 for the same employer (without restrictions on the location) 
 and across positions, except that the prior consent of the 
 Corporation (which may require a new application) shall be 
 required for any proposed significant changes in the 
 individual's security-related duties or responsibilities, such 
 as promotion to an officer or other positions that the employer 
 determines will require higher security screening credentials.
 ``(9) Coordination with the ncua.--In carrying out this 
 section, the Corporation shall consult and coordinate with the 
 National Credit Union Administration as needed to promote 
 consistent implementation where appropriate.
 ``(g) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Consent application.--The term `consent application' 
 means an application filed with Corporation by an individual 
 (or by an insured depository institution or depository 
 institution holding company on behalf of an individual) seeking 
 the written consent of the Corporation under subsection (a)(1).
 ``(2) Criminal offense involving dishonesty.--The term 
 `criminal offense involving dishonesty'--
 ``(A) means an offense under which an individual, 
 directly or indirectly--
 ``(i) cheats or defrauds; or
 ``(ii) wrongfully takes property belonging 
 to another in violation of a criminal statute;
 ``(B) includes an offense that Federal, State, or 
 local law defines as dishonest, or for which dishonesty 
 is an element of the offense; and
 ``(C) does not include--
 ``(i) a misdemeanor criminal offense 
 committed more than one year before the date on 
 which an individual files a consent 
 application, excluding any period of 
 incarceration; or
 ``(ii) an offense involving the possession 
 of controlled substances.
 ``(3) Pretrial diversion or similar program.--The term 
 `pretrial diversion or similar program' means a program 
 characterized by a suspension or eventual dismissal or reversal 
 of charges or criminal prosecution upon agreement by the 
 accused to restitution, drug or alcohol rehabilitation, anger 
 management, or community service.''.
 (b) Federal Credit Union Act.--Section 205(d) of the Federal Credit 
Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1785(d)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:
 ``(4) Exceptions.--
 ``(A) Certain older offenses.--
 ``(i) In general.--With respect to an 
 individual, paragraph (1) shall not apply to an 
 offense if--
 ``(I) it has been 7 years or more 
 since the offense occurred; or
 ``(II) the individual was 
 incarcerated with respect to the 
 offense and it has been 5 years or more 
 since the individual was released from 
 incarceration.
 ``(ii) Offenses committed by individuals 21 
 or younger.--For individuals who committed an 
 offense when they were 21 years of age or 
 younger, paragraph (1) shall not apply to the 
 offense if it has been more than 30 months 
 since the sentencing occurred.
 ``(iii) Limitation.--This subparagraph 
 shall not apply to an offense described under 
 paragraph (1)(B).
 ``(B) Expungement and sealing.--With respect to an 
 individual, paragraph (1) shall not apply to an offense 
 if--
 ``(i) there is an order of expungement, 
 sealing, or dismissal that has been issued in 
 regard to the conviction in connection with 
 such offense; and
 ``(ii) it is intended by the language in 
 the order itself, or in the legislative 
 provisions under which the order was issued, 
 that the conviction shall be destroyed or 
 sealed from the individual's State or Federal 
 record, even if exceptions allow the record to 
 be considered for certain character and fitness 
 evaluation purposes.
 ``(C) De minimis exemption.--
 ``(i) In general.--Paragraph (1) shall not 
 apply to such de minimis offenses as the Board 
 determines, by rule.
 ``(ii) Confinement criteria.--In issuing 
 rules under clause (i), the Board shall include 
 a requirement that the offense was punishable 
 by a term of three years or less confined in a 
 correctional facility, where such confinement--
 ``(I) is calculated based on the 
 time an individual spent incarcerated 
 as a punishment or a sanction, not as 
 pretrial detention; and
 ``(II) does not include probation 
 or parole where an individual was 
 restricted to a particular jurisdiction 
 or was required to report occasionally 
 to an individual or a specific 
 location.
 ``(iii) Bad check criteria.--In setting the 
 criteria for de minimis offenses under clause 
 (i), if the Board establishes criteria with 
 respect to insufficient funds checks, the Board 
 shall require that the aggregate total face 
 value of all insufficient funds checks across 
 all convictions or program entries related to 
 insufficient funds checks is $2,000 or less.
 ``(iv) Designated lesser offenses.--
 Paragraph (1) shall not apply to certain lesser 
 offenses (including the use of a fake ID, 
 shoplifting, trespass, fare evasion, driving 
 with an expired license or tag, and such other 
 low-risk offenses as the Board may designate) 
 if 1 year or more has passed since the 
 applicable conviction or program entry.
 ``(5) Consent applications.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Board shall accept consent 
 applications from an individual and from an insured 
 credit union on behalf of an individual that are filed 
 separately or contemporaneously with a regional office 
 of the Board.
 ``(B) Sponsored applications filed with regional 
 offices.--Consent applications filed at a regional 
 office of the Board by an insured credit union on 
 behalf of an individual--
 ``(i) shall be reviewed by such office;
 ``(ii) may be approved or denied by such 
 office, if such authority has been delegated to 
 such office by the Board; and
 ``(iii) may only be denied by such office 
 if the general counsel of the Board (or a 
 designee) certifies that the denial is 
 consistent with this section.
 ``(C) Individual applications filed with regional 
 offices.--Consent applications filed at a regional 
 office by an individual--
 ``(i) shall be reviewed by such office; and
 ``(ii) may be approved or denied by such 
 office, if such authority has been delegated to 
 such office by the Board, except with respect 
 to--
 ``(I) cases involving an offense 
 described under paragraph (1)(B); and
 ``(II) such other high-level 
 security cases as may be designated by 
 the Board.
 ``(D) National office review.--The national office 
 of the Board shall--
 ``(i) review any consent application with 
 respect to which a regional office is not 
 authorized to approve or deny the application; 
 and
 ``(ii) review any consent application that 
 is denied by a regional office, if the 
 individual requests a review by the national 
 office.
 ``(E) Forms and instructions.--
 ``(i) Availability.--The Board shall make 
 all forms and instructions related to consent 
 applications available to the public, including 
 on the website of the Board.
 ``(ii) Contents.--The forms and 
 instructions described under clause (i) shall 
 provide a sample cover letter and a 
 comprehensive list of items that may accompany 
 the application, including clear guidance on 
 evidence that may support a finding of 
 rehabilitation.
 ``(F) Consideration of criminal history.--
 ``(i) Regional office consideration.--In 
 reviewing a consent application, a regional 
 office shall--
 ``(I) primarily rely on the 
 criminal history record of the Federal 
 Bureau of Investigation; and
 ``(II) provide such record to the 
 applicant to review for accuracy.
 ``(ii) Certified copies.--The Board may not 
 require an applicant to provide certified 
 copies of criminal history records unless the 
 Board determines that there is a clear and 
 compelling justification to require additional 
 information to verify the accuracy of the 
 criminal history record of the Federal Bureau 
 of Investigation.
 ``(G) Consideration of rehabilitation.--Consistent 
 with title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 
 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.), the Board shall--
 ``(i) conduct an individualized assessment 
 when evaluating consent applications that takes 
 into account evidence of rehabilitation, the 
 applicant's age at the time of the conviction 
 or program entry, the time that has elapsed 
 since conviction or program entry, and the 
 relationship of individual's offense to the 
 responsibilities of the applicable position;
 ``(ii) consider the individual's employment 
 history, letters of recommendation, 
 certificates documenting participation in 
 substance abuse programs, successful 
 participating in job preparation and 
 educational programs, and other relevant 
 mitigating evidence; and
 ``(iii) consider any additional information 
 the Board determines necessary for safety and 
 soundness.
 ``(H) Scope of employment.--With respect to an 
 approved consent application filed by an insured credit 
 union on behalf of an individual, if the Board 
 determines it appropriate, such approved consent 
 application shall allow the individual to work for the 
 same employer (without restrictions on the location) 
 and across positions, except that the prior consent of 
 the Board (which may require a new application) shall 
 be required for any proposed significant changes in the 
 individual's security-related duties or 
 responsibilities, such as promotion to an officer or 
 other positions that the employer determines will 
 require higher security screening credentials.
 ``(I) Coordination with fdic.--In carrying out this 
 subsection, the Board shall consult and coordinate with 
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation as needed to 
 promote consistent implementation where appropriate.
 ``(6) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Consent application.--The term `consent 
 application' means an application filed with Board by 
 an individual (or by an insured credit union on behalf 
 of an individual) seeking the written consent of the 
 Board under paragraph (1)(A).
 ``(B) Criminal offense involving dishonesty.--The 
 term `criminal offense involving dishonesty'--
 ``(i) means an offense under which an 
 individual, directly or indirectly--
 ``(I) cheats or defrauds; or
 ``(II) wrongfully takes property 
 belonging to another in violation of a 
 criminal statute;
 ``(ii) includes an offense that Federal, 
 State, or local law defines as dishonest, or 
 for which dishonesty is an element of the 
 offense; and
 ``(iii) does not include--
 ``(I) a misdemeanor criminal 
 offense committed more than one year 
 before the date on which an individual 
 files a consent application, excluding 
 any period of incarceration; or
 ``(II) an offense involving the 
 possession of controlled substances.
 ``(C) Pretrial diversion or similar program.--The 
 term `pretrial diversion or similar program' means a 
 program characterized by a suspension or eventual 
 dismissal or reversal of charges or criminal 
 prosecution upon agreement by the accused to 
 restitution, drug or alcohol rehabilitation, anger 
 management, or community service.''.
 (c) Review and Report to Congress.--Not later than the end of the 
2-year period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the National Credit Union 
Administration shall--
 (1) review the rules issued to carry out this Act and the 
 amendments made by this Act on--
 (A) the application of section 19 of the Federal 
 Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1829) and section 
 205(d) of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 
 1785(d));
 (B) the number of applications for consent 
 applications under such sections; and
 (C) the rates of approval and denial for consent 
 applications under such sections;
 (2) make the results of the review required under paragraph 
 (1) available to the public; and
 (3) issue a report to Congress containing any legislative 
 or regulatory recommendations for expanding employment 
 opportunities for those with a previous minor criminal offense.
 (d) Discretionary Surplus Fund.--
 (1) In general.--Subparagraph (A) of section 7(a)(3) of the 
 Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 289(a)(3)(A)) is amended by 
 reducing the dollar figure described in such subparagraph by 
 $1,500,000.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) 
 shall take effect on September 30, 2032.

SEC. 5439. BANKING TRANSPARENCY FOR SANCTIONED PERSONS.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, and every 180 days thereafter, the Secretary of the Treasury shall 
issue a report to the Committees on Financial Services and Foreign 
Affairs of the House of Representatives and the Committees on Banking, 
Housing, and Urban Affairs and Foreign Relations of the Senate that 
includes a copy of any license issued by the Secretary in the preceding 
180 days that authorizes a United States financial institution (as 
defined under section 561.309 of title 31, Code of Federal Regulations) 
to provide financial services benefitting--
 (1) a state sponsor of terrorism; or
 (2) a person sanctioned pursuant to any of the following:
 (A) Section 404 of the Russia and Moldova Jackson-
 Vanik Repeal and Sergei Magnitsky Rule of Law 
 Accountability Act of 2012 (Public Law 112-208).
 (B) Subtitle F of title XII of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017 (Public Law 114-
 328, the Global Magnitsky Human Rights Accountability 
 Act).
 (C) Executive Order No. 13818.

SEC. 5440. UKRAINE DEBT PAYMENT RELIEF.

 (a) Suspension of Multilateral Debt Payments of Ukraine.--
 (1) United states position in the international financial 
 institutions.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the 
 United States Executive Director at each international 
 financial institution (as defined in section 1701(c)(2) of the 
 International Financial Institutions Act) to use the voice, 
 vote, and influence of the United States to advocate that the 
 respective institution immediately suspend all debt service 
 payments owed to the institution by Ukraine.
 (2) Official bilateral and commercial debt service payment 
 relief.--The Secretary of the Treasury, working in coordination 
 with the Secretary of State, shall commence immediate efforts 
 with other governments and commercial creditor groups, through 
 the Paris Club of Official Creditors and other bilateral and 
 multilateral frameworks, both formal and informal, to pursue 
 comprehensive debt payment relief for Ukraine.
 (3) Multilateral financial support for ukraine.--The 
 Secretary of the Treasury shall direct the United States 
 Executive Director at each international financial institution 
 (as defined in section 1701(c)(2) of the International 
 Financial Institutions Act) to use the voice and vote of the 
 United States to support, to the maximum extent practicable, 
 the provision of concessional financial assistance for Ukraine.
 (4) Multilateral financial support for refugees.--The 
 Secretary of the Treasury shall direct the United States 
 Executive Director at each international financial institution 
 (as defined in section 1701(c)(2) of the International 
 Financial Institutions Act) to use the voice and vote of the 
 United States to seek to provide economic support for refugees 
 from Ukraine, including refugees of African descent, and for 
 countries receiving refugees from Ukraine.
 (b) Report to the Congress.--Not later than December 31 of each 
year, the President shall--
 (1) submit to the Committees on Financial Services, on 
 Appropriations, and on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives and the Committees on Foreign Relations and on 
 Appropriations of the Senate, a report on the activities 
 undertaken under this section; and
 (2) make public a copy of the report.
 (c) Waiver and Termination.--
 (1) Waiver.--The President may waive the preceding 
 provisions of this section if the President determines that a 
 waiver is in the national interest of the United States and 
 reports to the Congress an explanation of the reasons therefor.
 (2) Termination.--The preceding provisions of this section 
 shall have no force or effect on or after the date that is 7 
 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 5441. GRANT PROGRAM FOR GRANDFAMILY HOUSING.

 (a) In General.--Title II of the LEGACY Act of 2003 (12 U.S.C. 
1790q note) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 206. GRANT PROGRAM.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall, not later than 180 days 
after the date of the enactment of this section, establish a program to 
provide grants to owners of intergenerational dwelling units.
 ``(b) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this 
section, an owner of an intergenerational dwelling unit shall submit an 
application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and 
containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
 ``(c) Use of Grant Amounts.--An owner of an intergenerational 
dwelling unit that receives a grant under this section shall use 
amounts provided to cover costs associated with--
 ``(1) employing a service coordinator to--
 ``(A) offer onsite services to intergenerational 
 families, including tutoring, health care services, 
 afterschool care, and activities that are age 
 appropriate for children of various ages of 
 development; and
 ``(B) coordinate with any local kinship navigator 
 program (as described in section 474(a)(7) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 674(a)(7));
 ``(2) facilitating outreach to intergenerational families 
 as described in subsection (d);
 ``(3) planning and offering services to intergenerational 
 families; and
 ``(4) retrofitting and maintaining existing spaces within 
 the property that contains the intergenerational dwelling unit 
 for the services and programs provided to intergenerational 
 families.
 ``(d) Outreach.--
 ``(1) In general.--An owner of an intergenerational 
 dwelling unit that receives a grant under this section shall 
 engage with intergenerational families in the community 
 surrounding the property that contains the grandfamily housing 
 owned by the grant recipient by--
 ``(A) performing periodic informational outreach; 
 and
 ``(B) planning and executing events for 
 intergenerational families.
 ``(2) Coordination.--Outreach under this subsection shall, 
 where possible, be in coordination with a local kinship 
 navigator program (as described in section 474(a)(7) of the 
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 674(a)(7)) or a comparable 
 program or entity in the State in which the intergenerational 
 dwelling unit is located.
 ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to the Secretary to carry out this section $50,000,000 for 
each of fiscal years 2023 and 2024.
 ``(f) Nondiscrimination.--The program established under this 
section shall be implemented by the Secretary in a manner that is 
consistent with the Fair Housing Act.''.
 (b) VAWA Protections.--Section 41411(a)(3) of the Violence Against 
Women Act of 1994 (34 U.S.C. 12491(a)(3)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (O) and (P) as 
 subparagraphs (P) and (Q), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (N) the following:
 ``(O) the program established under the Grandfamily 
 Housing Act of 2022;''.
 (c) Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of 
this section, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall 
submit to the Congress a report that--
 (1) describes the effectiveness of the grant program 
 established under section 206 of the LEGACY Act of 2003, as 
 added by subsection (a); and
 (2) makes recommendations for legislative changes that 
 could allow for the grant program to be more effective.

SEC. 5442. FLEXIBILITY IN ADDRESSING RURAL HOMELESSNESS.

 Subsection (a) of section 423 of subtitle C of title IV of the 
McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11383(a)) is amended 
by adding at the end the following:
 ``(13) Projects in rural areas that consist of one or more 
 of the following activities:
 ``(A) Payment of short-term emergency lodging, 
 including in motels or shelters, directly or through 
 vouchers.
 ``(B) Repairs to units--
 ``(i) in which homeless individuals and 
 families will be housed; or
 ``(ii) which are currently not fit for 
 human habitation.
 ``(C) Staff training, professional development, 
 skill development, and staff retention activities.''.

SEC. 5443. PROMOTING DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION IN THE APPRAISAL 
 PROFESSION.

 (a) In General.--The Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and 
Enforcement Act of 1989 is amended--
 (1) in section 1103(a) (12 U.S.C. 3332(a))--
 (A) in paragraph (3), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in paragraph (4), by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting a semicolon;
 (C) in paragraph (5), by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting a semicolon;
 (D) in paragraph (6), by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting ``a semicolon; and''; and
 (E) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(7) administer the grant program under section 
 1122(j).'';
 (2) in section 1106 (12 U.S.C. 3335)--
 (A) by inserting ``(a) In General.--'' before ``The 
 Appraisal Subcommittee'';
 (B) by striking the comma after ``comment'';
 (C) by inserting before ``Any regulations'' the 
 following:
 ``(b) Regulations.--''; and
 (D) in subsection (a) (as so designated by 
 subparagraph (A) of this paragraph), by adding at the 
 end the following: ``The Appraisal Subcommittee may 
 coordinate, and enter into agreements, with private 
 industry stakeholders (including appraisal management 
 companies and industry associations) to facilitate 
 activities and practices that ensure diversity among 
 individuals newly hired as appraisers in their first 
 employment positions in the appraisal industry.''; and
 (3) in section 1122 (12 U.S.C. 3351), by adding at the end 
 the following new subsection:
 ``(j) Grant Program To Promote Diversity and Inclusion in the 
Appraisal Profession.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Appraisal Subcommittee shall carry 
 out a program under this subsection to makes grants to State 
 agencies, nonprofit organizations, and institutions of higher 
 education to promote diversity and inclusion in the appraisal 
 profession.
 ``(2) Eligible activities.--Activities carried out with 
 amounts from a grant under this Act shall be designed to 
 promote diversity and inclusion in the appraisal profession, 
 and may include--
 ``(A) funding scholarships;
 ``(B) providing training and education;
 ``(C) providing implicit bias training for 
 appraisers; and
 ``(D) other activities as determined appropriate to 
 further the purposes of this grant program by the 
 Appraisal Subcommittee.
 ``(3) Allocation of funds.--In making grants under this 
 subsection, the Appraisal Subcommittee shall--
 ``(A) allocate 50 percent of the funds made 
 available to part B institutions (as such term is 
 defined in section 322 of the Higher Education Act of 
 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1061)) or universities with degree 
 programs approved by the Appraiser Qualifications Board 
 or a relevant State regulatory agency for--
 ``(i) scholarships for students of color 
 who want to pursue a career in real estate 
 appraisal; and
 ``(ii) subsidizing living expenses for 
 those students while in training; and
 ``(B) allocate 20 percent of the funds to cover the 
 cost of fulfilling the experience requirements or other 
 applicable requirements that the students described 
 under subparagraph (A) will need to complete in order 
 to become appraisers.
 ``(4) Administrative costs.--The Appraisal Subcommittee may 
 use 1 percent of amounts appropriated pursuant to paragraph (6) 
 to cover the administrative costs of carrying out this 
 subsection.
 ``(5) Reports.--For each fiscal year during which grants 
 are made under the program under this subsection, the Appraisal 
 Subcommittee shall submit a report to the Congress regarding 
 implementation of the program and describing the grants made, 
 activities conducted using grant amounts, and the number of 
 individuals served by such grants, disaggregated by race, 
 ethnicity, age, and gender.''.
 (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to the Appraisal Subcommittee for carrying out the 
amendments made by this section, including for making grants authorized 
by such amendments, $50,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2023 through 
2027.

SEC. 5444. COMBATING TRADE-BASED MONEY LAUNDERING.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) Trade-based money laundering is among the most widely 
 used and least understood forms of money laundering, disguising 
 proceeds of crime by moving value through international trade 
 transactions in an attempt to legitimize illicit origins of 
 money or products.
 (2) The transnational nature and complexity of trade-based 
 money laundering make detection and investigation exceedingly 
 difficult.
 (3) Drug trafficking organizations, terrorist 
 organizations, and other transnational criminal organizations 
 have succeeded at trade-based money laundering despite the best 
 efforts of United States law enforcement.
 (4) Trade-based money laundering includes other offenses 
 such as tax evasion, disruption of markets, profit loss for 
 businesses, and corruption of government officials, and 
 constitutes a persistent threat to the economy and security of 
 the United States.
 (5) Trade-based money laundering can result in the 
 decreased collection of customs duties as a result of the 
 undervaluation of imports and fraudulent cargo manifests.
 (6) Trade-based money laundering can decrease tax revenue 
 collected as a result of the sale of underpriced goods in the 
 marketplace.
 (7) Trade-based money laundering is one mechanism by which 
 counterfeiters infiltrate supply chains, threatening the 
 quality and safety of consumer, industrial, and military 
 products.
 (8) Drug trafficking organizations collaborate with Chinese 
 criminal networks to launder profits from drug trafficking 
 through Chinese messaging applications.
 (9) On March 16, 2021, the Commander of the United States 
 Southern Command, Admiral Faller, testified to the Committee on 
 Armed Services of the Senate that transnational criminal 
 organizations ``market in drugs and people and guns and illegal 
 mining, and one of the prime sources that underwrites their 
 efforts is Chinese money-laundering''.
 (10) The deaths and violence associated with drug 
 traffickers, the financing of terrorist organizations and other 
 violent non-state actors, and the adulteration of supply chains 
 with counterfeit goods showcase the danger trade-based money 
 laundering poses to the United States.
 (11) Trade-based money laundering undermines national 
 security and the rule of law in countries where it takes place.
 (12) Illicit profits for transnational criminal 
 organizations and other criminal organizations can lead to 
 instability globally.
 (13) The United States is facing a drug use and overdose 
 epidemic, as well as an increase in consumption of synthetic 
 drugs, such as methamphetamine and fentanyl, which is often 
 enabled by Chinese money laundering organizations operating in 
 coordination with drug-trafficking organizations and 
 transnational criminal organizations in the Western Hemisphere 
 that use trade-based money laundering to disguise the proceeds 
 of drug trafficking.
 (14) The presence of drug traffickers in the United States 
 and their intrinsic connection to international threat 
 networks, as well as the use of licit trade to further their 
 motives, is a national security concern.
 (15) Drug-trafficking organizations frequently use the 
 trade-based money laundering scheme known as the ``Black Market 
 Peso Exchange'' to move their ill-gotten gains out of the 
 United States and into Central and South America.
 (16) United States ports and U.S. Customs and Border 
 Protection do not have the capacity to properly examine the 
 60,000,000 shipping containers that pass through United States 
 ports annually, with only 2 to 5 percent of that cargo actively 
 inspected.
 (17) Trade-based money laundering can only be combated 
 effectively if the intelligence community, law enforcement 
 agencies, the Department of State, the Department of Defense, 
 the Department of the Treasury, the Department of Homeland 
 Security, the Department of Justice, and the private sector 
 work together.
 (18) Drug-trafficking organizations, terrorist 
 organizations, and other transnational criminal organizations 
 disguise the proceeds of their illegal activities behind 
 sophisticated mechanisms that operate seamlessly between licit 
 and illicit trade and financial transactions, making it almost 
 impossible to address without international cooperation.
 (19) The United States has established Trade Transparency 
 Units with 18 partner countries, including with major drug-
 producing and transit countries, to facilitate the increased 
 exchange of import-export data to combat trade-based money 
 laundering.
 (b) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the activities of transnational criminal organizations 
 and their networks, and the means by which such organizations 
 and networks move and launder their ill-gotten gains, such as 
 through the use of illicit economies, illicit trade, and trade-
 based money laundering, pose a threat to the national interests 
 and national security of the United States and allies and 
 partners of the United States around the world;
 (2) in addition to considering the countering of illicit 
 economies, illicit trade, and trade-based money laundering as a 
 national priority and committing to detect, address, and 
 prevent such activities, the President should--
 (A) continue to assess, in the periodic national 
 risk assessments on money laundering, terrorist 
 financing, and proliferation financing conducted by the 
 Department of the Treasury, the ongoing risks of trade-
 based money laundering;
 (B) finalize the assessment described in the 
 Explanatory Statement accompanying the Financial 
 Services and General Government Appropriations Act, 
 2020 (division C of the Consolidated Appropriations 
 Act, 2020 (Public Law 116-93)), which directs the 
 Financial Crimes Enforcement Network of the Department 
 of the Treasury to thoroughly assess the risk that 
 trade-based money laundering and other forms of illicit 
 finance pose to national security;
 (C) work expeditiously to develop, finalize, and 
 execute a strategy, as described in section 6506 of the 
 Anti-Money Laundering Act of 2020 (title LXV of 
 division F of Public Law 116-283; 134 Stat. 4631), 
 drawing on the multiple instruments of United States 
 national power available, to counter--
 (i) the activities of transnational 
 criminal organizations, including illicit trade 
 and trade-based money laundering; and
 (ii) the illicit economies such 
 organizations operate in;
 (D) coordinate with international partners to 
 implement that strategy, exhorting those partners to 
 strengthen their approaches to combating transnational 
 criminal organizations; and
 (E) review that strategy on a biennial basis and 
 improve it as needed in order to most effectively 
 address illicit economies, illicit trade, and trade-
 based money laundering by exploring the use of emerging 
 technologies and other new avenues for interrupting and 
 putting an end to those activities; and
 (3) the Trade Transparency Unit program of the Department 
 of Homeland Security should take steps to strengthen its work, 
 including in countries that the Department of State has 
 identified as major money laundering jurisdictions under 
 section 489 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 
 2291h).

SEC. 5445. DISCLOSURE OF DISABILITY, VETERAN, AND MILITARY STATUS.

 Section 304(b)(4) of the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 1975 (12 
U.S.C. 2803(b)(4)) is amended by striking ``age,'' and inserting ``age, 
veteran and military status, disability status,''.

SEC. 5446. STRENGTHENING CYBERSECURITY FOR THE FINANCIAL SECTOR.

 (a) Regulation and Examination of Credit Union Organizations and 
Service Providers.--Section 206A of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 
U.S.C. 1786a) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ``that'' and 
 inserting ``an'';
 (2) in subsection (c)(2), by inserting after ``shall notify 
 the Board'' the following: ``, in a manner and method 
 prescribed by the Board,''; and
 (3) by striking subsection (f) and inserting the following:
 ``(f) Exercise of Authority.--To minimize duplicative efforts, 
prior to conducting any examination of a credit union organization 
under the authority provided to the Board under this section, the Board 
shall first seek to collect any information which the Board intends to 
acquire through such examination from--
 ``(1) any Federal regulatory agencies that supervise any 
 activity of that credit union organization; and
 ``(2) any Federal banking agency that supervises any other 
 person who maintains an ownership interest in that credit union 
 organization.''.
 (b) GAO Study on FHFA's Regulation of Service Providers.--
 (1) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States 
 shall carry out a study on the Federal Housing Finance Agency's 
 authority and regulation of service providers to its regulated 
 entities, including the Federal National Mortgage Association, 
 the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, and the Federal 
 Home Loan Banks.
 (2) Report.--Not later than the end of the 12-month period 
 beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
 Comptroller General shall issue a report to Congress 
 containing--
 (A) all findings and determinations made in 
 carrying out the study required under paragraph (1);
 (B) an analysis of the Federal Housing Finance 
 Agency's existing authority, how service providers to 
 the Federal Housing Finance Agency's regulated entities 
 are currently regulated, and risks to the regulated 
 entities associated with third-party service providers; 
 and
 (C) recommendations for legislative and 
 administrative action.

SEC. 5447. REVIEW OF IMF LOAN SURCHARGE POLICY.

 (a) Findings.--The Congress finds as follows:
 (1) The International Monetary Fund (in this section 
 referred to as the ``IMF'') imposes a surcharge, in addition to 
 standard interest and service fees, of 200 basis points on 
 outstanding credit provided through its General Resources 
 Account that exceeds 187.5 percent of the IMF country quota, 
 and an additional 100 basis points if that credit has been 
 outstanding for over 36 or 51 months, depending on the 
 facility.
 (2) According to the IMF, ``These level and time-based 
 surcharges are intended to help mitigate credit risk by 
 providing members with incentives to limit their demand for 
 Fund assistance and encourage timely repurchases while at the 
 same time generating income for the Fund to accumulate 
 precautionary balances.''.
 (3) According to a 2021 report by the European Network on 
 Debt and Development, surcharges increase the average cost of 
 borrowing from the IMF by over 64 percent for surcharged 
 countries. Surcharges increased Ukraine's borrowing costs on 
 its IMF lending program by nearly 27 percent, Jordan's by 72 
 percent, and Egypt's by over 104 percent.
 (4) As a result of Russia's invasion, the World Bank 
 predicts that Ukraine will experience an economic contraction 
 of 45 percent in 2022. Yet Ukraine is expected to pay the IMF 
 an estimated $483,000,000 in surcharges from 2021 through 2027.
 (5) The Ukraine Comprehensive Debt Payment Relief Act of 
 2022 (H.R.7081), which requires the Department of Treasury to 
 make efforts to secure debt relief for Ukraine, was passed by 
 the House of Representatives on May 11, 2022, with overwhelming 
 bipartisan support, by a vote of 362 Yeas to 56 Nays.
 (6) As a result of the war in Ukraine and other factors, 
 the World Bank predicted that global growth rates will slow to 
 2.9 percent in 2022, down nearly half from 2021. External 
 public debt of developing economies is at record levels, and 
 the World Bank, IMF, and United Nations have all warned of 
 coming defaults and a potential global debt crisis. As food and 
 energy prices rise, the World Food Program has estimated that 
 750,000 people are at immediate risk of starvation or death, 
 and 323,000,000 people may experience acute food insecurity 
 before the end of the year.
 (7) Since 2020, the number of countries paying surcharges 
 to the IMF has increased from 9 to 16. A December 2021 IMF 
 policy paper, notes that under the IMF's model-based World 
 Economic Outlook scenario ``the number of surcharge-paying 
 members would increase to 38 in FY 2024 and FY 2025'' and that 
 under the Fund's ``adverse scenario, the number of surcharge-
 paying members and the amount of surcharge income would 
 increase even more sharply''.
 (8) An April 2022 brief from the United Nations Global 
 Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance on the 
 impacts of the war in Ukraine on developing countries called 
 for the immediate suspension of surcharge payments for a 
 minimum of 2 years, because ``[s]urcharges do not make sense 
 during a global crisis since the need for more financing does 
 not stem from national conditions but from the global economy 
 shock''.
 (b) Review of Surcharge Policy at the International Monetary 
Fund.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States 
Executive Director at the International Monetary Fund to use the voice 
and vote of the United States to--
 (1) initiate an immediate review by the IMF of the 
 surcharge policy of the IMF to be completed, and its results 
 and underlying data published, within 365 days; and
 (2) suspend and waive surcharge payments during the 
 pendency of the review.
 (c) Components of the Review of Surcharge Policy.--The review 
referred to in subsection (b) shall include the following:
 (1) A borrower-by-borrower analysis of surcharges in terms 
 of cost and as a percentage of national spending on debt 
 service on IMF loans, food security, and health for the 5-year 
 period beginning at the start of the COVID-19 pandemic.
 (2) Evaluation of the policy's direct impact on--
 (A) disincentivizing large and prolonged reliance 
 on Fund credit;
 (B) mitigating the credit risks taken by the IMF;
 (C) improving borrower balance of payments and debt 
 sustainability, particularly during periods of 
 contraction, unrest, and pandemic;
 (D) promoting fiscally responsible policy reforms;
 (E) disincentivizing borrowers from seeking opaque 
 and potentially predatory bilateral loans; and
 (F) improving the ability of borrowers to repay 
 private creditors and access the private credit market.
 (3) Recommendations for--
 (A) Identifying alternative sources of funding for 
 the IMF's precautionary balances that prioritize stable 
 funding sources and equitable burden-sharing among IMF 
 members;
 (B) Determining whether the Fund should maintain, 
 reform, temporarily suspend or eliminate the use of 
 surcharges.
 (4) The review process must incorporate extensive 
 consultation with relevant experts, particularly those from 
 countries that are currently paying or have recently paid 
 surcharges. These experts should include government officials 
 responsible for overseeing economic development, social 
 services, and defense, United Nations officials, economic 
 research institutes, academics, and civil society 
 organizations.

SEC. 5448. GRANTS TO ELIGIBLE ENTITIES FOR ENHANCED PROTECTION OF 
 SENIOR INVESTORS AND SENIOR POLICYHOLDERS.

 (a) In General.--Section 989A of the Investor Protection and 
Securities Reform Act of 2010 (15 U.S.C. 5537) is amended to read as 
follows:

``SEC. 989A. GRANTS TO ELIGIBLE ENTITIES FOR ENHANCED PROTECTION OF 
 SENIOR INVESTORS AND SENIOR POLICYHOLDERS.

 ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means--
 ``(A) the securities commission (or any agency or 
 office performing like functions) of any State; and
 ``(B) the insurance department (or any agency or 
 office performing like functions) of any State.
 ``(2) Senior.--The term `senior' means any individual who 
 has attained the age of 62 years or older.
 ``(3) Senior financial fraud.--The term `senior financial 
 fraud' means a fraudulent or otherwise illegal, unauthorized, 
 or improper act or process of an individual, including a 
 caregiver or a fiduciary, that--
 ``(A) uses the resources of a senior for monetary 
 or personal benefit, profit, or gain;
 ``(B) results in depriving a senior of rightful 
 access to or use of benefits, resources, belongings, or 
 assets; or
 ``(C) is an action described in section 1348 of 
 title 18, United States Code, that is taken against a 
 senior.
 ``(4) Task force.--The term `task force' means the task 
 force established under subsection (b)(1).
 ``(b) Grant Program.--
 ``(1) Task force.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Commission shall establish a 
 task force to carry out the grant program under 
 paragraph (2).
 ``(B) Membership.--The task force shall consist of 
 the following members:
 ``(i) A Chair of the task force, who--
 ``(I) shall be appointed by the 
 Chairman of the Commission, in 
 consultation with the Commissioners of 
 the Commission; and
 ``(II) may be a representative of 
 the Office of the Investor Advocate of 
 the Commission, the Division of 
 Enforcement of the Commission, or such 
 other representative as the Commission 
 determines appropriate.
 ``(ii) If the Chair is not a representative 
 of the Office of the Investor Advocate of the 
 Commission, a representative of such Office.
 ``(iii) If the Chair is not a 
 representative of the Division of Enforcement 
 of the Commission, a representative of such 
 Division.
 ``(iv) Such other representatives as the 
 Commission determines appropriate.
 ``(C) Detail of executive agency employees.--Upon 
 the request of the Commission, the head of any Federal 
 agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the 
 personnel of that Federal agency to the Commission to 
 assist it in carrying out its functions under this 
 section. The detail of any such personnel shall be 
 without interruption or loss of civil service status or 
 privilege.
 ``(2) Grants.--The task force shall carry out a program 
 under which the task force shall make grants, on a competitive 
 basis, to eligible entities, which--
 ``(A) may use the grant funds--
 ``(i) to hire staff to identify, 
 investigate, and prosecute (through civil, 
 administrative, or criminal enforcement 
 actions) cases involving senior financial 
 fraud;
 ``(ii) to fund technology, equipment, and 
 training for regulators, prosecutors, and law 
 enforcement officers, in order to identify, 
 investigate, and prosecute cases involving 
 senior financial fraud;
 ``(iii) to provide educational materials 
 and training to seniors to increase awareness 
 and understanding of senior financial fraud;
 ``(iv) to develop comprehensive plans to 
 combat senior financial fraud; and
 ``(v) to enhance provisions of State law to 
 provide protection from senior financial fraud; 
 and
 ``(B) may not use the grant funds for any indirect 
 expense, such as rent, utilities, or any other general 
 administrative cost that is not directly related to the 
 purpose of the grant program.
 ``(3) Authority of task force.--In carrying out paragraph 
 (2), the task force--
 ``(A) may consult with staff of the Commission; and
 ``(B) shall make public all actions of the task 
 force relating to carrying out that paragraph.
 ``(c) Applications.--An eligible entity desiring a grant under this 
section shall submit an application to the task force, in such form and 
in such a manner as the task force may determine, that includes--
 ``(1) a proposal for activities to protect seniors from 
 senior financial fraud that are proposed to be funded using a 
 grant under this section, including--
 ``(A) an identification of the scope of the problem 
 of senior financial fraud in the applicable State;
 ``(B) a description of how the proposed activities 
 would--
 ``(i) protect seniors from senior financial 
 fraud, including by proactively identifying 
 victims of senior financial fraud;
 ``(ii) assist in the investigation and 
 prosecution of those committing senior 
 financial fraud; and
 ``(iii) discourage and reduce cases of 
 senior financial fraud; and
 ``(C) a description of how the proposed activities 
 would be coordinated with other State efforts; and
 ``(2) any other information that the task force determines 
 appropriate.
 ``(d) Performance Objectives; Reporting Requirements; Audits.--
 ``(1) In general.--The task force--
 ``(A) may establish such performance objectives and 
 reporting requirements for eligible entities receiving 
 a grant under this section as the task force determines 
 are necessary to carry out and assess the effectiveness 
 of the program under this section; and
 ``(B) shall require each eligible entity that 
 receives a grant under this section to submit to the 
 task force a detailed accounting of the use of grant 
 funds, which shall be submitted at such time, in such 
 form, and containing such information as the task force 
 may require.
 ``(2) Report.--Not later than 2 years, and again not later 
 than 5 years, after the date of the enactment of the Empowering 
 States to Protect Seniors from Bad Actors Act, the task force 
 shall submit to the Committee on Financial Services of the 
 House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, 
 and Urban Affairs of the Senate a report that--
 ``(A) specifies each recipient of a grant under 
 this section;
 ``(B) includes a description of the programs that 
 are supported by each such grant; and
 ``(C) includes an evaluation by the task force of 
 the effectiveness of such grants.
 ``(3) Audits.--The task force shall annually conduct an 
 audit of the program under this section to ensure that eligible 
 entities to which grants are made under that program are, for 
 the year covered by the audit, using grant funds for the 
 intended purposes of those funds.
 ``(e) Maximum Amount.--The amount of a grant to an eligible entity 
under this section may not exceed $500,000, which the task force shall 
adjust annually to reflect the percentage change in the Consumer Price 
Index for All Urban Consumers published by the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics of the Department of Labor.
 ``(f) Subgrants.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under 
this section may, in consultation with the task force, make a subgrant, 
as the eligible entity determines is necessary or appropriate--
 ``(1) to carry out the activities described in subsection 
 (b)(2)(A); and
 ``(2) which may not be used for any activity described in 
 subsection (b)(2)(B).
 ``(g) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $10,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2023 through 2028.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of 
the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act is 
amended by striking the item relating to section 989A and inserting the 
following:

``Sec. 989A. Grants to eligible entities for enhanced protection of 
 senior investors and senior 
 policyholders.''.

SEC. 5449. BANKING TRANSPARENCY FOR SANCTIONED PERSONS.

 (a) Report on Financial Services Benefitting State Sponsors of 
Terrorism, Human Rights Abusers, and Corrupt Officials.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, and every 180 days thereafter, the 
 Secretary of the Treasury shall issue a report to the 
 Committees on Financial Services and Foreign Affairs of the 
 House of Representatives and the Committees on Banking, 
 Housing, and Urban Affairs and Foreign Relations of the Senate 
 that includes--
 (A) a copy of any license issued by the Secretary 
 in the preceding 180 days that authorizes a financial 
 institution to provide financial services benefitting a 
 state sponsor of terrorism; and
 (B) a list of any foreign financial institutions 
 that, in the preceding 180 days, knowingly conducted a 
 significant transaction or transactions, directly or 
 indirectly, for a sanctioned person included on the 
 Department of the Treasury's Specially Designated 
 Nationals And Blocked Persons List who--
 (i) is owned or controlled by, or acts on 
 behalf of, the government of a state sponsor of 
 terrorism; or
 (ii) is designated pursuant to any of the 
 following:
 (I) Section 404 of the Russia and 
 Moldova Jackson-Vanik Repeal and Sergei 
 Magnitsky Rule of Law Accountability 
 Act of 2012 (Public Law 112208).
 (II) Subtitle F of title XII of the 
 National Defense Authorization Act for 
 Fiscal Year 2017 (Public Law 114-328, 
 the Global Magnitsky Human Rights 
 Accountability Act).
 (III) Executive Order No. 13818.
 (2) Form of report.--The report required under paragraph 
 (1) shall be submitted in unclassified form but may contain a 
 classified annex.
 (b) Waiver.--The Secretary of the Treasury may waive the 
requirements of subsection (a) with respect to a foreign financial 
institution described in paragraph (1)(B) of such subsection--
 (1) upon receiving credible assurances that the foreign 
 financial institution has ceased, or will imminently cease, to 
 knowingly conduct any significant transaction or transactions, 
 directly or indirectly, for a person described in clause (i) or 
 (ii) of such subparagraph (B); or
 (2) upon certifying to the Committees on Financial Services 
 and Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives and the 
 Committees on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs and Foreign 
 Relations of the Senate that the waiver is important to the 
 national interest of the United States, with an explanation of 
 the reasons therefor.
 (c) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
 (1) Financial institution.--The term ``financial 
 institution'' means a United States financial institution or a 
 foreign financial institution.
 (2) Foreign financial institution.--The term ``foreign 
 financial institution'' has the meaning given that term under 
 section 561.308 of title 31, Code of Federal Regulations.
 (3) Knowingly.--The term ``knowingly'' with respect to 
 conduct, a circumstance, or a result, means that a person has 
 actual knowledge, or should have known, of the conduct, the 
 circumstance, or the result.
 (4) United states financial institution.--The term ``United 
 States financial institution'' has the meaning given the term 
 ``U.S. financial institution'' under section 561.309 of title 
 31, Code of Federal Regulations.
 (d) Sunset.--The reporting requirement under this section shall 
terminate on the date that is the end of the 7-year period beginning on 
the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 5450. BUREAU SERVICEMEMBER AND VETERAN CREDIT REPORTING 
 OMBUDSPERSON.

 (a) In General.--Section 611(a) of the Fair Credit Reporting Act 
(15 U.S.C. 1681i(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(9) Bureau servicemember and veteran credit reporting 
 ombudsperson.--
 ``(A) In general.--Not later than 180 days after 
 the date of enactment of this paragraph, the Bureau 
 shall establish the position of servicemember and 
 veteran credit reporting ombudsperson, who shall carry 
 out the Bureau's responsibilities with respect to--
 ``(i) resolving persistent errors that are 
 not resolved in a timely manner by a consumer 
 reporting agency in connection with 
 servicemembers and veterans; and
 ``(ii) enhancing oversight of consumer 
 reporting agencies by--
 ``(I) advising the Director of the 
 Bureau, in consultation with the Office 
 of Enforcement and the Office of 
 Supervision of the Bureau, on any 
 potential violations of paragraph (5) 
 or any other applicable law by a 
 consumer reporting agency in connection 
 with servicemembers and veterans, 
 including appropriate corrective action 
 for such a violation; and
 ``(II) making referrals to the 
 Office of Supervision for supervisory 
 action or the Office of Enforcement for 
 enforcement action, as appropriate, in 
 response to violations of paragraph (5) 
 or any other applicable law by a 
 consumer reporting agency in connection 
 with servicemembers and veterans.
 ``(B) Consultation with veterans service 
 organizations.--The servicemember and veteran credit 
 reporting ombudsperson shall consult with veterans 
 service organizations in carrying out the duties of the 
 ombudsperson.
 ``(C) Report.--The ombudsperson shall submit to the 
 Committees on Financial Services and Veterans' Affairs 
 of the House of Representatives and the Committees on 
 Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs and Veterans' 
 Affairs of the Senate an annual report including 
 statistics and analysis on consumer complaints the 
 Bureau receives relating to consumer reports in 
 connection with servicemembers and veterans, as well as 
 a summary of the supervisory actions and enforcement 
 actions taken with respect to consumer reporting 
 agencies in connection with servicemembers and veterans 
 during the year covered by the report.''.
 (b) Discretionary Surplus Funds.--
 (1) In general.--The dollar amount specified under section 
 7(a)(3)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 289(a)(3)(A)) 
 is reduced by $18,000,000.
 (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) 
 shall take effect on September 30, 2032.

SEC. 5451. SENIOR INVESTOR TASKFORCE.

 (a) In General.--Section 4 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 
(15 U.S.C. 78d) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(k) Senior Investor Taskforce.--
 ``(1) Establishment.--There is established within the 
 Commission the Senior Investor Taskforce (in this subsection 
 referred to as the `Taskforce').
 ``(2) Director of the taskforce.--The head of the Taskforce 
 shall be the Director, who shall--
 ``(A) report directly to the Chairman; and
 ``(B) be appointed by the Chairman, in consultation 
 with the Commission, from among individuals--
 ``(i) currently employed by the Commission 
 or from outside of the Commission; and
 ``(ii) having experience in advocating for 
 the interests of senior investors.
 ``(3) Staffing.--The Chairman shall ensure that--
 ``(A) the Taskforce is staffed sufficiently to 
 carry out fully the requirements of this subsection; 
 and
 ``(B) such staff shall include individuals from the 
 Division of Enforcement, Office of Compliance 
 Inspections and Examinations, and Office of Investor 
 Education and Advocacy.
 ``(4) No compensation for members of taskforce.--All 
 members of the Taskforce appointed under paragraph (2) or (3) 
 shall serve without compensation in addition to that received 
 for their services as officers or employees of the United 
 States.
 ``(5) Minimizing duplication of efforts.--In organizing and 
 staffing the Taskforce, the Chairman shall take such actions as 
 may be necessary to minimize the duplication of efforts within 
 the divisions and offices described under paragraph (3)(B) and 
 any other divisions, offices, or taskforces of the Commission.
 ``(6) Functions of the taskforce.--The Taskforce shall--
 ``(A) identify challenges that senior investors 
 encounter, including problems associated with financial 
 exploitation and cognitive decline;
 ``(B) identify areas in which senior investors 
 would benefit from changes in the regulations of the 
 Commission or the rules of self-regulatory 
 organizations;
 ``(C) coordinate, as appropriate, with other 
 offices within the Commission, other taskforces that 
 may be established within the Commission, self-
 regulatory organizations, and the Elder Justice 
 Coordinating Council; and
 ``(D) consult, as appropriate, with State 
 securities and law enforcement authorities, State 
 insurance regulators, and other Federal agencies.
 ``(7) Report.--The Taskforce, in coordination, as 
 appropriate, with the Office of the Investor Advocate and self-
 regulatory organizations, and in consultation, as appropriate, 
 with State securities and law enforcement authorities, State 
 insurance regulators, and Federal agencies, shall issue a 
 report every 2 years to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and 
 Urban Affairs and the Special Committee on Aging of the Senate 
 and the Committee on Financial Services of the House of 
 Representatives, the first of which shall not be issued until 
 after the report described in section 5403(b) of the National 
 Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023 has been issued 
 and considered by the Taskforce, containing--
 ``(A) appropriate statistical information and full 
 and substantive analysis;
 ``(B) a summary of recent trends and innovations 
 that have impacted the investment landscape for senior 
 investors;
 ``(C) a summary of regulatory initiatives that have 
 concentrated on senior investors and industry practices 
 related to senior investors;
 ``(D) key observations, best practices, and areas 
 needing improvement, involving senior investors 
 identified during examinations, enforcement actions, 
 and investor education outreach;
 ``(E) a summary of the most serious issues 
 encountered by senior investors, including issues 
 involving financial products and services;
 ``(F) an analysis with regard to existing policies 
 and procedures of brokers, dealers, investment 
 advisers, and other market participants related to 
 senior investors and senior investor-related topics and 
 whether these policies and procedures need to be 
 further developed or refined;
 ``(G) recommendations for such changes to the 
 regulations, guidance, and orders of the Commission and 
 self-regulatory organizations and such legislative 
 actions as may be appropriate to resolve problems 
 encountered by senior investors; and
 ``(H) any other information, as determined 
 appropriate by the Director of the Taskforce.
 ``(8) Request for reports.--The Taskforce shall make any 
 report issued under paragraph (7) available to a Member of 
 Congress who requests such a report.
 ``(9) Sunset.--The Taskforce shall terminate after the end 
 of the 10-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of 
 this subsection.
 ``(10) Senior investor defined.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term `senior investor' means an investor over 
 the age of 65.
 ``(11) Use of existing funds.--The Commission shall use 
 existing funds to carry out this subsection.''.
 (b) GAO Study.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United 
 States shall submit to Congress and the Senior Investor 
 Taskforce the results of a study of financial exploitation of 
 senior citizens.
 (2) Contents.--The study required under paragraph (1) shall 
 include information with respect to--
 (A) economic costs of the financial exploitation of 
 senior citizens--
 (i) associated with losses by victims that 
 were incurred as a result of the financial 
 exploitation of senior citizens;
 (ii) incurred by State and Federal 
 agencies, law enforcement and investigatory 
 agencies, public benefit programs, public 
 health programs, and other public programs as a 
 result of the financial exploitation of senior 
 citizens;
 (iii) incurred by the private sector as a 
 result of the financial exploitation of senior 
 citizens; and
 (iv) any other relevant costs that--
 (I) result from the financial 
 exploitation of senior citizens; and
 (II) the Comptroller General 
 determines are necessary and 
 appropriate to include in order to 
 provide Congress and the public with a 
 full and accurate understanding of the 
 economic costs resulting from the 
 financial exploitation of senior 
 citizens in the United States;
 (B) frequency of senior financial exploitation and 
 correlated or contributing factors--
 (i) information about percentage of senior 
 citizens financially exploited each year; and
 (ii) information about factors contributing 
 to increased risk of exploitation, including 
 such factors as race, social isolation, income, 
 net worth, religion, region, occupation, 
 education, home-ownership, illness, and loss of 
 spouse; and
 (C) policy responses and reporting of senior 
 financial exploitation--
 (i) the degree to which financial 
 exploitation of senior citizens unreported to 
 authorities;
 (ii) the reasons that financial 
 exploitation may be unreported to authorities;
 (iii) to the extent that suspected elder 
 financial exploitation is currently being 
 reported--
 (I) information regarding which 
 Federal, State, and local agencies are 
 receiving reports, including adult 
 protective services, law enforcement, 
 industry, regulators, and professional 
 licensing boards;
 (II) information regarding what 
 information is being collected by such 
 agencies; and
 (III) information regarding the 
 actions that are taken by such agencies 
 upon receipt of the report and any 
 limits on the agencies' ability to 
 prevent exploitation, such as 
 jurisdictional limits, a lack of 
 expertise, resource challenges, or 
 limiting criteria with regard to the 
 types of victims they are permitted to 
 serve;
 (iv) an analysis of gaps that may exist in 
 empowering Federal, State, and local agencies 
 to prevent senior exploitation or respond 
 effectively to suspected senior financial 
 exploitation; and
 (v) an analysis of the legal hurdles that 
 prevent Federal, State, and local agencies from 
 effectively partnering with each other and 
 private professionals to effectively respond to 
 senior financial exploitation.
 (3) Senior citizen defined.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term ``senior citizen'' means an individual 
 over the age of 65.

SEC. 5452. MILITARY SERVICE QUESTION.

 (a) In General.--Subpart A of part 2 of subtitle A of title VIII of 
the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992 (12 U.S.C. 4541 et 
seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 1329. UNIFORM RESIDENTIAL LOAN APPLICATION.

 ``The Director shall, not later than 6 months after the date of the 
enactment of this section, require each enterprise to--
 ``(1) include a military service question on the form known 
 as the Uniform Residential Loan Application; and
 ``(2) position such question above the signature line of 
 the Uniform Residential Loan Application.''.
 (b) Rulemaking.--The Director of the Federal Housing Finance Agency 
shall, not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this 
section, issue a rule to carry out the amendment made by this section.

SEC. 5453. PROHIBITION ON TRADING AHEAD BY MARKET MAKERS.

 (a) In General.--Section 15 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 
(15 U.S.C. 78o) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(p) Prohibition on Trading Ahead by Market Makers.--
 ``(1) In general.--With respect to a person acting in the 
 capacity of a market maker, if the person accepts an order with 
 respect to a security from a customer, including a broker or 
 dealer--
 ``(A) the market maker has a duty of trust and 
 loyalty to the customer arising from the receipt of 
 such order; and
 ``(B) the information in such order is material, 
 non-public information that may be used only in 
 furtherance of executing such customer's order.
 ``(2) Annual ceo certification.--The Chief Executive 
 Officer of each person that acts in the capacity of a market 
 maker shall issue an annual certification to the Commission, in 
 such form and manner as the Commission may prescribe by rule, 
 that certifies that--
 ``(A) the person has performed reasonable due 
 diligence during the reporting period to ensure that 
 the person has not violated the duty of trust and 
 loyalty described under paragraph (1)(A) or used the 
 information described under paragraph (1)(B) in a 
 prohibited fashion; and
 ``(B) the person has not violated the duty of trust 
 and loyalty described under paragraph (1)(A) or used 
 the information described under paragraph (1)(B) in a 
 prohibited fashion during the reporting period.
 ``(3) Personal liability.--
 ``(A) Fine for individual violations.--Any 
 associated person of a market maker who knowingly and 
 willfully causes the market maker to violate paragraph 
 (1) (or who directs another agent or associated person 
 of the market maker to commit such a violation or 
 engage in such acts that result in the associated 
 person being personally unjustly enriched) shall be 
 fined in an amount equal to the greater of--
 ``(i) two times the amount of profit 
 realized by reason of such violation; or
 ``(ii) $50,000.
 ``(B) Course of conduct.--Any associated person of 
 a market maker who knowingly and willfully causes the 
 market maker to engage in a course of conduct of 
 knowingly and willfully violating paragraph (1) (or who 
 directs another agent or associated person of the 
 market maker to commit such a violation or engage in 
 such acts that result in the associated person being 
 personally unjustly enriched) shall be--
 ``(i) fined in an amount not to exceed 200 
 percent of the compensation (including stock 
 options awarded as compensation) received by 
 such associated person from the market maker--
 ``(I) during the time period in 
 which the violations occurred; or
 ``(II) in the one- to three-year 
 time period preceding the date on which 
 the violations were discovered; and
 ``(ii) imprisoned for not more than 5 
 years.
 ``(C) Associated person defined.--The term 
 `associated person' means an associated person of a 
 broker or dealer.
 ``(4) Rulemaking.--Not later than the end of the 90-day 
 period beginning on the date of enactment of this subsection, 
 the Commission--
 ``(A) shall issue rules to carry out this 
 subsection; and
 ``(B) may provide exemptions from the requirements 
 of this subsection, by rule, if the Commission 
 determines that such exemptions would promote market 
 integrity and are necessary or appropriate in the 
 public interest or for the protection of investors.''.
 (b) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of the Congress that the 
prohibitions added by this section should complement, and not replace, 
existing rules of self-regulatory organizations applicable to their 
members, including brokers and dealers.
 (c) Effective Date.--Section 15(p) of the Securities Exchange Act 
of 1934, as added by subsection (a), shall take effect after the end of 
the 180-day period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 5454. SECURING AMERICA'S VACCINES FOR EMERGENCIES.

 (a) Securing Essential Medical Materials.--
 (1) Statement of policy.--Section 2(b) of the Defense 
 Production Act of 1950 (50 U.S.C. 4502) is amended--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (3) through (8) as 
 paragraphs (4) through (9), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following:
 ``(3) authorities under this Act should be used when 
 appropriate to ensure the availability of medical materials 
 essential to national defense, including through measures 
 designed to secure the drug supply chain, and taking into 
 consideration the importance of United States competitiveness, 
 scientific leadership and cooperation, and innovative 
 capacity;''.
 (2) Strengthening domestic capability.--Section 107 of the 
 Defense Production Act of 1950 (50 U.S.C. 4517) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a), by inserting ``(including 
 medical materials)'' after ``materials''; and
 (B) in subsection (b)(1), by inserting ``(including 
 medical materials such as drugs, devices, and 
 biological products to diagnose, cure, mitigate, treat, 
 or prevent disease that are essential to national 
 defense)'' after ``essential materials''.
 (3) Strategy on securing supply chains for medical 
 materials.--Title I of the Defense Production Act of 1950 (50 
 U.S.C. 4511 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following:

``SEC. 109. STRATEGY ON SECURING SUPPLY CHAINS FOR MEDICAL MATERIALS.

 ``(a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this section, the President, in consultation with the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Secretary of Commerce, the 
Secretary of Homeland Security, and the Secretary of Defense, shall 
transmit a strategy to the appropriate Members of Congress that 
includes the following:
 ``(1) A detailed plan to use the authorities under this 
 title and title III, or any other provision of law, to ensure 
 the supply of medical materials (including drugs, devices, and 
 biological products (as that term is defined in section 351 of 
 the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262)) to diagnose, 
 cure, mitigate, treat, or prevent disease) essential to 
 national defense, to the extent necessary for the purposes of 
 this Act.
 ``(2) An analysis of vulnerabilities to existing supply 
 chains for such medical materials, and recommendations to 
 address the vulnerabilities.
 ``(3) Measures to be undertaken by the President to 
 diversify such supply chains, as appropriate and as required 
 for national defense.
 ``(4) A discussion of--
 ``(A) any significant effects resulting from the 
 plan and measures described in this subsection on the 
 production, cost, or distribution of biological 
 products (as that term is defined in section 351 of the 
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262)) or any other 
 devices or drugs (as defined under the Federal Food, 
 Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.));
 ``(B) a timeline to ensure that essential 
 components of the supply chain for medical materials 
 are not under the exclusive control of a foreign 
 government in a manner that the President determines 
 could threaten the national defense of the United 
 States; and
 ``(C) efforts to mitigate any risks resulting from 
 the plan and measures described in this subsection to 
 United States competitiveness, scientific leadership, 
 and innovative capacity, including efforts to cooperate 
 and proactively engage with United States allies.
 ``(b) Progress Report.--Following submission of the strategy under 
subsection (a), the President shall submit to the appropriate Members 
of Congress an annual progress report until September 30, 2025, 
evaluating the implementation of the strategy, and may include updates 
to the strategy as appropriate. The strategy and progress reports shall 
be submitted in unclassified form but may contain a classified annex.
 ``(c) Appropriate Members of Congress.--The term `appropriate 
Members of Congress' means the Speaker, majority leader, and minority 
leader of the House of Representatives, the majority leader and 
minority leader of the Senate, the Chairman and Ranking Member of the 
Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives, the 
Chairman and Ranking Member of the Committee on Financial Services of 
the House of Representatives, the Chairman and Ranking Member of the 
Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate, and the 
Chairman and Ranking Member of the Committee on Health, Education, 
Labor, and Pensions of the Senate.''.
 (b) Investment in Supply Chain Security.--
 (1) In general.--Section 303 of the Defense Production Act 
 of 1950 (50 U.S.C. 4533) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following:
 ``(h) Investment in Supply Chain Security.--
 ``(1) In general.--In addition to other authorities in this 
 title, the President may make available to an eligible entity 
 described in paragraph (2) payments to increase the security of 
 supply chains and supply chain activities, if the President 
 certifies to Congress not less than 30 days before making such 
 a payment that the payment is critical to meet national defense 
 requirements of the United States.
 ``(2) Eligible entity.--An eligible entity described in 
 this paragraph is an entity that--
 ``(A) is organized under the laws of the United 
 States or any jurisdiction within the United States; 
 and
 ``(B) produces--
 ``(i) one or more critical components;
 ``(ii) critical technology; or
 ``(iii) one or more products or raw 
 materials for the security of supply chains or 
 supply chain activities.
 ``(3) Definitions.--In this subsection, the terms `supply 
 chain' and `supply chain activities' have the meanings given 
 those terms by the President by regulation.''.
 (2) Regulations.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall 
 prescribe regulations setting forth definitions for the 
 terms ``supply chain'' and ``supply chain activities'' 
 for the purposes of section 303(h) of the Defense 
 Production Act of 1950 (50 U.S.C. 4533(h)), as added by 
 paragraph (1).
 (B) Scope of definitions.--The definitions required 
 by subparagraph (A)--
 (i) shall encompass--
 (I) the organization, people, 
 activities, information, and resources 
 involved in the delivery and operation 
 of a product or service used by the 
 Government; or
 (II) critical infrastructure as 
 defined in Presidential Policy 
 Directive 21 (February 12, 2013; 
 relating to critical infrastructure 
 security and resilience); and
 (ii) may include variations as determined 
 necessary and appropriate by the President for 
 purposes of national defense.

SEC. 5455. SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS EXCHANGE PROHIBITION.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of the Treasury may not engage in 
any transaction involving the exchange of Special Drawing Rights issued 
by the International Monetary Fund that are held by the Russian 
Federation or Belarus.
 (b) Advocacy.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall--
 (1) vigorously advocate that the governments of the member 
 countries of the International Monetary Fund, to the extent 
 that the member countries issue freely usable currencies, 
 prohibit transactions involving the exchange of Special Drawing 
 Rights held by the Russian Federation or Belarus; and
 (2) direct the United States Executive Director at each 
 international financial institution (as defined in section 
 1701(c)(2) of the International Financial Institutions Act) to 
 use the voice and vote of the United States to oppose the 
 provision of financial assistance to the Russian Federation and 
 Belarus, except to address basic human needs of the civilian 
 population.
 (c) Termination.--The preceding provisions of this section shall 
have no force or effect on the earlier of--
 (1) the date that is 5 years after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act; or
 (2) 30 days after the date that the President reports to 
 the Congress that the governments of the Russian Federation and 
 Belarus have ceased destabilizing activities with respect to 
 the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
 (d) Waiver.--The President may waive the application of this 
section if the President reports to the Congress that the waiver is in 
the national interest of the United States and includes an explanation 
of the reasons therefor.

SEC. 5456. PROHIBITION ON INSIDER TRADING.

 (a) In General.--The Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78a 
et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 16 (15 U.S.C. 78p) the 
following:

``SEC. 16A. PROHIBITION ON INSIDER TRADING.

 ``(a) Prohibition Against Trading Securities While Aware of 
Material, Nonpublic Information.--It shall be unlawful for any person, 
directly or indirectly, to purchase, sell, or enter into, or cause the 
purchase or sale of, or entry into, any security, security-based swap, 
or security-based swap agreement if that person, at the time the person 
takes such an action--
 ``(1) has access to information relating to such security, 
 security-based swap, or security-based swap agreement that is 
 material and nonpublic and is aware (including if the person 
 consciously avoids being aware), or recklessly disregards, that 
 such information is material and nonpublic; and
 ``(2) is aware (including if the person consciously avoids 
 being aware), or recklessly disregards, that--
 ``(A) the information described in paragraph (1) 
 has been obtained wrongfully; or
 ``(B) the purchase, sale, or entry would constitute 
 wrongful trading on the information described in 
 paragraph (1).
 ``(b) Prohibition Against the Wrongful Communication of Certain 
Material, Nonpublic Information.--It shall be unlawful for any person, 
the purchase or sale of a security or security-based swap (or entry 
into a security-based swap agreement) by which would violate subsection 
(a), to wrongfully communicate material, nonpublic information relating 
to that security, security-based swap, or security-based swap agreement 
to any other person, if--
 ``(1) the person communicating the information, at the time 
 the person communicates the information, is aware (including if 
 the person consciously avoids being aware), or recklessly 
 disregards, that such communication would result in such a 
 purchase, sale, or entry; and
 ``(2) any recipient of the wrongfully communicated 
 information purchases, sells, or causes the purchase or sale of 
 any security or security-based swap, or enters into (or causes 
 the entry into) any security-based swap agreement, based on 
 that communication.
 ``(c) Standard and Knowledge Requirement.--
 ``(1) Standard.--For purposes of this section, trading 
 while aware of material, nonpublic information under subsection 
 (a), or communicating material, nonpublic information under 
 subsection (b), is wrongful only if the information has been 
 obtained by, or the communication or trading on the information 
 would constitute, directly or indirectly--
 ``(A) theft, conversion, bribery, 
 misrepresentation, espionage (through electronic or 
 other means), or other unauthorized access of the 
 information;
 ``(B) a violation of any Federal law protecting--
 ``(i) computer data; or
 ``(ii) the intellectual property or privacy 
 of computer users;
 ``(C) misappropriation from a source of the 
 information; or
 ``(D) a breach of any fiduciary duty to 
 shareholders of an issuer for a direct or indirect 
 personal benefit, including--
 ``(i) an existing or future pecuniary gain 
 or reputational benefit; or
 ``(ii) a gift of confidential information 
 to a relative or friend.
 ``(2) Knowledge requirement.--It shall not be necessary 
 that a person trading while aware of information in violation 
 of subsection (a), or making a communication in violation of 
 subsection (b), knows the specific means by which the 
 information was obtained or communicated or traded on, or the 
 specific benefit described in paragraph (1)(D) that was 
 received, paid, or promised by or to any person in the chain of 
 communication, if the person trading while aware of the 
 information or making the communication, as applicable, at the 
 time the person makes the trade or communicates the 
 information, is aware (including if the person consciously 
 avoids being aware), or recklessly disregards, that the 
 information was wrongfully obtained, wrongfully traded on, or 
 wrongfully communicated.
 ``(d) Affirmative Defenses.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Commission may, by rule or by order, 
 exempt any person, security, or transaction, or any class of 
 persons, securities, or transactions, from any or all of the 
 provisions of this section, upon such terms and conditions as 
 the Commission considers necessary or appropriate in 
 furtherance of the purposes of this title.
 ``(2) Rule 10b5-1 compliant transactions.--The prohibitions 
 of this section shall not apply to any transaction that 
 satisfies the requirements of section 240.10b5-1 of title 17, 
 Code of Federal Regulations, or any successor regulation.
 ``(e) Rule of Construction.--The rights and remedies provided by 
this section shall be in addition to any and all other rights and 
remedies that may exist at law or in equity (without regard to whether 
such a right or remedy is provided under this Act) with respect to an 
action by a person to--
 ``(1) purchase, sell, or enter into a security, security-
 based swap, or security-based swap agreement while aware of 
 material, nonpublic information; or
 ``(2) communicate material, nonpublic information relating 
 to a security, security-based swap, or security-based swap 
 agreement.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--The Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 
U.S.C. 78a et seq.) is amended--
 (1) in section 3(a)(78)(A) (15 U.S.C. 78c(a)(78)(A)), by 
 inserting ``16A,'' after ``16,'';
 (2) in section 21(d)(2) (15 U.S.C. 78u(d)(2)), by striking 
 ``or the rules or regulations thereunder'' and inserting ``, 
 section 16A of this title, or the rules or regulations under 
 either such section'';
 (3) in section 21A (15 U.S.C. 78u-1)--
 (A) in subsection (g)(1), by striking ``section 
 10(b) and Rule 10b-5 thereunder'' and inserting 
 ``section 10(b), Rule 10b-5 thereunder, and section 
 16A''; and
 (B) in subsection (h)(1), by striking ``section 
 10(b), and Rule 10b-5 thereunder'' and inserting 
 ``section 10(b), Rule 10b-5 thereunder, and section 
 16A''; and
 (4) in section 21C(f) (15 U.S.C. 78u-3(f)), by striking 
 ``or the rules or regulations thereunder'' and inserting ``, 
 section 16A, or the rules or regulations under either such 
 section''.

SEC. 5457. COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT DISASTER RECOVERY PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--Title I of the Housing and Community Development 
Act of 1974 is amended--
 (1) in section 101(c) (42 U.S.C. 5301(c))--
 (A) in paragraph (8), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in paragraph (9), by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (9) and before the 
 undesignated matter at the end the following:
 ``(10) in the case of grants awarded under section 123, the 
 recovery from disasters and efforts to mitigate the effects of 
 future disasters.'';
 (2) in section 102(a) (42 U.S.C. 5302(a))--
 (A) in paragraph (20)(A), by inserting before the 
 last sentence the following: ``The term `persons of 
 middle income' means families and individuals whose 
 incomes exceed 80 percent, but do not exceed 120 
 percent, of the median income of the area involved, as 
 determined by the Secretary with adjustments for 
 smaller and larger families.''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(25) The term `major disaster' has the meaning given such 
 term in section 102 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief 
 and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5122).'';
 (3) in section 106(c)(4) (42 U.S.C. 5306(c)(4))--
 (A) in subparagraph (A)--
 (i) by striking ``declared by the President 
 under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief 
 and Emergency Assistance Act''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``major'' before 
 ``disaster, any amounts'';
 (B) in subparagraph (C), by inserting ``major'' 
 before ``disaster''; and
 (C) in subparagraph (F), by inserting ``major'' 
 before ``disaster'';
 (4) in section 122 (42 U.S.C. 5321)), by striking 
 ``disaster under title IV of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster 
 Relief and Emergency Assistance Act'' and inserting ``major 
 disaster''; and
 (5) by adding at the end the following new sections:

``SEC. 123. CDBG-DISASTER RECOVERY ASSISTANCE.

 ``(a) Authority; Use.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may provide assistance 
 under this section to States, including Puerto Rico, units of 
 general local government, and Indian tribes for necessary 
 expenses for activities authorized under this title related to 
 disaster relief, resiliency, long-term recovery, restoration of 
 infrastructure and housing, mitigation, and economic 
 revitalization in the most impacted and distressed areas (as 
 such term shall be defined by the Secretary by regulation) 
 resulting from a major disaster declared pursuant to the Robert 
 T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 
 U.S.C. 5121 et seq.).
 ``(2) Authorization of appropriations.--For purposes of 
 assistance under this section, there are authorized to be 
 appropriated and made available in the Community Development 
 Block Grant Declared Disaster Recovery Fund established under 
 section 124, such sums as are necessary to respond to current 
 or future disasters, which shall remain available until 
 expended.
 ``(b) Allocation; Coordination.--
 ``(1) Allocation amounts.--The Secretary shall annually 
 establish and publish on its website an unmet needs threshold 
 for most impacted and distressed areas resulting from a major 
 disaster that shall result in a grant under this section. In 
 determining the amount allocated under this section for any 
 grantee, the Secretary shall make allocations based on the best 
 available data on unmet recover needs and include an additional 
 amount, as determined by the Secretary, for mitigation, based 
 on the best available research, the type of disaster, and such 
 amounts awarded for mitigation for similar types of disasters 
 in prior years. Such data may include information from the 
 Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Small business 
 Administration, and any other relevant Federal, State, or local 
 agency, and data from the Bureau of the Census to assess the 
 unmet needs of both homeowners and renters.
 ``(2) Deadlines for allocation.--Except as provided in 
 paragraph (3), for any major disaster meeting the most impacted 
 and distressed unmet need threshold requirements in paragraph 
 (1), the Secretary shall allocate funds available to a grantee 
 for assistance under this section within 60 days of the date of 
 a major disaster declaration or 60 days from when sufficient 
 funds become available to make the allocation.
 ``(3) Inapplicability of deadlines based on insufficient 
 information.--The deadlines under paragraph (2) for allocation 
 of funds shall not apply in the case of funds made available 
 for assistance under this section if Federal Emergency 
 Management Agency has not made sufficient information available 
 to the Secretary regarding relevant unmet recovery needs to 
 make allocations in accordance with such deadlines. The 
 Secretary shall notify the Congress of progress on or delay in 
 receiving the necessary information within 60 days following 
 declaration of such a major disaster and monthly thereafter 
 until all necessary information is received.
 ``(4) Obligation of amounts by the secretary.--Subject to 
 subsection (c)(1), the Secretary shall provide for the 
 disbursement of the amounts allocated for a grantee, but shall 
 require the grantee to be in substantial compliance with the 
 requirements of this section before each such disbursement.
 ``(5) Coordination of disaster benefits and data with other 
 federal agencies.--
 ``(A) Coordination of data.--The Secretary shall 
 coordinate with other agencies to obtain data on 
 recovery needs, including the Administrator of the 
 Federal Emergency Management Agency and the 
 Administrator of the Small Business Administration, and 
 other agencies when necessary regarding disaster 
 benefits.
 ``(B) Coordination with fema.--The Secretary shall 
 share with the Administrator of the Federal Emergency 
 Management Agency, and make publicly available (with 
 such redactions necessary to protect personally 
 identifiable information), all data collected, 
 possessed, or analyzed during the course of a disaster 
 recovery for which assistance is provided under this 
 section. Notwithstanding section 552a of title 5, 
 U.S.C., or any other law, the Secretary may make data 
 transfers pertaining to grants under this section with 
 the FEMA Administrator, grantees, and academic and 
 research institutions described in section 123(l)(3), 
 which transfers may disclose information about an 
 individual without the individual's written consent, 
 including the use and retention of this data for 
 computer matching programs to assess disaster recovery 
 needs and to prevent the duplication of benefits and 
 other waste, fraud, and abuse; provided, that the 
 Secretary shall enter a data sharing agreement before 
 sharing or receiving any information under transfers 
 authorized by this section. The data sharing agreements 
 must, in the determination of the Secretary, include 
 measures adequate to safeguard the privacy and 
 personally identifying information of individuals. The 
 data the Secretary shares with the Administrator shall 
 include--
 ``(i) all data on damage caused by the 
 disaster;
 ``(ii) information on how any Federal 
 assistance provided in connection with the 
 disaster is expended; and
 ``(iii) information regarding the effect of 
 the disaster on education, transportation 
 capabilities and dependence, housing needs, 
 health care capacity, and displacement of 
 persons.
 ``(C) Requirements regarding eligibility for direct 
 assistance and duplication of benefits.--
 ``(i) Compliance.--Funds made available 
 under this subsection shall be used in 
 accordance with section 312 of the Robert T. 
 Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency 
 Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5155), as amended by 
 section 1210 of the Disaster Recovery Reform 
 Act of 2018 (division D, Public Law 115-254), 
 and such rules as may be prescribed under such 
 section.
 ``(ii) Priority.--Households having the 
 lowest incomes shall be prioritized for direct 
 assistance under this subsection until all 
 unmet needs are satisfied for families having 
 an income up to 120 percent of the median for 
 the area.
 ``(D) Treatment of duplicative benefits.--In any 
 case in which a grantee provides assistance that 
 duplicates benefits available to a person for the same 
 purpose from another source, the grantee itself shall 
 either (i) be subject to remedies for noncompliance 
 under section 111, or (ii) bear responsibility for 
 absorbing such cost of duplicative benefits and 
 returning an amount equal to any duplicative benefits 
 paid to the grantee's funds available for use under 
 this section or to the Community Development Block 
 Grant Declared Disaster Recovery Fund under section 
 124, unless the Secretary issues a public determination 
 by publication in the Federal Register that it is not 
 in the best interest of the Federal Government to 
 pursue such remedies based on hardships identified in 
 subparagraph (E) or other reasons.
 ``(E) Waiver of recoupment.--A grantee of 
 assistance from funds made available for use under this 
 section may request a waiver from the Secretary of any 
 recoupment by the Secretary of such funds for amounts 
 owed by persons who have received such assistance from 
 such funds and who have been defrauded, or after 
 receiving assistance, have filed for bankruptcy, gone 
 through a foreclosure procedure on property that 
 received such assistance, or are deceased. If the 
 grantee self-certifies to the Secretary in such request 
 that it has verified that the individual conditions of 
 each person it is requesting a waiver for meets one of 
 the conditions specified in the preceding sentence, the 
 Secretary may grant such waivers on the basis of 
 grantee self-certification, issue a public 
 determination by publication in the Federal Register 
 that it is not in the best interest of the Federal 
 Government to pursue such recoupment, and may conduct 
 oversight to verify grantee self-certification and 
 subject the grantee to remedies for noncompliance for 
 any amounts that have not met such requirements.
 ``(F) Protection of personally identifiable 
 information.--In carrying out this paragraph, the 
 Secretary and the grantee shall take such actions as 
 may be necessary to ensure that personally identifiable 
 information regarding recipients of assistance provided 
 from funds made available under this section is not 
 made publicly available by the Department of Housing 
 and Urban Development or any agency with which 
 information is shared pursuant to this paragraph.
 ``(c) Plan for Use of Assistance.--
 ``(1) Requirement.--Not later than 90 days after the 
 allocation pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of all of the funds 
 made available by an appropriations Act for assistance under 
 this section and before the Secretary obligates any of such 
 funds for a grantee, the grantee shall submit a plan to the 
 Secretary for approval detailing the proposed use of all funds, 
 which shall include, at a minimum--
 ``(A) criteria for eligibility for each proposed 
 use of funds, including eligibility limits on income 
 and geography, and a description of how each proposed 
 use of such funds will comply with all civil rights and 
 fair housing laws and will address disaster relief, 
 resiliency, long-term recovery, restoration of 
 infrastructure and housing, hazard mitigation, and 
 economic revitalization in the most impacted and 
 distressed areas, including, as appropriate, assistance 
 for the benefit of impacted households experiencing 
 homelessness as defined by section 103 of the McKinney-
 Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11302) or at 
 risk of homelessness as defined by section 401 of such 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 11360);
 ``(B) an agreement to share data, disaggregated by 
 the smallest census tract, block group, or block 
 possible for the data set, with Federal agencies and 
 other providers of disaster relief, which shall include 
 information the grantee has regarding the matters 
 described in subsection (b)(4)(B);
 ``(C) identification of officials and offices 
 responsible for administering such funds and processes 
 and procedures for identifying and recovering duplicate 
 benefits;
 ``(D) for grantees other than Indian tribes, a plan 
 for compliance with the Fair Housing Act, which may 
 include, at the election of the grantee, providing for 
 partnerships with local fair housing organizations and 
 funding set-aside for local fair housing organizations 
 to handle complaints relating to assistance with 
 amounts made available for use under this section; and
 ``(E) a plan to provide for the funding and 
 delivery of--
 ``(i) case management services to assist 
 disaster-impacted residents in identifying, 
 understanding, and accessing available 
 assistance; and
 ``(ii) housing counseling services through 
 housing counseling agencies approved by the 
 Secretary to assist disaster-impacted residents 
 with mortgage assistance, housing 
 affordability, homeownership, tenancy, avoiding 
 foreclosure and eviction, and other housing 
 counseling topics;
 ``(F) a plan for addressing displacement or 
 relocation caused by activities performed pursuant to 
 this section,
 such a plan shall set forth how housing counseling 
 services will be delivered in coordination with case 
 management services; and
 ``(G) a plan for addressing displacement or 
 relocation caused by activities performed pursuant to 
 this section.
 ``(2) Implementation funding.--To speed recovery, the 
 Secretary may award a portion of a grant for implementation 
 purposes under this section at the time the Secretary announces 
 the allocation of funds and before the Secretary has issued 
 pre-grant certifications and the grantee has made required 
 submissions to the Secretary, and with the following 
 conditions:
 ``(A) Implementation funding under this paragraph 
 shall not exceed 10 percent of the grant awarded under 
 subsection (a).
 ``(B) Implementation funding shall be limited to 
 eligible activities that, in the determination of the 
 Secretary, will support faster recovery, improve the 
 grantee's ability to assess unmet recovery needs, plan 
 for the prevention of improper payments, and reduce 
 fraud, waste, and abuse.
 ``(C) Awards under this subsection shall not be 
 subject to the substantial compliance determination 
 under subsection (b)(4).
 ``(3) Approval.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall, by 
 regulation, specify criteria for approval of plans 
 under paragraph (1), including approval of substantial 
 amendments to such plans.
 ``(B) Partial approval.--The Secretary may approve 
 a plan addressing the use of funds for unmet recovery 
 needs under paragraph (1) before approving a plan 
 addressing the use of funds for mitigation.
 ``(4) Disapproval.--The Secretary shall disapprove a plan 
 or substantial amendment to a plan if--
 ``(A) the plan or substantial amendment does not 
 meet the approval criteria;
 ``(B) based on damage and unmet needs assessments 
 of the Secretary and the Federal Emergency Management 
 Administration or such other information as may be 
 available, the plan or substantial amendment describing 
 activities to address unmet recovery needs does not 
 provide an allocation of resources that is reasonably 
 proportional to unmet need--
 ``(i) between infrastructure and housing 
 activities; and
 ``(ii) between homeowners, renters, and 
 persons experiencing homelessness;
 ``(C) unless the plan is submitted by an Indian 
 tribe, the plan or amendment does not provide an 
 adequate plan for ensuring that funding provided under 
 this section is used in compliance with the Fair 
 Housing Act;
 ``(D) the plan or substantial amendment does not 
 adequately address, as determined by the Secretary in 
 regulation, the unmet needs for replacement or 
 rehabilitation of certain disaster-damaged housing 
 units, with cost adjustment where appropriate, 
 including damaged dwelling units in public housing, as 
 such term is defined in section 3(b) of the United 
 States Housing Act of 1937 (42 U.S.C. 1437a(b)), 
 projects receiving tax credits pursuant to section 42 
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, or for projects 
 assisted under section 8 of the Housing Act of 1937 (42 
 U.S.C. 1437f), under section 202 of the Housing Act of 
 1959 (12 U.S.C. 1701q), under section 811 of the 
 Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 
 U.S.C. 8013), under the HOME Investment Partnerships 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 12721 et seq.), under the community 
 development block grant program under this title, or by 
 the Housing Trust Fund under section 1338 of the 
 Federal Housing Enterprises Financial Safety and 
 Soundness Act of 1992 (12 U.S.C. 4568) or any low and 
 moderate income dwelling units demolished or converted 
 to a use other than for housing for low and moderate 
 income persons, as defined in section 104(d) of this 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 5304(d));
 ``(E) the plan or substantial amendment does not 
 use a percentage of the grant, as determined by the 
 Secretary in regulation, for acquisition, 
 rehabilitation, reconstruction, or other activities 
 permitted by the Secretary to provide affordable rental 
 housing to benefit persons of low and moderate income, 
 which rental housing will, upon completion, be occupied 
 by such persons; or
 ``(F) the plan or substantial amendment does not 
 provide a process to provide applicants--
 ``(i) notice by grantee of applicant's 
 right to administrative appeal of any adverse 
 action on the applicant's application; and
 ``(ii) right to full discovery of 
 applicant's entire application file.
 ``(5) Public consultation.--In developing the plan required 
 under paragraph (1), a grantee shall, at a minimum--
 ``(A) consult with affected residents, 
 stakeholders, local governments, and public housing 
 authorities to assess needs;
 ``(B) publish the plan in accordance with the 
 requirements set forth by the Secretary, including a 
 requirement to prominently post the plan on the website 
 of the grantee for not less than 14 days;
 ``(C) ensure equal access for individuals with 
 disabilities and individuals with limited English 
 proficiency; and
 ``(D) publish the plan in a manner that affords 
 citizens, affected local governments, and other 
 interested parties a reasonable opportunity to examine 
 the contents of the plan and provide feedback.
 ``(6) Resubmission.--The Secretary shall permit a grantee 
 to revise and resubmit a disapproved plan or plan amendment.
 ``(7) Timing.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall approve or 
 disapprove a plan not later than 60 days after 
 submission of the plan to the Secretary. The Secretary 
 shall immediately notify the State, unit of general 
 local government, or Indian tribe that submitted the 
 plan or substantial amendment of the Secretary's 
 decision.
 ``(B) Disapproval.--If the Secretary disapproves a 
 plan or a substantial amendment, not later than 15 days 
 after such disapproval the Secretary shall inform the 
 State, unit of general local government, or Indian 
 tribe in writing of (i) the reasons for disapproval, 
 and (ii) actions that the State, unit of general local 
 government, or Indian tribe could take to meet the 
 criteria for approval.
 ``(C) Substantial amendments; resubmission.--The 
 Secretary shall, for a period of not less than 45 days 
 following the date of disapproval, permit the revision 
 and resubmission of any plan or substantial amendment 
 that is disapproved. The Secretary shall approve or 
 disapprove a resubmission of any plan or substantial 
 amendment not less than 30 days after receipt of such 
 substantial amendments or resubmission.
 ``(D) Grant agreements.--Subject to subsection 
 (b)(3), the Secretary shall ensure that all grant 
 agreements necessary for prompt disbursement of funds 
 allocated to a grantee are signed by the Secretary 
 within 60 days of approval of grantee's plan describing 
 the use of such funds.
 ``(d) Financial Controls.--
 ``(1) Compliance system.--The Secretary shall develop and 
 maintain a system to ensure that each grantee has and will 
 maintain for the life of the grant--
 ``(A) proficient financial controls and procurement 
 processes;
 ``(B) adequate procedures to ensure that eligible 
 applicants are approved for assistance with amounts 
 made available for use under this section and that 
 recipients are provided the full amount of assistance 
 for which they are eligible, subject to funding 
 availability;
 ``(C) adequate procedures to prevent any 
 duplication of benefits, as defined by section 312 of 
 the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency 
 Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5155), to ensure timely 
 expenditure of funds, and to detect and prevent waste, 
 fraud, and abuse of funds; and
 ``(D) adequate procedures to ensure the grantee 
 will maintain comprehensive and publicly accessible 
 websites that make available information regarding all 
 disaster recovery activities assisted with such funds, 
 which information shall include common reporting 
 criteria established by the Secretary that permits 
 individuals and entities awaiting assistance and the 
 general public to see how all grant funds are used, 
 including copies of all relevant, unredacted 
 procurement documents, grantee administrative contracts 
 and details of ongoing procurement processes, as 
 determined by the Secretary.
 ``(2) Evaluation of compliance.--The Secretary shall 
 provide, by regulation or guideline, a method for qualitatively 
 and quantitatively evaluating compliance with the requirements 
 under paragraph (1).
 ``(3) Certification.--Before making a grant, the Secretary 
 shall certify in advance that the grantee has in place the 
 processes and procedures required under subparagraphs (A) 
 through (D) of paragraph (1), as determined by the Secretary. 
 No additional certification is necessary if the Secretary has 
 recently certified that the grantee has the required processes 
 and procedures. The Secretary may permit a State, unit of 
 general local government, or Indian tribe to demonstrate 
 compliance with requirements for adequate financial controls 
 before disasters occur and before receiving an allocation for a 
 grant under this section.
 ``(e) Use of Funds.--
 ``(1) Administrative costs.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall establish by 
 regulation the maximum grant amounts a State, unit of 
 general local government, or Indian tribe may use for 
 administrative costs, and for technical assistance and 
 planning activities, taking into consideration size of 
 grant, complexity of recovery, and other factors as 
 determined by the Secretary. Amounts available for 
 administrative costs for a grant under this section 
 shall be available for eligible administrative costs of 
 the grantee for any grant made under this section, 
 without regard to a particular disaster.
 ``(B) Discretion to establish sliding scale.--The 
 Secretary may establish a series of percentage 
 limitations on the amount of grant funds received that 
 may be used by a grantee for administrative costs, but 
 only if--
 ``(i) such percentage limitations are based 
 on the amount of grant funds received by a 
 grantee;
 ``(ii) such series provides that the 
 percentage that may be so used is lower for 
 grantees receiving a greater amount of grant 
 funds and such percentage that may be so used 
 is higher for grantees receiving a lesser 
 amount of grant funds; and
 ``(iii) in no case may a grantee so use 
 more than 10 percent of grant funds received.
 ``(2) Limitations on use.--Amounts from a grant under this 
 section may not be used for activities--
 ``(A) that are reimbursable, or for which funds are 
 made available, by the Federal Emergency Management 
 Agency, including under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster 
 Relief and Emergency Assistance Act or the National 
 Flood Insurance Program; or
 ``(B) for which funds are made available by the 
 Army Corps of Engineers.
 ``(3) HUD administrative costs.--
 ``(A) Limitation.--Of any funds made available to 
 the Community Development Block Grant Declared Disaster 
 Recovery Fund established under section 124 or 
 otherwise made available for use under this section by 
 any single appropriations Act, the Secretary may use 1 
 percent of any such amount for necessary costs, 
 including information technology costs, of 
 administering and overseeing the obligation and 
 expenditure of amounts made available for use under 
 this section.
 ``(B) Transfer of funds.--Any amounts made 
 available for use in accordance with subparagraph (A)--
 ``(i) shall be transferred to the 
 appropriate salaries and expenses account in 
 the Community Development Block Grant Declared 
 Disaster Recovery Fund established under 
 section 124 for use by the Office of Disaster 
 Recovery and Resilient Communities;
 ``(ii) shall remain available until 
 expended; and
 ``(iii) may be used for administering any 
 funds appropriated for the same purposes 
 described in section 123(a) to the Community 
 Development fund or Community Development Block 
 Grant Declared Disaster Recovery Fund 
 established under section 124 in any prior or 
 future Act, notwithstanding the disaster for 
 which such funds were appropriated.
 ``(4) Inspector general.--Of any funds made available for 
 use in accordance with paragraph (3)(A), 15 percent shall be 
 transferred to the Office of the Inspector General for 
 necessary costs of audits, reviews, oversight, evaluation, and 
 investigations relating to amounts made available for use under 
 this section.
 ``(5) Capacity building.--Of any funds made available for 
 use under this section, not more than 0.1 percent or 
 $15,000,000, whichever is less, shall be made available to the 
 Secretary for capacity building and technical assistance, 
 including assistance regarding contracting and procurement 
 processes, to support grantees and subgrantees receiving funds 
 under this section.
 ``(6) Mitigation planning.--
 ``(A) Requirement.--The Secretary shall require 
 each grantee to use a fixed percentage of any 
 allocation for mitigation for comprehensive mitigation 
 planning, subject to the limitations on funds in 
 paragraph (2).
 ``(B) Amount.--The Secretary may establish such 
 fixed percentage by regulation and may establish a 
 lower percentage for grantees receiving a grant 
 exceeding $1,000,000,000.
 ``(C) Coordination.--Each grantee shall ensure that 
 such comprehensive mitigation planning is coordinated 
 and aligned with existing comprehensive, land use, 
 transportation, and economic development plans, and 
 specifically analyze multiple types of hazard exposures 
 and risks. Each grantee shall coordinate and align such 
 mitigation planning with other mitigation projects 
 funded by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the 
 Army Corps of Engineers, the Forest Service, and other 
 agencies as appropriate.
 ``(D) Use of funds.--Such funds may be used for the 
 purchase of data and development or updating of risk 
 mapping for all relevant hazards.
 ``(E) Priority.--Grantees shall prioritize the 
 expenditure of grant funds to support hazard mitigation 
 and resiliency funds for activities primarily 
 benefitting persons of low and moderate income with the 
 greatest risk of harm from natural hazards.
 ``(7) Building safety.--
 ``(A) In general.--In consultation with the 
 Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management 
 Agency, the Secretary shall provide that no funds made 
 available under this section shall be used for 
 installation, substantial rehabilitation, 
 reconstruction, or new construction of infrastructure 
 or residential, commercial, or public buildings in 
 hazard-prone areas, unless construction complies with 
 paragraph (8) and with the latest published editions of 
 relevant national consensus-based codes, and 
 specifications and standards referenced therein, except 
 that nothing in this section shall be construed to 
 prohibit a grantee from requiring higher standards.
 ``(B) Savings provision.--Nothing in subparagraph 
 (A) shall be construed as a requirement for a grantee 
 to adopt the latest published editions of relevant 
 national consensus-based codes, specifications, and 
 standards.
 ``(C) Compliance.--Compliance with this paragraph 
 may be certified by a suitable design professional.
 ``(D) Definitions.--For purposes of this paragraph, 
 the following definitions shall apply:
 ``(i) Hazard-prone areas.--The term 
 `hazard-prone areas' means areas identified by 
 the Secretary, in consultation with the 
 Administrator, at risk from natural hazards 
 that threaten property damage or health, 
 safety, and welfare, such as floods (including 
 special flood hazard areas), wildfires 
 (including Wildland-Urban Interface areas), 
 earthquakes, tornados, and high winds. The 
 Secretary may consider future risks and the 
 likelihood such risks may pose to protecting 
 property and health, safety, and general 
 welfare when making the determination of or 
 modification to hazard-prone areas.
 ``(ii) Latest published editions.--The term 
 `latest published editions' means, with respect 
 to relevant national consensus-based codes, and 
 specifications and standards referenced 
 therein, the two most recent published 
 editions, including, if any, amendments made by 
 States, units of general local government, or 
 Indian tribes during the adoption process, that 
 incorporate the latest natural hazard-resistant 
 designs and establish criteria for the design, 
 construction, and maintenance of structures and 
 facilities that may be eligible for assistance 
 under this section for the purposes of 
 protecting the health, safety, and general 
 welfare of a structure's or facility's users 
 against disasters.
 ``(8) Flood risk mitigation.--
 ``(A) Requirements.--Subject to subparagraph (B), 
 the Secretary shall require that any structure that is 
 located in an area having special flood hazards and 
 that is newly constructed, for which substantial damage 
 is repaired, or that is substantially improved, using 
 amounts made available under this section, shall be 
 elevated with the lowest floor, including the basement, 
 at least two feet above the base flood level, or to a 
 future flood protection standard that provides 
 equivalent protection and is developed in conjunction 
 with the Administrator of the Federal Emergency 
 Management Agency, except that critical facilities, 
 including hospitals, nursing homes, and other public 
 facilities providing social and economic lifelines, as 
 defined by the Secretary, shall be elevated at least 3 
 feet above the base flood elevation (or higher if 
 required under paragraph (7)).
 ``(B) Alternative mitigation.--In the case of 
 existing structures consisting of multifamily housing 
 and row houses, and other structures, as determined by 
 the Secretary, the Secretary shall seek consultation 
 with the Administrator of the Federal Emergency 
 Management Agency, shall provide for alternative forms 
 of mitigation (apart from elevation), and shall exempt 
 from the requirement under subparagraph (A) any such 
 structure that meets the standards for such an 
 alternative form of mitigation.
 ``(C) Definitions.--For purposes of subparagraph 
 (A), the terms `area having special flood hazards', 
 `newly constructed', `substantial damage', `substantial 
 improvement', and `base flood level' have the same 
 meanings as under the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 
 1973 and the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (42 
 U.S.C. 4001 et seq.).
 ``(f) Administration.--In administering any amounts made available 
for assistance under this section, the Secretary--
 ``(1) may not allow a grantee to use any such amounts for 
 any purpose other than the purpose approved by the Secretary in 
 the plan or amended plan submitted under subsection (c) to the 
 Secretary for use of such amounts; and
 ``(2) shall prohibit a grantee from delegating, by contract 
 or otherwise, the responsibility for inherent government 
 functions.
 ``(g) Training for Grant Management for Subgrantees.--The Secretary 
shall require each grantee to provide ongoing training to all staff and 
subgrantees.
 ``(h) Procurement Processes and Procedures for Grantees.--
 ``(1) Grantee processes and procedures.--In procuring 
 property or services to be paid for in whole or in part with 
 amounts from a grant under this section, a grantee shall--
 ``(A) follow its own procurement processes and 
 procedures, but only if the Secretary makes a 
 determination that such processes and procedures comply 
 with the requirements under paragraph (2); or
 ``(B) comply with such processes and procedures as 
 the Secretary shall, by regulation, establish for 
 purposes of this section.
 ``(2) Requirements.--The requirements under this paragraph 
 with respect to such processes and procedures shall--
 ``(A) provide for full and open competition and 
 compliance with applicable statutory requirements on 
 the use of Federal funds, and require cost or price 
 analysis;
 ``(B) include requirements for procurement policies 
 and procedures for subgrantees;
 ``(C) specify methods of procurement and their 
 applicability, but not allow cost-plus-a-percentage-of 
 cost or percentage-of-construction-cost methods of 
 procurement;
 ``(D) include standards of conduct governing 
 employees engaged in the award or administration of 
 contracts; and
 ``(E) ensure that all purchase orders and contracts 
 include any clauses required by Federal statute, 
 Executive order, or implementing regulation.
 ``(i) Treatment of CDBG Allocations.--Amounts made available for 
use under this section shall not be considered relevant to the non-
disaster formula allocations made pursuant to section 106 of this title 
(42 U.S.C. 5306).
 ``(j) Waivers.--
 ``(1) Authority.--Subject to the other provisions of this 
 section, in administering amounts made available for use under 
 this section, the Secretary may waive, or specify alternative 
 requirements for, any provision of any statute or regulation 
 that the Secretary administers in connection with the 
 obligation by the Secretary or the use by the recipient of such 
 funds (except for requirements related to fair housing, 
 nondiscrimination, labor standards, and the environment and 
 except for the requirements of this section), if the Secretary 
 makes a public finding that good cause exists for the waiver or 
 alternative requirement and such waiver or alternative 
 requirement would not be inconsistent with the overall purposes 
 of this title.
 ``(2) Notice and publication.--Any waiver of or alternative 
 requirement pursuant to paragraph (1) shall not take effect 
 before the expiration of the 5-day period beginning upon the 
 publication of notice in the Federal Register of such waiver or 
 alternative requirement.
 ``(3) Applicable requirements and benefit to low- and 
 moderate-income persons.--
 ``(A) In general.--The requirements in this Act 
 that apply to grants made under section 106 of this 
 title (except those related to the allocation) apply 
 equally to grants under this section unless modified by 
 a waiver or alternative requirement pursuant to 
 paragraph (1).
 ``(B) Limitation.--Notwithstanding subparagraph 
 (A), the Secretary may not grant a waiver or 
 alternative requirement to reduce the percentage of 
 funds that must be used for activities that benefit 
 persons of low and moderate income to less than 70 
 percent, unless the Secretary specifically finds that 
 there is compelling need to further reduce the 
 percentage requirement and that funds are not necessary 
 to address the housing needs of low- and moderate-
 income residents.
 ``(4) Prohibition.--The Secretary may not use the authority 
 under paragraph (1) to waive any provision of this section.
 ``(k) Environmental Review.--
 ``(1) Adoption.--Notwithstanding subsection (j)(1), 
 recipients of funds provided under this section that use such 
 funds to supplement Federal assistance provided under section 
 402, 403, 404, 406, 407, 408(c)(4), 428, or 502 of the Robert 
 T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 
 U.S.C. 5121 et seq.) may adopt, without review or public 
 comment, any environmental review, approval, or permit 
 performed by a Federal agency, and such adoption shall satisfy 
 the responsibilities of the recipient with respect to such 
 environmental review, approval, or permit under section 
 104(g)(1) of this title (42 U.S.C. 5304(g)(1)).
 ``(2) Release of funds.--Notwithstanding section 104(g)(2) 
 of this title (42 U.S.C. 5304(g)(2)), the Secretary may, upon 
 receipt of a request for release of funds and certification, 
 immediately approve the release of funds for an activity or 
 project assisted with amounts made available for use under this 
 section if the recipient has adopted an environmental review, 
 approval or permit under paragraph (1) or the activity or 
 project is categorically excluded from review under the 
 National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4321 et 
 seq.).
 ``(3) State actions.--The requirements of section 104(g)(4) 
 shall apply to assistance under this section that a State 
 distributes to a unit of general local government.
 ``(l) Collection of Information; Audits and Oversight.--
 ``(1) Collection of information.--For each major disaster 
 for which assistance is made available under this section, the 
 Secretary shall collect information from grantees regarding all 
 recovery activities so assisted, including information on 
 applicants and recipients of assistance, and shall make such 
 information available to the public and to the Inspector 
 General for the Department of Housing and Urban Development on 
 a monthly basis using uniform data collection practices, and 
 shall provide a quarterly update to the Congress regarding 
 compliance with this section. Information collected and 
 reported by grantees and the Secretary shall be disaggregated 
 by program, race, income, geography, and all protected classes 
 of individuals under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 
 1990, the Fair Housing Act, the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and 
 other civil rights and nondiscrimination protections, with 
 respect to the smallest census tract, block group, or block 
 possible for the data set.
 ``(2) Availability of information.--In carrying out this 
 paragraph, the Secretary may make full and unredacted 
 information available to academic and research institutions for 
 the purpose of research into the equitable distribution of 
 recovery funds, adherence to civil rights protections, and 
 other areas.
 ``(3) Protection of information.--The Secretary shall take 
 such actions and make such redactions as may be necessary to 
 ensure that personally identifiable information regarding 
 recipients of assistance provided from funds made available 
 under this section shall not made publicly available.
 ``(4) Audits and oversight.--In conducting audits, reviews, 
 oversight, evaluation, and investigations, in addition to 
 activities designed to prevent and detect waste, fraud, and 
 abuse, the Inspector General shall review activities carried 
 out by grantees under this section to ensure such programs 
 fulfill their authorized purposes, as identified in the 
 grantee's action plan.
 ``(m) Plan Pre-Certification for States and Units of General Local 
Government.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall carry out a program 
 under this subsection to provide for States and units of 
 general local government to pre-certify as eligible grantees 
 for assistance under this section. The objective of such 
 program shall be to--
 ``(A) allow grantees that have consistently 
 demonstrated the ability to administer funds 
 responsibly and equitably in similar disasters to 
 utilize in subsequent years plans which are 
 substantially similar to those the Department has 
 previously approved; and
 ``(B) facilitate the re-use of a plan or its 
 substantially similar equivalent by a pre-certified 
 grantee for whom the plan has previously been approved 
 and executed upon.
 ``(2) Requirements.--To be eligible for pre-certification 
 under the program under this subsection a State or unit of 
 general local government shall--
 ``(A) demonstrate to the satisfaction of the 
 Secretary compliance with the requirements of this 
 section; and
 ``(B) have previously submitted a plan or its 
 substantially similar equivalent and received 
 assistance thereunder as a grantee or subgrantee under 
 this section, or with amounts made available for the 
 Community Development Block Grant--Disaster Recovery 
 account, in connection with two or more major disasters 
 declared pursuant to the Robert T. Stafford Disaster 
 Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5121 et 
 seq.).
 ``(3) Approval of plans.--
 ``(A) Expedited approval processes.--The Secretary 
 shall establish and maintain processes for expediting 
 approval of plans for States and units of general local 
 government that are pre-certified under this 
 subsection.
 ``(B) Effect of pre-certification.--Pre-
 certification pursuant to this subsection shall not--
 ``(i) establish any entitlement to, or 
 priority or preference for, allocation of funds 
 made available under this section; or
 ``(ii) exempt any grantee from complying 
 with any of the requirements under, or 
 established pursuant to, subsection (c) or (d).
 ``(4) Duration.--Pre-certification under this subsection 
 shall be effective for a term of 5 years.
 ``(n) Deposit of Unused Amounts in Fund.--
 ``(1) Unmet needs.--If any amounts made available for 
 assistance for unmet needs under this section to grantees 
 remain unexpended upon the earlier of--
 ``(A) the date that the grantee of such amounts 
 notifies the Secretary that the grantee has completed 
 all activities identified in the grantee's plan for use 
 of such amounts that was approved by the Secretary in 
 connection with such grant; or
 ``(B) the expiration of the 6-year period beginning 
 upon the Secretary obligating such amounts to the 
 grantee, as such period may be extended pursuant to 
 paragraph (3);
 the Secretary may, subject to authority provided in advance by 
 appropriations Acts, transfer such unexpended amounts to the 
 Secretary of the Treasury for deposit into the Community 
 Development Block Grant Declared Disaster Recovery Fund 
 established under section 124, except that the Secretary may, 
 by regulation, permit the grantee to retain amounts needed to 
 close out the grant.
 ``(2) Mitigation.--If any amounts made available for 
 assistance for mitigation under this section to grantees remain 
 unexpended upon the earlier of--
 ``(A) the date that the grantee of such amounts 
 notifies the Secretary that the grantee has completed 
 all activities identified in the grantee's plan for use 
 of such amounts that was approved by the Secretary in 
 connection with such grant; or
 ``(B) the expiration of the 12-year period 
 beginning upon the Secretary obligating such amounts to 
 the grantee, as such period may be extended pursuant to 
 paragraph (3);
 the Secretary may, subject to authority provided in advance by 
 appropriations Acts, transfer such unexpended amounts to the 
 Secretary of the Treasury for deposit into the Community 
 Development Block Grant Declared Disaster Recovery Fund 
 established under section 124, except that the Secretary may, 
 by regulation, permit the grantee to retain amounts needed to 
 close out the grant.
 ``(3) Extension of period of performance.--
 ``(A) Unmet needs.--
 ``(i) In general.--The period of 
 performance under paragraph (1)(B) shall be 
 extended by not more than 4 years if, before 
 the expiration of such 6-year period, the 
 Secretary waives this requirement and submits a 
 written justification for such waiver to the 
 Committees on Appropriations of the House of 
 Representatives and the Senate that specifies 
 the amended period of performance under the 
 waiver.
 ``(ii) Insular areas.--For any amounts made 
 available for unmet needs under this section to 
 a grantee that is an insular area as defined in 
 section 102, the Secretary may extend the 
 period of performance under clause (i) by not 
 more than an additional 4 years, and shall 
 provide additional technical assistance to help 
 increase capacity within the insular area 
 receiving such extension. If the Secretary 
 extends the period of performance pursuant to 
 this subparagraph, the Secretary shall submit a 
 written justification for such extension to the 
 Committees on Appropriations of the House of 
 Representatives and the Senate that specifies 
 the period of such extension.
 ``(B) Mitigation.--The period under paragraph 
 (2)(B) shall be extended to a date determined by the 
 Secretary if, before the expiration of such 12-year 
 period, the Secretary issues a waiver to amend the 
 period of performance and submits a written 
 justification for such waiver to the Committees on 
 Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the 
 Senate that specifies the amended period of performance 
 under the waiver.
 ``(o) Best Practices.--
 ``(1) Study.--The Secretary, in consultation with the 
 Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, shall 
 identify best practices for grantees on issues including 
 developing the action plan and substantial amendments under 
 subsection (c) and substantive amendments, establishing 
 financial controls, building grantee technical and 
 administrative capacity, procurement, compliance with Fair 
 Housing Act statute and regulations, and use of grant funds as 
 local match for other sources of Federal funding. The Secretary 
 shall publish a compilation of such identified best practices 
 and share with all relevant grantees, including States, units 
 of general local government, and Indian tribes to facilitate a 
 more efficient and effective disaster recovery process. The 
 compilation shall include--
 ``(A) guidelines for housing and economic 
 revitalization programs, including mitigation, with 
 sufficient model language on program design for 
 grantees to incorporate into action plans; and
 ``(B) standards for at least form of application, 
 determining unmet need, and income eligibility.
 ``(2) Expedited review.--
 ``(A) Requirements.--After publication of the final 
 compilation required by paragraph (1), the Secretary 
 shall issue either Federal regulations, as part of the 
 final rule required under section 5403(b) of the 
 National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023 
 or as a separate rule, or a Federal Register notice 
 soliciting public comment for at least 60 days, that 
 establishes grant requirements, including the 
 requirements that grantees must follow in order to 
 qualify for expedited review and approval of a plan or 
 substantial amendment required by subsection (c) of 
 this section.
 ``(B) Approval; disapproval.--The Secretary shall 
 approve or disapprove plans or substantial amendments 
 of grantees that comply with the requirements for such 
 expedited review within 45 days.
 ``(C) Standardization.----The requirements for 
 expedited review shall establish standard language for 
 inclusion in action plans and substantial amendments 
 under subsection (c) of this section and for 
 establishing standardized programs and activities 
 recognized by the Secretary.
 ``(D) Applicability of grant requirements.--
 Compliance with the requirements for expedited review 
 shall not exempt grantees from complying with grant 
 requirements, including requirements for public 
 comment, community citizen participation, and 
 establishing and maintaining a public website.
 ``(E) Revision.--The Secretary may revise the 
 requirements for expedited review at any time after a 
 public comment period of at least 60 days.
 ``(p) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
 ``(1) Grantee.--The term `grantee' means a recipient of 
 funds made available under this section after its enactment.
 ``(2) Substantially similar.--The term `substantially 
 similar' means, with respect to a plan, a plan previously 
 approved by the Department, administered successfully by the 
 grantee, and relating to disasters of the same type.

``SEC. 124. COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT DECLARED DISASTER 
 RECOVERY FUND.

 ``(a) Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the 
United States an account to be known as the Community Development Block 
Grant Declared Disaster Recovery Fund (in this section referred to as 
the `Fund').
 ``(b) Amounts.--The Fund shall consist of any amounts appropriated 
to or deposited into the Fund, including amounts deposited into the 
Fund pursuant to section 123.
 ``(c) Use.--Amounts in the Fund shall be available, pursuant to the 
occurrence of a major disaster declared under the Robert T. Stafford 
Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, only for providing 
technical assistance and capacity building in connection with section 
123 for grantees under such section that have been allocated assistance 
under such section in connection with such disaster to facilitate 
planning required under such section and increase capacity to 
administer assistance provided under such section, including for 
technical assistance and training building and fire officials, 
builders, contractors and subcontractors, architects, and other design 
and construction professionals regarding the latest published editions 
of national consensus-based codes, specifications, and standards (as 
such term is defined in section 123(e)(7)).''.
 (b) Regulations.--
 (1) Proposed rule.--Not later than the expiration of the 
 12-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this 
 Act, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall issue 
 proposed rules to carry out sections 123 and 124 of the Housing 
 and Community Development Act of 1974, as added by the 
 amendment made by subsection (a) of this section, and shall 
 provide a 60-day period for submission of public comments on 
 such proposed rule.
 (2) Final rule.--Not later than the expiration of the 24-
 month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this 
 Act, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, in 
 consultation with the Administrator of the Federal Emergency 
 Management Agency, shall issue final regulations to carry out 
 sections 123 and 124 of the Housing and Community Development 
 Act of 1974, as added by the amendment made by subsection (a) 
 of this section.

 Subtitle B--SAFE Banking

SEC. 5461. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS; PURPOSE.

 (a) Short Title.--This subtitle may be cited as the ``Secure And 
Fair Enforcement Banking Act of 2022'' or the ``SAFE Banking Act of 
2022''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this subtitle is 
as follows:

 Subtitle B--SAFE Banking

Sec. 5461. Short title; table of contents; purpose.
Sec. 5462. Safe harbor for depository institutions.
Sec. 5463. Protections for ancillary businesses.
Sec. 5464. Protections under Federal law.
Sec. 5465. Rules of construction.
Sec. 5466. Requirements for filing suspicious activity reports.
Sec. 5467. Guidance and examination procedures.
Sec. 5468. Annual diversity and inclusion report.
Sec. 5469. GAO study on diversity and inclusion.
Sec. 5470. GAO study on effectiveness of certain reports on finding 
 certain persons.
Sec. 5471. Application of this subtitle with respect to hemp-related 
 legitimate businesses and hemp-related 
 service providers.
Sec. 5472. Banking services for hemp-related legitimate businesses and 
 hemp-related service providers.
Sec. 5473. Requirements for deposit account termination requests and 
 orders.
Sec. 5474. Definitions.
Sec. 5475. Discretionary surplus funds.
 (c) Purpose.--The purpose of this subtitle is to increase public 
safety by ensuring access to financial services to cannabis-related 
legitimate businesses and service providers and reducing the amount of 
cash at such businesses.

SEC. 5462. SAFE HARBOR FOR DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS.

 (a) In General.--A Federal banking regulator may not--
 (1) terminate or limit the deposit insurance or 
 share insurance of a depository institution under the 
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1811 et seq.), 
 the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1751 et seq.), 
 or take any other adverse action against a depository 
 institution under section 8 of the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1818) solely because the 
 depository institution provides or has provided 
 financial services to a cannabis-related legitimate 
 business or service provider;
 (2) prohibit, penalize, or otherwise discourage a 
 depository institution from providing financial 
 services to a cannabis-related legitimate business or 
 service provider or to a State, political subdivision 
 of a State, or Indian Tribe that exercises jurisdiction 
 over cannabis-related legitimate businesses;
 (3) recommend, incentivize, or encourage a 
 depository institution not to offer financial services 
 to an account holder, or to downgrade or cancel the 
 financial services offered to an account holder solely 
 because--
 (A) the account holder is a cannabis-
 related legitimate business or service 
 provider, or is an employee, owner, or operator 
 of a cannabis-related legitimate business or 
 service provider;
 (B) the account holder later becomes an 
 employee, owner, or operator of a cannabis-
 related legitimate business or service 
 provider; or
 (C) the depository institution was not 
 aware that the account holder is an employee, 
 owner, or operator of a cannabis-related 
 legitimate business or service provider;
 (4) take any adverse or corrective supervisory 
 action on a loan made to--
 (A) a cannabis-related legitimate business 
 or service provider, solely because the 
 business is a cannabis-related legitimate 
 business or service provider;
 (B) an employee, owner, or operator of a 
 cannabis-related legitimate business or service 
 provider, solely because the employee, owner, 
 or operator is employed by, owns, or operates a 
 cannabis-related legitimate business or service 
 provider, as applicable; or
 (C) an owner or operator of real estate or 
 equipment that is leased to a cannabis-related 
 legitimate business or service provider, solely 
 because the owner or operator of the real 
 estate or equipment leased the equipment or 
 real estate to a cannabis-related legitimate 
 business or service provider, as applicable; or
 (5) prohibit or penalize a depository institution 
 (or entity performing a financial service for or in 
 association with a depository institution) for, or 
 otherwise discourage a depository institution (or 
 entity performing a financial service for or in 
 association with a depository institution) from, 
 engaging in a financial service for a cannabis-related 
 legitimate business or service provider.
 (b) Safe Harbor Applicable to De Novo Institutions.--Subsection (a) 
shall apply to an institution applying for a depository institution 
charter to the same extent as such subsection applies to a depository 
institution.

SEC. 5463. PROTECTIONS FOR ANCILLARY BUSINESSES.

 For the purposes of sections 1956 and 1957 of title 18, United 
States Code, and all other provisions of Federal law, the proceeds from 
a transaction involving activities of a cannabis-related legitimate 
business or service provider shall not be considered proceeds from an 
unlawful activity solely because--
 (1) the transaction involves proceeds from a cannabis-
 related legitimate business or service provider; or
 (2) the transaction involves proceeds from--
 (A) cannabis-related activities described in 
 section 5474(4)(B) conducted by a cannabis-related 
 legitimate business; or
 (B) activities described in section 5474(13)(A) 
 conducted by a service provider.

SEC. 5464. PROTECTIONS UNDER FEDERAL LAW.

 (a) In General.--With respect to providing a financial service to a 
cannabis-related legitimate business (where such cannabis-related 
legitimate business operates within a State, political subdivision of a 
State, or Indian country that allows the cultivation, production, 
manufacture, sale, transportation, display, dispensing, distribution, 
or purchase of cannabis pursuant to a law or regulation of such State, 
political subdivision, or Indian Tribe that has jurisdiction over the 
Indian country, as applicable) or a service provider (wherever 
located), a depository institution, entity performing a financial 
service for or in association with a depository institution, or insurer 
that provides a financial service to a cannabis-related legitimate 
business or service provider, and the officers, directors, and 
employees of that depository institution, entity, or insurer may not be 
held liable pursuant to any Federal law or regulation--
 (1) solely for providing such a financial service; or
 (2) for further investing any income derived from such a 
 financial service.
 (b) Protections for Federal Reserve Banks and Federal Home Loan 
Banks.--With respect to providing a service to a depository institution 
that provides a financial service to a cannabis-related legitimate 
business (where such cannabis-related legitimate business operates 
within a State, political subdivision of a State, or Indian country 
that allows the cultivation, production, manufacture, sale, 
transportation, display, dispensing, distribution, or purchase of 
cannabis pursuant to a law or regulation of such State, political 
subdivision, or Indian Tribe that has jurisdiction over the Indian 
country, as applicable) or service provider (wherever located), a 
Federal reserve bank or Federal Home Loan Bank, and the officers, 
directors, and employees of the Federal reserve bank or Federal Home 
Loan Bank, may not be held liable pursuant to any Federal law or 
regulation--
 (1) solely for providing such a service; or
 (2) for further investing any income derived from such a 
 service.
 (c) Protections for Insurers.--With respect to engaging in the 
business of insurance within a State, political subdivision of a State, 
or Indian country that allows the cultivation, production, manufacture, 
sale, transportation, display, dispensing, distribution, or purchase of 
cannabis pursuant to a law or regulation of such State, political 
subdivision, or Indian Tribe that has jurisdiction over the Indian 
country, as applicable, an insurer that engages in the business of 
insurance with a cannabis-related legitimate business or service 
provider or who otherwise engages with a person in a transaction 
permissible under State law related to cannabis, and the officers, 
directors, and employees of that insurer may not be held liable 
pursuant to any Federal law or regulation--
 (1) solely for engaging in the business of insurance; or
 (2) for further investing any income derived from the 
 business of insurance.
 (d) Forfeiture.--
 (1) Depository institutions.--A depository institution that 
 has a legal interest in the collateral for a loan or another 
 financial service provided to an owner, employee, or operator 
 of a cannabis-related legitimate business or service provider, 
 or to an owner or operator of real estate or equipment that is 
 leased or sold to a cannabis-related legitimate business or 
 service provider, shall not be subject to criminal, civil, or 
 administrative forfeiture of that legal interest pursuant to 
 any Federal law for providing such loan or other financial 
 service.
 (2) Federal reserve banks and federal home loan banks.--A 
 Federal reserve bank or Federal Home Loan Bank that has a legal 
 interest in the collateral for a loan or another financial 
 service provided to a depository institution that provides a 
 financial service to a cannabis-related legitimate business or 
 service provider, or to an owner or operator of real estate or 
 equipment that is leased or sold to a cannabis-related 
 legitimate business or service provider, shall not be subject 
 to criminal, civil, or administrative forfeiture of that legal 
 interest pursuant to any Federal law for providing such loan or 
 other financial service.

SEC. 5465. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.

 (a) No Requirement to Provide Financial Services.--Nothing in this 
subtitle shall require a depository institution, entity performing a 
financial service for or in association with a depository institution, 
or insurer to provide financial services to a cannabis-related 
legitimate business, service provider, or any other business.
 (b) General Examination, Supervisory, and Enforcement Authority.--
Nothing in this subtitle may be construed in any way as limiting or 
otherwise restricting the general examination, supervisory, and 
enforcement authority of the Federal banking regulators, provided that 
the basis for any supervisory or enforcement action is not the 
provision of financial services to a cannabis-related legitimate 
business or service provider.
 (c) Business of Insurance.--Nothing in this subtitle shall 
interfere with the regulation of the business of insurance in 
accordance with the Act of March 9, 1945 (59 Stat. 33, chapter 20; 15 
U.S.C. 1011 et seq.) (commonly known as the ``McCarran-Ferguson Act'') 
and the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (12 
U.S.C. 5301 et seq.).

SEC. 5466. REQUIREMENTS FOR FILING SUSPICIOUS ACTIVITY REPORTS.

 Section 5318(g) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(5) Requirements for cannabis-related legitimate 
 businesses.--
 ``(A) In general.--With respect to a financial 
 institution or any director, officer, employee, or 
 agent of a financial institution that reports a 
 suspicious transaction pursuant to this subsection, if 
 the reason for the report relates to a cannabis-related 
 legitimate business or service provider, the report 
 shall comply with appropriate guidance issued by the 
 Financial Crimes Enforcement Network. Not later than 
 the end of the 180-day period beginning on the date of 
 enactment of this paragraph, the Secretary shall update 
 the February 14, 2014, guidance titled `BSA 
 Expectations Regarding Marijuana-Related Businesses' 
 (FIN-2014-G001) to ensure that the guidance is 
 consistent with the purpose and intent of the SAFE 
 Banking Act of 2022 and does not significantly inhibit 
 the provision of financial services to a cannabis-
 related legitimate business or service provider in a 
 State, political subdivision of a State, or Indian 
 country that has allowed the cultivation, production, 
 manufacture, transportation, display, dispensing, 
 distribution, sale, or purchase of cannabis pursuant to 
 law or regulation of such State, political subdivision, 
 or Indian Tribe that has jurisdiction over the Indian 
 country.
 ``(B) Definitions.--For purposes of this paragraph:
 ``(i) Cannabis.--The term `cannabis' has 
 the meaning given the term `marihuana' in 
 section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act 
 (21 U.S.C. 802).
 ``(ii) Cannabis-related legitimate 
 business.--The term `cannabis-related 
 legitimate business' has the meaning given that 
 term in section 5474 of the SAFE Banking Act of 
 2022.
 ``(iii) Indian country.--The term `Indian 
 country' has the meaning given that term in 
 section 1151 of title 18.
 ``(iv) Indian tribe.--The term `Indian 
 Tribe' has the meaning given that term in 
 section 102 of the Federally Recognized Indian 
 Tribe List Act of 1994 (25 U.S.C. 479a).
 ``(v) Financial service.--The term 
 `financial service' has the meaning given that 
 term in section 5474 of the SAFE Banking Act of 
 2022.
 ``(vi) Service provider.--The term `service 
 provider' has the meaning given that term in 
 section 5474 of the SAFE Banking Act of 2022.
 ``(vii) State.--The term `State' means each 
 of the several States, the District of 
 Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and 
 any territory or possession of the United 
 States.''.

SEC. 5467. GUIDANCE AND EXAMINATION PROCEDURES.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, 
the Financial Institutions Examination Council shall develop uniform 
guidance and examination procedures for depository institutions that 
provide financial services to cannabis-related legitimate businesses 
and service providers.

SEC. 5468. ANNUAL DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION REPORT.

 The Federal banking regulators shall issue an annual report to 
Congress containing--
 (1) information and data on the availability of access to 
 financial services for minority-owned and women-owned cannabis-
 related legitimate businesses; and
 (2) any regulatory or legislative recommendations for 
 expanding access to financial services for minority-owned and 
 women-owned cannabis-related legitimate businesses.

SEC. 5469. GAO STUDY ON DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION.

 (a) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall 
carry out a study on the barriers to marketplace entry, including in 
the licensing process, and the access to financial services for 
potential and existing minority-owned and women-owned cannabis-related 
legitimate businesses.
 (b) Report.--The Comptroller General shall issue a report to the 
Congress--
 (1) containing all findings and determinations made in 
 carrying out the study required under subsection (a); and
 (2) containing any regulatory or legislative 
 recommendations for removing barriers to marketplace entry, 
 including in the licensing process, and expanding access to 
 financial services for potential and existing minority-owned 
 and women-owned cannabis-related legitimate businesses.

SEC. 5470. GAO STUDY ON EFFECTIVENESS OF CERTAIN REPORTS ON FINDING 
 CERTAIN PERSONS.

 Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
the Comptroller General of the United States shall carry out a study on 
the effectiveness of reports on suspicious transactions filed pursuant 
to section 5318(g) of title 31, United States Code, at finding 
individuals or organizations suspected or known to be engaged with 
transnational criminal organizations and whether any such engagement 
exists in a State, political subdivision, or Indian Tribe that has 
jurisdiction over Indian country that allows the cultivation, 
production, manufacture, sale, transportation, display, dispensing, 
distribution, or purchase of cannabis. The study shall examine reports 
on suspicious transactions as follows:
 (1) During the period of 2014 until the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, reports relating to marijuana-related 
 businesses.
 (2) During the 1-year period after date of the enactment of 
 this Act, reports relating to cannabis-related legitimate 
 businesses.

SEC. 5471. APPLICATION OF THIS SUBTITLE WITH RESPECT TO HEMP-RELATED 
 LEGITIMATE BUSINESSES AND HEMP-RELATED SERVICE PROVIDERS.

 (a) In General.--The provisions of this subtitle (other than 
sections 5466 and 5470) shall apply with respect to hemp-related 
legitimate businesses and hemp-related service providers in the same 
manner as such provisions apply with respect to cannabis-related 
legitimate businesses and service providers.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) CBD.--The term ``CBD'' means cannabidiol.
 (2) Hemp.--The term ``hemp'' has the meaning given that 
 term under section 297A of the Agricultural Marketing Act of 
 1946 (7 U.S.C. 1639o).
 (3) Hemp-related legitimate business.--The term ``hemp-
 related legitimate business'' means a manufacturer, producer, 
 or any person or company that--
 (A) engages in any activity described in 
 subparagraph (B) in conformity with the Agricultural 
 Improvement Act of 2018 (Public Law 115-334) and the 
 regulations issued to implement such Act by the 
 Department of Agriculture, where applicable, and the 
 law of a State or political subdivision thereof or 
 Indian Tribe; and
 (B) participates in any business or organized 
 activity that involves handling hemp, hemp-derived CBD 
 products, and other hemp-derived cannabinoid products, 
 including cultivating, producing, extracting, 
 manufacturing, selling, transporting, displaying, 
 dispensing, distributing, or purchasing hemp, hemp-
 derived CBD products, and other hemp-derived 
 cannabinoid products.
 (4) Hemp-related service provider.--The term ``hemp-related 
 service provider''--
 (A) means a business, organization, or other person 
 that--
 (i) sells goods or services to a hemp-
 related legitimate business; or
 (ii) provides any business services, 
 including the sale or lease of real or any 
 other property, legal or other licensed 
 services, or any other ancillary service, 
 relating to hemp, hemp-derived CBD products, or 
 other hemp-derived cannabinoid products; and
 (B) does not include a business, organization, or 
 other person that participates in any business or 
 organized activity that involves handling hemp, hemp-
 derived CBD products, or other hemp-derived cannabinoid 
 products, including cultivating, producing, 
 manufacturing, selling, transporting, displaying, 
 dispensing, distributing, or purchasing hemp, hemp-
 derived CBD products, and other hemp-derived 
 cannabinoid products.

SEC. 5472. BANKING SERVICES FOR HEMP-RELATED LEGITIMATE BUSINESSES AND 
 HEMP-RELATED SERVICE PROVIDERS.

 (a) Findings.--The Congress finds that--
 (1) the Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018 (Public Law 
 115-334) legalized hemp by removing it from the definition of 
 ``marihuana'' under the Controlled Substances Act;
 (2) despite the legalization of hemp, some hemp businesses 
 (including producers, manufacturers, and retailers) continue to 
 have difficulty gaining access to banking products and 
 services; and
 (3) businesses involved in the sale of hemp-derived CBD 
 products are particularly affected, due to confusion about the 
 legal status of such products.
 (b) Federal Banking Regulators' Hemp Banking Guidance.--Not later 
than the end of the 90-day period beginning on the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Federal banking regulators shall update their existing 
guidance, as applicable, regarding the provision of financial services 
to hemp-related legitimate businesses and hemp-related service 
providers to address--
 (1) compliance with financial institutions' existing 
 obligations under Federal laws and implementing regulations 
 determined relevant by the Federal banking regulators, 
 including subchapter II of chapter 53 of title 31, United 
 States Code, and its implementing regulation in conformity with 
 this subtitle and the Department of Agriculture's rules 
 regulating domestic hemp production (7 CFR 990); and
 (2) best practices for financial institutions to follow 
 when providing financial services, including processing 
 payments, to hemp-related legitimate businesses and hemp-
 related service providers.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Financial institution.--The term ``financial 
 institution''--
 (A) has the meaning given that term under section 
 5312(a) of title 31, United States Code; and
 (B) includes a bank holding company, as defined 
 under section 2(a) of the Bank Holding Company Act of 
 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1841(a)).
 (2) Hemp terms.--The terms ``CBD'', ``hemp'', ``hemp-
 related legitimate business'', and ``hemp-related service 
 provider'' have the meaning given those terms, respectively, 
 under section 5471.

SEC. 5473. REQUIREMENTS FOR DEPOSIT ACCOUNT TERMINATION REQUESTS AND 
 ORDERS.

 (a) Termination Requests or Orders Must Be Valid.--
 (1) In general.--An appropriate Federal banking agency may 
 not formally or informally request or order a depository 
 institution to terminate a specific customer account or group 
 of customer accounts or to otherwise restrict or discourage a 
 depository institution from entering into or maintaining a 
 banking relationship with a specific customer or group of 
 customers unless--
 (A) the agency has a valid reason for such request 
 or order; and
 (B) such reason is not based solely on reputation 
 risk.
 (2) Treatment of national security threats.--If an 
 appropriate Federal banking agency believes a specific customer 
 or group of customers is, or is acting as a conduit for, an 
 entity which--
 (A) poses a threat to national security;
 (B) is involved in terrorist financing;
 (C) is an agency of the Government of Iran, North 
 Korea, Syria, or any country listed from time to time 
 on the State Sponsors of Terrorism list;
 (D) is located in, or is subject to the 
 jurisdiction of, any country specified in subparagraph 
 (C); or
 (E) does business with any entity described in 
 subparagraph (C) or (D), unless the appropriate Federal 
 banking agency determines that the customer or group of 
 customers has used due diligence to avoid doing 
 business with any entity described in subparagraph (C) 
 or (D),
 such belief shall satisfy the requirement under paragraph (1).
 (b) Notice Requirement.--
 (1) In general.--If an appropriate Federal banking agency 
 formally or informally requests or orders a depository 
 institution to terminate a specific customer account or a group 
 of customer accounts, the agency shall--
 (A) provide such request or order to the 
 institution in writing; and
 (B) accompany such request or order with a written 
 justification for why such termination is needed, 
 including any specific laws or regulations the agency 
 believes are being violated by the customer or group of 
 customers, if any.
 (2) Justification requirement.--A justification described 
 under paragraph (1)(B) may not be based solely on the 
 reputation risk to the depository institution.
 (c) Customer Notice.--
 (1) Notice required.--Except as provided under paragraph 
 (2) or as otherwise prohibited from being disclosed by law, if 
 an appropriate Federal banking agency orders a depository 
 institution to terminate a specific customer account or a group 
 of customer accounts, the depository institution shall inform 
 the specific customer or group of customers of the 
 justification for the customer's account termination described 
 under subsection (b).
 (2) Notice prohibited.--
 (A) Notice prohibited in cases of national 
 security.--If an appropriate Federal banking agency 
 requests or orders a depository institution to 
 terminate a specific customer account or a group of 
 customer accounts based on a belief that the customer 
 or customers pose a threat to national security, or are 
 otherwise described under subsection (a)(2), neither 
 the depository institution nor the appropriate Federal 
 banking agency may inform the customer or customers of 
 the justification for the customer's account 
 termination.
 (B) Notice prohibited in other cases.--If an 
 appropriate Federal banking agency determines that the 
 notice required under paragraph (1) may interfere with 
 an authorized criminal investigation, neither the 
 depository institution nor the appropriate Federal 
 banking agency may inform the specific customer or 
 group of customers of the justification for the 
 customer's account termination.
 (d) Reporting Requirement.--Each appropriate Federal banking agency 
shall issue an annual report to the Congress stating--
 (1) the aggregate number of specific customer accounts that 
 the agency requested or ordered a depository institution to 
 terminate during the previous year; and
 (2) the legal authority on which the agency relied in 
 making such requests and orders and the frequency on which the 
 agency relied on each such authority.
 (e) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
 (1) Appropriate federal banking agency.--The term 
 ``appropriate Federal banking agency'' means--
 (A) the appropriate Federal banking agency, as 
 defined under section 3 of the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813); and
 (B) the National Credit Union Administration, in 
 the case of an insured credit union.
 (2) Depository institution.--The term ``depository 
 institution'' means--
 (A) a depository institution, as defined under 
 section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 
 U.S.C. 1813); and
 (B) an insured credit union.

SEC. 5474. DEFINITIONS.

 In this subtitle:
 (1) Business of insurance.--The term ``business of 
 insurance'' has the meaning given such term in section 1002 of 
 the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act 
 (12 U.S.C. 5481).
 (2) Cannabis.--The term ``cannabis'' has the meaning given 
 the term ``marihuana'' in section 102 of the Controlled 
 Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802).
 (3) Cannabis product.--The term ``cannabis product'' means 
 any article which contains cannabis, including an article which 
 is a concentrate, an edible, a tincture, a cannabis-infused 
 product, or a topical.
 (4) Cannabis-related legitimate business.--The term 
 ``cannabis-related legitimate business'' means a manufacturer, 
 producer, or any person or company that--
 (A) engages in any activity described in 
 subparagraph (B) pursuant to a law established by a 
 State or a political subdivision of a State, as 
 determined by such State or political subdivision; and
 (B) participates in any business or organized 
 activity that involves handling cannabis or cannabis 
 products, including cultivating, producing, 
 manufacturing, selling, transporting, displaying, 
 dispensing, distributing, or purchasing cannabis or 
 cannabis products.
 (5) Depository institution.--The term ``depository 
 institution'' means--
 (A) a depository institution as defined in section 
 3(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 
 1813(c));
 (B) a Federal credit union as defined in section 
 101 of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1752); 
 or
 (C) a State credit union as defined in section 101 
 of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1752).
 (6) Federal banking regulator.--The term ``Federal banking 
 regulator'' means each of the Board of Governors of the Federal 
 Reserve System, the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, 
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Housing 
 Finance Agency, the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, the 
 Office of Foreign Asset Control, the Office of the Comptroller 
 of the Currency, the National Credit Union Administration, the 
 Department of the Treasury, or any Federal agency or department 
 that regulates banking or financial services, as determined by 
 the Secretary of the Treasury.
 (7) Financial service.--The term ``financial service''--
 (A) means a financial product or service, as 
 defined in section 1002 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street 
 Reform and Consumer Protection Act (12 U.S.C. 5481), 
 regardless if the customer receiving the product or 
 service is a consumer or commercial entity;
 (B) means a financial product or service, or any 
 combination of products and services, permitted to be 
 provided by--
 (i) a national bank or a financial 
 subsidiary pursuant to the authority provided 
 under--
 (I) the provision designated 
 ``Seventh'' of section 5136 of the 
 Revised Statutes of the United States 
 (12 U.S.C. 24); or
 (II) section 5136A of the Revised 
 Statutes of the United States (12 
 U.S.C. 24a); and
 (ii) a Federal credit union, pursuant to 
 the authority provided under the Federal Credit 
 Union Act;
 (C) includes the business of insurance;
 (D) includes, whether performed directly or 
 indirectly, the authorizing, processing, clearing, 
 settling, billing, transferring for deposit, 
 transmitting, delivering, instructing to be delivered, 
 reconciling, collecting, or otherwise effectuating or 
 facilitating of payments or funds, where such payments 
 or funds are made or transferred by any means, 
 including by the use of credit cards, debit cards, 
 other payment cards, or other access devices, accounts, 
 original or substitute checks, or electronic funds 
 transfers;
 (E) includes acting as a money transmitting 
 business which directly or indirectly makes use of a 
 depository institution in connection with effectuating 
 or facilitating a payment for a cannabis-related 
 legitimate business or service provider in compliance 
 with section 5330 of title 31, United States Code, and 
 any applicable State law; and
 (F) includes acting as an armored car service for 
 processing and depositing with a depository institution 
 or a Federal reserve bank with respect to any monetary 
 instruments (as defined under section 1956(c)(5) of 
 title 18, United States Code.
 (8) Indian country.--The term ``Indian country'' has the 
 meaning given that term in section 1151 of title 18.
 (9) Indian tribe.--The term ``Indian Tribe'' has the 
 meaning given that term in section 102 of the Federally 
 Recognized Indian Tribe List Act of 1994 (25 U.S.C. 479a).
 (10) Insurer.--The term ``insurer'' has the meaning given 
 that term under section 313(r) of title 31, United States Code.
 (11) Manufacturer.--The term ``manufacturer'' means a 
 person who manufactures, compounds, converts, processes, 
 prepares, or packages cannabis or cannabis products.
 (12) Producer.--The term ``producer'' means a person who 
 plants, cultivates, harvests, or in any way facilitates the 
 natural growth of cannabis.
 (13) Service provider.--The term ``service provider''--
 (A) means a business, organization, or other person 
 that--
 (i) sells goods or services to a cannabis-
 related legitimate business; or
 (ii) provides any business services, 
 including the sale or lease of real or any 
 other property, legal or other licensed 
 services, or any other ancillary service, 
 relating to cannabis; and
 (B) does not include a business, organization, or 
 other person that participates in any business or 
 organized activity that involves handling cannabis or 
 cannabis products, including cultivating, producing, 
 manufacturing, selling, transporting, displaying, 
 dispensing, distributing, or purchasing cannabis or 
 cannabis products.
 (14) State.--The term ``State'' means each of the several 
 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto 
 Rico, and any territory or possession of the United States.

SEC. 5475. DISCRETIONARY SURPLUS FUNDS.

 Section 7(a)(3)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 
289(a)(3)(A)) is amended by reducing the dollar figure by $6,000,000.

 TITLE LV--NATURAL RESOURCES MATTERS

SEC. 5501. YSLETA DEL SUR PUEBLO AND ALABAMA-COUSHATTA TRIBES OF TEXAS 
 EQUAL AND FAIR OPPORTUNITY AMENDMENT.

 The Ysleta del Sur Pueblo and Alabama and Coushatta Indian Tribes 
of Texas Restoration Act (Public Law 100-89; 101 Stat. 666) is amended 
by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 301. RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.

 ``Nothing in this Act shall be construed to preclude or limit the 
applicability of the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act (25 U.S.C. 2701 et 
seq.).''.

SEC. 5502. INCLUSION OF COMMONWEALTH OF THE NORTHERN MARIANA ISLANDS 
 AND AMERICAN SAMOA.

 The Wagner-Peyser Act is amended--
 (1) in section 2(5) (29 U.S.C. 49a(5)), by inserting ``the 
 Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa,'' 
 after ``Guam,'';
 (2) in section 5(b)(1) (29 U.S.C. 49d(b)(1)), by inserting 
 ``the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and 
 American Samoa,'' after ``Guam,'';
 (3) in section 6(a) (29 U.S.C. 49e(a))--
 (A) by inserting ``, the Commonwealth of the 
 Northern Mariana Islands, and American Samoa'' after 
 ``except for Guam'';
 (B) by striking ``allot to Guam'' and inserting the 
 following: ``allot to--
 ``(1) Guam'';
 (C) by striking the period at the end and inserting 
 ``; and''; and
 (D) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands and 
 American Samoa an amount which, in relation to the total amount 
 available for the fiscal year, is equal to the allotment 
 percentage that Guam received of amounts available under this 
 Act in fiscal year 1983.''; and
 (4) in section 6(b)(1) (29 U.S.C. 49e(b)(1)), in the matter 
 following subparagraph (B), by inserting ``, the Commonwealth 
 of the Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa,'' after ``does 
 not include Guam''.

SEC. 5503. AMENDMENTS TO SIKES ACT.

 (a) Use of Natural Features.--Section 101(a)(3)(A) of the Sikes Act 
(16 U.S.C. 670a(a)(3)(A)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating clauses (ii) and (iii) as clauses 
 (iii) and (iv), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after clause (i) the following:
 ``(ii) the use of natural and nature-based 
 features to maintain or improve military 
 installation resilience;''.
 (b) Expanding and Making Permanent the Program for Invasive Species 
Management for Military Installations.--Section 101(g) of the Sikes Act 
(16 U.S.C. 670a(g)) is amended--
 (1) by striking the header and inserting ``Program for 
 Invasive Species Management for Military Installations''; and
 (2) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) by striking ``During fiscal years 2009 through 
 2014, the'' and inserting ``The''; and
 (B) by striking ``in Guam''.

SEC. 5504. BRENNAN REEF.

 (a) Designation.--The reef described in subsection (b) shall be 
known and designated as ``Brennan Reef'', in honor of the late Rear 
Admiral Richard T. Brennan of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration.
 (b) Reef Described.--The reef referred to in subsection (a) is--
 (1) between San Miguel and Santa Rosa Islands on the north 
 side of the San Miguel Passage in the Channel Island National 
 Marine Sanctuary; and
 (2) centered at 34 degrees 03.12 minutes North, 120 degrees 
 15.95 minutes West.
 (c) References.--Any reference in any law, regulation, document, 
record, map, or other paper of the United States to the reef described 
in subsection (b) is deemed to be a reference to Brennan Reef.

SEC. 5505. ESTABLISHMENT OF FUND.

 (a) Establishment.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this section, the Secretary shall enter into a cooperative 
agreement with the Foundation to establish the Community Resilience and 
Restoration Fund at the Foundation to--
 (1) improve community safety in the face of climactic 
 extremes through conservation and protection of restoration and 
 resilience lands;
 (2) to protect, conserve, and restore restoration and 
 resilience lands in order to help communities respond and adapt 
 to natural threats, including wildfire, drought, extreme heat, 
 and other threats posed or exacerbated by the impacts of global 
 climate;
 (3) to build the resilience of restoration and resilience 
 lands to adapt to, recover from, and withstand natural threats, 
 including wildfire, drought, extreme heat, and other threats 
 posed or exacerbated by the impacts of global climate change;
 (4) to protect and enhance the biodiversity of wildlife 
 populations across restoration and resilience lands;
 (5) to support the health of restoration and resilience 
 lands for the benefit of present and future generations;
 (6) to foster innovative, nature-based solutions that help 
 meet the goals of this section; and
 (7) to enhance the nation's natural carbon sequestration 
 capabilities and help communities strengthen natural carbon 
 sequestration capacity where applicable.
 (b) Management of the Fund.--The Foundation shall manage the Fund--
 (1) pursuant to the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation 
 Establishment Act (16 U.S.C. 3701 et seq.); and
 (2) in such a manner that, to the greatest extent 
 practicable and consistent with the purposes for which the Fund 
 is established--
 (A) ensures that amounts made available through the 
 Fund are accessible to historically underserved 
 communities, including Tribal communities, communities 
 of color, and rural communities; and
 (B) avoids project selection and funding overlap 
 with those projects and activities that could otherwise 
 receive funding under--
 (i) the National Oceans and Coastal 
 Security Fund, established under the National 
 Oceans and Coastal Security Act (16 U.S.C. 
 7501); or
 (ii) other coastal management focused 
 programs.
 (c) Competitive Grants.--
 (1) In general.--To the extent amounts are available in the 
 Fund, the Foundation shall award grants to eligible entities 
 through a competitive grant process in accordance with 
 procedures established pursuant to the National Fish and 
 Wildlife Foundation Establishment Act (16 U.S.C. 3701 et seq.) 
 to carry out eligible projects and activities, including 
 planning eligible projects and activities.
 (2) Proposals.--The Foundation, in coordination with the 
 Secretary, shall establish requirements for proposals for 
 competitive grants under this section.
 (d) Use of Amounts in the Fund.--
 (1) Planning.--Not less than 8 percent of amounts 
 appropriated annually to the Fund may be used to plan eligible 
 projects and activities, including capacity building.
 (2) Administrative costs.--Not more than 4 percent of 
 amounts appropriated annually to the Fund may be used by the 
 Foundation for administrative expenses of the Fund or 
 administration of competitive grants offered under the Fund.
 (3) Priority.--Not less than $10,000,000 shall be awarded 
 annually to support eligible projects and activities for Indian 
 Tribes.
 (4) Coordination.--The Secretary and Foundation shall 
 ensure, to the greatest extent practicable and through 
 meaningful consultation, that input from Indian Tribes, 
 including traditional ecological knowledge, is incorporated in 
 the planning and execution of eligible projects and activities.
 (e) Reports.--
 (1) Annual reports.--Beginning at the end the first full 
 fiscal year after the date of enactment of this section, and 
 not later than 60 days after the end of each fiscal year in 
 which amounts are deposited into the Fund, the Foundation shall 
 submit to the Secretary a report on the operation of the Fund 
 including--
 (A) an accounting of expenditures made under the 
 Fund, including leverage and match where applicable;
 (B) an accounting of any grants made under the 
 Fund, including a list of recipients and a brief 
 description of each project and its purposes and goals; 
 and
 (C) measures and metrics to track benefits created 
 by grants administered under the Fund, including 
 enhanced biodiversity, water quality, natural carbon 
 sequestration, and resilience.
 (2) 5-Year reports.--Not later than 90 days after the end 
 of the fifth full fiscal year after the date of enactment of 
 this section, and not later than 90 days after the end every 
 fifth fiscal year thereafter, the Foundation shall submit to 
 the Secretary a report containing--
 (A) a description of any socioeconomic, 
 biodiversity, community resilience, or climate 
 resilience or mitigation (including natural carbon 
 sequestration), impacts generated by projects funded by 
 grants awarded by the Fund, including measures and 
 metrics illustrating these impacts;
 (B) a description of land health benefits derived 
 from projects funded by grants awarded by the Fund, 
 including an accounting of--
 (i) lands treated for invasive species;
 (ii) lands treated for wildfire threat 
 reduction, including those treated with 
 controlled burning or other natural fire-
 management techniques; and
 (iii) lands restored either from wildfire 
 or other forms or degradation, including over-
 grazing and sedimentation;
 (C) key findings for Congress, including any 
 recommended changes to the authorization or purposes of 
 the Fund;
 (D) best practices for other Federal agencies in 
 the administration of funds intended for land and 
 habitat restoration;
 (E) information on the use and outcome of funds 
 specifically set aside for planning and capacity 
 building pursuant to section 6; and
 (F) any other information that the Foundation 
 considers relevant.
 (3) Submission of reports to congress.--Not later than 10 
 days after receiving a report under this section, the Secretary 
 shall submit the report to the Committee on Natural Resources 
 of the House of Representatives and the Committee on 
 Environment and Public Works of the Senate.
 (4) Authorization of appropriations.--There is hereby 
 authorized to be appropriated to the Fund $100,000,000 for each 
 of fiscal years 2023 through 2028 to carry out this section.
 (f) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
 (1) The term ``eligible entity'' means a Federal agency, 
 State, the District of Columbia, a territory of the United 
 States, a unit of local government, an Indian Tribe, a non-
 profit organization, or an accredited institution of higher 
 education.
 (2) The term ``eligible projects and activities'' means 
 projects and activities carried out by an eligible entity on 
 public lands, tribal lands, or private land, or any combination 
 thereof, to further the purposes for which the Fund is 
 established, including planning and capacity building and 
 projects and activities carried out in coordination with 
 Federal, State, or tribal departments or agencies, or any 
 department or agency of a subdivision of a State.
 (3) The term ``Foundation'' means the National Fish and 
 Wildlife Foundation established under the National Fish and 
 Wildlife Foundation Establishment Act (16 U.S.C. 3701 et seq.).
 (4) The term ``Fund'' means the Community Resilience and 
 Restoration Fund established under subsection (a).
 (5) The term ``Indian Tribe'' means the governing body of 
 any individually identified and federally recognized Indian or 
 Alaska Native Tribe, band, nation, pueblo, village, community, 
 affiliated Tribal group, or component reservation in the list 
 published pursuant to section 104(a) of the Federally 
 Recognized Indian Tribe List Act of 1994 (25 U.S.C. 5131(a)).
 (6) The term ``restoration and resilience lands'' means 
 fish, wildlife, and plant habitats, and other important natural 
 areas in the United States, on public lands, private land 
 (after obtaining proper consent from the landowner), or land of 
 Indian Tribes, including grasslands, shrublands, prairies, 
 chapparal lands, forest lands, deserts, and riparian or wetland 
 areas within or adjacent to these ecosystems.
 (7) The term ``public lands'' means lands owned or 
 controlled by the United States.
 (8) The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the 
 Interior, acting through the Director of the United States Fish 
 and Wildlife Service.
 (9) The term ``State'' means a State of the United States, 
 the District of Columbia, any Indian Tribe, and any 
 commonwealth, territory, or possession of the United States.

SEC. 5506. LEASING ON THE OUTER CONTINENTAL SHELF.

 (a) Leasing Authorized.--Notwithstanding the Presidential 
Memorandum entitled ``Memorandum on the Withdrawal of Certain Areas of 
the United States Outer Continental Shelf from Leasing Disposition'' 
(issued September 8, 2020) and the Presidential Memorandum entitled 
``Presidential Determination on the Withdrawal of Certain Areas of the 
United States Outer Continental Shelf from Leasing Disposition'' 
(issued September 25, 2020), the Secretary of the Interior is 
authorized to grant leases pursuant to section 8(p)(1)(C) of the Outer 
Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1337(p)(1)(C)) in the South 
Atlantic Planning Area, the Straits of Florida Planning Area, and the 
Mid Atlantic Planning Area designated by the Bureau of Ocean Energy 
Management as of September 25, 2020.
 (b) Withdrawals.--Any Presidential withdrawal of an area of the 
Outer Continental Shelf from leasing under section 12(a) of the Outer 
Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1341(a)) issued after the date 
of enactment of this section shall apply only to leasing authorized 
under subsections (a) and (i) of section 8 of the Outer Continental 
Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1337(a) and 1337(i)), unless the withdrawal 
explicitly applies to other leasing authorized under such Act.

SEC. 5507. CONTINENTAL DIVIDE NATIONAL SCENIC TRAIL.

 (a) Completion of Trail.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than November 10, 2028, the 
 Secretary and the Secretary of the Interior shall, to the 
 maximum extent practicable, ensure the completion of the 
 Continental Divide National Scenic Trail as a contiguous route, 
 consistent with the following provisions of the National Trails 
 System Act:
 (A) Section 3(a)(2) (16 U.S.C. 1242(a)(2)).
 (B) Section 5(a)(5) (16 U.S.C. 1244(a)(5)).
 (C) Section 7 (16 U.S.C. 1246).
 (2) Priority of actions.--The Secretary and the Secretary 
 of the Interior shall, to the maximum extent practicable, take 
 necessary actions to achieve this goal, including the following 
 steps, listed in order of priority:
 (A) Complete the Continental Divide National Scenic 
 Trail by acquiring land or an interest in land, or by 
 encouraging States or local governments to enter into 
 cooperative agreements to acquire interests in land, to 
 eliminate gaps between sections of the Trail while 
 maintaining the nature and purposes of the Trail.
 (B) Optimize the Trail by relocating incompatible 
 existing portions of the Trail on Federal land as 
 necessary to provide for maximum outdoor recreation 
 potential and for the conservation and enjoyment of the 
 nationally significant scenic, historic, natural, or 
 cultural qualities of the areas through which the Trail 
 passes, consistent with the Trail's nature and 
 purposes.
 (C) Publish maps of the completed Trail corridor.
 (b) Trail Completion Team.--
 (1) In general.--In carrying out subsection (a), not later 
 than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this section, 
 the Secretary, in coordination with the Secretary of the 
 Interior, shall establish a joint Forest Service and Bureau of 
 Land Management trail completion team to work in coordination 
 with the Trail Administrator to facilitate the completion and 
 optimization of the Trail, pursuant to the purposes of section 
 3(a)(2) of the National Trails System Act (16 U.S.C. 
 1242(a)(2)) and the Trail's nature and purposes.
 (2) Duties of the team.--The Team shall:
 (A) Implement land and right-of-way acquisitions, 
 relocations, and trail construction consistent with any 
 Optimal Location Review for the trail, giving priority 
 to land that--
 (i) eliminates gaps between segments of the 
 Trail;
 (ii) may be acquired by the Secretary or 
 the Secretary of the Interior by purchase from 
 a willing seller, donation, exchange, or by 
 cooperative agreement;
 (iii) is best suited for inclusion in the 
 Trail corridor in accordance with the purposes, 
 policies, and provisions of the National Trails 
 System Act (16 U.S.C. 1241 et seq.); and
 (iv) has been identified as a segment of 
 the Trail on Federal land that should be 
 relocated to provide for maximum outdoor 
 recreation potential and the conservation and 
 enjoyment of the nationally significant scenic, 
 historic, natural, or cultural qualities of the 
 areas through which the Trail passes.
 (B) Provide the necessary administrative and 
 technical support to complete the Trail corridor under 
 subsection (a).
 (C) As appropriate, consult with other Federal 
 agencies, Governors of affected States, Indian Tribes, 
 Land Grants-Mercedes, Acequias, relevant landowners or 
 land users of an acequia or land grant-merced, the 
 Continental Divide Trail Coalition, and other volunteer 
 and nonprofit organizations that assist in, or whose 
 members may be affected by, the development, 
 maintenance, and management of the Trail.
 (D) Support the Secretary in the development of the 
 acquisition and development plan under subsection (c) 
 and annual reports under subsection (f).
 (c) Comprehensive Acquisition and Development Plan.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the 
 establishment of the Team under subsection (b), the Secretary 
 shall submit to the Committee on Natural Resources of the House 
 of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural 
 Resources of the Senate a comprehensive acquisition and 
 development plan for the Trail.
 (2) Contents of plan.--The comprehensive acquisition and 
 development plan should--
 (A) identify any gaps in the Trail where the 
 Secretary and the Secretary of the Interior have not 
 been able to acquire land or interests in land by 
 purchase from a willing seller, by donation, by 
 exchange, or by cooperative agreement;
 (B) include a plan for closing such gaps by 
 acquiring lands or interests in land; and
 (C) include general and site-specific development 
 plans, including anticipated costs.
 (d) Method of Acquisition.--In carrying out this section, the 
Secretary and the Secretary of the Interior--
 (1) may acquire land only by purchase from a willing seller 
 with donated or appropriated funds, by donation, or by 
 exchange; and
 (2) may not acquire land by eminent domain.
 (e) Maintaining Existing Partnerships.--In carrying out this 
section, the Secretary, the Secretary of the Interior, and the Team 
shall continue to maintain and develop working relationships with 
volunteer and nonprofit organizations that assist in the development, 
maintenance, and management of the Trail.
 (f) Reports.--Not later than September 30, 2024, and at the close 
of each fiscal year until the acquisition and development plan is fully 
implemented, the Secretary shall report on the following, in writing, 
to the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives 
and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate:
 (1) The progress in acquiring land or interests in land to 
 complete the Trail consistent with this section.
 (2) The amount of land or interests in land acquired during 
 the fiscal year and the amount expended for such land or 
 interests in land.
 (3) The amount of land or interests in land planned for 
 acquisition in the ensuing fiscal year and the estimated cost 
 of such land or interests in land.
 (4) The estimated amount of land or interests in land 
 remaining to be acquired.
 (5) The amount of existing Trail miles on Federal lands 
 that need to be relocated to provide for maximum outdoor 
 recreation potential and for conservation and enjoyment of the 
 nationally significant scenic, historic, natural, or cultural 
 qualities of the areas through which the Trail passes.
 (g) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Acequia.--The term ``acequia'' has the meaning of the 
 term ``community ditch'' as such term is defined under section 
 73-2-27 of the New Mexico Statutes.
 (2) Land grant-merced.--The term ``land grant-merced'' 
 means a community land grant issued under the laws or customs 
 of the Government of Spain or Mexico that is recognized under 
 chapter 49 of the New Mexico Statutes (or a successor statute).
 (3) Optimal location review.--The term ``Optimal Location 
 Review'' means the procedures described in the Continental 
 Divide National Scenic Trail Optimal Location Review Guide, 
 dated November 2017.
 (4) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Agriculture, acting through the Chief of the Forest Service.
 (5) Team.--The term ``Team'' means the trail completion 
 team established under subsection (b).
 (6) Trail.--The term ``Trail'' means the Continental Divide 
 National Scenic Trail established by section 5 of the National 
 Trails System Act (16 U.S.C. 1244).

SEC. 5508. SACRAMENTO-SAN JOAQUIN DELTA NATIONAL HERITAGE AREA.

 Section 6001(a)(4)(A) of the John D. Dingell, Jr. Conservation, 
Management, and Recreation Act (Public Law 116-9) is amended by adding 
at the end the following: ``In addition, the Sacramento-San Joaquin 
Delta National Heritage Area shall include the area depicted as `Rio 
Vista/Expansion Area' on the map entitled `Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta 
National Heritage Area Proposed Boundary Expansion' and dated February 
2021.''.

SEC. 5509. NEW YORK-NEW JERSEY WATERSHED PROTECTION.

 (a) Program Establishment.--
 (1) Establishment.--Not later than 180 days after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall establish a 
 nonregulatory program to be known as the ``New York-New Jersey 
 Watershed Restoration Program''.
 (2) Duties.--In carrying out the program, the Secretary 
 shall--
 (A) draw on existing and new approved plans for the 
 Watershed, or portions of the Watershed, and work in 
 consultation with applicable management entities, 
 including representatives of the New York-New Jersey 
 Harbor and Estuary Program (HEP), Hudson River Estuary 
 Program, Mohawk River Basin Program, Sustainable 
 Raritan River Initiative, the Federal Government, and 
 other State and local governments, and regional and 
 nonprofit organizations, as appropriate, to identify, 
 prioritize, and implement restoration and protection 
 activities within the Watershed; and
 (B) adopt a Watershed-wide strategy that--
 (i) supports the implementation of a shared 
 set of science-based restoration and protection 
 activities developed in accordance with 
 subparagraph (A);
 (ii) targets cost-effective projects with 
 measurable results;
 (iii) maximizes conservation outcomes;
 (iv) prioritizes the needs of communities 
 lacking in environmental justice; and
 (v) establishes the voluntary grant and 
 technical assistance programs authorized in 
 this section.
 (3) Consultation.--In establishing the program, the 
 Secretary shall, as appropriate--
 (A) consult with--
 (i) the heads of Federal agencies, 
 including--
 (I) the Administrator of the 
 Environmental Protection Agency;
 (II) the Administrator of the 
 National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
 Administration;
 (III) the Secretary of Agriculture; 
 and
 (IV) the Director of the National 
 Park Service; and
 (ii) Indian Tribes; and
 (B) coordinate with --
 (i) the Governors of New York and New 
 Jersey and the Commissioner of the New York 
 State Department of Environmental Conservation 
 and the Director of the New Jersey Division of 
 Fish and Wildlife;
 (ii) the New York-New Jersey Harbor & 
 Estuary Program; and
 (iii) other public agencies and 
 organizations with authority for the planning 
 and implementation of conservation strategies 
 in the Watershed.
 (4) Purposes.--The purposes of the program include--
 (A) coordinating restoration and protection 
 activities among Federal, State, local, and regional 
 entities and conservation partners throughout the 
 Watershed;
 (B) carrying out coordinated restoration and 
 protection activities, and providing for technical 
 assistance throughout the Watershed--
 (i) to sustain and enhance fish and 
 wildlife habitat restoration and protection 
 activities;
 (ii) to improve and maintain water quality 
 to support fish, wildlife, and their habitat, 
 as well as to improve opportunities for public 
 access and recreation in the Watershed 
 consistent with the ecological needs of fish 
 and wildlife habitat;
 (iii) to advance the use of natural and 
 nature-based features, living shoreline, and 
 other green infrastructure techniques to 
 maximize the resilience of communities, natural 
 systems, and habitats under changing sea 
 levels, storm risks, and watershed conditions;
 (iv) to engage the public, communities 
 experiencing environmental injustice, through 
 outreach, education, and community involvement 
 to increase capacity and support for 
 coordinated restoration and protection 
 activities in the Watershed;
 (v) to increase scientific capacity to 
 support the planning, monitoring, and research 
 activities necessary to carry out coordinated 
 restoration and protection activities;
 (vi) to provide for feasibility and 
 planning studies for green infrastructure 
 projects that achieve habitat restoration and 
 stormwater management goals;
 (vii) to support land conservation and 
 management activities necessary to fulfill the 
 Watershed-wide strategy adopted under 
 subsection (a)(2)(B);
 (viii) to provide technical assistance to 
 carry out restoration and protection activities 
 in the Watershed;
 (ix) to monitor environmental quality to 
 assess progress toward the goals of this 
 section; and
 (x) to improve fish and wildlife habitats, 
 as well as opportunities for personal 
 recreation, along rivers and shore fronts 
 within communities lacking in environmental 
 justice; and
 (C) other activities necessary for the 
 implementation of approved plans.
 (b) New York-New Jersey Watershed Restoration Grant Program.--
 (1) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a 
 voluntary grant and technical assistance program, to be known 
 as the ``New York-New Jersey Watershed Restoration Grant 
 Program'', to provide competitive matching grants of varying 
 amounts to State and local governments, nonprofit 
 organizations, institutions of higher education, and other 
 eligible entities to carry out activities described in 
 subsection (a)(4).
 (2) Criteria.--The Secretary, in consultation with the 
 agencies, organizations, and other persons referred to in 
 section 404(c), shall develop criteria for the grant program to 
 help ensure that activities funded under this section 
 accomplish one or more of the purposes identified in subsection 
 (a)(4) and advance the implementation of priority actions or 
 needs identified in the Watershed-wide strategy adopted under 
 subsection (a)(2)(B).
 (3) Capacity building.--The Secretary shall include grant 
 program provisions designed to increase the effectiveness of 
 organizations that work at the nexus of natural resource and 
 community health issues within the New York-New Jersey 
 Watershed by addressing organizational capacity needs.
 (4) Cost sharing.--
 (A) Department of the interior share.--The 
 Department of the Interior share of the cost of a 
 project funded under the grant program shall not exceed 
 50 percent of the total cost of the activity, as 
 determined by the Secretary.
 (B) Non-department of the interior share.--The non-
 Department of the Interior share of the cost of a 
 project funded under the grant program may be provided 
 in cash or in the form of an in-kind contribution of 
 services or materials.
 (c) Administration.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary may enter into an agreement 
 to manage the grant program with the National Fish and Wildlife 
 Foundation or a similar organization that offers grant 
 management services.
 (2) Funding.--If the Secretary enters into an agreement 
 under paragraph (A), the organization selected shall--
 (A) for each fiscal year, receive amounts made 
 available to carry out this section in an advance 
 payment of the entire amounts on October 1 of that 
 fiscal year, or as soon as practicable thereafter;
 (B) invest and reinvest those amounts for the 
 benefit of the grant program; and
 (C) otherwise administer the grant program to 
 support partnerships between the public and private 
 sectors in accordance with this section.
 (3) Requirements.--If the Secretary enters into an 
 agreement with the Foundation under subparagraph (A), any 
 amounts received by the Foundation under this section shall be 
 subject to the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation 
 Establishment Act (16 U.S.C. 3701 et seq.), excluding section 
 10(a) of that Act (16 U.S.C. 3709(a)).
 (d) Annual Reports.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall 
submit to the Congress a report on the implementation of this section, 
including a description of each project that has received funding under 
this section in the preceding fiscal year.
 (e) Prohibition on Federal Land Holdings.--The Federal Government 
may not maintain ownership of any land acquired under this section 
except for the purpose of promptly transferring ownership to a State or 
local entity.
 (f) Sunset.--This section shall have no force or effect after 
September 30, 2030.
 (g) Authorization of Appropriations.--
 (1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated to 
 the Secretary to carry out this section $20,000,000 for each of 
 fiscal years 2023 through 2028, of which not more than 3 
 percent shall be used for administrative costs to carry out 
 this section.
 (2) Use for grant program.--Of any amount made available 
 under this section for each fiscal year, the Secretary shall 
 use at least 75 percent to carry out the grant program under 
 subsection (b) and to provide, or provide for, technical 
 assistance under such program.
 (h) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Approved plans.--The term ``approved plan''--
 (A) means any plan for management of the New York-
 New Jersey Watershed--
 (i) that has been approved by a Federal, 
 regional, State, or local governmental entity, 
 including State Wildlife Action Plans, 
 Comprehensive Conservation Management Plans, 
 Watershed Improvement Plans; or
 (ii) that is determined by the Director, in 
 consultation with such entities, to contribute 
 to the achievement of the purposes of this 
 section; and
 (B) includes the New York-New Jersey Harbor & 
 Estuary Program (HEP) Action Agenda, the Hudson Raritan 
 Comprehensive Restoration Plan, the Hudson River 
 Comprehensive Restoration Plan, the Hudson River 
 Estuary Program Action Agenda, the Hudson River Park 
 Trust Estuarine Sanctuary Management Plan, the Mohawk 
 River Action Agenda, the Sustainable Raritan River 
 Initiative Action Plan, the Lower Passaic and Bronx & 
 Harlem Federal Urban Waters Partnership Workplans, the 
 New Jersey Sports and Exhibition Authority Meadowlands 
 Restoration Plan, as well as other critical 
 conservation projects in the region that achieve the 
 purposes of this section.
 (2) Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director of 
 the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
 (3) Environmental justice.--The term ``environmental 
 justice'' means the fair treatment and meaningful involvement 
 of all people regardless of race, color, national origin, or 
 income, with respect to the development, implementation, and 
 enforcement of environmental laws, regulations, and policies.
 (4) Foundation.--The term ``Foundation'' means the National 
 Fish and Wildlife Foundation.
 (5) Grant program.--The term ``grant program'' means the 
 voluntary New York-New Jersey Watershed Restoration Grant 
 Program established under section 405.
 (6) Program.--The term ``program'' means the New York-New 
 Jersey Watershed Restoration Program established under section 
 404.
 (7) Restoration and protection.--The term ``restoration and 
 protection'' means the conservation, stewardship, and 
 enhancement of habitat for fish and wildlife and water quality 
 to preserve and improve ecosystems and ecological processes on 
 which they depend and for use and enjoyment by the public.
 (8) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of the Interior, acting through the Director.
 (9) Service.--The term ``Service'' means the United States 
 Fish and Wildlife Service.
 (10) Watershed.--The term ``Watershed'' means the New York-
 New Jersey Watershed, which is comprised of all land area whose 
 surface water drains into New York-New Jersey Harbor, the 
 waters contained within that land area, and the estuaries 
 associated with those watersheds.

SEC. 5510. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE NATIONAL MARITIME 
 HERITAGE GRANT PROGRAM.

 Section 308703 of title 54, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)(1), by inserting ``subsection (k) 
 and'' after ``amounts for that purpose under'';
 (2) in subsection (c)(1), by inserting ``subsection (k) 
 and'' after ``amounts for that purpose under''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(k) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are hereby authorized 
to be appropriated to the Secretary $10,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2023 and 2024 to carry out this section.''.

SEC. 5511. BERRYESSA SNOW MOUNTAIN NATIONAL MONUMENT EXPANSION.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Board.--The term ``Board'' means the Board on 
 Geographic Names established by section 2 of the Act of July 
 25, 1947 (61 Stat. 456, chapter 330; 43 U.S.C. 364a).
 (2) Map.--The term ``Map'' means the map entitled 
 ``Proposed Walker Ridge (Molok Luyuk) Addition Berryessa Snow 
 Mountain National Monument'' and dated October 26, 2021.
 (3) Molok luyuk.--The term ``Molok Luyuk'' means Condor 
 Ridge (in the Patwin language).
 (4) National monument.--The term ``National Monument'' 
 means the Berryessa Snow Mountain National Monument established 
 by Presidential Proclamation 9298, dated July 10, 2015 (80 Fed. 
 Reg. 41975), including all land, interests in the land, and 
 objects on the land identified in that Presidential 
 Proclamation.
 (5) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of the Interior.
 (6) Walker ridge (molok luyuk) addition.--The term ``Walker 
 Ridge (Molok Luyuk) Addition'' means the approximately 3,925 
 acres of Federal land (including any interests in, or objects 
 on, the land) administered by the Bureau of Land Management in 
 Lake County, California, and identified as ``Proposed Walker 
 Ridge (Molok Luyuk) Addition'' on the Map.
 (b) National Monument Expansion.--
 (1) Boundary modification.--The boundary of the National 
 Monument is modified to include the Walker Ridge (Molok Luyuk) 
 Addition.
 (2) Map.--
 (A) Corrections.--The Secretary may make clerical 
 and typographical corrections to the Map.
 (B) Public availability; effect.--The Map and any 
 corrections to the Map under subparagraph (A) shall--
 (i) be publicly available on the website of 
 the Bureau of Land Management; and
 (ii) have the same force and effect as if 
 included in this section.
 (3) Administration.--Subject to valid existing rights, the 
 Secretary shall administer the Walker Ridge (Molok Luyuk) 
 Addition--
 (A) as part of the National Monument;
 (B) in accordance with Presidential Proclamation 
 9298, dated July 10, 2015 (80 Fed. Reg. 41975); and
 (C) in accordance with applicable laws (including 
 regulations).
 (c) Management Plan.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 the enactment of this section, the Secretary and the Secretary 
 of Agriculture shall jointly develop a comprehensive management 
 plan for the National Monument in accordance with, and in a 
 manner that fulfills the purposes described in, Presidential 
 Proclamation 9298, dated July 10, 2015 (80 Fed. Reg. 41975).
 (2) Tribal consultation.--The Secretary and the Secretary 
 of Agriculture shall consult with affected federally recognized 
 Indian Tribes in--
 (A) the development of the management plan under 
 paragraph (1); and
 (B) making management decisions relating to the 
 National Monument.
 (3) Continued engagement with indian tribes.--The 
 management plan developed under paragraph (1) shall set forth 
 parameters for continued meaningful engagement with affected 
 federally recognized Indian Tribes in the implementation of the 
 management plan.
 (4) Effect.--Nothing in this section affects the conduct of 
 fire mitigation or suppression activities at the National 
 Monument, including through the use of existing agreements.
 (d) Agreements and Partnerships.--To the maximum extent practicable 
and in accordance with applicable laws, on request of an affected 
federally recognized Indian Tribe, the Secretary (acting through the 
Director of the Bureau of Land Management) and the Secretary of 
Agriculture (acting through the Chief of the Forest Service) shall 
enter into agreements, contracts, and other cooperative and 
collaborative partnerships with the federally recognized Indian Tribe 
regarding management of the National Monument under relevant Federal 
authority, including--
 (1) the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance 
 Act (25 U.S.C. 5301 et seq.);
 (2) the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 
 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.);
 (3) the Tribal Self-Governance Act of 1994 (25 U.S.C. 5361 
 et seq.);
 (4) the Tribal Forest Protection Act of 2004 (25 U.S.C. 
 3115a et seq.);
 (5) the good neighbor authority under section 8206 of the 
 Agricultural Act of 2014 (16 U.S.C. 2113a);
 (6) Executive Order 13175 (25 U.S.C. 5301 note; relating to 
 consultation and coordination with Indian Tribal governments);
 (7) Secretarial Order 3342, issued by the Secretary on 
 October 21, 2016 (relating to identifying opportunities for 
 cooperative and collaborative partnerships with federally 
 recognized Indian Tribes in the management of Federal lands and 
 resources); and
 (8) Joint Secretarial Order 3403, issued by the Secretary 
 and the Secretary of Agriculture on November 15, 2021 (relating 
 to fulfilling the trust responsibility to Indian Tribes in the 
 stewardship of Federal lands and waters).
 (e) Designation of Condor Ridge (Molok Luyuk) in Lake and Colusa 
Counties, California.--
 (1) In general.--The parcel of Federal land administered by 
 the Bureau of Land Management located in Lake and Colusa 
 Counties in the State of California and commonly referred to as 
 ``Walker Ridge'' shall be known and designated as ``Condor 
 Ridge (Molok Luyuk)''.
 (2) References.--Any reference in a law, map, regulation, 
 document, paper, or other record of the United States to the 
 parcel of Federal land described in paragraph (1) shall be 
 deemed to be a reference to ``Condor Ridge (Molok Luyuk)''.
 (3) Map and legal description.--
 (A) Preparation.--
 (i) Initial map.--The Board shall prepare a 
 map and legal description of the parcel of 
 Federal land designated by subsection (a).
 (ii) Corrections.--The Board and the 
 Director of the Bureau of Land Management may 
 make clerical and typographical corrections to 
 the map and legal description prepared under 
 clause (i).
 (B) Consultation.--In preparing the map and legal 
 description under subparagraph (A)(i), the Board shall 
 consult with--
 (i) the Director of the Bureau of Land 
 Management; and
 (ii) affected federally recognized Indian 
 Tribes.
 (C) Public availability; effect.--The map and legal 
 description prepared under subparagraph (A)(i) and any 
 correction to the map or legal description made under 
 subparagraph (A)(ii) shall--
 (i) be publicly available on the website of 
 the Board, the Bureau of Land Management, or 
 both; and
 (ii) have the same force and effect as if 
 included in this section.

 TITLE LVI--INSPECTOR GENERAL INDEPENDENCE AND EMPOWERMENT MATTERS

 Subtitle A--Inspector General Independence

SEC. 5601. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Securing Inspector General 
Independence Act of 2022''.

SEC. 5602. REMOVAL OR TRANSFER OF INSPECTORS GENERAL; PLACEMENT ON NON-
 DUTY STATUS.

 (a) In General.--The Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.) 
is amended--
 (1) in section 3(b)--
 (A) by inserting ``(1)(A)'' after ``(b)'';
 (B) in paragraph (1), as so designated--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), as so designated, 
 in the second sentence--
 (I) by striking ``reasons'' and 
 inserting the following: ``substantive 
 rationale, including detailed and case-
 specific reasons,''; and
 (II) by inserting ``(including to 
 the appropriate congressional 
 committees)'' after ``Houses of 
 Congress''; and
 (ii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(B) If there is an open or completed inquiry into an Inspector 
General that relates to the removal or transfer of the Inspector 
General under subparagraph (A), the written communication required 
under that subparagraph shall--
 ``(i) identify each entity that is conducting, or that 
 conducted, the inquiry; and
 ``(ii) in the case of a completed inquiry, contain the 
 findings made during the inquiry.''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2)(A) Subject to the other provisions of this paragraph, only 
the President may place an Inspector General on non-duty status.
 ``(B) If the President places an Inspector General on non-duty 
status, the President shall communicate in writing the substantive 
rationale, including detailed and case-specific reasons, for the change 
in status to both Houses of Congress (including to the appropriate 
congressional committees) not later than 15 days before the date on 
which the change in status takes effect, except that the President may 
submit that communication not later than the date on which the change 
in status takes effect if--
 ``(i) the President has made a determination that the 
 continued presence of the Inspector General in the workplace 
 poses a threat described in any of clauses (i) through (iv) of 
 section 6329b(b)(2)(A) of title 5, United States Code; and
 ``(ii) in the communication, the President includes a 
 report on the determination described in clause (i), which 
 shall include--
 ``(I) a specification of which clause of section 
 6329b(b)(2)(A) of title 5, United States Code, the 
 President has determined applies under clause (i) of 
 this subparagraph;
 ``(II) the substantive rationale, including 
 detailed and case-specific reasons, for the 
 determination made under clause (i);
 ``(III) an identification of each entity that is 
 conducting, or that conducted, any inquiry upon which 
 the determination under clause (i) was made; and
 ``(IV) in the case of an inquiry described in 
 subclause (III) that is completed, the findings made 
 during that inquiry.
 ``(C) The President may not place an Inspector General on non-duty 
status during the 30-day period preceding the date on which the 
Inspector General is removed or transferred under paragraph (1)(A) 
unless the President--
 ``(i) has made a determination that the continued presence 
 of the Inspector General in the workplace poses a threat 
 described in any of clauses (i) through (iv) of section 
 6329b(b)(2)(A) of title 5, United States Code; and
 ``(ii) not later than the date on which the change in 
 status takes effect, submits to both Houses of Congress 
 (including to the appropriate congressional committees) a 
 written communication that contains the information required 
 under subparagraph (B), including the report required under 
 clause (ii) of that subparagraph.
 ``(D) For the purposes of this paragraph--
 ``(i) the term `Inspector General'--
 ``(I) means an Inspector General who was appointed 
 by the President, without regard to whether the Senate 
 provided advice and consent with respect to that 
 appointment; and
 ``(II) includes the Inspector General of an 
 establishment, the Inspector General of the 
 Intelligence Community, the Inspector General of the 
 Central Intelligence Agency, the Special Inspector 
 General for Afghanistan Reconstruction, the Special 
 Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief 
 Program, and the Special Inspector General for Pandemic 
 Recovery; and
 ``(ii) a reference to the removal or transfer of an 
 Inspector General under paragraph (1), or to the written 
 communication described in that paragraph, shall be considered 
 to be--
 ``(I) in the case of the Inspector General of the 
 Intelligence Community, a reference to section 
 103H(c)(4) of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 
 U.S.C. 3033(c)(4));
 ``(II) in the case of the Inspector General of the 
 Central Intelligence Agency, a reference to section 
 17(b)(6) of the Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949 
 (50 U.S.C. 3517(b)(6));
 ``(III) in the case of the Special Inspector 
 General for Afghanistan Reconstruction, a reference to 
 section 1229(c)(6) of the National Defense 
 Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008 (Public Law 110-
 181; 122 Stat. 378);
 ``(IV) in the case of the Special Inspector General 
 for the Troubled Asset Relief Program, a reference to 
 section 121(b)(4) of the Emergency Economic 
 Stabilization Act of 2008 (12 U.S.C. 5231(b)(4)); and
 ``(V) in the case of the Special Inspector General 
 for Pandemic Recovery, a reference to section 
 4018(b)(3) of the CARES Act (15 U.S.C. 9053(b)(3)).''; 
 and
 (2) in section 8G(e)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``or placement 
 on non-duty status'' after ``a removal'';
 (B) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) by inserting ``(A)'' after ``(2)'';
 (ii) in subparagraph (A), as so designated, 
 in the first sentence--
 (I) by striking ``reasons'' and 
 inserting the following: ``substantive 
 rationale, including detailed and case-
 specific reasons,''; and
 (II) by inserting ``(including to 
 the appropriate congressional 
 committees)'' after ``Houses of 
 Congress''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(B) If there is an open or completed inquiry into an Inspector 
General that relates to the removal or transfer of the Inspector 
General under subparagraph (A), the written communication required 
under that subparagraph shall--
 ``(i) identify each entity that is conducting, or that 
 conducted, the inquiry; and
 ``(ii) in the case of a completed inquiry, contain the 
 findings made during the inquiry.''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3)(A) Subject to the other provisions of this paragraph, only 
the head of the applicable designated Federal entity (referred to in 
this paragraph as the `covered official') may place an Inspector 
General on non-duty status.
 ``(B) If a covered official places an Inspector General on non-duty 
status, the covered official shall communicate in writing the 
substantive rationale, including detailed and case-specific reasons, 
for the change in status to both Houses of Congress (including to the 
appropriate congressional committees) not later than 15 days before the 
date on which the change in status takes effect, except that the 
covered official may submit that communication not later than the date 
on which the change in status takes effect if--
 ``(i) the covered official has made a determination that 
 the continued presence of the Inspector General in the 
 workplace poses a threat described in any of clauses (i) 
 through (iv) of section 6329b(b)(2)(A) of title 5, United 
 States Code; and
 ``(ii) in the communication, the covered official includes 
 a report on the determination described in clause (i), which 
 shall include--
 ``(I) a specification of which clause of section 
 6329b(b)(2)(A) of title 5, United States Code, the 
 covered official has determined applies under clause 
 (i) of this subparagraph;
 ``(II) the substantive rationale, including 
 detailed and case-specific reasons, for the 
 determination made under clause (i);
 ``(III) an identification of each entity that is 
 conducting, or that conducted, any inquiry upon which 
 the determination under clause (i) was made; and
 ``(IV) in the case of an inquiry described in 
 subclause (III) that is completed, the findings made 
 during that inquiry.
 ``(C) A covered official may not place an Inspector General on non-
duty status during the 30-day period preceding the date on which the 
Inspector General is removed or transferred under paragraph (2)(A) 
unless the covered official--
 ``(i) has made a determination that the continued presence 
 of the Inspector General in the workplace poses a threat 
 described in any of clauses (i) through (iv) of section 
 6329b(b)(2)(A) of title 5, United States Code; and
 ``(ii) not later than the date on which the change in 
 status takes effect, submits to both Houses of Congress 
 (including to the appropriate congressional committees) a 
 written communication that contains the information required 
 under subparagraph (B), including the report required under 
 clause (ii) of that subparagraph.
 ``(D) Nothing in this paragraph may be construed to limit or 
otherwise modify--
 ``(i) any statutory protection that is afforded to an 
 Inspector General; or
 ``(ii) any other action that a covered official may take 
 under law with respect to an Inspector General.''.
 (b) Technical and Conforming Amendment.--Section 12(3) of the 
Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.) is amended by inserting 
``except as otherwise expressly provided,'' before ``the term''.

SEC. 5603. VACANCY IN POSITION OF INSPECTOR GENERAL.

 (a) In General.--Section 3 of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 
U.S.C. App.) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(h)(1) In this subsection--
 ``(A) the term `first assistant to the position of 
 Inspector General' means, with respect to an Office of 
 Inspector General--
 ``(i) an individual who, as of the day before the 
 date on which the Inspector General dies, resigns, or 
 otherwise becomes unable to perform the functions and 
 duties of that position--
 ``(I) is serving in a position in that 
 Office; and
 ``(II) has been designated in writing by 
 the Inspector General, through an order of 
 succession or otherwise, as the first assistant 
 to the position of Inspector General; or
 ``(ii) if the Inspector General has not made a 
 designation described in clause (i)(II)--
 ``(I) the Principal Deputy Inspector 
 General of that Office, as of the day before 
 the date on which the Inspector General dies, 
 resigns, or otherwise becomes unable to perform 
 the functions and duties of that position; or
 ``(II) if there is no Principal Deputy 
 Inspector General of that Office, the Deputy 
 Inspector General of that Office, as of the day 
 before the date on which the Inspector General 
 dies, resigns, or otherwise becomes unable to 
 perform the functions and duties of that 
 position; and
 ``(B) the term `Inspector General'--
 ``(i) means an Inspector General who is appointed 
 by the President, by and with the advice and consent of 
 the Senate; and
 ``(ii) includes the Inspector General of an 
 establishment, the Inspector General of the 
 Intelligence Community, the Inspector General of the 
 Central Intelligence Agency, the Special Inspector 
 General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program, and the 
 Special Inspector General for Pandemic Recovery.
 ``(2) If an Inspector General dies, resigns, or is otherwise unable 
to perform the functions and duties of the position--
 ``(A) section 3345(a) of title 5, United States Code, and 
 section 103(e) of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 
 3025(e)) shall not apply;
 ``(B) subject to paragraph (4), the first assistant to the 
 position of Inspector General shall perform the functions and 
 duties of the Inspector General temporarily in an acting 
 capacity subject to the time limitations of section 3346 of 
 title 5, United States Code; and
 ``(C) notwithstanding subparagraph (B), and subject to 
 paragraphs (4) and (5), the President (and only the President) 
 may direct an officer or employee of any Office of an Inspector 
 General to perform the functions and duties of the Inspector 
 General temporarily in an acting capacity subject to the time 
 limitations of section 3346 of title 5, United States Code, 
 only if--
 ``(i) during the 365-day period preceding the date 
 of death, resignation, or beginning of inability to 
 serve of the Inspector General, the officer or employee 
 served in a position in an Office of an Inspector 
 General for not less than 90 days, except that--
 ``(I) the requirement under this clause 
 shall not apply if the officer is an Inspector 
 General; and
 ``(II) for the purposes of this 
 subparagraph, performing the functions and 
 duties of an Inspector General temporarily in 
 an acting capacity does not qualify as service 
 in a position in an Office of an Inspector 
 General;
 ``(ii) the rate of pay for the position of the 
 officer or employee described in clause (i) is equal to 
 or greater than the minimum rate of pay payable for a 
 position at GS-15 of the General Schedule;
 ``(iii) the officer or employee has demonstrated 
 ability in accounting, auditing, financial analysis, 
 law, management analysis, public administration, or 
 investigations; and
 ``(iv) not later than 30 days before the date on 
 which the direction takes effect, the President 
 communicates in writing to both Houses of Congress 
 (including to the appropriate congressional committees) 
 the substantive rationale, including the detailed and 
 case-specific reasons, for such direction, including 
 the reason for the direction that someone other than 
 the individual who is performing the functions and 
 duties of the Inspector General temporarily in an 
 acting capacity (as of the date on which the President 
 issues that direction) perform those functions and 
 duties temporarily in an acting capacity.
 ``(3) Notwithstanding section 3345(a) of title 5, United States 
Code, section 103(e) of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 
3025(e)), and subparagraphs (B) and (C) of paragraph (2), and subject 
to paragraph (4), during any period in which an Inspector General is on 
non-duty status--
 ``(A) the first assistant to the position of Inspector 
 General shall perform the functions and duties of the position 
 temporarily in an acting capacity subject to the time 
 limitations of section 3346 of title 5, United States Code; and
 ``(B) if the first assistant described in subparagraph (A) 
 dies, resigns, or becomes otherwise unable to perform those 
 functions and duties, the President (and only the President) 
 may direct an officer or employee in that Office of Inspector 
 General to perform those functions and duties temporarily in an 
 acting capacity, subject to the time limitations of section 
 3346 of title 5, United States Code, if--
 ``(i) that direction satisfies the requirements 
 under clauses (ii), (iii), and (iv) of paragraph 
 (2)(C); and
 ``(ii) that officer or employee served in a 
 position in that Office of Inspector General for not 
 fewer than 90 of the 365 days preceding the date on 
 which the President makes that direction.
 ``(4) An individual may perform the functions and duties of an 
Inspector General temporarily and in an acting capacity under 
subparagraph (B) or (C) of paragraph (2), or under paragraph (3), with 
respect to only 1 Inspector General position at any given time.
 ``(5) If the President makes a direction under paragraph (2)(C), 
during the 30-day period preceding the date on which the direction of 
the President takes effect, the functions and duties of the position of 
the applicable Inspector General shall be performed by--
 ``(A) the first assistant to the position of Inspector 
 General; or
 ``(B) the individual performing those functions and duties 
 temporarily in an acting capacity, as of the date on which the 
 President issues that direction, if that individual is an 
 individual other than the first assistant to the position of 
 Inspector General.''.
 (b) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in the amendment made by 
subsection (a) may be construed to limit the applicability of sections 
3345 through 3349d of title 5, United States Code (commonly known as 
the ``Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998''), other than with respect 
to section 3345(a) of that title.
 (c) Effective Date.--
 (1) Definition.--In this subsection, the term ``Inspector 
 General'' has the meaning given the term in subsection 
 (h)(1)(B) of section 3 of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 
 U.S.C. App.), as added by subsection (a) of this section.
 (2) Applicability.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B), this section, and the amendments made by this 
 section, shall take effect on the date of enactment of 
 this Act.
 (B) Existing vacancies.--If, as of the date of 
 enactment of this Act, an individual is performing the 
 functions and duties of an Inspector General 
 temporarily in an acting capacity, this section, and 
 the amendments made by this section, shall take effect 
 with respect to that Inspector General position on the 
 date that is 30 days after the date of enactment of 
 this Act.

SEC. 5604. OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL WHISTLEBLOWER COMPLAINTS.

 (a) Whistleblower Protection Coordinator.--Section 3(d)(1)(C) of 
the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.) is amended--
 (1) in clause (i), in the matter preceding subclause (I), 
 by inserting ``, including employees of that Office of 
 Inspector General'' after ``employees''; and
 (2) in clause (iii), by inserting ``(including the 
 Integrity Committee of that Council)'' after ``and 
 Efficiency''.
 (b) Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and 
Efficiency.--Section 11(c)(5)(B) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 
(5 U.S.C. App.) is amended by striking ``, allegations of reprisal,'' 
and inserting the following: ``and allegations of reprisal (including 
the timely and appropriate handling and consideration of protected 
disclosures and allegations of reprisal that are internal to an Office 
of Inspector General)''.

 Subtitle B--Presidential Explanation of Failure to Nominate an 
 Inspector General

SEC. 5611. PRESIDENTIAL EXPLANATION OF FAILURE TO NOMINATE AN INSPECTOR 
 GENERAL.

 (a) In General.--Subchapter III of chapter 33 of title 5, United 
States Code, is amended by inserting after section 3349d the following:
``Sec. 3349e. Presidential explanation of failure to nominate an 
 inspector general
 ``If the President fails to make a formal nomination for a vacant 
inspector general position that requires a formal nomination by the 
President to be filled within the period beginning on the later of the 
date on which the vacancy occurred or on which a nomination is 
rejected, withdrawn, or returned, and ending on the day that is 210 
days after that date, the President shall communicate, within 30 days 
after the end of such period and not later than June 1 of each year 
thereafter, to the appropriate congressional committees, as defined in 
section 12 of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.)--
 ``(1) the reasons why the President has not yet made a 
 formal nomination; and
 ``(2) a target date for making a formal nomination.''.
 (b) Technical and Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for 
subchapter III of chapter 33 of title 5, United States Code, is amended 
by inserting after the item relating to section 3349d the following:

``3349e. Presidential explanation of failure to nominate an Inspector 
 General.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
take effect--
 (1) on the date of enactment of this Act with respect to 
 any vacancy first occurring on or after that date; and
 (2) on the day that is 210 days after the date of enactment 
 of this Act with respect to any vacancy that occurred before 
 the date of enactment of this Act.

Subtitle C--Integrity Committee of the Council of Inspectors General on 
 Integrity and Efficiency Transparency

SEC. 5621. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Integrity Committee 
Transparency Act of 2022''.

SEC. 5622. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION TO BE INCLUDED IN REQUESTS AND 
 REPORTS TO CONGRESS.

 Section 11(d) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.) 
is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (5)(B)(ii), by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting ``, the length of time the Integrity 
 Committee has been evaluating the allegation of wrongdoing, and 
 a description of any previous written notice provided under 
 this clause with respect to the allegation of wrongdoing, 
 including the description provided for why additional time was 
 needed.''; and
 (2) in paragraph (8)(A)(ii), by inserting ``or corrective 
 action'' after ``disciplinary action''.

SEC. 5623. AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION TO CONGRESS ON CERTAIN 
 ALLEGATIONS OF WRONGDOING CLOSED WITHOUT REFERRAL.

 Section 11(d)(5)(B) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. 
App.) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(iii) Availability of information to 
 congress on certain allegations of wrongdoing 
 closed without referral.--
 ``(I) In general.--With respect to 
 an allegation of wrongdoing made by a 
 member of Congress that is closed by 
 the Integrity Committee without 
 referral to the Chairperson of the 
 Integrity Committee to initiate an 
 investigation, the Chairperson of the 
 Integrity Committee shall, not later 
 than 60 days after closing the 
 allegation of wrongdoing, provide a 
 written description of the nature of 
 the allegation of wrongdoing and how 
 the Integrity Committee evaluated the 
 allegation of wrongdoing to--
 ``(aa) the Chair and 
 Ranking Minority Member of the 
 Committee on Homeland Security 
 and Governmental Affairs of the 
 Senate; and
 ``(bb) the Chair and 
 Ranking Minority Member of the 
 Committee on Oversight and 
 Reform of the House of 
 Representatives.
 ``(II) Requirement to forward.--The 
 Chairperson of the Integrity Committee 
 shall forward any written description 
 or update provided under this clause to 
 the members of the Integrity Committee 
 and to the Chairperson of the 
 Council.''.

SEC. 5624. SEMIANNUAL REPORT.

 Section 11(d)(9) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. 
App.) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(9) Semiannual report.--On or before May 31, 2022, and 
 every 6 months thereafter, the Council shall submit to Congress 
 and the President a report on the activities of the Integrity 
 Committee during the immediately preceding 6-month periods 
 ending March 31 and September 30, which shall include the 
 following with respect to allegations of wrongdoing that are 
 made against Inspectors General and staff members of the 
 various Offices of Inspector General described in paragraph 
 (4)(C):
 ``(A) An overview and analysis of the allegations 
 of wrongdoing disposed of by the Integrity Committee, 
 including--
 ``(i) analysis of the positions held by 
 individuals against whom allegations were made, 
 including the duties affiliated with such 
 positions;
 ``(ii) analysis of the categories or types 
 of the allegations of wrongdoing; and
 ``(iii) a summary of disposition of all the 
 allegations.
 ``(B) The number of allegations received by the 
 Integrity Committee.
 ``(C) The number of allegations referred to the 
 Department of Justice or the Office of Special Counsel, 
 including the number of allegations referred for 
 criminal investigation.
 ``(D) The number of allegations referred to the 
 Chairperson of the Integrity Committee for 
 investigation, a general description of the status of 
 such investigations, and a summary of the findings of 
 investigations completed.
 ``(E) An overview and analysis of allegations of 
 wrongdoing received by the Integrity Committee during 
 any previous reporting period, but remained pending 
 during some part of the six months covered by the 
 report, including--
 ``(i) analysis of the positions held by 
 individuals against whom allegations were made, 
 including the duties affiliated with such 
 positions;
 ``(ii) analysis of the categories or types 
 of the allegations of wrongdoing; and
 ``(iii) a summary of disposition of all the 
 allegations.
 ``(F) The number and category or type of pending 
 investigations.
 ``(G) For each allegation received--
 ``(i) the date on which the investigation 
 was opened;
 ``(ii) the date on which the allegation was 
 disposed of, as applicable; and
 ``(iii) the case number associated with the 
 allegation.
 ``(H) The nature and number of allegations to the 
 Integrity Committee closed without referral, including 
 the justification for why each allegation was closed 
 without referral.
 ``(I) A brief description of any difficulty 
 encountered by the Integrity Committee when receiving, 
 evaluating, investigating, or referring for 
 investigation an allegation received by the Integrity 
 Committee, including a brief description of--
 ``(i) any attempt to prevent or hinder an 
 investigation; or
 ``(ii) concerns about the integrity or 
 operations at an Office of Inspector General.
 ``(J) Other matters that the Council considers 
 appropriate.''.

SEC. 5625. ADDITIONAL REPORTS.

 Section 5 of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.) is 
amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsections (e) and (f) as subsections 
 (g) and (h), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (d) the following:
 ``(e) Additional Reports.--
 ``(1) Report to inspector general.--The Chairperson of the 
 Integrity Committee of the Council of the Inspectors General on 
 Integrity and Efficiency shall, immediately whenever the 
 Chairperson of the Integrity Committee becomes aware of 
 particularly serious or flagrant problems, abuses, or 
 deficiencies relating to the administration of programs and 
 operations of an Office of Inspector General for which the 
 Integrity Committee may receive, review, and refer for 
 investigation allegations of wrongdoing under section 11(d), 
 submit a report to the Inspector General who leads the Office 
 at which the serious or flagrant problems, abuses, or 
 deficiencies were alleged.
 ``(2) Report to president, congress, and the 
 establishment.--Not later than 7 days after the date on which 
 an Inspector General receives a report submitted under 
 paragraph (1), the Inspector General shall submit to the 
 President, the appropriate congressional committees, and the 
 head of the establishment--
 ``(A) the report received under paragraph (1); and
 ``(B) a report by the Inspector General containing 
 any comments the Inspector General determines 
 appropriate.''.

SEC. 5626. REQUIREMENT TO REPORT FINAL DISPOSITION TO CONGRESS.

 Section 11(d)(8)(B) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. 
App.) is amended by inserting ``and the appropriate congressional 
committees'' after ``Integrity Committee''.

SEC. 5627. INVESTIGATIONS OF OFFICES OF INSPECTORS GENERAL OF 
 ESTABLISHMENTS BY THE INTEGRITY COMMITTEE.

 Section 11(d)(7)(B)(i)(V) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 
U.S.C. App.) is amended by inserting ``, and that an investigation of 
an Office of Inspector General of an establishment is conducted by 
another Office of Inspector General of an establishment'' after 
``size''.

Subtitle D--Notice of Ongoing Investigations When There Is a Change in 
 Status of Inspector General

SEC. 5631. NOTICE OF ONGOING INVESTIGATIONS WHEN THERE IS A CHANGE IN 
 STATUS OF INSPECTOR GENERAL.

 Section 5 of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.) is 
amended by inserting after subsection (e), as added by section 5625 of 
this title, the following:
 ``(f) Not later than 15 days after an Inspector General is removed, 
placed on paid or unpaid non-duty status, or transferred to another 
position or location within an establishment, the officer or employee 
performing the functions and duties of the Inspector General 
temporarily in an acting capacity shall submit to the Committee on 
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate and the 
Committee on Oversight and Reform of the House of Representatives 
information regarding work being conducted by the Office as of the date 
on which the Inspector General was removed, placed on paid or unpaid 
non-duty status, or transferred, which shall include--
 ``(1) for each investigation--
 ``(A) the type of alleged offense;
 ``(B) the fiscal quarter in which the Office 
 initiated the investigation;
 ``(C) the relevant Federal agency, including the 
 relevant component of that Federal agency for any 
 Federal agency listed in section 901(b) of title 31, 
 United States Code, under investigation or affiliated 
 with the individual or entity under investigation; and
 ``(D) whether the investigation is administrative, 
 civil, criminal, or a combination thereof, if known; 
 and
 ``(2) for any work not described in paragraph (1)--
 ``(A) a description of the subject matter and 
 scope;
 ``(B) the relevant agency, including the relevant 
 component of that Federal agency, under review;
 ``(C) the date on which the Office initiated the 
 work; and
 ``(D) the expected time frame for completion.''.

 Subtitle E--Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and 
 Efficiency Report on Expenditures

SEC. 5641. CIGIE REPORT ON EXPENDITURES.

 Section 11(c)(3) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. 
App.) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(D) Report on expenditures.--Not later than 
 November 30 of each year, the Chairperson shall submit 
 to the appropriate committees or subcommittees of 
 Congress, including the Committee on Appropriations of 
 the Senate and the Committee on Appropriations of the 
 House of Representatives, a report on the expenditures 
 of the Council for the preceding fiscal year, including 
 from direct appropriations to the Council, interagency 
 funding pursuant to subparagraph (A), a revolving fund 
 pursuant to subparagraph (B), or any other source.''.

 Subtitle F--Notice of Refusal to Provide Inspectors General Access

SEC. 5651. NOTICE OF REFUSAL TO PROVIDE INFORMATION OR ASSISTANCE TO 
 INSPECTORS GENERAL.

 Section 6(c) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.) 
is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) If the information or assistance that is the subject of a 
report under paragraph (2) is not provided to the Inspector General by 
the date that is 30 days after the report is made, the Inspector 
General shall submit a notice that the information or assistance 
requested has not been provided by the head of the establishment 
involved or the head of the Federal agency involved, as applicable, to 
the appropriate congressional committees.''.

Subtitle G--Training Resources for Inspectors General and Other Matters

SEC. 5671. TRAINING RESOURCES FOR INSPECTORS GENERAL.

 Section 11(c)(1) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. 
App.) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (E) through (I) as 
 subparagraphs (F) through (J), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after subparagraph (D) the following:
 ``(E) support the professional development of 
 Inspectors General, including by providing training 
 opportunities on the duties, responsibilities, and 
 authorities under this Act and on topics relevant to 
 Inspectors General and the work of Inspectors General, 
 as identified by Inspectors General and the Council.''.

SEC. 5672. DEFINITION OF APPROPRIATE CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEES.

 The Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.) is amended--
 (1) in section 5--
 (A) in subsection (b), in the matter preceding 
 paragraph (1), by striking ``committees or 
 subcommittees of the Congress'' and inserting 
 ``congressional committees''; and
 (B) in subsection (d), by striking ``committees or 
 subcommittees of Congress'' and inserting 
 ``congressional committees'';
 (2) in section 6(h)(4)--
 (A) in subparagraph (B), by striking 
 ``Government''; and
 (B) by amending subparagraph (C) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(C) Any other relevant congressional committee or 
 subcommittee of jurisdiction.'';
 (3) in section 8--
 (A) in subsection (b)--
 (i) in paragraph (3), by striking ``the 
 Committees on Armed Services and Governmental 
 Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on 
 Armed Services and the Committee on Government 
 Reform and Oversight of the House of 
 Representatives and to other appropriate 
 committees or subcommittees of the Congress'' 
 and inserting ``the appropriate congressional 
 committees, including the Committee on Armed 
 Services of the Senate and the Committee on 
 Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives''; and
 (ii) in paragraph (4), by striking ``and to 
 other appropriate committees or 
 subcommittees''; and
 (B) in subsection (f)--
 (i) in paragraph (1), by striking ``the 
 Committees on Armed Services and on Homeland 
 Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate 
 and the Committees on Armed Services and on 
 Oversight and Government Reform of the House of 
 Representatives and to other appropriate 
 committees or subcommittees of Congress'' and 
 inserting ``the appropriate congressional 
 committees, including the Committee on Armed 
 Services of the Senate and the Committee on 
 Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives''; and
 (ii) in paragraph (2), by striking 
 ``committees or subcommittees of the Congress'' 
 and inserting ``congressional committees'';
 (4) in section 8D--
 (A) in subsection (a)(3), by striking ``Committees 
 on Governmental Affairs and Finance of the Senate and 
 the Committees on Government Operations and Ways and 
 Means of the House of Representatives, and to other 
 appropriate committees or subcommittees of the 
 Congress'' and inserting ``appropriate congressional 
 committees, including the Committee on Finance of the 
 Senate and the Committee on Ways and Means of the House 
 of Representatives''; and
 (B) in subsection (g)--
 (i) in paragraph (1)--
 (I) by striking ``committees or 
 subcommittees of the Congress'' and 
 inserting ``congressional committees''; 
 and
 (II) by striking ``Committees on 
 Governmental Affairs and Finance of the 
 Senate and the Committees on Government 
 Reform and Oversight and Ways and Means 
 of the House of Representatives'' and 
 inserting ``Committee on Finance of the 
 Senate and the Committee on Ways and 
 Means of the House of 
 Representatives''; and
 (ii) in paragraph (2), by striking 
 ``committees or subcommittees of Congress'' and 
 inserting ``congressional committees'';
 (5) in section 8E--
 (A) in subsection (a)(3), by striking ``Committees 
 on Governmental Affairs and Judiciary of the Senate and 
 the Committees on Government Operations and Judiciary 
 of the House of Representatives, and to other 
 appropriate committees or subcommittees of the 
 Congress'' and inserting ``appropriate congressional 
 committees, including the Committee on the Judiciary of 
 the Senate and the Committee on the Judiciary of the 
 House of Representatives''; and
 (B) in subsection (c)--
 (i) by striking ``committees or 
 subcommittees of the Congress'' and inserting 
 ``congressional committees''; and
 (ii) by striking ``Committees on the 
 Judiciary and Governmental Affairs of the 
 Senate and the Committees on the Judiciary and 
 Government Operations of the House of 
 Representatives'' and inserting ``Committee on 
 the Judiciary of the Senate and the Committee 
 on the Judiciary of the House of 
 Representatives'';
 (6) in section 8G--
 (A) in subsection (d)(2)(E), in the matter 
 preceding clause (i), by inserting ``the appropriate 
 congressional committees, including'' after ``are''; 
 and
 (B) in subsection (f)(3)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A)(iii), by striking 
 ``Committee on Governmental Affairs of the 
 Senate and the Committee on Government Reform 
 and Oversight of the House of Representatives, 
 and to other appropriate committees or 
 subcommittees of the Congress'' and inserting 
 ``the appropriate congressional committees''; 
 and
 (ii) by striking subparagraph (C);
 (7) in section 8I--
 (A) in subsection (a)(3), in the matter preceding 
 subparagraph (A), by striking ``committees and 
 subcommittees of Congress'' and inserting 
 ``congressional committees''; and
 (B) in subsection (d), by striking ``committees and 
 subcommittees of Congress'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``congressional committees'';
 (8) in section 8N(b), by striking ``committees of 
 Congress'' and inserting ``congressional committees'';
 (9) in section 11--
 (A) in subsection (b)(3)(B)(viii)--
 (i) by striking subclauses (III) and (IV);
 (ii) in subclause (I), by adding ``and'' at 
 the end; and
 (iii) by amending subclause (II) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(II) the appropriate 
 congressional committees.''; and
 (B) in subsection (d)(8)(A)(iii), by striking ``to 
 the'' and all that follows through ``jurisdiction'' and 
 inserting ``to the appropriate congressional 
 committees''; and
 (10) in section 12--
 (A) in paragraph (4), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in paragraph (5), by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(6) the term `appropriate congressional committees' 
 means--
 ``(A) the Committee on Homeland Security and 
 Governmental Affairs of the Senate;
 ``(B) the Committee on Oversight and Reform of the 
 House of Representatives; and
 ``(C) any other relevant congressional committee or 
 subcommittee of jurisdiction.''.

SEC. 5673. SEMIANNUAL REPORTS.

 The Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.) is amended--
 (1) in section 4(a)(2)--
 (A) by inserting ``, including'' after ``to make 
 recommendations''; and
 (B) by inserting a comma after ``section 5(a)'';
 (2) in section 5--
 (A) in subsection (a)--
 (i) by striking paragraphs (1) through (12) 
 and inserting the following:
 ``(1) a description of significant problems, abuses, and 
 deficiencies relating to the administration of programs and 
 operations of the establishment and associated reports and 
 recommendations for corrective action made by the Office;
 ``(2) an identification of each recommendation made before 
 the reporting period, for which corrective action has not been 
 completed, including the potential costs savings associated 
 with the recommendation;
 ``(3) a summary of significant investigations closed during 
 the reporting period;
 ``(4) an identification of the total number of convictions 
 during the reporting period resulting from investigations;
 ``(5) information regarding each audit, inspection, or 
 evaluation report issued during the reporting period, 
 including--
 ``(A) a listing of each audit, inspection, or 
 evaluation;
 ``(B) if applicable, the total dollar value of 
 questioned costs (including a separate category for the 
 dollar value of unsupported costs) and the dollar value 
 of recommendations that funds be put to better use, 
 including whether a management decision had been made 
 by the end of the reporting period;
 ``(6) information regarding any management decision made 
 during the reporting period with respect to any audit, 
 inspection, or evaluation issued during a previous reporting 
 period;'';
 (ii) by redesignating paragraphs (13) 
 through (22) as paragraphs (7) through (16), 
 respectively;
 (iii) by amending paragraph (13), as so 
 redesignated, to read as follows:
 ``(13) a report on each investigation conducted by the 
 Office where allegations of misconduct were substantiated 
 involving a senior Government employee or senior official (as 
 defined by the Office) if the establishment does not have 
 senior Government employees, which shall include--
 ``(A) the name of the senior Government employee, 
 if already made public by the Office; and
 ``(B) a detailed description of--
 ``(i) the facts and circumstances of the 
 investigation; and
 ``(ii) the status and disposition of the 
 matter, including--
 ``(I) if the matter was referred to 
 the Department of Justice, the date of 
 the referral; and
 ``(II) if the Department of Justice 
 declined the referral, the date of the 
 declination;''; and
 (iv) by amending paragraph (15), as so 
 redesignated, to read as follows:
 ``(15) information related to interference by the 
 establishment, including--
 ``(A) a detailed description of any attempt by the 
 establishment to interfere with the independence of the 
 Office, including--
 ``(i) with budget constraints designed to 
 limit the capabilities of the Office; and
 ``(ii) incidents where the establishment 
 has resisted or objected to oversight 
 activities of the Office or restricted or 
 significantly delayed access to information, 
 including the justification of the 
 establishment for such action; and
 ``(B) a summary of each report made to the head of 
 the establishment under section 6(c)(2) during the 
 reporting period;''; and
 (B) in subsection (b)--
 (i) by striking paragraphs (2) and (3) and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(2) where final action on audit, inspection, and 
 evaluation reports had not been taken before the commencement 
 of the reporting period, statistical tables showing--
 ``(A) with respect to management decisions--
 ``(i) for each report, whether a management 
 decision was made during the reporting period;
 ``(ii) if a management decision was made 
 during the reporting period, the dollar value 
 of disallowed costs and funds to be put to 
 better use as agreed to in the management 
 decision; and
 ``(iii) total number of reports where a 
 management decision was made during the 
 reporting period and the total corresponding 
 dollar value of disallowed costs and funds to 
 be put to better use as agreed to in the 
 management decision; and
 ``(B) with respect to final actions--
 ``(i) whether, if a management decision was 
 made before the end of the reporting period, 
 final action was taken during the reporting 
 period;
 ``(ii) if final action was taken, the 
 dollar value of--
 ``(I) disallowed costs that were 
 recovered by management through 
 collection, offset, property in lieu of 
 cash, or otherwise;
 ``(II) disallowed costs that were 
 written off by management;
 ``(III) disallowed costs and funds 
 to be put to better use not yet 
 recovered or written off by management;
 ``(IV) recommendations that were 
 completed; and
 ``(V) recommendations that 
 management has subsequently concluded 
 should not or could not be implemented 
 or completed; and
 ``(iii) total number of reports where final 
 action was not taken and total number of 
 reports where final action was taken, including 
 the total corresponding dollar value of 
 disallowed costs and funds to be put to better 
 use as agreed to in the management 
 decisions;'';
 (ii) by redesignating paragraph (4) as 
 paragraph (3);
 (iii) in paragraph (3), as so redesignated, 
 by striking ``subsection (a)(20)(A)'' and 
 inserting ``subsection (a)(14)(A)''; and
 (iv) by striking paragraph (5) and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(4) a statement explaining why final action has not been 
 taken with respect to each audit, inspection, and evaluation 
 report in which a management decision has been made but final 
 action has not yet been taken, except that such statement--
 ``(A) may exclude reports if--
 ``(i) a management decision was made within 
 the preceding year; or
 ``(ii) the report is under formal 
 administrative or judicial appeal or management 
 of the establishment has agreed to pursue a 
 legislative solution; and
 ``(B) shall identify the number of reports in each 
 category so excluded.'';
 (C) by redesignating subsection (h), as so 
 redesignated by section __305 of this title, as 
 subsection (i); and
 (D) by inserting after subsection (g), as so 
 redesignated by section __305 of this title, the 
 following:
 ``(h) If an Office has published any portion of the report or 
information required under subsection (a) to the website of the Office 
or on oversight.gov, the Office may elect to provide links to the 
relevant webpage or website in the report of the Office under 
subsection (a) in lieu of including the information in that report.''.

SEC. 5674. SUBMISSION OF REPORTS THAT SPECIFICALLY IDENTIFY NON-
 GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS OR BUSINESS ENTITIES.

 (a) In General.--Section 5(g) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 
(5 U.S.C. App.), as so redesignated by section __305 of this title, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(6)(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), if an audit, 
evaluation, inspection, or other non-investigative report prepared by 
an Inspector General specifically identifies a specific non-
governmental organization or business entity, whether or not the non-
governmental organization or business entity is the subject of that 
audit, evaluation, inspection, or non-investigative report--
 ``(i) the Inspector General shall notify the non-
 governmental organization or business entity;
 ``(ii) the non-governmental organization or business entity 
 shall have--
 ``(I) 30 days to review the audit, evaluation, 
 inspection, or non-investigative report beginning on 
 the date of publication of the audit, evaluation, 
 inspection, or non-investigative report; and
 ``(II) the opportunity to submit a written response 
 for the purpose of clarifying or providing additional 
 context as it directly relates to each instance wherein 
 an audit, evaluation, inspection, or non-investigative 
 report specifically identifies that non-governmental 
 organization or business entity; and
 ``(iii) if a written response is submitted under clause 
 (ii)(II) within the 30-day period described in clause (ii)(I)--
 ``(I) the written response shall be attached to the 
 audit, evaluation, inspection, or non-investigative 
 report; and
 ``(II) in every instance where the report may 
 appear on the public-facing website of the Inspector 
 General, the website shall be updated in order to 
 access a version of the audit, evaluation, inspection, 
 or non-investigative report that includes the written 
 response.
 ``(B) Subparagraph (A) shall not apply with respect to a non-
governmental organization or business entity that refused to provide 
information or assistance sought by an Inspector General during the 
creation of the audit, evaluation, inspection, or non-investigative 
report.
 ``(C) An Inspector General shall review any written response 
received under subparagraph (A) for the purpose of preventing the 
improper disclosure of classified information or other non-public 
information, consistent with applicable laws, rules, and regulations, 
and, if necessary, redact such information.''.
 (b) Retroactive Applicability.--During the 30-day period beginning 
on the date of enactment of this Act--
 (1) the amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply upon 
 the request of a non-governmental organization or business 
 entity named in an audit, evaluation, inspection, or other non-
 investigative report prepared on or after January 1, 2019; and
 (2) any written response submitted under clause (iii) of 
 section 5(g)(6)(A) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 
 U.S.C. App.), as added by subsection (a), with respect to such 
 an audit, evaluation, inspection, or other non-investigative 
 report shall attach to the original report in the manner 
 described in that clause.

SEC. 5675. REVIEW RELATING TO VETTING, PROCESSING, AND RESETTLEMENT OF 
 EVACUEES FROM AFGHANISTAN AND THE AFGHANISTAN SPECIAL 
 IMMIGRANT VISA PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--In accordance with the Inspector General Act of 
1978 (5 U.S.C. App.), the Inspector General of the Department of 
Homeland Security, jointly with the Inspector General of the Department 
of State, and in coordination with the Inspector General of the 
Department of Defense and any appropriate inspector general, shall 
conduct a thorough review of efforts to support and process evacuees 
from Afghanistan and the Afghanistan special immigrant visa program.
 (b) Elements.--The review required by subsection (a) shall include 
an assessment of the systems, staffing, policies, and programs used--
 (1) to the screen and vet such evacuees, including--
 (A) an assessment of whether personnel conducting 
 such screening and vetting were appropriately 
 authorized and provided with training, including 
 training in the detection of fraudulent personal 
 identification documents;
 (B) an analysis of the degree to which such 
 screening and vetting deviated from United States law, 
 regulations, policy, and best practices relating to the 
 screening and vetting of refugees and applicants for 
 United States visas that have been in use at any time 
 since January 1, 2016;
 (C) an identification of any risk to the national 
 security of the United States posed by any such 
 deviations;
 (D) an analysis of the processes used for evacuees 
 traveling without personal identification records, 
 including the creation or provision of any new 
 identification records to such evacuees; and
 (E) an analysis of the degree to which such 
 screening and vetting process was capable of 
 detecting--
 (i) instances of human trafficking and 
 domestic abuse;
 (ii) evacuees who are unaccompanied minors; 
 and
 (iii) evacuees with a spouse that is a 
 minor;
 (2) to admit and process such evacuees at United States 
 ports of entry;
 (3) to temporarily house such evacuees prior to 
 resettlement;
 (4) to account for the total number of individuals 
 evacuated from Afghanistan in 2021 with support of the United 
 States Government, disaggregated by--
 (A) country of origin;
 (B) citizenship, only if different from country of 
 origin;
 (C) age;
 (D) gender;
 (E) eligibility for special immigrant visas under 
 the Afghan Allies Protection Act of 2009 (8 U.S.C. 1101 
 note; Public Law 111-8) or section 1059 of the National 
 Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2006 (8 
 U.S.C. 1101 note; Public Law 109-163) at the time of 
 evacuation;
 (F) eligibility for employment-based nonimmigrant 
 visas at the time of evacuation; and
 (G) familial relationship to evacuees who are 
 eligible for visas described in subparagraphs (E) and 
 (F); and
 (5) to provide eligible individuals with special immigrant 
 visas under the Afghan Allies Protection Act of 2009 (8 U.S.C. 
 1101 note; Public Law 111-8) and section 1059 of the National 
 Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2006 (8 U.S.C. 1101 
 note; Public Law 109-163) since the date of the enactment of 
 the Afghan Allies Protection Act of 2009 (8 U.S.C. 1101 note; 
 Public Law 111-8), including--
 (A) a detailed step-by-step description of the 
 application process for such special immigrant visas, 
 including the number of days allotted by the United 
 States Government for the completion of each step;
 (B) the number of such special immigrant visa 
 applications received, approved, and denied, 
 disaggregated by fiscal year;
 (C) the number of such special immigrant visas 
 issued, as compared to the number available under law, 
 disaggregated by fiscal year;
 (D) an assessment of the average length of time 
 taken to process an application for such a special 
 immigrant visa, beginning on the date of submission of 
 the application and ending on the date of final 
 disposition, disaggregated by fiscal year;
 (E) an accounting of the number of applications for 
 such special immigrant visas that remained pending at 
 the end of each fiscal year;
 (F) an accounting of the number of interviews of 
 applicants for such special immigrant visas conducted 
 during each fiscal year;
 (G) the number of noncitizens who were admitted to 
 the United States pursuant to such a special immigrant 
 visa during each fiscal year;
 (H) an assessment of the extent to which each 
 participating department or agency of the United States 
 Government, including the Department of State and the 
 Department of Homeland Security, adjusted processing 
 practices and procedures for such special immigrant 
 visas so as to vet applicants and expand processing 
 capacity since the February 29, 2020, Doha Agreement 
 between the United States and the Taliban;
 (I) a list of specific steps, if any, taken between 
 February 29, 2020, and August 31, 2021--
 (i) to streamline the processing of 
 applications for such special immigrant visas; 
 and
 (ii) to address longstanding bureaucratic 
 hurdles while improving security protocols;
 (J) a description of the degree to which the 
 Secretary of State implemented recommendations made by 
 the Department of State Office of Inspector General in 
 its June 2020 reports on Review of the Afghan Special 
 Immigrant Visa Program (AUD-MERO-20-35) and Management 
 Assistance Report: Quarterly Reporting on Afghan 
 Special Immigrant Visa Program Needs Improvement (AUD-
 MERO-20-34);
 (K) an assessment of the extent to which challenges 
 in verifying applicants' employment with the Department 
 of Defense contributed to delays in the processing of 
 such special immigrant visas, and an accounting of the 
 specific steps taken since February 29, 2020, to 
 address issues surrounding employment verification; and
 (L) recommendations to strengthen and streamline 
 such special immigrant visa process going forward.
 (c) Interim Reporting.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Inspector General of the 
 Department of Homeland Security and the Inspector General of 
 the Department of State shall submit to the appropriate 
 congressional committees not fewer than one interim report on 
 the review conducted under this section.
 (2) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term 
 ``appropriate congressional committees'' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 12 of the Inspector 
 General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.), as amended by this 
 subtitle.
 (B) Screen; screening.--The terms ``screen'' and 
 ``screening'', with respect to an evacuee, mean the 
 process by which a Federal official determines--
 (i) the identity of the evacuee;
 (ii) whether the evacuee has a valid 
 identification documentation; and
 (iii) whether any database of the United 
 States Government contains derogatory 
 information about the evacuee.
 (C) Vet; vetting.--The term ``vet'' and 
 ``vetting'', with respect to an evacuee, means the 
 process by which a Federal official interviews the 
 evacuee to determine whether the evacuee is who they 
 purport to be, including whether the evacuee poses a 
 national security risk.
 (d) Discharge of Responsibilities.--The Inspector General of the 
Department of Homeland Security and the Inspector General of the 
Department of State shall discharge the responsibilities under this 
section in a manner consistent with the authorities and requirements of 
the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.) and the authorities 
and requirements applicable to the Inspector General of the Department 
of Homeland Security and the Inspector General of the Department of 
State under that Act.
 (e) Coordination.--Upon request of an Inspector General for 
information or assistance under subsection (a), the head of any Federal 
agency involved shall, insofar as is practicable and not in 
contravention of any existing statutory restriction or regulation of 
the Federal agency from which the information is requested, furnish to 
such Inspector General, or to an authorized designee, such information 
or assistance.
 (f) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to limit the ability of the Inspector General of the 
Department of Homeland Security or the Inspector General of the 
Department of State to enter into agreements to conduct joint audits, 
inspections, or investigations in the exercise of the oversight 
responsibilities of the Inspector General of the Department of Homeland 
Security and the Inspector General of the Department of State, in 
accordance with the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.), with 
respect to oversight of the evacuation from Afghanistan, the selection, 
vetting, and processing of applicants for special immigrant visas and 
asylum, and any resettlement in the United States of such evacuees.

SEC. 5676. INVESTIGATIONS OF DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE PERSONNEL.

 Section 8E of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.) is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (2), by striking ``and paragraph 
 (3)'';
 (B) by striking paragraph (3);
 (C) by redesignating paragraphs (4) and (5) as 
 paragraphs (3) and (4), respectively; and
 (D) in paragraph (4), as redesignated, by striking 
 ``paragraph (4)'' and inserting ``paragraph (3)''; and
 (2) in subsection (d), by striking ``, except with respect 
 to allegations described in subsection (b)(3),''.

SEC. 5677. LAW ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL OF THE 
 UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT FINANCE 
 CORPORATION.

 Section 6(f)(3) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. 
App.) is amended by inserting ``International Development Finance 
Corporation,'' before ``Environmental''.

SEC. 5678. INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR THE OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET.

 (a) Establishment of Office.--Section 12 of the Inspector General 
Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. App.) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph, (1) by inserting ``the Director of the 
 Office of Management and Budget,'' after ``means''; and
 (2) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``the Office of 
 Management and Budget,'' after ``means''.
 (b) Special Provisions Concerning the Inspector General of the 
Office of Management and Budget.--The Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 
U.S.C. App.) is amended by adding after section 8N the following new 
section:

``SEC. 8O. SPECIAL PROVISIONS CONCERNING THE INSPECTOR GENERAL OF THE 
 OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET.

 ``The Inspector General of the Office of Management and Budget 
shall only have jurisdiction over those matters that have been 
specifically assigned to the Office under law.''.
 (c) Appointment.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the President shall appoint an individual to 
serve as the Inspector General of the Office of Management and Budget 
in accordance with section 3(a) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 
U.S.C. App.).

 TITLE LVII--FEDERAL EMPLOYEE MATTERS

SEC. 5701. APPEALS TO MERIT SYSTEMS PROTECTION BOARD RELATING TO FBI 
 REPRISAL ALLEGATIONS; SALARY OF SPECIAL COUNSEL.

 (a) Appeals to MSPB.--Section 2303 of title 5, United States Code, 
is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(d)(1) An employee of the Federal Bureau of Investigation who 
makes an allegation of a reprisal under regulations promulgated under 
this section may appeal a final determination or corrective action 
order by the Bureau under those regulations to the Merit Systems 
Protection Board pursuant to section 1221.
 ``(2) If no final determination or corrective action order has been 
made or issued for an allegation described in paragraph (1) before the 
expiration of the 180-day period beginning on the date on which the 
allegation is received by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the 
employee described in that paragraph may seek corrective action 
directly from the Merit Systems Protection Board pursuant to section 
1221.''.
 (b) Special Counsel Salary.--
 (1) In general.--Subchapter II of chapter 53 of title 5, 
 United States Code, is amended--
 (A) in section 5314, by adding at the end the 
 following new item :``Special Counsel of the Office of 
 Special Counsel.''; and
 (B) in section 5315, by striking ``Special Counsel 
 of the Merit Systems Protection Board.''
 (2) Application.--The rate of pay applied under the 
 amendments made by paragraph (1) shall begin to apply on the 
 first day of the first pay period beginning after date of 
 enactment of this Act.

SEC. 5702. MINIMUM WAGE FOR FEDERAL CONTRACTORS.

 Executive Order 14026 and its implementing regulations in part 23 
of title 29, Code of Federal Regulations, are hereby enacted into law, 
except that nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any 
Federal department or agency from requiring any Federal contract 
entered into on or after the date of enactment of this section to 
include a clause requiring that workers employed in the performance of 
such contract or any covered subcontract (as defined in such 
regulations) be paid at a minimum wage that exceeds the minimum wage in 
effect pursuant to such executive order and regulations.

SEC. 5703. FEDERAL WILDLAND FIREFIGHTER RECRUITMENT AND RETENTION.

 (a) Recruitment and Retention Bonus.--In order to promote the 
recruitment and retention of Federal wildland firefighters, the 
Director of the Office of Personnel Management, in coordination with 
the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior, shall 
establish a program under which a recruitment or retention bonus of not 
less than $1,000 may be paid to a Federal wildland firefighter in an 
amount as determined appropriate by the Director of the Office of 
Personnel Management and the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary 
of the Interior. The minimum amount of such bonus in the previous 
sentence shall be increased each year by the Consumer Price Index in 
the manner prescribed under subsection (b)(2). Any bonus under this 
subsection--
 (1) shall be paid to any primary or secondary Federal 
 wildland firefighter upon the date that such firefighter 
 successfully completes a work capacity test; and
 (2) may not be paid to any such firefighter more than once 
 per calendar year.
 (b) Federal Wildland Firefighter.--In this section, the term 
``Federal wildland firefighter'' means any temporary, seasonal, or 
permanent position at the Department of Agriculture or the Department 
of the Interior that maintains group, emergency incident management, or 
fire qualifications, as established annually by the Standards for 
Wildland Fire Position Qualifications published by the National 
Wildfire Coordinating Group, and primarily engages in or supports 
wildland fire management activities, including forestry and rangeland 
technicians and positions concerning aviation, engineering heavy 
equipment operations, or fire and fuels management.

SEC. 5704. STUDY AND REPORT ON RETURNSHIP PROGRAMS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than September 30, 2023, the Secretary 
of Defense shall conduct a study, and submit a report on such study to 
the congressional defense committees, on the feasibility and benefits 
of establishing returnship programs for the civilian workforce of the 
Department of Defense. The study and report shall assess--
 (1) where returnship programs could be used to address such 
 workforce needs and bolster the knowledge and experience base 
 of such workforce;
 (2) how the programs would be structured and the estimated 
 funding levels to implement the returnship programs; and
 (3) if and how returnship programs impact the diversity of 
 such workforce.
 (b) Returnship Program Defined.--In this section, the term 
``returnship program'' means any program that supports entry into the 
civilian workforce of the Department of Defense of an individual who 
has taken an extended leave of absence from such workforce, including a 
leave of absence to care for a dependent.

SEC. 5705. LIMITATIONS ON EXCEPTION OF COMPETITIVE SERVICE POSITIONS.

 (a) In General.--No position in the competitive service (as defined 
under section 2102 of title 5, United States Code) may be excepted from 
the competitive service unless such position is placed--
 (1) in any of the schedules A through E as described in 
 section 6.2 of title 5, Code of Federal 5 Regulations, as in 
 effect on September 30, 2020; and
 (2) under the terms and conditions under part 8 of such 
 title as in effect on such date.
 (b) Subsequent Transfers.--No position in the excepted service (as 
defined under section 2103 of title 5, United States Code) may be 
placed in any schedule other than a schedule described in subsection 
(a)(1).

 TITLE LVIII--OTHER MATTERS

 Subtitle A--In General

SEC. 5801. AFGHAN ALLIES PROTECTION.

 Clause (ii) of section 602(b)(2)(A) of the Afghan Allies Protection 
Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-8; 8 U.S.C. 1101 note) is amended in the 
matter preceding subclause (I), by striking ``year--'' and inserting 
the following: ``year, or in the case of an alien who was wounded or 
seriously injured in connection with employment described in this 
subparagraph, for the period until such wound or injury occurred, if 
the wound or injury prevented the alien from continuing employment--''.

SEC. 5802. ADVANCING MUTUAL INTERESTS AND GROWING OUR SUCCESS.

 (a) Nonimmigrant Traders and Investors.--For purposes of clauses 
(i) and (ii) of section 101(a)(15)(E) of the Immigration and 
Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)(E)), Portugal shall be considered 
to be a foreign state described in such section if the Government of 
Portugal provides similar nonimmigrant status to nationals of the 
United States.
 (b) Modification of Eligibility Criteria for E Visas.--
 Section 101(a)(15)(E) of the Immigration and Nationality 
 Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)(E)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(or, in the case of an alien who 
 acquired the relevant nationality through a financial 
 investment and who has not previously been granted status under 
 this subparagraph, the foreign state of which the alien is a 
 national and in which the alien has been domiciled for a 
 continuous period of not less than 3 years at any point before 
 applying for a nonimmigrant visa under this subparagraph)'' 
 before ``, and the spouse''; and
 (2) by striking ``him'' and inserting ``such alien''; and
 (3) by striking ``he'' each place such term appears and 
 inserting ``the alien''.

SEC. 5803. EXPANSION OF STUDY OF PFAS CONTAMINATION.

 (a) CDC Study on Health Implications of Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substances Contamination in Drinking Water.--The Secretary of Health 
and Human Services, acting through the Director of the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention and the Director of the Agency for Toxic 
Substances and Disease Registry, and, as appropriate, the Director of 
the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, and in 
consultation with the Secretary of Defense, shall--
 (1) expand (by including more military installations, 
 communities, or other sites, including schools operated by the 
 Department of Defense Education Activity) the study authorized 
 by section 316 of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
 Fiscal Year 2018 (Public Law 115-91) on the human health 
 implications of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (in this 
 section referred to as ``PFAS'') contamination in drinking 
 water, ground water, and any other sources of water and 
 relevant exposure pathways, including the cumulative human 
 health implications of multiple types of PFAS contamination at 
 levels above and below health advisory levels to assess health 
 effects at additional military installations;
 (2) not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment 
 of this Act, and annually thereafter until submission of the 
 report under paragraph (3)(B), submit to the appropriate 
 congressional committees a report on the progress of such 
 expanded study; and
 (3) not later than 5 years after the date of enactment of 
 this Act (or 7 years after such date of enactment after 
 providing notice to the appropriate congressional committees of 
 the need for the delay)--
 (A) complete the expanded study and make any 
 appropriate recommendations; and
 (B) submit a report to the appropriate 
 congressional committees on the results of such 
 expanded study.
 (b) Exposure Assessment.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services, acting through the Director of the Centers for 
 Disease Control and Prevention and the Director of the Agency 
 for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, and, as appropriate, 
 the Director of the National Institute of Environmental Health 
 Sciences, and in consultation with the Secretary of Defense, 
 shall conduct an exposure assessment of not less than 10 
 current or former domestic military installations which were 
 not included in the study authorized by section 316(a) of the 
 National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 (Public 
 Law 115-91) and which are known to have PFAS contamination in 
 drinking water, ground water, and any other sources of water 
 and relevant exposure pathways.
 (2) Contents.--The exposure assessment required under this 
 subsection shall--
 (A) include--
 (i) for each military installation covered 
 under the exposure assessment, a statistical 
 sample to be determined by the Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services in consultation with 
 the relevant State health departments; and
 (ii) biomonitoring for assessing the 
 contamination described in paragraph (1); and
 (B) produce findings, which shall be--
 (i) used to help design the study described 
 in subsection (a)(1); and
 (ii) not later than 1 year after the 
 conclusion of such exposure assessment, 
 released to the appropriate congressional 
 committees.
 (3) Timing.--The exposure assessment required under this 
 subsection shall--
 (A) begin not later than 180 days after the date of 
 enactment of this Act; and
 (B) conclude not later than 2 years after such date 
 of enactment.
 (c) Coordination With Other Agencies.--The Director of the Agency 
for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry may, as necessary, use staff 
and other resources from other Federal agencies in carrying out the 
study under subsection (a) and the assessment under subsection (b).
 (d) No Effect on Regulatory Process.--The study under subsection 
(a) and assessment under subsection (b) shall not interfere with any 
regulatory processes of the Environmental Protection Agency, including 
determinations of maximum contaminant levels.
 (e) Definition.--In this section, the term ``appropriate 
congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the congressional defense committees;
 (2) the Committee on Heath, Education, Labor, and Pensions, 
 the Committee on Environment and Public Works, and the 
 Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate; and
 (3) the Committee on Energy and Commerce, the Committee on 
 Education and Labor, and the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of 
 the House of Representatives.
 (f) Funding.--
 (1) Source of funds.--The study under subsection (a) and 
 assessment under subsection (b) may be paid for using funds 
 authorized to be appropriated to the Department of Defense 
 under the heading ``Operation and Maintenance, Defense-Wide''.
 (2) Transfer authority.--Without regard to section 2215 of 
 title 10, United States Code, the Secretary of Defense may 
 transfer not more than $20,000,000 a year during each of fiscal 
 years 2023 and 2024 to the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services to pay for the study under subsection (a) and 
 assessment under subsection (b).
 (3) Expenditure authority.--Amounts transferred to the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services shall be used to carry 
 out the study under subsection (a) and assessment under 
 subsection (b) through contracts, cooperative agreements, or 
 grants. In addition, such funds may be transferred by the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services to other accounts of the 
 Department of Health and Human Services for the purposes of 
 carrying out this section.
 (4) Relationship to other transfer authorities.--The 
 transfer authority provided under this subsection is in 
 addition to any other transfer authority available to the 
 Department of Defense or the Department of Health and Human 
 Services.

SEC. 5804. NATIONAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY FOR DISTRIBUTED 
 LEDGER TECHNOLOGY.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Director.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, the 
 term ``Director'' means the Director of the Office of Science 
 and Technology Policy.
 (2) Distributed ledger.--The term ``distributed ledger'' 
 means a ledger that--
 (A) is shared across a set of distributed nodes, 
 which are devices or processes, that participate in a 
 network and store a complete or partial replica of the 
 ledger;
 (B) is synchronized between the nodes;
 (C) has data appended to it by following the 
 ledger's specified consensus mechanism;
 (D) may be accessible to anyone (public) or 
 restricted to a subset of participants (private); and
 (E) may require participants to have authorization 
 to perform certain actions (permissioned) or require no 
 authorization (permissionless).
 (3) Distributed ledger technology.--The term ``distributed 
 ledger technology'' means technology that enables the operation 
 and use of distributed ledgers.
 (4) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 1001).
 (5) Relevant congressional committees.--The term ``relevant 
 congressional committees'' means--
 (A) the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate; and
 (B) the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology 
 of the House of Representatives.
 (6) Smart contract.--The term ``smart contract'' means a 
 computer program stored in a distributed ledger system that is 
 executed when certain predefined conditions are satisfied and 
 wherein the outcome of any execution of the program may be 
 recorded on the distributed ledger.
 (b) National Distributed Ledger Technology R&D Strategy.--
 (1) In general.--The Director, or a designee of the 
 Director, shall, in coordination with the National Science and 
 Technology Council, and the heads of such other relevant 
 Federal agencies and entities as the Director considers 
 appropriate, which may include the National Academies, and in 
 consultation with such nongovernmental entities as the Director 
 considers appropriate, develop a national strategy for the 
 research and development of distributed ledger technologies and 
 their applications, including applications of public and 
 permissionless distributed ledgers. In developing the national 
 strategy, the Director shall consider the following:
 (A) Current efforts and coordination by Federal 
 agencies to invest in the research and development of 
 distributed ledger technologies and their applications, 
 including through programs like the Small Business 
 Innovation Research program, the Small Business 
 Technology Transfer program, and the National Science 
 Foundation's Innovation Corps programs.
 (B)(i) The potential benefits and risks of 
 applications of distributed ledger technologies across 
 different industry sectors, including their potential 
 to--
 (I) lower transactions costs and facilitate 
 new types of commercial transactions;
 (II) protect privacy and increase 
 individuals' data sovereignty;
 (III) reduce friction to the 
 interoperability of digital systems;
 (IV) increase the accessibility, 
 auditability, security, efficiency, and 
 transparency of digital services;
 (V) increase market competition in the 
 provision of digital services;
 (VI) enable dynamic contracting and 
 contract execution through smart contracts;
 (VII) enable participants to collaborate in 
 trustless and disintermediated environments;
 (VIII) enable the operations and governance 
 of distributed organizations;
 (IX) create new ownership models for 
 digital items; and
 (X) increase participation of populations 
 historically underrepresented in the 
 technology, business, and financial sectors.
 (ii) In consideration of the potential risks of 
 applications of distributed ledger technologies under 
 clause (i), the Director shall take into account, where 
 applicable--
 (I) additional risks that may emerge from 
 distributed ledger technologies, as identified 
 in reports submitted to the President pursuant 
 to Executive Order 14067, that may be addressed 
 by research and development;
 (II) software vulnerabilities in 
 distributed ledger technologies and smart 
 contracts;
 (III) limited consumer literacy on engaging 
 with applications of distributed ledger 
 technologies in a secure way;
 (IV) the use of distributed ledger 
 technologies in illicit finance and their use 
 in combating illicit finance;
 (V) manipulative, deceptive, and fraudulent 
 practices that harm consumers engaging with 
 applications of distributed ledger 
 technologies;
 (VI) the implications of different 
 consensus mechanisms for digital ledgers and 
 governance and accountability mechanisms for 
 applications of distributed ledger 
 technologies, which may include decentralized 
 networks;
 (VII) foreign activities in the development 
 and deployment of distributed ledger 
 technologies and their associated tools and 
 infrastructure; and
 (VIII) environmental, sustainability, and 
 economic impacts of the computational resources 
 required for distributed ledger technologies.
 (C) Potential uses for distributed ledger 
 technologies that could improve the operations and 
 delivery of services by Federal agencies, taking into 
 account the potential of digital ledger technologies 
 to--
 (i) improve the efficiency and 
 effectiveness of privacy-preserving data 
 sharing among Federal agencies and with State, 
 local, territorial, and Tribal governments;
 (ii) promote government transparency by 
 improving data sharing with the public;
 (iii) introduce or mitigate risks that may 
 threaten individuals' rights or broad access to 
 Federal services;
 (iv) automate and modernize processes for 
 assessing and ensuring regulatory compliance; 
 and
 (v) facilitate broad access to financial 
 services for underserved and underbanked 
 populations.
 (D) Ways to support public and private sector 
 dialogue on areas of research that could enhance the 
 efficiency, scalability, interoperability, security, 
 and privacy of applications using distributed ledger 
 technologies.
 (E) The need for increased coordination of the 
 public and private sectors on the development of 
 voluntary standards in order to promote research and 
 development, including standards regarding security, 
 smart contracts, cryptographic protocols, virtual 
 routing and forwarding, interoperability, zero-
 knowledge proofs, and privacy, for distributed ledger 
 technologies and their applications.
 (F) Applications of distributed ledger technologies 
 that could positively benefit society but that receive 
 relatively little private sector investment.
 (G) The United States position in global leadership 
 and competitiveness across research, development, and 
 deployment of distributed ledger technologies.
 (2) Consultation.--
 (A) In general.--In carrying out the Director's 
 duties under this subsection, the Director shall 
 consult with the following:
 (i) Private industry.
 (ii) Institutions of higher education, 
 including minority-serving institutions.
 (iii) Nonprofit organizations, including 
 foundations dedicated to supporting distributed 
 ledger technologies and their applications.
 (iv) State governments.
 (v) Such other persons as the Director 
 considers appropriate.
 (B) Representation.--The Director shall ensure 
 consultations with the following:
 (i) Rural and urban stakeholders from 
 across the Nation.
 (ii) Small, medium, and large businesses.
 (iii) Subject matter experts representing 
 multiple industrial sectors.
 (iv) A demographically diverse set of 
 stakeholders.
 (3) Coordination.--In carrying out this subsection, the 
 Director shall, for purposes of avoiding duplication of 
 activities, consult, cooperate, and coordinate with the 
 programs and policies of other relevant Federal agencies, 
 including the interagency process outlined in section 3 of 
 Executive Order 14067 (87 Fed. Reg. 14143; relating ensuring 
 responsible development of digital assets).
 (4) National strategy.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Director shall submit to the 
 relevant congressional committees and the President a national 
 strategy that includes the following:
 (A) Priorities for the research and development of 
 distributed ledger technologies and their applications.
 (B) Plans to support public and private sector 
 investment and partnerships in research and technology 
 development for societally beneficial applications of 
 distributed ledger technologies.
 (C) Plans to mitigate the risks of distributed 
 ledger technologies and their applications.
 (D) An identification of additional resources, 
 administrative action, or legislative action 
 recommended to assist with the implementation of such 
 strategy.
 (5) Research and development funding.--The Director shall, 
 as the Director considers necessary, consult with the Director 
 of the Office of Management and Budget and with the heads of 
 such other elements of the Executive Office of the President as 
 the Director considers appropriate, to ensure that the 
 recommendations and priorities with respect to research and 
 development funding, as expressed in the national strategy 
 developed under this subsection, are incorporated in the 
 development of annual budget requests for Federal research 
 agencies.
 (c) Distributed Ledger Technology Research.--
 (1) In general.--The Director of the National Science 
 Foundation shall make awards, on a competitive basis, to 
 institutions of higher education, including minority-serving 
 institutions, or nonprofit organizations (or consortia of such 
 institutions or organizations) to support research, including 
 interdisciplinary research, on distributed ledger technologies, 
 their applications, and other issues that impact or are caused 
 by distributed ledger technologies, which may include research 
 on--
 (A) the implications on trust, transparency, 
 privacy, accessibility, accountability, and energy 
 consumption of different consensus mechanisms and 
 hardware choices, and approaches for addressing these 
 implications;
 (B) approaches for improving the security, privacy, 
 resiliency, interoperability, performance, and 
 scalability of distributed ledger technologies and 
 their applications, which may include decentralized 
 networks;
 (C) approaches for identifying and addressing 
 vulnerabilities and improving the performance and 
 expressive power of smart contracts;
 (D) the implications of quantum computing on 
 applications of distributed ledger technologies, 
 including long-term protection of sensitive information 
 (such as medical or digital property), and techniques 
 to address them;
 (E) game theory, mechanism design, and economics 
 underpinning and facilitating the operations and 
 governance of decentralized networks enabled by 
 distributed ledger technologies;
 (F) the social behaviors of participants in 
 decentralized networks enabled by distributed ledger 
 technologies;
 (G) human-centric design approaches to make 
 distributed ledger technologies and their applications 
 more usable and accessible;
 (H) use cases for distributed ledger technologies 
 across various industry sectors and government, 
 including applications pertaining to--
 (i) digital identity, including trusted 
 identity and identity management;
 (ii) digital property rights;
 (iii) delivery of public services;
 (iv) supply chain transparency;
 (v) medical information management;
 (vi) inclusive financial services;
 (vii) community governance;
 (viii) charitable giving;
 (ix) public goods funding;
 (x) digital credentials;
 (xi) regulatory compliance;
 (xii) infrastructure resilience, including 
 against natural disasters; and
 (xiii) peer-to-peer transactions; and
 (I) the social, behavioral, and economic 
 implications associated with the growth of applications 
 of distributed ledger technologies, including 
 decentralization in business, financial, and economic 
 systems.
 (2) Accelerating innovation.--The Director of the National 
 Science Foundation shall consider continuing to support 
 startups that are in need of funding, would develop in and 
 contribute to the economy of the United States, leverage 
 distributed ledger technologies, have the potential to 
 positively benefit society, and have the potential for 
 commercial viability, through programs like the Small Business 
 Innovation Research program, the Small Business Technology 
 Transfer program, and, as appropriate, other programs that 
 promote broad and diverse participation.
 (3) Consideration of national distributed ledger technology 
 research and development strategy.--In making awards under 
 paragraph (1), the Director of the National Science Foundation 
 shall take into account the national strategy, as described in 
 subsection (b)(4).
 (4) Fundamental research.--The Director of the National 
 Science Foundation shall consider continuing to make awards 
 supporting fundamental research in areas related to distributed 
 ledger technologies and their applications, such as applied 
 cryptography and distributed systems.
 (d) Distributed Ledger Technology Applied Research Project.--
 (1) Applied research project.--Subject to the availability 
 of appropriations, the Director of the National Institute of 
 Standards and Technology, may carry out an applied research 
 project to study and demonstrate the potential benefits and 
 unique capabilities of distributed ledger technologies.
 (2) Activities.--In carrying out the applied research 
 project, the Director of the National Institute of Standards 
 and Technology shall--
 (A) identify potential applications of distributed 
 ledger technologies, including those that could benefit 
 activities at the Department of Commerce or at other 
 Federal agencies, considering applications that could--
 (i) improve the privacy and 
 interoperability of digital identity and access 
 management solutions;
 (ii) increase the integrity and 
 transparency of supply chains through the 
 secure and limited sharing of relevant supplier 
 information;
 (iii) facilitate increased interoperability 
 across healthcare information systems and 
 consumer control over the movement of their 
 medical data;
 (iv) facilitate broader participation in 
 distributed ledger technologies of populations 
 historically underrepresented in technology, 
 business, and financial sectors; or
 (v) be of benefit to the public or private 
 sectors, as determined by the Director in 
 consultation with relevant stakeholders;
 (B) solicit and provide the opportunity for public 
 comment relevant to potential projects;
 (C) consider, in the selection of a project, 
 whether the project addresses a pressing need not 
 already addressed by another organization or Federal 
 agency;
 (D) establish plans to mitigate potential risks, 
 including those outlined in subsection (b)(1)(B)(ii), 
 if applicable, of potential projects;
 (E) produce an example solution leveraging 
 distributed ledger technologies for 1 of the 
 applications identified in subparagraph (A);
 (F) hold a competitive process to select private 
 sector partners, if they are engaged, to support the 
 implementation of the example solution;
 (G) consider hosting the project at the National 
 Cybersecurity Center of Excellence; and
 (H) ensure that cybersecurity best practices 
 consistent with the Cybersecurity Framework of the 
 National Institute of Standards and Technology are 
 demonstrated in the project.
 (3) Briefings to congress.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the National 
 Institute of Standards and Technology shall offer a briefing to 
 the relevant congressional committees on the progress and 
 current findings from the project under this subsection.
 (4) Public report.--Not later than 12 months after the 
 completion of the project under this subsection, the Director 
 of the National Institute of Standards and Technology shall 
 make public a report on the results and findings from the 
 project.

SEC. 5805. COMMERCIAL AIR WAIVER FOR NEXT OF KIN REGARDING 
 TRANSPORTATION OF REMAINS OF CASUALTIES.

 Section 580A of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2020 (Public Law 116-92) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:
 ``(c) Transportation of Deceased Military Member.--In the event of 
a death that requires the Secretary concerned to provide a death 
benefit under subchapter II of chapter 75 of title 10, United States 
Code, such Secretary shall provide the next of kin or other appropriate 
person a commercial air travel use waiver for the transportation of 
deceased remains of military member who dies outside of the United 
States.''.

SEC. 5806. ARMS EXPORTS DELIVERY SOLUTIONS ACT.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) prioritizing the defense needs of United States allies 
 and partners globally is a national security priority; and
 (2) sustained support to key partners for interoperable 
 defense systems is critical to preserve--
 (A) the safety and security of American persons;
 (B) the free flow of commerce through international 
 trade routes;
 (C) the United States commitment to collective 
 security agreements, territorial integrity, and 
 recognized maritime boundaries; and
 (D) Taiwan's defense capability both in 
 quantitative and qualitative terms.
 (b) Report Required.--Not later than March 1, 2023, and March 1, 
2024, the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense shall jointly 
transmit to the appropriate congressional committees a report with 
respect to the transfer of all defense articles or defense services, on 
or after October 1, 2017, pursuant to the authorities provided by--
 (1) section 3, 21, or 36 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 
 U.S.C. 2753, 2761, or 2776); or
 (2) section 516(c)(2) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 
 (22 U.S.C. 2321j(c)(2)).
 (c) Elements.--The report required by subsection (b) shall also 
contain the following:
 (1) A list of all approved transfers of defense articles 
 and services authorized by Congress pursuant to sections 25 and 
 36 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2765 and 2776) 
 with a total value of $25,000,000 or more, to Taiwan, Japan, 
 South Korea, Australia, or New Zealand, that have not been 
 fully delivered by the start of the fiscal year in which the 
 report is being submitted.
 (2) The estimated start and end dates of delivery for each 
 approved and incomplete transfer listed pursuant to paragraph 
 (1), including additional details and dates for any transfers 
 that involve multiple tranches of deliveries.
 (3) With respect to each approved and incomplete transfer 
 listed pursuant to paragraph (1), a detailed description of--
 (A) any changes in the delivery dates of defense 
 articles or services relative to the dates anticipated 
 at the time of congressional approval of the transfer, 
 including specific reasons for any delays related to 
 the United States Government, defense suppliers, or a 
 foreign partner;
 (B) the feasibility and advisability of providing 
 the partner subject to such delayed delivery with an 
 interim capability or solution, including drawing from 
 United States stocks, and any challenges to 
 implementing such a capability or solution; and
 (C) authorities, appropriations, or waiver requests 
 that Congress could provide to improve delivery 
 timelines or authorize the provision of interim 
 capabilities or solutions identified pursuant to 
 subparagraph (B).
 (4) A description of ongoing interagency efforts to support 
 attainment of operational capability of the corresponding 
 defense articles and services once delivered, including advance 
 training with United States or allied forces on the systems to 
 be received. The description of any such training shall also 
 include an identification of the training implementer.
 (5) If a transfer listed pursuant to paragraph (1) has been 
 terminated prior to the date of the submission of the report 
 for any reason--
 (A) the case information for such transfer;
 (B) a description of the reasons for which the 
 transfer is no longer in effect; and
 (C) the impact this termination will have on the 
 intended end-user and the consequent implications for 
 regional security.
 (6) A separate description of the actions the United States 
 is taking to expedite deliveries of defense articles and 
 services to Taiwan, including in particular, whether the United 
 States intends to divert defense articles from United States 
 stocks to provide an interim capability or solution with 
 respect to any delayed deliveries to Taiwan and the plan, if 
 applicable, to replenish any such diverted stocks.
 (7) A description of other potential actions undertaken by 
 the Department of State to improve delivery timelines for the 
 transfers listed pursuant to paragraph (1).
 (d) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on 
 Armed Services of the House of Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on 
 Armed Services of the Senate.

SEC. 5807. PROHIBITION ON TRANSFERS TO BADR ORGANIZATION.

 None of the amounts authorized to be appropriated by this Act or 
otherwise made available to the Department of Defense may be made 
available, directly or indirectly, to the Badr Organization.

SEC. 5808. PROHIBITION OF FEDERAL FUNDING FOR INDUCED OR REQUIRED 
 UNDERMINING OF SECURITY OF CONSUMER COMMUNICATIONS GOODS.

 (a) Prohibition.--None of the funds made available in this or any 
other Act may be used by any Federal agency to require, support, pay, 
or otherwise induce any private sector provider of consumer software 
and hardware to--
 (1) intentionally add any security vulnerability or weaken 
 or omit any safeguard in the standards, items, or services of 
 the provider;
 (2) remove or omit any information security function, 
 mechanism, service, or solution from the items or services of 
 the provider; or
 (3) take any action that--
 (A) undermines, circumvents, defeats, bypasses, or 
 otherwise counteracts the end-to-end encryption of the 
 item or service of the provider;
 (B) prevents an item or service from adopting end-
 to-end encryption; or
 (C) otherwise makes an unencrypted version of the 
 end-to-end encrypted content of any communication, 
 file, or data of the item or service of the provider 
 available to any person or entity other than the 
 intended recipients.
 (b) Federal Agency Defined.--In this section, the term ``Federal 
agency'' means any executive department, military department, 
Government corporation, Government controlled corporation, or other 
establishment in the executive branch of the Government (including the 
Executive Office of the President), or any independent regulatory 
agency.

SEC. 5809. FOREIGN STATE COMPUTER INTRUSIONS.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 97 of title 28, United States Code, is 
amended by inserting after section 1605B the following:
``Sec. 1605C. Computer intrusions by a foreign state
 ``A foreign state shall not be immune from the jurisdiction of the 
courts of the United States or of the States in any case not otherwise 
covered by this chapter in which money damages are sought against a 
foreign state by a national of the United States for personal injury, 
harm to reputation, or damage to or loss of property resulting from any 
of the following activities, whether occurring in the United States or 
a foreign state:
 ``(1) Unauthorized access to or access exceeding 
 authorization to a computer located in the United States.
 ``(2) Unauthorized access to confidential, electronic 
 stored information located in the United States.
 ``(3) The transmission of a program, information, code, or 
 command to a computer located in the United States, which, as a 
 result of such conduct, causes damage without authorization.
 ``(4) The use, dissemination, or disclosure, without 
 consent, of any information obtained by means of any activity 
 described in paragraph (1), (2), or (3).
 ``(5) The provision of material support or resources for 
 any activity described in paragraph (1), (2), (3), or (4), 
 including by an official, employee, or agent of such foreign 
 state.''.
 (b) Application.--This section and the amendments made by this 
section shall apply to any action pending on or filed on or after the 
date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 5810. SCHOOL PFAS TESTING AND FILTRATION PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of this section, the Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the 
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, shall establish a 
program to--
 (1) test for perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances 
 in drinking water at eligible entities, which testing shall be 
 conducted by an entity approved by the Administrator or the 
 applicable State to conduct the testing;
 (2) install, maintain, and repair water filtration systems 
 effective for reducing perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl 
 substances in drinking water at eligible entities that contains 
 a level of any perfluoroalkyl or polyfluoroalkyl substance that 
 exceeds--
 (A) an applicable maximum contaminant level 
 established by the Administrator under section 1412 of 
 the Safe Drinking Water Act (42 U.S.C. 300g-1); or
 (B) an applicable standard established by the 
 applicable State that is more stringent than the level 
 described in subparagraph (A); and
 (3) safely dispose of spent water filtration equipment used 
 to reduce perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances in 
 drinking water at schools.
 (b) Public Availability.--The Secretary of Defense shall--
 (1) make publicly available, including, to the maximum 
 extent practicable, on the website of the eligible entity, a 
 copy of the results of any testing carried out under this 
 section; and
 (2) notify relevant parent, teacher, and employee 
 organizations of the availability of the results described in 
 paragraph (1).
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of 
 the Environmental Protection Agency.
 (2) The term ``eligible entity'' means a school operated by 
 the Department of Defense Education Activity.

SEC. 5811. REPORT ON EMT NATIONAL LICENSING STANDARDS.

 The Secretary of Defense, in coordination with each branch of the 
United States military, shall submit a report to Congress on how the 
Department of Defense can feasibly incorporate EMT national licensing 
standards into their existing training.

SEC. 5812. REQUIREMENT FOR CUT FLOWERS AND CUT GREENS DISPLAYED IN 
 CERTAIN FEDERAL BUILDINGS TO BE PRODUCED IN THE UNITED 
 STATES.

 (a) In General.--A cut flower or a cut green may not be officially 
displayed in any public area of a building of the Executive Office of 
the President, of the Department of State, or of the Department of 
Defense that is in a State of the United States or in the District of 
Columbia, unless the cut flower or cut green is produced in the United 
States.
 (b) Waiver.--The prohibition under subsection (a) may be waived by 
the head of the agency concerned with respect to a cut flower or cut 
green that is a gift from a foreign country.
 (c) Rule of Construction.--The limitation in subsection (a) may not 
be construed to apply to any cut flower or cut green used by a Federal 
officer or employee for personal display.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``cut flower'' means a flower removed from a 
 living plant for decorative use.
 (2) The term ``cut green'' means a green, foliage, or 
 branch removed from a living plant for decorative use.
 (3) The term ``produced in the United States'' means grown 
 in--
 (A) any of the several States;
 (B) the District of Columbia;
 (C) a territory or possession of the United States; 
 or
 (D) an area subject to the jurisdiction of a 
 federally recognized Indian Tribe.
 (e) Effective Date.--This section shall take effect on the date 
that is 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 5813. RENEGOTIATION OF COMPACTS OF FREE ASSOCIATION.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress as follows:
 (1) The United States shares deep ties, history and 
 interests with the Freely Associated States of the Republic of 
 the Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, and Palau 
 and continues a special, unique and mutually beneficial 
 relationship with them under the decades-old Compacts of Free 
 Association.
 (2) Under the Compacts, the United States has undertaken 
 the responsibility and obligation to provide and ensure the 
 security and defense of the Freely Associated States.
 (3) The Compacts are critical to the national security of 
 the United States and its allies and partners and are the 
 bedrock of the United States role in the Pacific.
 (4) Renewal of key provisions of the Compacts, now being 
 negotiated with each nation, is critical for regional security.
 (5) Maintaining and strengthening the Compacts supports 
 both United States national security and the United States 
 responsibility for the security and defense of the Freely 
 Associated States.
 (6) As the Department charged with fulfilling the security 
 mandates of the Compacts, the Department of Defense is an 
 integral partner with the Departments of State and Interior in 
 the Compact renewal negotiations, has a vested interest in the 
 outcome, and should play an active role in the negotiations for 
 their renewal.
 (7) The Department of Defense should continue its 
 engagement in the negotiations of the Compacts of Free 
 Association, in coordination with the Departments of State and 
 Interior and the Special Presidential Envoy for Compact 
 Negotiations.
 (8) It would be beneficial for the Secretary of Defense to 
 detail a senior officer -- or such other personal and 
 assistance as the Envoy may request -- to the Special 
 Presidential Envoy for Compact Negotiations to support the 
 negotiations for the renewal of Compact provisions.
 (b) Briefing on Negotiations.--Not later than 90 days after the 
date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall brief 
the following committees on the role of the Department in the 
renegotiations of the Compacts and opportunities to expand its support 
for the negotiations:
 (1) the congressional defense committees;
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on 
 Natural Resources of the House of Representatives; and
 (3) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on 
 Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate.

SEC. 5814. INTERAGENCY REPORT ON EXTREMIST ACTIVITY.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, and every 6 months thereafter, the Director of 
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Secretary of Homeland 
Security, and the Secretary of Defense shall publish a report that 
analyzes and sets out strategies to combat White supremacist and neo-
Nazi activity in the uniformed services and Federal law enforcement 
agencies.
 (b) Report.--
 (1) In general.--The Director of the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation, the Secretary of Homeland Security, and the 
 Secretary of Defense shall submit a joint report detailing 
 Executive-wide plans described in subsection (a) that 
 includes--
 (A) the number of individuals discharged from the 
 uniformed services due to incidents related to White 
 supremacy and neo-Nazi activity;
 (B) for each instance included in the total number 
 in subparagraph (A), a description of the circumstances 
 that led to the separation of servicemembers from the 
 uniformed services due to White supremacy and neo-Nazi 
 activity;
 (C) the number of Federal law enforcement officers 
 separated from federal agencies due to incidents 
 related to White supremacy or neo-Nazi activity;
 (D) for each instance included in the total number 
 in subparagraph (C), a description of the circumstances 
 that led to the separation of Federal law enforcement 
 officers from federal agencies due to White supremacy 
 and neo-Nazi activity;
 (E) the response of the Director of the Federal 
 Bureau of Investigation, the Secretary of Homeland 
 Security, and the Secretary of Defense to planned or 
 effectuated incidents that have a nexus to White 
 supremacist and neo-Nazi ideology involving those 
 described in subparagraphs (B) and (D); and
 (F) specific plans to address such incidents 
 described in this subsection within uniformed services 
 and Federal law enforcement agencies.
 (2) Transmission.--The Director of the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation, the Secretary of Homeland Security, and the 
 Secretary of Defense shall transmit each report described in 
 paragraph (1) to--
 (A) the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate;
 (B) the Committee on Homeland Security and 
 Governmental Affairs of the Senate;
 (C) the Select Committee on Intelligence of the 
 Senate;
 (D) the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate;
 (E) the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of 
 Representatives;
 (F) the Committee on Homeland Security of the House 
 of Representatives;
 (G) the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence 
 of the House of Representatives; and
 (H) the Committee on Armed Services of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (3) Classification and public release.--The report 
 submitted under paragraph (1) shall be--
 (A) submitted in unclassified form, to the greatest 
 extent possible, with a classified annex only if 
 necessary; and
 (B) in the case of the unclassified portion of the 
 report, posted on the public website of the Department 
 of Defense, the Department of Homeland Security, the 
 Department of Justice, and the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation.

SEC. 5815. REPORTING ON PREVIOUS FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION AND 
 DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) Report Required.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Director of the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation and the Secretary of Homeland Security, in consultation 
with the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, shall submit 
to the appropriate congressional committees a report on the processes 
needed to regularly report to Congress on domestic terrorism threats 
pursuant to Section 5602 of the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2020 (Public Law 116-92).
 (b) Data Limitations.--In the event that data internal to the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation and Department of Homeland Security on 
completed or attempted acts of domestic terrorism from January 1, 2009, 
to December 31, 2014 is incomplete or inconsistent, the Director of the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Secretary of Homeland Security 
shall engage with State, local, Tribal, and territorial partners, 
academic institutions, non-profit organizations, and the private sector 
with expertise in domestic terrorism threats and acts to provide the 
most accurate and consistent information for the report required under 
subsection (a).
 (c) GAO Report.-- Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Government Accountability Office shall 
produce a report providing a full review of the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation's, the Secretary of Homeland Security's, and the Office 
of the Director of National Intelligence's compliance with domestic 
terrorism transparency mechanisms required by Federal law, including 
the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section, the ter ``appropriate 
congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental 
 Affairs of the Senate;
 (2) the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate;
 (3) the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate;
 (4) the Committee on Homeland Security of the House of 
 Representatives;
 (5) the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (6) the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the 
 House of Representatives.

SEC. 5816. PFAS DATA CALL.

 Section 8(a)(7) of the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 
2607(a)(7)) is amended by inserting ``that contains at least one fully 
fluorinated carbon atom,'' after ``perfluoroalkyl or polyfluoroalkyl 
substance''.

SEC. 5817. PROHIBITION ON CONTRACTING WITH PERSONS WITH WILLFUL OR 
 REPEATED VIOLATIONS OF THE FAIR LABOR STANDARDS ACT OF 
 1938.

 (a) Initiation of Debarment Proceedings.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Labor shall initiate a 
 debarment proceeding with respect to a covered person for whom 
 information regarding two or more willful or repeated 
 violations of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 
 201 et seq.) (as determined by a disposition described under 
 subsection (c)(1) of section 2313 of title 41, United States 
 Code, and issued in the last five years) is included in the 
 database established under subsection (a) of such section.
 (2) Length of debarment.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of law, the Secretary of Labor may determine the 
 length of a debarment under paragraph (1).
 (b) Databases.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Labor shall ensure that the enforcement 
and compliance databases of the Department of Labor--
 (1) identify persons that have been finally adjudicated to 
 have violated labor laws;
 (2) list each person, identified by the tax identification 
 number of the person, that is suspended or debarred for a 
 violation of a labor law; and
 (3) are accessible to contracting officers and suspension 
 and debarment officials at all Federal agencies.
 (c) Revision of FAR.--The Federal Acquisition Regulation shall be 
revised to require contracting officers--
 (1) when renewing or awarding a contract, to check the 
 database in subsection (b) for suspensions or debarments 
 described under that subsection when determining present 
 responsibility and conducting a past performance evaluation;
 (2) to enter relevant information from the database in 
 subsection (b) into past performance evaluations in the 
 Contractor Performance Assessment and Reporting System; and
 (3) to coordinate with the Labor Advisor of the agency and 
 consult with experts regarding alleged violations of labor law.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section--
 (1) the term ``covered person'' means any individual, 
 enterprise, or firm applying for a contract worth $500,000 or 
 more;
 (2) the term ``Federal agency'' has the meaning given that 
 term in section 102 of title 40, United States Code;
 (3) the term ``labor law'' includes--
 (A) subchapter IV of chapter 31 of title 40, United 
 States Code (commonly referred to as the ``Davis Bacon 
 Act'');
 (B) chapter 67 of subtitle II of title 41, United 
 States Code (commonly referred to as the ``Services 
 Contracting Act''); and
 (C) the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 U.S.C. 
 201 et seq.); and
 (4) the term ``willful'' has the meaning given that term in 
 section 578.3 of title 29, Code of Federal Regulations.

SEC. 5818. REPORT ON HUMAN RIGHTS IN THE PHILIPPINES.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of State, shall submit to the congressional defense 
committees a report that includes the following:
 (1) An assessment of extrajudicial killings and other human 
 rights violations committed by the Philippines military, 
 police, and paramilitary forces, specifically violations 
 against trade unionists, journalists, human rights defenders, 
 critics of the government, faith and religious leaders, and 
 other civil society activists.
 (2) A description of the human rights climate in the 
 Philippines; an assessment of the Philippines military, police, 
 and paramilitary forces' adherence to human rights; and an 
 analysis of such forces' role in the practice of ``red-
 tagging'', including against United States citizens.

SEC. 5819. REQUIREMENT FOR THE SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND URBAN 
 DEVELOPMENT TO ANNUALLY REPORT COMPLAINTS OF SEXUAL 
 HARASSMENT.

 (a) Requirement to Annually Report Complaints of Sexual 
Harassment.--
 (1) Annual report.--Section 808(e)(2) of the Fair Housing 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 3608(e)(2)) is amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (A) by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in subparagraph (B)(iii) by striking the 
 semicolon and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by inserting after subparagraph (B) the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(C) containing tabulations of the number of 
 instances in the preceding year in which complaints of 
 discriminatory housing practices were filed with the 
 Department of Housing and Urban Development or a fair 
 housing assistance program, including identification of 
 whether each complaint was filed with respect to 
 discrimination based on race, color, religion, national 
 origin, sex, handicap, or familial status.''.
 (2) Sexual harassment.--Section 808 of the Fair Housing Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 3608) is amended by adding at the end the following 
 new subsection:
 ``(g) In carrying out the reporting obligations under this section, 
the Secretary shall--
 ``(1) consider a complaint filed with respect to 
 discrimination based on sex to include any complaint filed with 
 respect to sexual harassment; and
 ``(2) in reporting the instances of a complaint filed with 
 respect to discrimination based on sex under subsection 
 (e)(2)(C), include a disaggregated tabulation of the total 
 number of such complaints filed with respect to sexual 
 harassment.''.
 (3) Initiative to combat sexual harassment in housing.--
 Title IX of the Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3631) is amended by 
 adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 902. INITIATIVE TO COMBAT SEXUAL HARASSMENT IN HOUSING.

 ``The Attorney General shall establish an initiative to investigate 
and prosecute an allegation of a violation under this Act with respect 
to sexual harassment.''.

SEC. 5820. DEPARTMENT OF LABOR STUDY ON FACTORS AFFECTING EMPLOYMENT 
 OPPORTUNITIES FOR IMMIGRANTS AND REFUGEES WITH 
 PROFESSIONAL CREDENTIALS OBTAINED IN FOREIGN COUNTRIES.

 (a) Study Required.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Labor, in coordination 
 with the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Education, the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Secretary of 
 Commerce, the Secretary of Homeland Security, the Administrator 
 of the Internal Revenue Service, and the Commissioner of the 
 Social Security Administration, shall conduct a study of the 
 factors affecting employment opportunities in the United States 
 for applicable immigrants and refugees who have professional 
 credentials that were obtained in a country other than the 
 United States.
 (2) Work with other entities.--The Secretary of Labor shall 
 seek to work with relevant nonprofit organizations and State 
 agencies to use the existing data and resources of such 
 entities to conduct the study required under paragraph (1).
 (3) Limitation on disclosure.--Any information provided to 
 the Secretary of Labor in connection with the study required 
 under paragraph (1)--
 (A) may only be used for the purposes of, and to 
 the extent necessary to ensure the efficient operation 
 of, such study; and
 (B) may not be disclosed to any other person or 
 entity except as provided under this subsection.
 (b) Inclusions.--The study required under subsection (a)(1) shall 
include--
 (1) an analysis of the employment history of applicable 
 immigrants and refugees admitted to the United States during 
 the 5-year period immediately preceding the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, which shall include, to the extent 
 practicable--
 (A) a comparison of the employment applicable 
 immigrants and refugees held before immigrating to the 
 United States with the employment they obtained in the 
 United States, if any, since their arrival; and
 (B) the occupational and professional credentials 
 and academic degrees held by applicable immigrants and 
 refugees before immigrating to the United States;
 (2) an assessment of any barriers that prevent applicable 
 immigrants and refugees from using occupational experience 
 obtained outside the United States to obtain employment in the 
 United States;
 (3) an analysis of available public and private resources 
 assisting applicable immigrants and refugees who have 
 professional experience and qualifications obtained outside of 
 the United States to obtain skill-appropriate employment in the 
 United States; and
 (4) policy recommendations for better enabling applicable 
 immigrants and refugees who have professional experience and 
 qualifications obtained outside of the United States to obtain 
 skill-appropriate employment in the United States.
 (c) Report.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the 
enactment of this section, the Secretary of Labor shall--
 (1) submit a report to Congress that describes the results 
 of the study conducted pursuant to subsection (a); and
 (2) make such report publicly available on the website of 
 the Department of Labor.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``applicable immigrants and refugees''--
 (A) means individuals who--
 (i)(I) are not citizens or nationals of the 
 United States; and
 (II) are lawfully present in the United 
 States and authorized to be employed in the 
 United States; or
 (ii) are naturalized citizens of the United 
 States who were born outside of the United 
 States and its outlying possessions; and
 (B) includes individuals described in section 
 602(b)(2) of the Afghan Allies Protection Act of 2009 
 (title VI of division F of Public Law 111-8; 8 U.S.C. 
 1101 note).
 (2) Except as otherwise defined in this section, terms used 
 in this section have the definitions given such terms under 
 section 101(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 
 1101(a)).

SEC. 5821. SENSE OF CONGRESS AND STATEMENT OF POLICY ON HAITI.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) Since 2018, the ruling PHTK has presided over 
 increasing instability, displacement, and poverty in Haiti 
 stemming from, among other reasons--
 (A) systematic dismantlement of the judicial 
 system;
 (B) a non-functioning parliamentary system;
 (C) mass gang violence against civilians and 
 between gangs resulting in large-scale massacres;
 (D) gang rule of large parts of Haiti; daily 
 kidnappings for ransom;
 (E) widespread sexual violence against women, girls 
 and marginalized people;
 (F) grand corruption;
 (G) state violence against protesters;
 (H) unsafe conditions for workers;
 (I) diminished access to water, food, healthcare 
 and education; and
 (J) unnatural devastation from natural disasters.
 (2) Government-supported violence in Haiti has forced large 
 numbers of Haitians to flee the country, including to the 
 United States.
 (3) Independent human rights organizations and the media 
 have documented PHTK collusion with gang activity through--
 (A) the participation of PHTK officials in gang 
 attacks;
 (B) the use of police vehicles in gang activities; 
 and
 (C) systemic refusals by the police to interfere in 
 gang attacks and the justice system to prosecute gang 
 members and government officials credibly accused of 
 participating in massacres.
 (4) In 2021, the United States together with the 
 international community installed PHTK official Ariel Henry as 
 the Prime Minister and thus de facto head of Government of 
 Haiti following the assassination of President Jovenel Moise.
 (b) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the 
security, freedom, and well-being of Haitians are intertwined with that 
of the people of the United States, and United States interests are not 
served by an unstable or unsafe Haiti.
 (c) Statement of Policy.--It is the policy of the United States--
 (1) to support a Haitian-led solution to the current 
 crisis;
 (2) that the people of Haiti must be empowered to choose 
 their leaders and govern Haiti free from foreign interference; 
 and
 (3) to support the sustainable rebuilding and development 
 of Haiti in a manner that promotes efforts led and supported by 
 the people and Government of Haiti at all levels, so that 
 Haitians lead the course of reconstruction and development of 
 Haiti.

SEC. 5822. CORRECTIONAL FACILITY DISASTER PREPAREDNESS.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section, the term ``major disaster'' 
means--
 (1) a major disaster declared by the President under 
 section 401 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and 
 Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5170); or
 (2) any natural disaster or extreme weather or public 
 health emergency event that--
 (A) would activate the use of any Bureau of Prisons 
 18 contingency plans; and
 (B) the Bureau of Prisons determines is a major 
 disaster.
 (b) Bureau of Prisons Annual Summary Report of Disaster Damage.--
 (1) In general.--The Director of the Bureau of Prisons 
 shall submit to the Committee on Appropriations, the Committee 
 on the Judiciary, and the Committee on Homeland Security and 
 Governmental Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on 
 Appropriations, the Committee on the Judiciary, and the 
 Committee on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives 
 an annual summary report of disaster damage on the scope of 
 physical damage from a major disaster in each Bureau of Prisons 
 facility and its contract prisons impacted or struck by a major 
 disaster that explains the effects of the damage on inmates and 
 staff, including--
 (A) data on injury and loss of life of inmates and 
 staff;
 (B) access to health and medical care, food, 
 special dietary needs, drinkable water, personal 
 protective equipment, and personal hygiene products;
 (C) guidance used to adjudicate early release or 
 home confinement requests, data on early release or 
 home confinement approvals, denials, and justification 
 for denials;
 (D) an explanation as to whether using home 
 confinement or early release was considered;
 (E) access to cost-free and uninterrupted 
 visitation with legal counsel and visitors with 
 justifications for facility decisions that resulted in 
 suspended or altered visitations;
 (F) access to appropriate accommodations for 
 inmates with disabilities;
 (G) access to educational and work programs;
 (H) inmate grievances;
 (I) assessment of the cost of the damage to the 
 facility and estimates for repairs;
 (J) the impact on staffing, equipment, and 
 financial resources; and
 (K) other factors relating to the ability of the 
 Bureau of Prisons and any existing contract prison to 
 uphold the health, safety, and civil rights of the 
 correctional population.
 (2) Corrective action plan.--The report required under 
 paragraph (1) shall include agency corrective actions that the 
 Bureau of Prisons will take to improve and modernize emergency 
 preparedness plans, as they relate to natural disasters, 
 extreme weather, and public health emergencies and a timeline 
 to implement the corrective action plan.
 (3) Recommendations.--The report required under paragraph 
 (1) shall include specific legislative recommendations to 
 Congress for improving emergency preparedness plans within the 
 Bureau of Prisons.
 (4) Appointment.--Not later than 90 days after the 
 enactment of this section, the Director of the Bureau of 
 Prisons shall appoint an official of the Bureau of Prisons 
 responsible for carrying out the corrective action plan.
 (c) National Institute of Corrections.--Section 4351 of title 18, 
United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by 
 striking ``ten'' and inserting ``13''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) One shall have served a sentence in either a Federal 
 or State correctional facility or have a professional 
 background advocating on the behalf of formerly incarcerated or 
 incarcerated individuals.
 ``(4) One shall have a background as an emergency response 
 coordinator that has created an emergency management 
 accreditation program.
 ``(5) One shall have an educational and professional 
 background in public health working with communicable 
 diseases.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(i) Field Hearing.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of this subsection, the National Institute of Corrections 
shall conduct at least one public field hearing on how correctional 
facilities can incorporate in their emergency preparedness plans and 
recovery efforts--
 ``(1) inmate access to medical care, food, drinkable water, 
 personal protective equipment, and personal hygiene products;
 ``(2) consideration by staff of using home confinement or 
 early release;
 ``(3) inmate access to cost-free and uninterrupted 
 visitation with legal counsel and visitors with clear standards 
 for when facilities may suspend or alter visitations;
 ``(4) inmate access to appropriate accommodations for 
 inmates with disabilities;
 ``(5) use of Federal funding to restore disaster-damaged 
 correctional facilities; and
 ``(6) incorporation by staff of risk management best 
 practices, such as those made available under the relevant 
 agencies of the Federal Emergency Management Administration, 
 Department of Health and Human Services, and the Government 
 Accountability Office to enhance emergency preparedness 
 plans.''.

SEC. 5823. NONDISCRIMINATION IN FEDERAL HIRING FOR VETERAN MEDICAL 
 CANNABIS USERS; AUTHORIZED PROVISION OF INFORMATION ON 
 STATE-APPROVED MARIJUANA PROGRAMS TO VETERANS.

 (a) In General.--It shall be unlawful for a ``veteran'', as defined 
in title 38, section 101(2) of the United States Code, to be excluded 
from employment in the Federal Government solely because the veteran 
consumes or has consumed cannabis, as defined in the Controlled 
Substances Act, or anywhere in the United States Code. For the purposes 
determining if a person is a veteran under this provision, an other 
than honorable, bad conduct, or dishonorable release premised solely on 
a nonviolent cannabis charge or conviction shall be construed as a 
general discharge.
 (b) Authorized Provision of Information.--Notwithstanding the 
provisions of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 801 et seq.) or 
any other Federal, State, or local law regulating or prohibiting the 
provision of information on marijuana, the Secretary of Veterans 
Affairs shall authorize physicians and other health care providers of 
the Veterans Health Administration of the Department of Veterans 
Affairs to provide to veterans who are residents of States with State-
approved marijuana programs information regarding the participation of 
such veterans in such programs and to recommend their participation in 
such programs.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``information'' includes details such as 
 informational materials, internet websites, and relevant 
 contact information for State-approved marijuana programs.
 (2) The term ``marijuana'' has the meaning given the term 
 ``marihuana'' in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act 
 (21 U.S.C. 802).
 (3) The term ``State'' means each of the several States, 
 the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, any 
 territory, Federal enclave, or possession of the United States, 
 and each federally recognized Indian Tribe.
 (4) The term ``nonviolent cannabis charge or conviction'' 
 shall include any nonviolent offense or offenses involving 
 marijuana, or tetrahydrocannabinols and any related nonviolent 
 offenses or convictions that would not have satisfied all 
 elements of the charged offense or offenses but for the 
 involvement of these substances except for any offenses or 
 convictions where it has been established in court that the 
 individual was associated with a foreign drug cartel or 
 operating a motor vehicle under the influence of a drug or 
 alcohol within the meaning of section 13(b) of title 18,United 
 States Code, n offense of operating or being in actual physical 
 control of a motor vehicle within the meaning of title 36, 
 section 4.23 of the Code of Federal Regulations, or drunken or 
 reckless operation of vehicle, aircraft or vessel within the 
 meaning of article 111 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice, 
 section 911 of title 10, United States Code.

SEC. 5824. REPORT ON CERTAIN ENTITIES CONNECTED TO FOREIGN PERSONS ON 
 THE MURDER OF JAMAL KHASHOGGI.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State, in consultation with the 
heads of appropriate agencies, shall submit to the appropriate 
congressional committees a report on private, commercial, and 
nongovernmental entities, including non-profit foundations, controlled 
in whole or in part by any foreign person named in the Office of the 
Director of National Intelligence report titled ``Assessing the Saudi 
Government's Role in the Killing of Jamal Khashoggi'', dated February 
11, 2021.
 (b) Matters to Be Included.--The report required by subsection (a) 
shall include the following:
 (1) A description of such entities.
 (2) A detailed assessment, based in part on credible open 
 sources and other publicly-available information, of the roles, 
 if any, such entities played in the murder of Jamal Khashoggi 
 or any other gross violations of internationally recognized 
 human rights.
 (3) A certification of whether any such entity is subject 
 to sanctions pursuant to the Global Magnitsky Human Rights 
 Accountability Act (22 U.S.C. 2656 note).
 (c) Form.--The report required by subsection (a) shall be submitted 
in unclassified form, but may include a classified annex.
 (d) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Permanent 
 Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Select 
 Committee on Intelligence of the Senate.

SEC. 5825. REVIEW OF IMPLEMENTATION OF UNITED STATES SANCTIONS WITH 
 RESPECT TO VIOLATORS OF THE ARMS EMBARGO ON LIBYA.

 (a) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the President shall submit to the appropriate 
congressional committees an unclassified report that describes whether 
the President has determined the persons described in subsection (b) 
meet the criteria for the imposition of sanctions under section 1(a) of 
Executive Order 13726 (81 Fed. Reg. 23559; relating to blocking 
property and suspending entry into the United States of persons 
contributing to the situation in Libya).
 (b) Persons.--For purposes of the determination required under 
subsection (a), the President shall consider all private companies 
listed for facilitating violations of the United Nations arms embargo 
on Libya in the report of the United Nations Panel of Experts entitled 
``Letter dated 8 March 2021 from the Panel of Experts on Libya 
established pursuant to resolution 1973 (2011) addressed to the 
President of the Security Council'' and ``Letter dated 24 May 2022 from 
the Panel of Experts on Libya established pursuant to resolution 1973 
(2011) addressed to the President of the Security Council'', including 
the following:
 (1) Maritime vessels.
 (2) Corporate facilitators of arms embargo violations.
 (3) Aircraft operators.
 (4) Mercenary recruiters and facilitators.
 (c) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on 
 Financial Services of the House of Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on 
 Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate.

SEC. 5826. MODIFICATION OF PRIOR NOTIFICATION OF SHIPMENT OF ARMS.

 Subsection (i) of section 36 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 
U.S.C. 2776) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(i) Prior Notification of Shipment of Arms.--At least 30 days 
prior to the initial and final shipment of a sale of defense articles 
subject to the requirements of subsection (b), the President shall 
provide notification of such pending shipment, in unclassified form, 
with a classified annex as necessary, to the Chairperson and Ranking 
Member of the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the 
Chairperson and Ranking Member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs of 
the House of Representatives.''.

SEC. 5827. STUDY AND REPORT ON FEASABILITY OF SUSPENSION OF MERGERS, 
 ACQUISITIONS, AND TAKEOVERS OF CERTAIN FOREIGN 
 SURVEILLANCE COMPANIES.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Commerce, in consultation with 
the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of State, the Secretary of 
Defense, the Director of National Intelligence, and the heads of other 
relevant agencies, shall--
 (1) study the feasibility of using existing authorities to 
 implement a suspension of any merger, acquisition, or takeover 
 that would result in control, including full or partial 
 ownership of some or all assets, of a covered foreign entity 
 described in subsection (c) by a United States person; and
 (2) submit to the appropriate congressional committees a 
 report on the results of such study.
 (b) Matters to Be Included.--The study and report required by 
subsection (a) shall include the following:
 (1) An assessment of whether the President or Executive 
 branch agencies have the authority to implement a suspension as 
 described in subsection (a) and what additional authorities 
 would be required if needed.
 (2) An assessment of whether the President or Executive 
 branch agencies could lift a suspension only if a determination 
 is made that the merger, acquisition, or takeover described in 
 subsection (a)--
 (A) does not pose a significant counterintelligence 
 or national security risk to the United States or 
 United States treaty allies, including an undue risk of 
 subversion of the United States intelligence community 
 or United States national security interests through 
 the design, integrity, manufacturing, production, 
 distribution, installation, operation, or maintenance 
 of targeted digital surveillance technologies;
 (B) does not seek or intend to evade or circumvent 
 United States export control laws, including through a 
 transaction, transfer, agreement or arrangement 
 intended or designed to limit exposure to United States 
 export controls; or
 (C) does not affect any existing contracts between 
 the United States Government and the United States 
 person.
 (c) Covered Foreign Entity Described.--A covered foreign entity 
described in this subsection is an entity, including a subsidiary or 
affiliate of the entity, that--
 (1) is organized under the laws of or having its principal 
 place of business in a foreign country;
 (2) develops, sells, or otherwise controls proprietary 
 technology, including non-sensitive technologies, related to 
 targeted digital surveillance capabilities; and
 (3) is included on the list maintained by the Bureau of 
 Industry and Security of the Department of Commerce and set 
 forth in Supplement No. 4 to part 744 of title 15, Code of 
 Federal Regulations.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Control.--The term ``control''' means the power, direct 
 or indirect, whether exercised or not exercised, to determine, 
 direct, or decide important matters affecting an entity, 
 subject to regulations prescribed by the Secretary of Commerce.
 (2) Intelligence community.--The term ``intelligence 
 community'' has the meaning given that term in section 3(4) of 
 the National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3003(4)).
 (3) Targeted digital surveillance.--The term ``targeted 
 digital surveillance'' means the use of items or services that 
 enable an individual or entity (with or without the knowing 
 authorization of the product's owner) to detect, monitor, 
 intercept, collect, exploit, preserve, protect, transmit, 
 retain, or otherwise gain access to the communications, 
 sensitive or protected information, work product, browsing 
 data, research, identifying information, location history, and 
 online and offline activities of other individuals, 
 organizations, or entities.
 (4) United states person.--The term ``United States 
 person'' means--
 (A) a United States citizen or an alien lawfully 
 admitted for permanent residence to the United States; 
 or
 (B) an entity organized under the laws of the 
 United States or of any jurisdiction of the United 
 States, including a foreign branch of such an entity.

SEC. 5828. REPORT ON POLITICAL PRISONERS IN EGYPT.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State, in consultation with the 
Director of National Intelligence, shall submit to the appropriate 
congressional committees a report on the status of political prisoners 
in Egypt.
 (b) Matters to Be Included.--The report required by subsection (a) 
shall include a detailed assessment of how many individuals are 
detained, imprisoned, or the victim of an enforced disappearance in 
Egypt, including individuals who--
 (1) are human rights defenders;
 (2) are detained, imprisoned, or otherwise physically 
 restricted because of their political, religious, other 
 conscientiously-held beliefs, or their identity;
 (3) are prisoners who are arbitrarily detained;
 (4) are victims of enforced disappearance or are reasonably 
 suspected of being detained or imprisoned in a secret location; 
 or
 (5) have been subject to torture or other gross violations 
 of human rights while detained or imprisoned.
 (c) Form.--The report required by subsection (a) shall be submitted 
in unclassified form, but portions of the report described in 
subsection (b) may contain a classified annex, so long as such annex is 
provided separately from the unclassified report.

SEC. 5829. ATTORNEY GENERAL AUTHORITY TO TRANSFER FORFEITED RUSSIAN 
 ASSETS TO ASSIST UKRAINE.

 (a) Authorization.--Subject to appropriations for such purpose, the 
Attorney General may transfer to the Secretary of State the proceeds of 
any covered forfeited property for use by the Secretary of State to 
provide assistance to Ukraine to remediate the harms of Russian 
aggression towards Ukraine. Any such transfer shall be considered 
foreign assistance under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 
2151 et seq.).
 (b) Report.--The Attorney General, in consultation with the 
Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of State, shall provide a 
semiannual report to the appropriate congressional committees on any 
transfers made pursuant to subsection (a).
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``covered forfeited property'' means property 
 seized by the Department of Justice under chapter 46 or section 
 1963 of title 18, United States Code, which property belonged 
 to or was possessed by a person subject to sanctions and 
 designated by the Secretary of Treasury or the Secretary of 
 State, pursuant to Executive Order 14024, and as expanded by 
 Executive Order 14066 of March 8, 2022, and relied on for 
 additional steps taken in Executive Order 14039 of August 20, 
 2021, and Executive Order 14068 of March 11, 2022.
 (2) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the Committees on the Judiciary of the House of 
 Representatives and of the Senate;
 (B) the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House 
 of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign 
 Relations of the Senate;
 (C) the Committee on Financial Services of the 
 House of Representatives and the Committee on Finance 
 of the Senate; and
 (D) the Committees on Appropriations of the House 
 of Representatives and of the Senate.
 (d) Sunset.--The authority under this section shall apply to any 
covered forfeited property seized on or before the date of the 
enactment of this Act and on or before May 1, 2025.

SEC. 5830. REMOVING RUSSIAN ROUGH DIAMONDS FROM GLOBAL MARKETS.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the 
Secretary of State, in coordination with the Secretary of the Treasury 
and the heads of all other relevant interagency partners, should 
instruct the United States representatives at each international 
institution as follows:
 (1) To use the voice and vote of the United States to expel 
 Russia from the Kimberley Process to ensure that Russian source 
 and origin rough diamonds are not used to finance Russia's war 
 in Ukraine or to circumvent United States sanctions.
 (2) To engage the current chair of the Kimberley Process to 
 ensure that Russia's exclusion from the process is brought to a 
 formal decision in a timely manner.
 (3) To use the role of the United States in the Working 
 Group on Monitoring in the Kimberley Process to ensure that 
 Kimberley Process compliance obligations include assessments on 
 tractability and provenance of potential Russian diamonds 
 moving through a particular country's compliance system.
 (4) To work with other participants in the Kimberley 
 Process, including partner countries that provide avenues for 
 sanctioned Russian oligarchs to protect their wealth, to 
 develop a coordinated policy with respect to ensuring Russian 
 rough diamonds, precious metals, or other assets are not used 
 to circumvent United States sanctions on Russian oligarchs.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State, in consultation with the 
Secretary of Treasury and the Department of Homeland Security, shall 
submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report on the 
implementation of United States sanctions of Russian diamond companies 
that includes the following:
 (1) An assessment on how specific countries are 
 implementing sanctions imposed with respect to the Russian 
 state-owned enterprise Alrosa and other sanctioned Russian 
 diamond companies, including in particular the countries that--
 (A) receive security assistance from the United 
 States authorized under title 10, United States Code, 
 or under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 
 2151 et seq.); and
 (B) have signed a collective defense arrangement 
 with the United States.
 (2) A list of which countries wealthy Russian oligarchs, 
 sanctioned or otherwise, have emigrated to following the 
 outbreak of the war in Ukraine.
 (3) An assessment on how implementation and enforcement of 
 the sanctions imposed with respect to Alrosa can be 
 strengthened, including through mechanisms for traceability.
 (c) Resources.--In completing the report required by subsection 
(b), the relevant departments shall directly engage with key industry 
associations and members, including grading laboratories, on matters of 
technical importance, including traceability and provenance.

SEC. 5831. LIU XIAOBO FUND FOR STUDY OF THE CHINESE LANGUAGE.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) as a substitute to Confucius Institutes, the United 
 States Government should invest heavily into alternative 
 programs and institutions that ensure there remains a robust 
 pipeline of Americans learning China's many languages; and
 (2) in a 21st century that will be dominated by a strategic 
 competition between the United States and China, it is in the 
 national security interests of the United States to ensure that 
 Americans continue to invest in Chinese language skills, as 
 well as Tibetan, Uyghur, and Mongolian languages, while 
 ensuring they can do so in a context free of malign political 
 influence from foreign state actors.
 (b) Establishment of the Liu Xiaobo Fund for Study of the Chinese 
Language.--The Secretary of State shall establish in the Department of 
State the ``Liu Xiaobo Fund for Study of the Chinese Language'' to fund 
study by United States persons of Mandarin and Cantonese Chinese, 
Tibetan, Uyghur, Mongolian, and other contemporary spoken languages of 
China, abroad or in the United States.
 (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to the Department of State for fiscal year 2021 and every 
fiscal year thereafter, $10,000,000 to carry out the Liu Xiaobo Fund 
for Study of the Chinese Language.
 (d) Required Activities.--Amounts authorized to be appropriated 
pursuant to subsection (c) shall--
 (1) be designed to advance the national security and 
 foreign policy interests of the United States, as determined by 
 the Secretary of State;
 (2) favor funding mechanisms that can maximize the total 
 number of United States persons given the opportunity to 
 acquire full conversational linguistic proficiency in Mandarin 
 and Cantonese Chinese, Tibetan, Uyghur, Mongolian, and other 
 contemporary spoken languages of China;
 (3) favor funding mechanisms that provide opportunities for 
 such language study to areas traditionally under-served by such 
 opportunities;
 (4) be shaped by an ongoing consultative process taking 
 into account design inputs of--
 (A) civil society institutions, including Chinese 
 diaspora community organizations;
 (B) language experts in Mandarin and Cantonese 
 Chinese, Tibetan, Uyghur, Mongolian, and other 
 contemporary spoken languages of China;
 (C) organizations representing historically 
 disadvantaged socioeconomic groups in the United 
 States; and
 (D) human rights organizations; and
 (5) favor opportunities to fund the study of Mandarin and 
 Cantonese Chinese, Tibetan, Uyghur, Mongolian, and other 
 contemporary spoken languages of China at Alaska Native-serving 
 institutions, Asian American and Native American Pacific 
 Islander-serving institutions, Hispanic-serving institutions, 
 historically Black college or universities, Native American-
 serving nontribal institutions, Native Hawaiian-serving 
 institutions, Predominantly Black institutions, Tribal Colleges 
 or Universities.
 (e) Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 120 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act and annually thereafter for five 
 years, the Secretary of State, in consultation with the heads 
 of appropriate Federal departments and agencies, as 
 appropriate, shall submit to the Committee on Foreign Affairs 
 of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign 
 Relations of the Senate a report detailing activities and 
 disbursements made to carry out this Act over the immediately 
 preceding academic year.
 (2) Report contents.--Each report required under paragraph 
 (1) shall include details on--
 (A) which institutions, programs, or entities 
 received funds through the Liu Xiaobo Fund for Study of 
 the Chinese Language;
 (B) funds distribution disaggregated by 
 institution, program, or entity, including 
 identification of the State or country in which such 
 institution, program, or entity is located;
 (C) the number of United States persons who 
 received language study under the Liu Xiaobo Fund for 
 Study of the Chinese Language, and the average amount 
 disbursed per person for such study;
 (D) a comparative analysis of per dollar program 
 effectiveness and efficiency in allowing United States 
 persons to reach conversational proficiency Mandarin or 
 Cantonese Chinese, Tibetan, Uyghur, Mongolian, or other 
 contemporary spoken languages of China;
 (E) an analysis of which of the languages referred 
 to in subparagraph (D) were studied through the funding 
 from the Liu Xiaobo Fund for Study of the Chinese 
 Language; and
 (F) any recommendations of the Secretary of State 
 for improvements to the authorities, priorities, or 
 management of the Liu Xiaobo Fund for Study of the 
 Chinese Language.
 (f) Interagency Funds Transfers Authorization.--Amounts authorized 
to be appropriated to the Secretary of State to carry out this Act are 
authorized to be transferred to the heads of other appropriate Federal 
departments and agencies for similar purposes, subject to prior 
notification to the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate. 
Such heads shall consult with the Secretary in the preparation of the 
report required under subsection (e).
 (g) Limitations.--Amounts authorized to be appropriated to carry 
out this Act may only be made available for the costs of language study 
funded and administration incurred by the Department of State or 
programs carried out by the Department of State (or by another Federal 
department or agency pursuant to subsection (f)) to carry out this 
section.
 (h) Offset.--Notwithstanding the amounts set forth in the funding 
tables in division D, the amount authorized to be appropriated for 
Operations and Maintenance, Defense-Wide, as specified in the 
corresponding funding table in section 4301, is hereby reduced by 
$10,000,000.
 (i) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``Alaska Native-serving institution'' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 317(b) of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1059d(b))
 (2) The term ``Asian American and Native American Pacific 
 Islander-serving institution'' has the meaning given such term 
 in section 371(c) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 1067q(c)).
 (3) The term ``Hispanic-serving institution'' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 502 of the Higher Education 
 Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1101a).
 (4) The term ``historically Black college or university'' 
 means a part B institution described in section 322(2) of the 
 Higher Education Act of 1965 (22 U.S.C. 1061(2)).
 (5) The term ``Native American-serving nontribal 
 institution'' has the meaning given such term in section 371(c) 
 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1067q(c)).
 (6) The term ``Native Hawaiian-serving institution'' has 
 the meaning given such term in section 317(b) of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1059d(b)).
 (7) The term ``Predominantly Black institution'' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 371(c) of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1067q(c)).
 (8) The term ``Tribal College or University'' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 316(b) of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1059c(b)).

SEC. 5832. ACCESS FOR VETERANS TO RECORDS.

 (a) Plan to Eliminate Records Backlog at the National Personnel 
Records Center.--
 (1) Plan required.--Not later than 60 days after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, the Archivist of the United 
 States shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees 
 a comprehensive plan for reducing the backlog of requests for 
 records from the National Personnel Records Center and 
 improving the efficiency and responsiveness of operations at 
 the National Personnel Records Center, that includes, at a 
 minimum, the following:
 (A) An estimate of the number of backlogged record 
 requests for veterans.
 (B) Target timeframes to reduce the backlog.
 (C) A detailed plan for using existing funds to 
 improve the information technology infrastructure, 
 including secure access to appropriate agency Federal 
 records, to prevent future backlogs.
 (D) Actions to improve customer service for 
 requesters.
 (E) Measurable goals with respect to the 
 comprehensive plan and metrics for tracking progress 
 toward such goals.
 (F) Strategies to prevent future record request 
 backlogs, including backlogs caused by an event that 
 prevents employees of the Center from reporting to work 
 in person.
 (2) Updates.--Not later than 90 days after the date on 
 which the comprehensive plan is submitted under paragraph (1), 
 and biannually thereafter until the response rate by the 
 National Personnel Records Center reaches 90 percent of all 
 requests in 20 days or less, not including any request 
 involving a record damaged or lost in the National Personnel 
 Records Center fire of 1973 or any request that is subject to a 
 fee that has not been paid in a timely manner by the requestor 
 (provided the National Personnel Records Center issues an 
 invoice within 20 days after the date on which the request is 
 made), the Archivist of the United States shall submit to the 
 appropriate congressional committees an update of such plan 
 that--
 (A) describes progress made by the National 
 Personnel Records Center during the preceding 90-day 
 period with respect to record request backlog reduction 
 and efficiency and responsiveness improvement;
 (B) provides data on progress made toward the goals 
 identified in the comprehensive plan; and
 (C) describes any changes made to the comprehensive 
 plan.
 (3) Consultation requirement.--In carrying out paragraphs 
 (1) and (2), the Archivist of the United States shall consult 
 with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
 (4) Appropriate congressional committees defined.--In this 
 section, the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the Committee on Oversight and Reform and the 
 Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Homeland Security and 
 Governmental Affairs and the Committee on Veterans' 
 Affairs of the Senate.
 (b) Additional Funding to Address Records Backlog.--
 (1) Authorization of appropriations.--In addition to 
 amounts otherwise available, there is authorized to be 
 appropriated to the National Archives and Records 
 Administration, $60,000,000 to address backlogs in responding 
 to requests from veterans for military personnel records, 
 improve cybersecurity, improve digital preservation and access 
 to archival Federal records, and address backlogs in requests 
 made under section 552 of title 5, United States Code (commonly 
 referred to as the Freedom of Information Act). Such amounts 
 may also be used for the Federal Records Center Program.
 (2) Requirement to maintain in-person staffing levels.--Not 
 later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
 the Archivist of the United States shall ensure that the 
 National Personnel Records Center maintains staffing levels and 
 telework arrangements that enable the maximum processing of 
 records requests possible in order to achieve the performance 
 goal of responding to 90 percent of all requests in 20 days or 
 less, not including any request involving a record damaged or 
 lost in the National Personnel Records Center fire of 1973 or 
 any request that is subject to a fee that has not been paid in 
 a timely manner by the requestor (provided the National 
 Personnel Records Center issues an invoice within 20 days after 
 the date on which the request is made).
 (3) Inspector general reporting.--The Inspector General for 
 the National Archives and Records Administration shall, for two 
 years following the date of the enactment of this Act, include 
 in every semiannual report submitted to Congress pursuant to 
 the Inspector General Act of 1978, a detailed summary of--
 (A) efforts taken by the National Archives and 
 Records Administration to address the backlog of 
 records requests at the National Personnel Records 
 Center; and
 (B) any recommendations for action proposed by the 
 Inspector General related to reducing the backlog of 
 records requests at the National Personnel Records 
 Center and the status of compliance with those 
 recommendations by the National Archives and Records 
 Administration.

SEC. 5833. JAPANESE AMERICAN CONFINEMENT EDUCATION GRANTS.

 Public Law 109-441 (120 Stat. 3290) is amended--
 (1) in section 2, by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) Japanese american confinement education grants.--The 
 term `Japanese American Confinement Education Grants' means 
 competitive grants, awarded through the Japanese American 
 Confinement Sites Program, for Japanese American organizations 
 to educate individuals, including through the use of digital 
 resources, in the United States on the historical importance of 
 Japanese American confinement during World War II, so that 
 present and future generations may learn from Japanese American 
 confinement and the commitment of the United States to equal 
 justice under the law.
 ``(5) Japanese american organization.--The term `Japanese 
 American organization' means a private nonprofit organization 
 within the United States established to promote the 
 understanding and appreciation of the ethnic and cultural 
 diversity of the United States by illustrating the Japanese 
 American experience throughout the history of the United 
 States.''; and
 (2) in section 4--
 (A) by inserting ``(a) In General.--'' before 
 ``There are authorized'';
 (B) by striking ``$38,000,000'' and inserting 
 ``$80,000,000''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(b) Japanese American Confinement Education Grants.--
 ``(1) In general.--Of the amounts made available under this 
 section, not more than $10,000,000 shall be awarded as Japanese 
 American Confinement Education Grants to Japanese American 
 organizations. Such competitive grants shall be in an amount 
 not less than $750,000 and the Secretary shall give priority 
 consideration to Japanese American organizations with fewer 
 than 100 employees.
 ``(2) Matching requirement.--
 ``(A) Fifty percent.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), for funds awarded under this 
 subsection, the Secretary shall require a 50 percent 
 match with non-Federal assets from non-Federal sources, 
 which may include cash or durable goods and materials 
 fairly valued, as determined by the Secretary.
 ``(B) Waiver.--The Secretary may waive all or part 
 of the matching requirement under subparagraph (A), if 
 the Secretary determines that--
 ``(i) no reasonable means are available 
 through which an applicant can meet the 
 matching requirement; and
 ``(ii) the probable benefit of the project 
 funded outweighs the public interest in such 
 matching requirement.''.

SEC. 5834. REPORTING ON INTERNATIONALLY RECOGNIZED HUMAN RIGHTS IN THE 
 UNITED STATES IN THE ANNUAL COUNTRY REPORTS ON HUMAN 
 RIGHTS PRACTICES.

 Section 116 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2151n) 
is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(h) Internationally Recognized Human Rights in the United 
States.--The report required by subsection (d) shall include a section 
that provides a list of reports published during the prior year by 
United States government agencies on the status of internationally 
recognized human rights in the United States, including reports issued 
by the Department of Justice, the Department of Homeland Security and 
the United States Commission on Civil Rights.''.

SEC. 5835. EXPORT PROHIBITION OF MUNITIONS ITEMS TO THE HONG KONG 
 POLICE FORCE.

 Section 3 of the Act entitled ``An Act to prohibit the commercial 
export of covered munitions items to the Hong Kong Police Force'', 
approved November 27, 2019 (Public Law 116-77; 133 Stat. 1173), is 
amended by striking ``December 31, 2021'' and inserting the following: 
``December 31, 2024''.

SEC. 5836. CONGRESSIONAL NOTIFICATION FOR REWARDS PAID USING 
 CRYPTOCURRENCIES.

 (a) In General.--Section 36(e)(6) of the State Department Basic 
Authorities Act of 1956 (22 U.S.C. 2708(e)(6)) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new sentence: ``Not later than 15 days before 
making a reward in a form that includes cryptocurrency, the Secretary 
of State shall notify the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate of 
such form for the reward.''.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State shall submit to the 
Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives and the 
Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate a report on the use of 
cryptocurrency as a part of the Department of State Rewards program 
established under section 36(a) of the State Department Basic 
Authorities Act of 1956 (22 U.S.C. 2708(a)) that--
 (1) justifies any determination of the Secretary to make 
 rewards under such program in a form that includes 
 cryptocurrency;
 (2) lists each cryptocurrency payment made under such 
 program as of the date of the submission of the report;
 (3) provides evidence of the manner and extent to which 
 cryptocurrency payments would be more likely to induce 
 whistleblowers to come forward with information than rewards 
 paid out in United States dollars or other forms of money or 
 nonmonetary items; and
 (4) examines whether the Department's use of cryptocurrency 
 could provide bad actors with additional hard-to-trace funds 
 that could be used for criminal or illicit purposes.

SEC. 5837. CONSULTATIONS ON REUNITING KOREAN AMERICANS WITH FAMILY 
 MEMBERS IN NORTH KOREA.

 (a) Consultations.--
 (1) Consultations with south korea.--The Secretary of 
 State, or a designee of the Secretary, should consult with 
 officials of South Korea, as appropriate, on potential 
 opportunities to reunite Korean American families with family 
 members in North Korea from which such Korean American families 
 were divided after the signing of the Korean War Armistice 
 Agreement, including potential opportunities for video reunions 
 for Korean Americans with such family members.
 (2) Consultations with korean americans.--The Special Envoy 
 on North Korean Human Rights Issues of the Department of State 
 should regularly consult with representatives of Korean 
 Americans who have family members in North Korea with respect 
 to efforts to reunite families divided after the signing of the 
 Korean War Armistice Agreement, including potential 
 opportunities for video reunions for Korean Americans with such 
 family members.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary of State, 
acting through the Special Envoy on North Korean Human Rights Issues, 
shall submit to the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate a 
report on the consultations conducted pursuant to this section during 
the preceding year.

SEC. 5838. SECURE ACCESS TO SANITATION FACILITIES FOR WOMEN AND GIRLS.

 Subsection (a) of section 501 of the Foreign Relations 
Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1994 and 1995 (22 U.S.C. 2601 note) is 
amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (6) through (11) as 
 paragraphs (7) through (12), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (5) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(6) the provision of safe and secure access to sanitation 
 facilities, with a special emphasis on women, girls, and 
 vulnerable populations.''.

SEC. 5839. BLACKWATER TRADING POST LAND.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``Blackwater Trading Post Land'' means the 
 approximately 55.3 acres of land as depicted on the map that--
 (A) is located in Pinal County, Arizona, and 
 bordered by Community land to the east, west, and north 
 and State Highway 87 to the south; and
 (B) is owned by the Community.
 (2) The term ``Community'' means the Gila River Indian 
 Community of the Reservation.
 (3) The term ``map'' means the map entitled ``Results of 
 Survey, Ellis Property, A Portion of the West \1/2\ of Section 
 12, Township 5 South, Range 7 East, Gila and Salt River 
 Meridian, Pinal County, Arizona'' and dated October 15, 2012.
 (4) The term ``Reservation'' means the land located within 
 the exterior boundaries of the reservation created under 
 sections 3 and 4 of the Act of February 28, 1859 (11 Stat. 401, 
 chapter LXVI), and Executive orders of August 31, 1876, June 
 14, 1879, May 5, 1882, November 15, 1883, July 31, 1911, June 
 2, 1913, August 27, 1914, and July 19, 1915, and any other 
 lands placed in trust for the benefit of the Community.
 (5) The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the 
 Interior.
 (b) Land Taken Into Trust for Benefit of the GILA River Indian 
Community.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall take the Blackwater 
 Trading Post land into trust for the benefit of the Community, 
 after the Community--
 (A) conveys to the Secretary all right, title, and 
 interest of the Community in and to the Blackwater 
 Trading Post Land;
 (B) submits to the Secretary a request to take the 
 Blackwater Trading Post Land into trust for the benefit 
 of the Community;
 (C) conducts a survey (to the satisfaction of the 
 Secretary) to determine the exact acreage and legal 
 description of the Blackwater Trading Post Land, if the 
 Secretary determines a survey is necessary; and
 (D) pays all costs of any survey conducted under 
 subparagraph (C).
 (2) Availability of map.--Not later than 180 days after the 
 Blackwater Trading Post Land is taken into trust under 
 paragraph (1), the map shall be on file and available for 
 public inspection in the appropriate offices of the Secretary.
 (3) Lands taken into trust part of reservation.--After the 
 date on which the Blackwater Trading Post Land is taken into 
 trust under paragraph (1), the land shall be treated as part of 
 the Reservation.
 (4) Gaming.--Class II and class III gaming under the Indian 
 Gaming Regulatory Act (25 U.S.C. 2701 et seq.) shall not be 
 allowed at any time on the land taken into trust under 
 paragraph (1).
 (5) Description.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall cause the full 
 metes-and-bounds description of the Blackwater Trading Post 
 Land to be published in the Federal Register. The description 
 shall, on publication, constitute the official description of 
 the Blackwater Trading Post Land.
 (c) CERCLA Compliance.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary 
shall comply with section 120(h) of the Comprehensive Environmental 
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9620(h)).

SEC. 5840. AUTHORIZATIONS RELATING TO VETERINARY CARE OVERSEAS.

 (a) Department of State.--The Secretary of State, in consultation 
with the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, is 
authorized, in order to facilitate the importation to the United 
States, of domestic animals by officers and employees of the United 
States Government, and their dependents, under the authority of any 
Chief of Mission from a country classified by the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention as high risk for dog rabies--
 (1) to enter into contracts with individuals who are 
 licensed in the United States for the provision of personal 
 services (as described in section 104 of part 37 of title 48, 
 Code of Federal Regulations and including pursuant to section 
 904 of the Foreign Service Act of 1980 (22 U.S.C. 4084)) to 
 provide veterinary care overseas for domestic animals of such 
 officers, employees, and dependents, except that--
 (A) such individuals may not be deemed officers or 
 employees of the United States for the purpose of any 
 law administered by the Office of Personnel Management; 
 and
 (B) such individuals shall be expected to be 
 available to travel to any overseas post as necessary 
 to provide veterinary care and shall not be hired for 
 or detailed exclusively to any specific overseas post; 
 and
 (2) to take such steps as may be necessary to provide 
 medical services or related support with respect to the 
 domestic animals of such officers, employees, and dependents, 
 including in particular the purchase, procurement, delivery, 
 and administration of rabies vaccines licensed by the Secretary 
 of Agriculture, on a reimbursable basis to the extent feasible, 
 except that such reimbursement may not exceed the amount that 
 would be charged for equivalent veterinarian services if 
 received in the United States.
 (b) Use of Existing Mechanisms.--To the maximum extent practicable, 
the Secretary of State shall use existing mechanisms, including for the 
purchase, procurement, delivery, and administration of COVID-19 
vaccines to officers and employees of the United States Government and 
their dependents under the authority of any Chief of Mission abroad, to 
carry out the authorities provided by subsection (a), especially with 
respect to the purchase, procurement, delivery, and administration of 
rabies vaccines licensed by the Secretary of Agriculture.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section--
 (1) the term ``domestic animal'' means a dog or a cat; and
 (2) the term ``officers and employees of the United States 
 Government'' includes volunteers in the Peace Corps.

SEC. 5841. CRISIS COUNSELING ASSISTANCE AND TRAINING.

 (a) Federal Emergency Assistance.--Section 502(a)(6) of the Robert 
T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 
5192(a)(6)) is amended by inserting ``and section 416'' after ``section 
408''.
 (b) Applicability.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall only 
apply to amounts appropriated on or after the date of enactment of this 
Act.

SEC. 5842. PROHIBITED USES OF ACQUIRED, DONATED, AND CONSERVATION LAND.

 Section 714(a) of the California Desert Protection Act of 1994 
(Public Law 103-433; 16 U.S.C. 410aaa-81c(a)) is amended by striking 
paragraph (3) and inserting the following:
 ``(3) Conservation land.--The term `conservation land' 
 means--
 ``(A) any land within the Conservation Area that is 
 designated to satisfy the conditions of a Federal 
 habitat conservation plan, general conservation plan, 
 or State natural communities conservation plan;
 ``(B) any national conservation land within the 
 Conservation Area established pursuant to section 
 2002(b)(2)(D) of the Omnibus Public Land Management Act 
 of 2009 (16 U.S.C. 7202(b)(2)(D)); and
 ``(C) any area of critical environmental concern 
 within the Conservation Area established pursuant to 
 section 202(c)(3) of the Federal Land Policy and 
 Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1712(c)(3)).''.

SEC. 5843. JAMAL KHASHOGGI PRESS FREEDOM ACCOUNTABILITY ACT OF 2021.

 (a) Expanding Scope of Human Rights Reports With Respect to 
Violations of Human Rights of Journalists.--The Foreign Assistance Act 
of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2151 et seq.) is amended as follows:
 (1) In paragraph (12) of section 116(d)--
 (A) in subparagraph (B)--
 (i) by inserting ``or online harassment'' 
 after ``direct physical attacks''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``or surveillance'' after 
 ``sources of pressure'';
 (B) in subparagraph (C)(ii), by striking ``ensure 
 the prosecution'' and all that follows to the end of 
 the clause and inserting ``ensure the investigation, 
 prosecution, and conviction of government officials or 
 private individuals who engage in or facilitate digital 
 or physical attacks, including hacking, censorship, 
 surveillance, harassment, unlawful imprisonment, or 
 bodily harm, against journalists and others who 
 perform, or provide administrative support to, the 
 dissemination of print, broadcast, internet-based, or 
 social media intended to communicate facts or 
 opinion.'';
 (C) by redesignating subparagraphs (B) and (C) (as 
 amended by subparagraph (A) of this section) as 
 subparagraphs (C) and (D), respectively; and
 (D) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(B) an identification of countries in which there 
 were gross violations of internationally recognized 
 human rights (as such term is defined for purposes of 
 section 502B) committed against journalists;''.
 (2) By redesignating the second subsection (i) of section 
 502B as subsection (j).
 (3) In the first subsection (i) of section 502B--
 (A) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) by inserting ``or online harassment'' 
 after ``direct physical attacks''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``or surveillance'' after 
 ``sources of pressure'';
 (B) by redesignating paragraph (2) (as amended by 
 subparagraph (A) of this section) and paragraph (3) as 
 paragraphs (3) and (4), respectively; and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(2) an identification of countries in which there were 
 gross violations of internationally recognized human rights 
 committed against journalists;''.
 (b) Imposition of Sanctions on Persons Responsible for the 
Commission of Gross Violations of Internationally Recognized Human 
Rights Against Journalists.--
 (1) Listing of persons who have committed gross violations 
 of internationally recognized human rights.--
 (A) In general.--On or after the date on which a 
 person is listed pursuant to subparagraph (B), the 
 President shall impose the sanctions described in 
 paragraph (2) on each foreign person the President 
 determines, based on credible information, has 
 perpetrated, ordered, or otherwise directed the 
 extrajudicial killing of or other gross violation of 
 internationally recognized human rights committed 
 against a journalist or other person who performs, or 
 provides administrative support to, the dissemination 
 of print, broadcast, internet-based, or social media 
 intended to report newsworthy activities or 
 information, or communicate facts or fact-based 
 opinions.
 (B) Publication of list.--The Secretary of State 
 shall publish on a publicly available website of the 
 Department of State a list of the names of each foreign 
 person determined pursuant to subparagraph (A) to have 
 perpetrated, ordered, or directed an act described in 
 such paragraph. Such list shall be updated at least 
 annually.
 (C) Exception.--The President may waive the 
 imposition of sanctions under subparagraph (A) (and 
 omit a foreign person from the list published in 
 accordance with subparagraph (B)) or terminate such 
 sanctions and remove a foreign person from such list, 
 if the President certifies to the Committee on Foreign 
 Affairs of the House of Representatives and the 
 Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate--
 (i) that public identification of the 
 individual is not in the national interest of 
 the United States, including an unclassified 
 description of the factual basis supporting 
 such certification, which may contain a 
 classified annex; or
 (ii) that appropriate foreign government 
 authorities have credibly--
 (I) investigated the foreign person 
 and, as appropriate, held such person 
 accountable for perpetrating, ordering, 
 or directing the acts described in 
 subparagraph (A);
 (II) publicly condemned violations 
 of the freedom of the press and the 
 acts described in subparagraph (A);
 (III) complied with any requests 
 for information from international or 
 regional human rights organizations 
 with respect to the acts described in 
 subparagraph (A); and
 (IV) complied with any United 
 States Government requests for 
 information with respect to the acts 
 described in subparagraph (A).
 (2) Sanctions described.--The sanctions described in this 
 paragraph are the following:
 (A) Asset blocking.--The President shall exercise 
 all of the powers granted to the President under the 
 International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 
 1701 et seq.) to the extent necessary to block and 
 prohibit all transactions in property and interests in 
 property of a foreign person identified in the report 
 required under paragraph (1)(A) if such property and 
 interests in property are in the United States, come 
 within the United States, or come within the possession 
 or control of a United States person.
 (B) Ineligibility for visas, admission, or 
 parole.--
 (i) Visas, admission, or parole.--An alien 
 described in paragraph (1)(A) is--
 (I) inadmissible to the United 
 States;
 (II) ineligible to receive a visa 
 or other documentation to enter the 
 United States; and
 (III) otherwise ineligible to be 
 admitted or paroled into the United 
 States or to receive any other benefit 
 under the Immigration and Nationality 
 Act (8 U.S.C. 1101 et seq.).
 (ii) Current visas revoked.--
 (I) In general.--An alien described 
 in paragraph (1)(A) is subject to 
 revocation of any visa or other entry 
 documentation regardless of when the 
 visa or other entry documentation is or 
 was issued.
 (II) Immediate effect.--A 
 revocation under subclause (I) shall 
 take effect immediately, and 
 automatically cancel any other valid 
 visa or entry documentation that is in 
 the alien's possession.
 (C) Exceptions.--
 (i) Exception for intelligence 
 activities.--The sanctions described in this 
 paragraph shall not apply to any activity 
 subject to the reporting requirements under 
 title V of the National Security Act of 1947 
 (50 U.S.C. 3091 et seq.) or any authorized 
 intelligence activities of the United States.
 (ii) Exception to comply with international 
 obligations.--The sanctions described in this 
 paragraph shall not apply with respect to an 
 alien if admitting or paroling the alien into 
 the United States is necessary to permit the 
 United States to comply with the Agreement 
 regarding the Headquarters of the United 
 Nations, signed at Lake Success June 26, 1947, 
 and entered into force November 21, 1947, 
 between the United Nations and the United 
 States, or other applicable international 
 obligations.
 (3) Implementation; penalties.--
 (A) Implementation.--The President may exercise all 
 authorities provided under sections 203 and 205 of the 
 International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 
 1702 and 1704) to carry out this subsection.
 (B) Penalties.--The penalties provided for in 
 subsections (b) and (c) of section 206 of the 
 International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 
 1705) shall apply to a foreign person that violates, 
 attempts to violate, conspires to violate, or causes a 
 violation of this subsection to the same extent that 
 such penalties apply to a person that commits an 
 unlawful act described in subsection (a) of such 
 section 206.
 (4) Exception relating to the importation of goods.--
 (A) In general.--The authorities and requirements 
 to impose sanctions under this section shall not 
 include any authority or requirement to impose 
 sanctions on the importation of goods.
 (B) Good defined.--For purposes of this section, 
 the term ``good'' means any article, natural or man-
 made substance, material, supply, or manufactured 
 product, including inspection and test equipment and 
 excluding technical data.
 (5) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) The terms ``admitted'' and ``alien'' have the 
 meanings given those terms in section 101 of the 
 Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1001).
 (B) The term ``foreign person'' means an individual 
 who is not--
 (i) a United States citizen or national; or
 (ii) an alien lawfully admitted for 
 permanent residence to the United States.
 (C) The term ``United States person'' means--
 (i) a United States citizen, an alien 
 lawfully admitted for permanent residence to 
 the United States, or any other individual 
 subject to the jurisdiction of the United 
 States;
 (ii) an entity organized under the laws of 
 the United States or of any jurisdiction within 
 the United States, including a foreign branch 
 of such entity; or
 (iii) any person in the United States.
 (c) Prohibition on Foreign Assistance.--
 (1) Prohibition.--Assistance authorized under the Foreign 
 Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2151 et seq.) or the Arms 
 Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2751 et seq.) may not be made 
 available to any governmental entity of a country if the 
 Secretary of State or the Director of National Intelligence has 
 credible information that one or more officials associated 
 with, leading, or otherwise acting under the authority of such 
 entity has committed a gross violation of internationally 
 recognized human rights against a journalist or other person 
 who performs, or provides administrative support to, the 
 dissemination of print, broadcast, internet-based, or social 
 media intended to report newsworthy activities or information, 
 or communicate facts or fact-based opinions. To the maximum 
 extent practicable, a list of such governmental entities shall 
 be published on publicly available websites of the Department 
 of State and of the Office of the Director of National 
 Intelligence and shall be updated on a regular basis.
 (2) Prompt information.--The Secretary of State shall 
 promptly inform appropriate officials of the government of a 
 country from which assistance is withheld in accordance with 
 the prohibition under paragraph (1).
 (3) Exception.--The prohibition under paragraph (1) shall 
 not apply with respect to the following:
 (A) Humanitarian assistance or disaster relief 
 assistance authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act 
 of 1961.
 (B) Assistance the Secretary determines to be 
 essential to assist the government of a country to 
 bring the responsible members of the relevant 
 governmental entity to justice for the acts described 
 in paragraph (1).
 (4) Waiver.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary of State, may waive 
 the prohibition under paragraph (1) with respect to a 
 governmental entity of a country if--
 (i) the President, acting through the 
 Secretary of State and the Director of National 
 Intelligence, determines that such a waiver is 
 in the national security interest of the United 
 States; or
 (ii) the Secretary of State has received 
 credible information that the government of 
 that country has--
 (I) performed a thorough 
 investigation of the acts described in 
 paragraph (1) and is taking effective 
 steps to bring responsible members of 
 the relevant governmental entity to 
 justice;
 (II) condemned violations of the 
 freedom of the press and the acts 
 described in paragraph (1);
 (III) complied with any requests 
 for information from international or 
 regional human rights organizations 
 with respect to the acts described in 
 paragraph (1), in accordance with 
 international legal obligations to 
 protect the freedom of expression; and
 (IV) complied with United States 
 Government requests for information 
 with respect to the acts described in 
 paragraph (1).
 (B) Certification.--A waiver described in 
 subparagraph (A) may only take effect if--
 (i) the Secretary of State certifies, not 
 later than 30 days before the effective date of 
 the waiver, to the Committee on Foreign Affairs 
 and the Committee on Appropriations of the 
 House of Representatives and the Committee on 
 Foreign Relations and the Committee on 
 Appropriations of the Senate that such waiver 
 is warranted and includes an unclassified 
 description of the factual basis supporting the 
 certification, which may contain a classified 
 annex; and
 (ii) the Director of National Intelligence, 
 not later than 30 days before the effective 
 date of the waiver, submits to the Permanent 
 Select Committee on Intelligence of the House 
 of Representatives and the Select Committee on 
 Intelligence of the Senate a report detailing 
 any underlying information that the 
 intelligence community (as such term is defined 
 in section 3 of the National Security Act of 
 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3003)) has regarding the 
 perpetrators of the acts described in paragraph 
 (1), which shall be submitted in unclassified 
 form but may contain a classified annex.

SEC. 5844. GAO STUDY ON THE DANIEL PEARL FREEDOM OF THE PRESS ACT OF 
 2009.

 (a) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall 
evaluate the implementation of the Daniel Pearl Freedom of the Press 
Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-166) by--
 (1) assessing the effects of including the information 
 described in section 116(d)(12) of the Foreign Assistance Act 
 of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2151n(d)(12)) in the annual Country Reports 
 on Human Rights Practices; and
 (2) determining how reporting on instances of governmental 
 suppression of free press abroad and inaction in addressing 
 press freedom violations has changed since the enactment of the 
 Daniel Pearl Freedom of the Press Act of 2009.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Comptroller General shall submit to Congress and to 
the Secretary of State a report that--
 (1) summarizes the results of the study required under 
 subsection (a); and
 (2) provides recommendations for any legislative or 
 regulatory action that would improve the efforts of the 
 Department of State to report on issues of press freedom 
 abroad.

SEC. 5845. SECRETARY OF STATE ASSISTANCE FOR PRISONERS IN ISLAMIC 
 REPUBLIC OF IRAN.

 (a) Statement of Policy.--It is the policy of the United States 
that--
 (1) the Islamic Republic of Iran should allow the United 
 Nations Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in 
 the Islamic Republic of Iran unimpeded access to facilitate the 
 full implementation of the mandate of the United Nations 
 Special Rapporteur, including--
 (A) investigating alleged violations of human 
 rights that are occurring or have occurred both within 
 prisons and elsewhere;
 (B) transmitting urgent appeals and letters to the 
 Islamic Republic of Iran regarding alleged violations 
 of human rights; and
 (C) engaging with relevant stakeholders in the 
 Islamic Republic of Iran and the surrounding region;
 (2) the Islamic Republic of Iran should immediately end 
 violations of the human rights of political prisoners or 
 persons imprisoned for exercising the right to freedom of 
 speech, including--
 (A) torture;
 (B) denial of access to health care; and
 (C) denial of a fair trial;
 (3) all prisoners of conscience and political prisoners in 
 the Islamic Republic of Iran should be unconditionally and 
 immediately released;
 (4) all diplomatic tools of the United States should be 
 invoked to ensure that all prisoners of conscience and 
 political prisoners in the Islamic Republic of Iran are 
 released, including raising individual cases of particular 
 concern; and
 (5) all officials of the government of the Islamic Republic 
 of Iran who are responsible for human rights abuses in the form 
 of politically motivated imprisonment should be held to 
 account, including through the imposition of sanctions pursuant 
 to the Global Magnitsky Human Rights Accountability Act (22 
 U.S.C. 10101 et seq.) and other applicable statutory 
 authorities of the United States.
 (b) Assistance for Prisoners.--The Secretary of State is authorized 
to continue to provide assistance to civil society organizations that 
support prisoners of conscience and political prisoners in the Islamic 
Republic of Iran, including organizations that--
 (1) work to secure the release of such prisoners;
 (2) document violations of human rights with respect to 
 such prisoners;
 (3) support international advocacy to raise awareness of 
 issues relating to such prisoners;
 (4) support the health, including mental health, of such 
 prisoners; and
 (5) provide post-incarceration assistance to enable such 
 prisoners to resume normal lives, including access to 
 education, employment, or other forms of reparation.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``political prisoner'' means a person who has 
 been detained or imprisoned on politically motivated grounds 
 and may include persons that--
 (A) have used violence;
 (B) have advocated violence or hatred; or
 (C) have committed a minor offense that serves as a 
 pretext for politically motivated imprisonment.
 (2) The term ``prisoner of conscience'' means a person 
 who--
 (A) is imprisoned or otherwise physically 
 restricted solely in response to the peaceful exercise 
 of the human rights of such person; and
 (B) has not used violence or advocated violence or 
 hatred.

SEC. 5846. POLICY REGARDING DEVELOPMENT OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS BY IRAN.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) Congress and several successive Presidential 
 administrations have long sought to prevent Iran from ever 
 acquiring a nuclear weapon.
 (2) It is currently estimated that Iran is almost to the 
 point of having enough highly-enriched nuclear material to 
 produce a nuclear weapon, if further enriched.
 (3) On March 3, 2020, the International Atomic Energy 
 Agency (IAEA) Director General reported to the Agency's Board 
 of Governors that nuclear material was found at three 
 previously undisclosed locations in Iran.
 (4) The IAEA reported it began investigating this matter 
 pursuant to Iran's IAEA safeguards obligations in 2019.
 (5) On March 5, 2022, the IAEA and the Atomic Energy 
 Organization of Iran announced an agreement wherein Iran 
 committed to provide the IAEA with information and documents in 
 response to the IAEA's questions related to uranium particles 
 discovered at undeclared sites in Iran.
 (6) On June 6, 2022, the Director General of the IAEA 
 stated that ``Iran has not provided explanations that are 
 technically credible in relation to the Agency's findings at 
 three undeclared locations in Iran. Nor has Iran informed the 
 Agency of the current location, or locations, of the nuclear 
 material and/or of the equipment contaminated with nuclear 
 material, that was moved from Turquzabad in 2018.''.
 (7) On June 8, 2022, the IAEA Board of Governors 
 overwhelmingly adopted a resolution calling on Iran to 
 cooperate with the IAEA on an urgent basis to fulfil its 
 safeguards obligations and expressing profound concern with 
 Iran's insufficient substantive cooperation thus far, with 30 
 Board Members voting in favor, two voting against, and three 
 abstaining.
 (8) The IAEA Board of Governors's resolution called upon 
 Iran to ``act on an urgent basis to fulfill its legal 
 obligations and, without delay, take up the Director General's 
 offer of further engagement to clarify and resolve all 
 outstanding safeguards issues.''.
 (9) Shortly before the IAEA Board of Governors's vote 
 adopting the resolution, Iran announced it would remove 27 IAEA 
 cameras installed to monitor the separate issue of Iran's JCPOA 
 commitments at certain Iranian facilities and Iran has since 
 followed through on disconnecting these cameras.
 (10) Following the vote of the IAEA Board of Governors, 
 Iran informed the IAEA it would install additional cascades of 
 advanced IR-6 centrifuges at its Natanz facility;
 (b) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that it--
 (1) reiterates its commitment to ensuring Iran will never 
 acquire a nuclear weapon;
 (2) supports the important work of the IAEA in safeguarding 
 nuclear material around the globe;
 (3) condemns Iran for its lack of transparency and 
 meaningful cooperation with the IAEA on the unresolved matter 
 of uranium particles discovered at undeclared sites in Iran and 
 additional escalatory actions related to its nuclear program; 
 and
 (4) applauds the IAEA Board of Governors' resolution urging 
 Iran's full cooperation with the IAEA on outstanding safeguards 
 issues on an urgent basis.

SEC. 5847. TRANSFER OF NOAA PROPERTY IN NORFOLK, VIRGINIA.

 (a) In General.--The Act entitled, ``An Act to authorize the 
Secretary of Commerce to sell or exchange certain National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration property located in Norfolk, Virginia, and 
for other purposes'', enacted on October 13, 2008 (P.L. 110-393; 122 
Stat. 4203), is amended by striking the heading and subsections (a), 
(b), (c), and (d) of section 1 and inserting the following:

``SECTION 1. TRANSFER OF NOAA PROPERTY IN NORFOLK, VIRGINIA.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary of Commerce shall transfer without 
consideration all right, title, and interest of the United States in 
and to the property described in subsection (b) to the City of Norfolk, 
Virginia, not later than the earlier of--
 ``(1) the date on which the Secretary of Commerce has 
 transferred all of the employees of the National Oceanic and 
 Atmospheric Administration (in this section referred to as 
 `NOAA') from its facilities at the property described in 
 subsection (b); or
 ``(2) 5 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 ``(b) Property Described.--The property described in this 
subsection is--
 ``(1) the real property under the administrative 
 jurisdiction of the NOAA, including land and improvements 
 thereon, located at 538 Front Street, Norfolk, Virginia, 
 consisting of approximately 3.78 acres; and
 ``(2) the real property under the administrative 
 jurisdiction of the NOAA, including land and improvements 
 thereon, located at 439 W. York Street, Norfolk, Virginia, 
 consisting of approximately 2.5231 acres.
 ``(c) Survey.--The exact acreage and legal description of the 
property described in subsection (b) shall be determined by a survey or 
surveys satisfactory to the Secretary.
 ``(d) Compliance With Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980.--In carrying out this section, 
the Secretary shall comply with section 120(h) of the Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 
U.S.C. 9620(h)).''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Subsection (e) of section 1 of such Act 
(122 Stat. 4204) is amended by striking the first sentence.

SEC. 5848. ELIMINATION OF SENTENCING DISPARITY FOR COCAINE OFFENSES.

 (a) Elimination of Increased Penalties for Cocaine Offenses Where 
the Cocaine Involved Is Cocaine Base.--
 (1) Controlled substances act.--The following provisions of 
 the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 801 et seq.) are 
 repealed:
 (A) Clause (iii) of section 401(b)(1)(A) (21 U.S.C. 
 841(b)(1)(A)).
 (B) Clause (iii) of section 401(b)(1)(B) (21 U.S.C. 
 841(b)(1)(B)).
 (2) Controlled substances import and export act.--The 
 following provisions of the Controlled Substances Import and 
 Export Act (21 U.S.C. 951 et seq.) are repealed:
 (A) Subparagraph (C) of section 1010(b)(1) (21 
 U.S.C. 960(b)(1)).
 (B) Subparagraph (C) of section 1010(b)(2) (21 
 U.S.C. 960(b)(2)).
 (3) Applicability to pending and past cases.--
 (A) Pending cases.--This section, and the 
 amendments made by this subsection, shall apply to any 
 sentence imposed after the date of enactment of this 
 section, regardless of when the offense was committed.
 (B) Past cases.--
 (i) In general.--In the case of a defendant 
 who, on or before the date of enactment of this 
 section, was sentenced for a Federal offense 
 described in clause (ii), the sentencing court 
 may, on motion of the defendant, the Bureau of 
 Prisons, the attorney for the Government, or on 
 its own motion, impose a reduced sentence after 
 considering the factors set forth in section 
 3553(a) of title 18, United States Code.
 (ii) Federal offense described.--A Federal 
 offense described in this clause is an offense 
 that involves cocaine base that is an offense 
 under one of the following:
 (I) Section 401 of the Controlled 
 Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 841).
 (II) Section 1010 of the Controlled 
 Substances Import and Export Act (21 
 U.S.C. 960).
 (III) Section 404(a) of the 
 Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 
 844(a)).
 (IV) Any other Federal criminal 
 offense, the conduct or penalties for 
 which were established by reference to 
 a provision described in subclause (I), 
 (II), or (III).
 (iii) Defendant not required to be 
 present.--Notwithstanding Rule 43 of the 
 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, the 
 defendant is not required to be present at any 
 hearing on whether to impose a reduced sentence 
 pursuant to this subparagraph.
 (iv) No reduction for previously reduced 
 sentences.--A court may not consider a motion 
 made under this subparagraph to reduce a 
 sentence if the sentence was previously imposed 
 or previously reduced in accordance with this 
 section.
 (v) No requirement to reduce sentence.--
 Nothing in this subparagraph may be construed 
 to require a court to reduce a sentence 
 pursuant to this subparagraph.
 (b) Determination of Budgetary Effects.--The budgetary effects of 
this section, for the purpose of complying with the Statutory Pay-As-
You-Go Act of 2010, shall be determined by reference to the latest 
statement titled ``Budgetary Effects of PAYGO Legislation'' for this 
section, submitted for printing in the Congressional Record by the 
Chairman of the House Budget Committee, provided that such statement 
has been submitted prior to the vote on passage.

SEC. 5849. IMPOSITION OF SANCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO THE SALE, SUPPLY, OR 
 TRANSFER OF GOLD TO OR FROM RUSSIA.

 (a) Identification.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, and periodically as necessary thereafter, the 
President--
 (1) shall submit to Congress a report identifying foreign 
 persons that knowingly participated in a significant 
 transaction--
 (A) for the sale, supply, or transfer (including 
 transportation) of gold, directly or indirectly, to or 
 from the Russian Federation or the Government of the 
 Russian Federation, including from reserves of the 
 Central Bank of the Russian Federation held outside the 
 Russian Federation; or
 (B) that otherwise involved gold in which the 
 Government of the Russian Federation had any interest; 
 and
 (2) shall impose the sanctions described in subsection 
 (b)(1) with respect to each such person; and
 (3) may impose the sanctions described in subsection (b)(2) 
 with respect to any such person that is an alien.
 (b) Sanctions Described.--The sanctions described in this 
subsection are the following:
 (1) Blocking of property.--The exercise of all powers 
 granted to the President by the International Emergency 
 Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) to the extent 
 necessary to block and prohibit all transactions in all 
 property and interests in property of a foreign person 
 identified in the report required by subsection (a)(1) if such 
 property and interests in property are in the United States, 
 come within the United States, or are or come within the 
 possession or control of a United States person.
 (2) Ineligibility for visas, admission, or parole.--
 (A) Visas, admission, or parole.--An alien 
 described in subsection (a)(1) may be--
 (i) inadmissible to the United States;
 (ii) ineligible to receive a visa or other 
 documentation to enter the United States; and
 (iii) otherwise ineligible to be admitted 
 or paroled into the United States or to receive 
 any other benefit under the Immigration and 
 Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101 et seq.).
 (B) Current visas revoked.--
 (i) In general.--An alien described in 
 subsection (a)(1) may be subject to revocation 
 of any visa or other entry documentation 
 regardless of when the visa or other entry 
 documentation is or was issued.
 (ii) Immediate effect.--A revocation under 
 clause (i) shall--
 (I) take effect pursuant to section 
 221(i) of the Immigration and 
 Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1201(i)); and
 (II) cancel any other valid visa or 
 entry documentation that is in the 
 alien's possession.
 (c) Implementation; Penalties.--
 (1) Implementation.--The President may exercise all 
 authorities provided under sections 203 and 205 of the 
 International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1702 and 
 1704) to carry out this section.
 (2) Penalties.--A person that violates, attempts to 
 violate, conspires to violate, or causes a violation of this 
 section or any regulation, license, or order issued to carry 
 out this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in 
 subsections (b) and (c) of section 206 of the International 
 Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1705) to the same 
 extent as a person that commits an unlawful act described in 
 subsection (a) of that section.
 (d) National Interest Waiver.--The President may waive the 
imposition of sanctions under this section with respect to a person if 
the President--
 (1) determines that such a waiver is in the national 
 interests of the United States; and
 (2) submits to Congress a notification of the waiver and 
 the reasons for the waiver.
 (e) Termination.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 requirement to impose sanctions under this section, and any 
 sanctions imposed under this section, shall terminate on the 
 earlier of--
 (A) the date that is 3 years after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act; or
 (B) the date that is 30 days after the date on 
 which the President certifies to Congress that--
 (i) the Government of the Russian 
 Federation has ceased its destabilizing 
 activities with respect to the sovereignty and 
 territorial integrity of Ukraine; and
 (ii) such termination in the national 
 interests of the United States.
 (2) Transition rules.--
 (A) Continuation of certain authorities.--Any 
 authorities exercised before the termination date under 
 paragraph (1) to impose sanctions with respect to a 
 foreign person under this section may continue to be 
 exercised on and after that date if the President 
 determines that the continuation of those authorities 
 is in the national interests of the United States.
 (B) Application to ongoing investigations.--The 
 termination date under paragraph (1) shall not apply to 
 any investigation of a civil or criminal violation of 
 this section or any regulation, license, or order 
 issued to carry out this section, or the imposition of 
 a civil or criminal penalty for such a violation, if--
 (i) the violation occurred before the 
 termination date; or
 (ii) the person involved in the violation 
 continues to be subject to sanctions pursuant 
 to subparagraph (A).
 (f) Exceptions.--
 (1) Exceptions for authorized intelligence and law 
 enforcement activities.--This section shall not apply with 
 respect to activities subject to the reporting requirements 
 under title V of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 
 3091 et seq.) or any authorized intelligence or law enforcement 
 activities of the United States.
 (2) Exception to comply with international agreements.--
 Sanctions under subsection (b)(2) may not apply with respect to 
 the admission of an alien to the United States if such 
 admission is necessary to comply with the obligations of the 
 United States under the Agreement regarding the Headquarters of 
 the United Nations, signed at Lake Success June 26, 1947, and 
 entered into force November 21, 1947, between the United 
 Nations and the United States, or the Convention on Consular 
 Relations, done at Vienna April 24, 1963, and entered into 
 force March 19, 1967, or other international obligations.
 (3) Humanitarian exemption.--The President shall not impose 
 sanctions under this section with respect to any person for 
 conducting or facilitating a transaction for the sale of 
 agricultural commodities, food, medicine, or medical devices or 
 for the provision of humanitarian assistance.
 (4) Exception relating to importation of goods.--
 (A) In general.--The requirement or authority to 
 impose sanctions under this section shall not include 
 the authority or a requirement to impose sanctions on 
 the importation of goods.
 (B) Good defined.--In this paragraph, the term 
 ``good'' means any article, natural or manmade 
 substance, material, supply, or manufactured product, 
 including inspection and test equipment, and excluding 
 technical data.
 (g) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The terms ``admission'', ``admitted'', ``alien'', and 
 ``lawfully admitted for permanent residence'' have the meanings 
 given those terms in section 101 of the Immigration and 
 Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101).
 (2) The term ``foreign person'' means an individual or 
 entity that is not a United States person.
 (3) The term ``knowingly'', with respect to conduct, a 
 circumstance, or a result, means that a person has actual 
 knowledge, or should have known, of the conduct, the 
 circumstance, or the result.
 (4) The term ``United States person'' means--
 (A) a United States citizen or an alien lawfully 
 admitted for permanent residence to the United States;
 (B) an entity organized under the laws of the 
 United States or any jurisdiction within the United 
 States, including a foreign branch of such an entity; 
 or
 (C) any person in the United States.

SEC. 5850. SUPPORT FOR AFGHAN SPECIAL IMMIGRANT VISA AND REFUGEE 
 APPLICANTS.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the United 
States should increase support for nationals of Afghanistan who aided 
the United States mission in Afghanistan during the past twenty years 
and are now under threat from the Taliban, specifically special 
immigrant visa applicants who are nationals of Afghanistan and 
referrals of nationals of Afghanistan to the United States Refugee 
Admissions Program, including through the Priority 2 Designation for 
nationals of Afghanistan, who remain in Afghanistan or are in third 
countries.
 (b) Requirements.--The Secretary of State, in coordination with the 
Secretary of Homeland Security and the heads of other relevant Federal 
departments and agencies, shall further surge capacity to better 
support special immigrant visa applicants who are nationals of 
Afghanistan and referrals of nationals of Afghanistan to the United 
States Refugee Admissions Program and who have been approved by the 
chief of mission, including through the Priority 2 Designation for 
nationals of Afghanistan, and reduce their application processing 
times, while ensuring strict and necessary security vetting, including, 
to the extent practicable, enabling refugee referrals to initiate 
application processes while still in Afghanistan.
 (c) Surge Capacity Described.--The term ``surge capacity'' includes 
increasing consular personnel to any embassy or consulate in the region 
processing visa applications for nationals of Afghanistan.

SEC. 5851. LIABILITY FOR FAILURE TO DISCLOSE OR UPDATE INFORMATION.

 Section 2313 of title 41, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (d)(3), by striking ``, to the extent 
 practicable,'';
 (2) in subsection (f)(1), by striking ``subsection (c)'' 
 and inserting ``subsections (c) and (d)'';
 (3) by redesignating subsection (g) as subsection (i); and
 (4) by inserting after subsection (f) the following new 
 subsections:
 ``(g) Liability.--A knowing and willful failure to disclose or 
update information in accordance with subsections (d)(3) and (f) can 
result in one or more of the following:
 ``(1) Entry of the violation in the database described by 
 this section.
 ``(2) Liability pursuant to section 3729 of title 31.
 ``(3) Suspension or debarment.
 ``(h) Annual Report on Awardee Beneficial Ownership Reporting and 
Compliance.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than October 31 of each year, 
 the Administrator of General Services, in coordination with the 
 Secretary of Defense, shall submit to the congressional defense 
 committees (as defined under section 101(a)(16) of title 10), 
 the Committee on Oversight and Reform of the House of 
 Representatives, and the Committee on Oversight and 
 Governmental Affairs of the Senate a report that assesses the 
 utility and risks of beneficial ownership disclosures by 
 persons with Federal agency contracts and grants.
 ``(2) Content.--The report required under paragraph (1) 
 shall address and include information about the number of 
 beneficial ownership disclosures that were made by persons with 
 Federal agency contracts and grants, gaps in the data caused by 
 the divergent reporting threshold for government and awardee 
 entries, the impact on small business concerns (as defined 
 under section 3 of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 632)), 
 data on contractors owned by entities outside of the United 
 States, data on violations of disclosure rules and any 
 penalties assessed for disclosure non-compliance, and 
 recommendations for improving the Federal Awardee Performance 
 and Integrity Information System disclosures by a person with 
 Federal agency contracts and grants.''.

SEC. 5852. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE STUDY AND REPORT ON 
 CONTRACTORS USING DISTRIBUTORS TO AVOID SCRUTINY.

 (a) In General.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall 
conduct a study on Federal Government contractors that supply goods to 
executive agencies using distributors or other intermediaries.
 (b) Contents of the Study.--The study under subsection (a) shall 
assess--
 (1) advantages and disadvantages of the use of distributors 
 or other intermediaries by Federal Government contractors to 
 supply goods to executive agencies; and
 (2) whether the use of distributors or other intermediaries 
 by Federal Government contractors has an effect on the ability 
 of the Federal Government to acquire needed goods at reasonable 
 prices.
 (c) Report Required.--Not later than one year after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall submit a report 
containing the results of the study required by this section to the--
 (1) Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Homeland Security and Government Affairs of the Senate; and
 (2) Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Oversight and Reform of the House of Representatives.

SEC. 5853. SUPPLEMENT TO FEDERAL EMPLOYEE VIEWPOINT SURVEY.

 (a) In General.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act and every 2 years thereafter, the Office of 
Personnel and Management shall make available through a secure and 
accessible online portal a supplement to the Federal Employee Viewpoint 
Survey to assess employee experiences with workplace harassment and 
discrimination.
 (b) Development of Supplement.--In developing the supplement, the 
Director shall--
 (1) use best practices from peer-reviewed research 
 measuring harassment and discrimination; and
 (2) consult with the Equal Employment Opportunity 
 Commission, experts in survey research related to harassment 
 and discrimination, and organizations engaged in the prevention 
 of and response to, and advocacy on behalf of victims of 
 harassment and discrimination regarding the development and 
 design of such supplement.
 (c) Survey Questions.--Survey questions included in the supplement 
developed pursuant to this section shall--
 (1) be designed to gather information on employee 
 experiences with harassment and discrimination, including the 
 experiences of victims of such incidents;
 (2) use trauma-informed language to prevent 
 retraumatization; and
 (3) include--
 (A) questions that give employees the option to 
 report their demographic information;
 (B) questions designed to determine the incidence 
 and prevalence of harassment and discrimination;
 (C) questions regarding whether employees know 
 about agency policies and procedures related to 
 harassment and discrimination;
 (D) questions designed to determine if the employee 
 reported perceived harassment or discrimination, to 
 whom the incident was reported and what response the 
 employee may have received;
 (E) questions to determine why the employee chose 
 to report or not report an incident;
 (F) questions to determine satisfaction with the 
 complaints process;
 (G) questions to determine the impact of harassment 
 and discrimination on performance and productivity;
 (H) questions to determine the impact of harassment 
 and discrimination on mental and physical health;
 (I) questions to determine the impact and 
 effectiveness of prevention and awareness programs and 
 complaints processes;
 (J) questions to determine attitudes toward 
 harassment and discrimination, including the 
 willingness of individuals to intervene as a bystander;
 (K) questions to determine whether employees 
 believe those who engage in harassment or 
 discrimination will face disciplinary action;
 (L) questions to determine whether employees 
 perceive prevention and accountability for harassment 
 and discrimination to be a priority for supervisors and 
 agency leadership; and
 (M) other questions, as determined by the Director.
 (d) Responses.--The responses to the survey questions described in 
subsection (c) shall--
 (1) be submitted confidentially;
 (2) in the case of such responses being included in a 
 report, shall not include personally identifiable information; 
 and
 (3) be disaggregated by agency and, to the extent 
 practicable, operating division, department, or bureau.
 (e) Publication.--The Director shall publish the results of the 
supplemental survey in a report on its website.

SEC. 5854. CERTAIN ACTIVITIES RELATING TO INTIMATE VISUAL DEPICTIONS.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 88 of title 18, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 1802. Certain activities relating to intimate visual depictions
 ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Communications service.--The term `communications 
 service' means--
 ``(A) a service provided by a person that is a 
 common carrier, as that term is defined in section 3 of 
 the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 153), insofar 
 as the person is acting as a common carrier;
 ``(B) an electronic communication service, as that 
 term is defined in section 2510;
 ``(C) an information service, as that term is 
 defined in section 3 of the Communications Act of 1934 
 (47 U.S.C. 153); and
 ``(D) an interactive computer service, as that term 
 is defined in section 230(f) of the Communications Act 
 of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 230(f)).
 ``(2) Information content provider.--The term `information 
 content provider' has the meaning given that term in section 
 230(f) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 230(f)).
 ``(3) Intimate visual depiction.--The term `intimate visual 
 depiction' means any visual depiction (as that term is defined 
 in section 2256(5)) of an individual who is recognizable by an 
 individual other than the depicted individual from the intimate 
 image itself or information or text displayed in connection 
 with the intimate image itself or information or text displayed 
 in connection with the intimate image who has attained 18 years 
 of age at the time the intimate visual depiction is created 
 and--
 ``(A) who is depicted engaging in sexually explicit 
 conduct; or
 ``(B) whose genitals, anus, pubic area, or female 
 nipple are unclothed and visible.
 ``(4) Visual depiction of a nude minor.--The term `visual 
 depiction of a nude minor' means any visual depiction (as that 
 term is defined in section 2256(5)) of an individual who is 
 recognizable by an individual other than the depicted 
 individual from the intimate image itself or information or 
 text displayed in connection with the intimate image who was 
 under the age of 18 at the time the visual depiction was 
 created in which the actual anus, genitals, or pubic area, or 
 post-pubescent female nipple, of the minor are unclothed, 
 visible, and displayed in a manner that does not constitute 
 sexually explicit conduct.
 ``(4) Sexually explicit conduct.--The term `sexually 
 explicit conduct' has the meaning given that term in section 
 2256(2)(A).
 ``(b) Offense.--
 ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in subsection (d), it 
 shall be unlawful to knowingly mail, or to distribute using any 
 means or facility of interstate or foreign commerce or 
 affecting interstate or foreign commerce, an intimate visual 
 depiction of an individual--
 ``(A) with knowledge of or reckless disregard for 
 the lack of consent of the individual to the 
 distribution; and
 ``(B) where what is depicted was not voluntarily 
 exposed by the individual in a public or commercial 
 setting; and
 ``(C) where what is depicted is not a matter of 
 public concern.
 For purposes of this section, the fact that the subject of the 
 depiction consented to the creation of the depiction shall not 
 establish that that person consented to its distribution.
 ``(2) Exception.--Except as provided in subsection (d), it 
 shall be unlawful to knowingly mail, or to distribute using any 
 means or facility of interstate or foreign commerce or 
 affecting interstate or foreign commerce, a visual depiction of 
 a nude minor with intent to abuse, humiliate, harass, or 
 degrade the minor, or to arouse or gratify the sexual desire of 
 any person.
 ``(c) Penalty.--
 ``(1) In general.--Any person who violates subsection (b), 
 or attempts or conspires to do so, shall be fined under this 
 title, imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both.
 ``(2) Forfeiture.--
 ``(A) The court, in imposing a sentence on any 
 person convicted of a violation involving intimate 
 visual depictions or visual depictions of a nude minor 
 under this subchapter, or convicted of a conspiracy of 
 a violation involving intimate visual depictions or 
 visual depictions of a nude minor under this 
 subchapter, shall order, in addition to any other 
 sentence imposed and irrespective of any provision of 
 State law, that such person forfeit to the United 
 States--
 ``(i) any material distributed in violation 
 of this chapter;
 ``(ii) such person's interest in property, 
 real or personal, constituting or derived from 
 any gross proceeds of such violation, or any 
 property traceable to such property, obtained 
 or retained directly or indirectly as a result 
 of such violation; and
 ``(iii) any property, real or personal, 
 used or intended to be used to commit or to 
 facilitate the commission of such offense.
 ``(B) Section 413 of the Controlled Substances Act 
 (21 U.S.C. 853), with the exception of subsections (a) 
 and (d), applies to the criminal forfeiture of property 
 pursuant to subsection (1).
 ``(3) Restitution.--Restitution shall be available as 
 provided in chapter 110A of title 18, United States Code, 
 section 2264.
 ``(d) Exceptions.--
 ``(1) Law enforcement, lawful reporting, and other legal 
 proceedings.--This section--
 ``(A) does not prohibit any lawfully authorized 
 investigative, protective, or intelligence activity of 
 a law enforcement agency of the United States, a State, 
 or a political subdivision of a State, or of an 
 intelligence agency of the United States;
 ``(B) shall not apply in the case of an individual 
 acting in good faith to report unlawful activity or in 
 pursuance of a legal or professional or other lawful 
 obligation; and
 ``(C) shall not apply in the case of a document 
 production or filing associated with a legal 
 proceeding.
 ``(2) Service providers.--This section shall not apply to 
 any provider of a communications service with regard to content 
 provided by another information content provider unless the 
 provider of the communications service intentionally solicits, 
 or knowingly and predominantly distributes, such content.
 ``(e) Threats.--Any person who threatens to commit an offense under 
subsection (b) shall be punished as provided in subsection (c).
 ``(f) Extraterritoriality.--There is extraterritorial Federal 
jurisdiction over an offense under this section if the defendant or the 
depicted individual is a citizen or permanent resident of the United 
States.
 ``(g) Civil Forfeiture.--
 ``(1) The following shall be subject to forfeiture to the 
 United States in accordance with provisions of chapter 46 and 
 no property right shall exist in them:
 ``(A) Any material distributed in violation of this 
 chapter.
 ``(B) Any property, real or personal, that was 
 used, in any manner, to commit or to facilitate the 
 commission of a violation involving intimate visual 
 depictions or visual depictions of a nude minor under 
 this subchapter or a conspiracy of a violation 
 involving intimate visual depictions or visual 
 depictions of a nude minor under this subchapter.
 ``(C) Any property, real or personal, constituting, 
 or traceable to the gross proceeds obtained or retained 
 in connection with or as a result of a violation 
 involving intimate visual depictions or visual 
 depictions of a nude minor under this subchapter, a 
 conspiracy of a violation involving intimate visual 
 depictions or visual depictions of a nude minor under 
 this subchapter.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections of chapter 88 of 
title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item 
relating to section 1801 the following:

``1802. Certain activities relating to intimate visual depictions.''.

SEC. 5855. WAIVER OF SPECIAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION FEE FOR VETERANS' 
 SPECIAL EVENTS.

 (a) Waiver.--The application fee for any special use permit solely 
for a veterans' special event at war memorials on land administered by 
the National Park Service in the District of Columbia and its environs 
shall be waived.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``the District of Columbia and its environs'' 
 has the meaning given that term in section 8902(a) of title 40, 
 United States Code.
 (2) The term ``Gold Star Families'' includes any individual 
 described in section 3.2 of Department of Defense Instruction 
 1348.36.
 (3) The term ``special events'' has the meaning given that 
 term in section 7.96 of title 36, Code of Federal Regulations.
 (4) The term ``veteran'' has the meaning given that term in 
 section 101(2) of title 38, United States Code.
 (5) The term ``veterans' special event'' means a special 
 event of which the majority of attendees are veterans or Gold 
 Star Families.
 (6) The term ``war memorial'' means any memorial or 
 monument which has been erected or dedicated to commemorate a 
 military unit, military group, war, conflict, victory, or 
 peace.
 (c) Applicability.--This section shall apply to any special use 
permit application submitted after the date of the enactment of this 
Act.
 (d) Applicability of Existing Laws.--Permit applicants remain 
subject to all other laws, regulations, and policies regarding the 
application, issuance and execution of special use permits for a 
veterans' special event at war memorials on land administered by the 
National Park Service in the District of Columbia and its environs.

SEC. 5856. REGIONAL WATER PROGRAMS.

 (a) San Francisco Bay Restoration Grant Program.--Title I of the 
Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) is amended 
by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 124. SAN FRANCISCO BAY RESTORATION GRANT PROGRAM.

 ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Estuary partnership.--The term `Estuary Partnership' 
 means the San Francisco Estuary Partnership, designated as the 
 management conference for the San Francisco Bay under section 
 320.
 ``(2) San francisco bay plan.--The term `San Francisco Bay 
 Plan' means--
 ``(A) until the date of the completion of the plan 
 developed by the Director under subsection (d), the 
 comprehensive conservation and management plan approved 
 under section 320 for the San Francisco Bay estuary; 
 and
 ``(B) on and after the date of the completion of 
 the plan developed by the Director under subsection 
 (d), the plan developed by the Director under 
 subsection (d).
 ``(b) Program Office.--
 ``(1) Establishment.--The Administrator shall establish in 
 the Environmental Protection Agency a San Francisco Bay Program 
 Office. The Office shall be located at the headquarters of 
 Region 9 of the Environmental Protection Agency.
 ``(2) Appointment of director.--The Administrator shall 
 appoint a Director of the Office, who shall have management 
 experience and technical expertise relating to the San 
 Francisco Bay and be highly qualified to direct the development 
 and implementation of projects, activities, and studies 
 necessary to implement the San Francisco Bay Plan.
 ``(3) Delegation of authority; staffing.--The Administrator 
 shall delegate to the Director such authority and provide such 
 staff as may be necessary to carry out this section.
 ``(c) Annual Priority List.--
 ``(1) In general.--After providing public notice, the 
 Director shall annually compile a priority list, consistent 
 with the San Francisco Bay Plan, identifying and prioritizing 
 the projects, activities, and studies to be carried out with 
 amounts made available under subsection (e).
 ``(2) Inclusions.--The annual priority list compiled under 
 paragraph (1) shall include the following:
 ``(A) Projects, activities, and studies, including 
 restoration projects and habitat improvement for fish, 
 waterfowl, and wildlife, that advance the goals and 
 objectives of the San Francisco Bay Plan, for--
 ``(i) water quality improvement, including 
 the reduction of marine litter;
 ``(ii) wetland, riverine, and estuary 
 restoration and protection;
 ``(iii) nearshore and endangered species 
 recovery; and
 ``(iv) adaptation to climate change.
 ``(B) Information on the projects, activities, and 
 studies specified under subparagraph (A), including--
 ``(i) the identity of each entity receiving 
 assistance pursuant to subsection (e); and
 ``(ii) a description of the communities to 
 be served.
 ``(C) The criteria and methods established by the 
 Director for identification of projects, activities, 
 and studies to be included on the annual priority list.
 ``(3) Consultation.--In compiling the annual priority list 
 under paragraph (1), the Director shall consult with, and 
 consider the recommendations of--
 ``(A) the Estuary Partnership;
 ``(B) the State of California and affected local 
 governments in the San Francisco Bay estuary watershed;
 ``(C) the San Francisco Bay Restoration Authority; 
 and
 ``(D) any other relevant stakeholder involved with 
 the protection and restoration of the San Francisco Bay 
 estuary that the Director determines to be appropriate.
 ``(d) San Francisco Bay Plan.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 5 years after the date of 
 enactment of this section, the Director, in conjunction with 
 the Estuary Partnership, shall review and revise the 
 comprehensive conservation and management plan approved under 
 section 320 for the San Francisco Bay estuary to develop a plan 
 to guide the projects, activities, and studies of the Office to 
 address the restoration and protection of the San Francisco 
 Bay.
 ``(2) Revision of san francisco bay plan.--Not less often 
 than once every 5 years after the date of the completion of the 
 plan described in paragraph (1), the Director shall review, and 
 revise as appropriate, the San Francisco Bay Plan.
 ``(3) Outreach.--In carrying out this subsection, the 
 Director shall consult with the Estuary Partnership and Indian 
 tribes and solicit input from other non-Federal stakeholders.
 ``(e) Grant Program.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Director may provide funding through 
 cooperative agreements, grants, or other means to State and 
 local agencies, special districts, and public or nonprofit 
 agencies, institutions, and organizations, including the 
 Estuary Partnership, for projects, activities, and studies 
 identified on the annual priority list compiled under 
 subsection (c).
 ``(2) Maximum amount of grants; non-federal share.--
 ``(A) Maximum amount of grants.--Amounts provided 
 to any entity under this section for a fiscal year 
 shall not exceed an amount equal to 75 percent of the 
 total cost of any projects, activities, and studies 
 that are to be carried out using those amounts.
 ``(B) Non-federal share.--Not less than 25 percent 
 of the cost of any project, activity, or study carried 
 out using amounts provided under this section shall be 
 provided from non-Federal sources.
 ``(f) Funding.--
 ``(1) Administrative expenses.--Of the amount made 
 available to carry out this section for a fiscal year, the 
 Director may not use more than 5 percent to pay administrative 
 expenses incurred in carrying out this section.
 ``(2) Prohibition.--No amounts made available under this 
 section may be used for the administration of a management 
 conference under section 320.''.
 (b) Puget Sound Coordinated Recovery.--Title I of the Federal Water 
Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) is amended by adding at 
the end the following:

``SEC. 124. PUGET SOUND.

 ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Coastal nonpoint pollution control program.--The term 
 `Coastal Nonpoint Pollution Control Program' means the State of 
 Washington's Coastal Nonpoint Pollution Control Program 
 approved under section 6217 of the Coastal Zone Act 
 Reauthorization Amendments of 1990.
 ``(2) Director.--The term `Director' means the Director of 
 the Program Office.
 ``(3) Federal action plan.--The term `Federal Action Plan' 
 means the plan developed under subsection (c)(3)(B).
 ``(4) International joint commission.--The term 
 `International Joint Commission' means the International Joint 
 Commission established by the Treaty relating to the boundary 
 waters and questions arising along the boundary between the 
 United States and Canada, signed at Washington January 11, 
 1909, and entered into force May 5, 1910 (36 Stat. 2448; TS 
 548; 12 Bevans 319).
 ``(5) Pacific salmon commission.--The term `Pacific Salmon 
 Commission' means the Pacific Salmon Commission established by 
 the United States and Canada under the Treaty concerning 
 Pacific salmon, with annexes and memorandum of understanding, 
 signed at Ottawa January 28, 1985, and entered into force March 
 18, 1985 (TIAS 11091; 1469 UNTS 357) (commonly known as the 
 `Pacific Salmon Treaty').
 ``(6) Program office.--The term `Program Office' means the 
 Puget Sound Recovery National Program Office established by 
 subsection (b).
 ``(7) Puget sound action agenda; action agenda.--The term 
 `Puget Sound Action Agenda' or `Action Agenda' means the most 
 recent plan developed by the Puget Sound National Estuary 
 Program Management Conference, in consultation with the Puget 
 Sound Tribal Management Conference, and approved by the 
 Administrator as the comprehensive conservation and management 
 plan for the Puget Sound under section 320.
 ``(8) Puget sound federal leadership task force.--The term 
 `Puget Sound Federal Leadership Task Force' means the Puget 
 Sound Federal Leadership Task Force established under 
 subsection (c).
 ``(9) Puget sound federal task force.--The term `Puget 
 Sound Federal Task Force' means the Puget Sound Federal Task 
 Force established in 2016 under a memorandum of understanding 
 among 9 Federal agencies.
 ``(10) Puget sound national estuary program management 
 conference.--The term `Puget Sound National Estuary Program 
 Management Conference' means the management conference for the 
 Puget Sound convened pursuant to section 320.
 ``(11) Puget sound partnership.--The term `Puget Sound 
 Partnership' means the State agency created under the laws of 
 the State of Washington (section 90.71.210 of the Revised Code 
 of Washington), or its successor agency that has been 
 designated by the Administrator as the lead entity to support 
 the Puget Sound National Estuary Program Management Conference.
 ``(12) Puget sound region.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `Puget Sound region' 
 means the land and waters in the northwest corner of 
 the State of Washington from the Canadian border to the 
 north to the Pacific Ocean on the west, including Hood 
 Canal and the Strait of Juan de Fuca.
 ``(B) Inclusion.--The term `Puget Sound region' 
 includes all watersheds that drain into the Puget 
 Sound.
 ``(13) Puget sound tribal management conference.--The term 
 `Puget Sound Tribal Management Conference' means the 20 treaty 
 Indian tribes of western Washington and the Northwest Indian 
 Fisheries Commission.
 ``(14) Salish sea.--The term `Salish Sea' means the network 
 of coastal waterways on the west coast of North America that 
 includes the Puget Sound, the Strait of Georgia, and the Strait 
 of Juan de Fuca.
 ``(15) Salmon recovery plans.--The term `Salmon Recovery 
 Plans' means the recovery plans for salmon and steelhead 
 species approved by the Secretary of the Interior under section 
 4(f) of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 that are applicable 
 to the Puget Sound region.
 ``(16) State advisory committee.--The term `State Advisory 
 Committee' means the advisory committee established by 
 subsection (d).
 ``(17) Treaty rights at risk initiative.--The term `Treaty 
 Rights at Risk Initiative' means the report from the treaty 
 Indian tribes of western Washington entitled `Treaty Rights At 
 Risk: Ongoing Habitat Loss, the Decline of the Salmon Resource, 
 and Recommendations for Change' and dated July 14, 2011, or its 
 successor report that outlines issues and offers solutions for 
 the protection of Tribal treaty rights, recovery of salmon 
 habitat, and management of sustainable treaty and nontreaty 
 salmon fisheries, including through Tribal salmon hatchery 
 programs.
 ``(b) Puget Sound Recovery National Program Office.--
 ``(1) Establishment.--There is established in the 
 Environmental Protection Agency a Puget Sound Recovery National 
 Program Office, to be located in the State of Washington.
 ``(2) Director.--
 ``(A) In general.--There shall be a Director of the 
 Program Office, who shall have leadership and project 
 management experience and shall be highly qualified 
 to--
 ``(i) direct the integration of multiple 
 project planning efforts and programs from 
 different agencies and jurisdictions; and
 ``(ii) align numerous, and possibly 
 competing, priorities to accomplish visible and 
 measurable outcomes under the Action Agenda.
 ``(B) Position.--The position of Director of the 
 Program Office shall be a career reserved position, as 
 such term is defined in section 3132 of title 5, United 
 States Code.
 ``(3) Delegation of authority; staffing.--Using amounts 
 made available to carry out this section, the Administrator 
 shall delegate to the Director such authority and provide such 
 staff as may be necessary to carry out this section.
 ``(4) Duties.--The Director shall--
 ``(A) coordinate and manage the timely execution of 
 the requirements of this section, including the 
 formation and meetings of the Puget Sound Federal 
 Leadership Task Force;
 ``(B) coordinate activities related to the 
 restoration and protection of the Puget Sound across 
 the Environmental Protection Agency;
 ``(C) coordinate and align the activities of the 
 Administrator with the Action Agenda, Salmon Recovery 
 Plans, the Treaty Rights at Risk Initiative, and the 
 Coastal Nonpoint Pollution Control Program;
 ``(D) promote the efficient use of Environmental 
 Protection Agency resources in pursuit of the 
 restoration and protection of the Puget Sound;
 ``(E) serve on the Puget Sound Federal Leadership 
 Task Force and collaborate with, help coordinate, and 
 implement activities with other Federal agencies that 
 have responsibilities involving the restoration and 
 protection of the Puget Sound;
 ``(F) provide or procure such other advice, 
 technical assistance, research, assessments, 
 monitoring, or other support as is determined by the 
 Director to be necessary or prudent to most efficiently 
 and effectively fulfill the objectives and priorities 
 of the Action Agenda, the Salmon Recovery Plans, the 
 Treaty Rights at Risk Initiative, and the Coastal 
 Nonpoint Pollution Control Program, consistent with the 
 best available science, to ensure the health of the 
 Puget Sound ecosystem;
 ``(G) track the progress of the Environmental 
 Protection Agency towards meeting the agency's 
 specified objectives and priorities within the Action 
 Agenda and the Federal Action Plan;
 ``(H) implement the recommendations of the 
 Comptroller General set forth in the report entitled 
 `Puget Sound Restoration: Additional Actions Could 
 Improve Assessments of Progress' and dated July 19, 
 2018;
 ``(I) serve as liaison and coordinate activities 
 for the restoration and protection of the Salish Sea 
 with Canadian authorities, the Pacific Salmon 
 Commission, and the International Joint Commission; and
 ``(J) carry out such additional duties as the 
 Director determines necessary and appropriate.
 ``(c) Puget Sound Federal Leadership Task Force.--
 ``(1) Establishment.--There is established a Puget Sound 
 Federal Leadership Task Force.
 ``(2) Membership.--
 ``(A) Composition.--The Puget Sound Federal 
 Leadership Task Force shall be composed of the 
 following members:
 ``(i) The following individuals appointed 
 by the Secretary of Agriculture:
 ``(I) A representative of the 
 National Forest Service.
 ``(II) A representative of the 
 Natural Resources Conservation Service.
 ``(ii) A representative of the National 
 Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
 appointed by the Secretary of Commerce.
 ``(iii) The following individuals appointed 
 by the Secretary of Defense:
 ``(I) A representative of the Corps 
 of Engineers.
 ``(II) A representative of the 
 Joint Base Lewis-McChord.
 ``(III) A representative of the 
 Commander, Navy Region Northwest.
 ``(iv) The Director of the Program Office.
 ``(v) The following individuals appointed 
 by the Secretary of Homeland Security:
 ``(I) A representative of the Coast 
 Guard.
 ``(II) A representative of the 
 Federal Emergency Management Agency.
 ``(vi) The following individuals appointed 
 by the Secretary of the Interior:
 ``(I) A representative of the 
 Bureau of Indian Affairs.
 ``(II) A representative of the 
 United States Fish and Wildlife 
 Service.
 ``(III) A representative of the 
 United States Geological Survey.
 ``(IV) A representative of the 
 National Park Service.
 ``(vii) The following individuals appointed 
 by the Secretary of Transportation:
 ``(I) A representative of the 
 Federal Highway Administration.
 ``(II) A representative of the 
 Federal Transit Administration.
 ``(viii) Representatives of such other 
 Federal agencies, programs, and initiatives as 
 the other members of the Puget Sound Federal 
 Leadership Task Force determines necessary.
 ``(B) Qualifications.--Members appointed under this 
 paragraph shall have experience and expertise in 
 matters of restoration and protection of large 
 watersheds and bodies of water, or related experience 
 that will benefit the restoration and protection of the 
 Puget Sound.
 ``(C) Co-chairs.--
 ``(i) In general.--The following members of 
 the Puget Sound Federal Leadership Task Force 
 shall serve as Co-Chairs of the Puget Sound 
 Federal Leadership Task Force:
 ``(I) The representative of the 
 National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
 Administration.
 ``(II) The Director of the Program 
 Office.
 ``(III) The representative of the 
 Corps of Engineers.
 ``(ii) Leadership.--The Co-Chairs shall 
 ensure the Puget Sound Federal Leadership Task 
 Force completes its duties through robust 
 discussion of all relevant issues. The Co-
 Chairs shall share leadership responsibilities 
 equally.
 ``(3) Duties.--
 ``(A) General duties.--The Puget Sound Federal 
 Leadership Task Force shall--
 ``(i) uphold Federal trust responsibilities 
 to restore and protect resources crucial to 
 Tribal treaty rights, including by carrying out 
 government-to-government consultation with 
 Indian tribes when requested by such tribes;
 ``(ii) provide a venue for dialogue and 
 coordination across all Federal agencies 
 represented by a member of the Puget Sound 
 Federal Leadership Task Force to align Federal 
 resources for the purposes of carrying out the 
 requirements of this section and all other 
 Federal laws that contribute to the restoration 
 and protection of the Puget Sound, including 
 by--
 ``(I) enabling and encouraging such 
 agencies to act consistently with the 
 objectives and priorities of the Action 
 Agenda, the Salmon Recovery Plans, the 
 Treaty Rights at Risk Initiative, and 
 the Coastal Nonpoint Pollution Control 
 Program;
 ``(II) facilitating the 
 coordination of Federal activities that 
 impact such restoration and protection;
 ``(III) facilitating the delivery 
 of feedback given by such agencies to 
 the Puget Sound Partnership during the 
 development of the Action Agenda;
 ``(IV) facilitating the resolution 
 of interagency conflicts associated 
 with such restoration and protection 
 among such agencies;
 ``(V) providing a forum for 
 exchanging information among such 
 agencies regarding activities being 
 conducted, including obstacles or 
 efficiencies found, during restoration 
 and protection activities; and
 ``(VI) promoting the efficient use 
 of government resources in pursuit of 
 such restoration and protection through 
 coordination and collaboration, 
 including by ensuring that the Federal 
 efforts relating to the science 
 necessary for such restoration and 
 protection are consistent, and not 
 duplicative, across the Federal 
 Government;
 ``(iii) catalyze public leaders at all 
 levels to work together toward shared goals by 
 demonstrating interagency best practices coming 
 from such agencies;
 ``(iv) provide advice and support on 
 scientific and technical issues and act as a 
 forum for the exchange of scientific 
 information about the Puget Sound;
 ``(v) identify and inventory Federal 
 environmental research and monitoring programs 
 related to the Puget Sound, and provide such 
 inventory to the Puget Sound National Estuary 
 Program Management Conference;
 ``(vi) ensure that Puget Sound restoration 
 and protection activities are as consistent as 
 practicable with ongoing restoration and 
 protection and related efforts in the Salish 
 Sea that are being conducted by Canadian 
 authorities, the Pacific Salmon Commission, and 
 the International Joint Commission;
 ``(vii) ensure that Puget Sound restoration 
 and protection activities are consistent with 
 national security interests;
 ``(viii) establish any working groups or 
 committees necessary to assist the Puget Sound 
 Federal Leadership Task Force in its duties, 
 including relating to public policy and 
 scientific issues; and
 ``(ix) raise national awareness of the 
 significance of the Puget Sound.
 ``(B) Puget sound federal action plan.--
 ``(i) In general.--Not later than 5 years 
 after the date of enactment of this section, 
 the Puget Sound Federal Leadership Task Force 
 shall develop and approve a Federal Action Plan 
 that leverages Federal programs across agencies 
 and serves to coordinate diverse programs and 
 priorities for the restoration and protection 
 of the Puget Sound.
 ``(ii) Revision of puget sound federal 
 action plan.--Not less often than once every 5 
 years after the date of approval of the Federal 
 Action Plan under clause (i), the Puget Sound 
 Federal Leadership Task Force shall review, and 
 revise as appropriate, the Federal Action Plan.
 ``(C) Feedback by federal agencies.--In 
 facilitating feedback under subparagraph (A)(ii)(III), 
 the Puget Sound Federal Leadership Task Force shall 
 request Federal agencies to consider, at a minimum, 
 possible Federal actions within the Puget Sound region 
 designed to--
 ``(i) further the goals, targets, and 
 actions of the Action Agenda, the Salmon 
 Recovery Plans, the Treaty Rights at Risk 
 Initiative, and the Coastal Nonpoint Pollution 
 Control Program;
 ``(ii) as applicable, implement and enforce 
 this Act, the Endangered Species Act of 1973, 
 and all other Federal laws that contribute to 
 the restoration and protection of the Puget 
 Sound, including those that protect Tribal 
 treaty rights;
 ``(iii) prevent the introduction and spread 
 of invasive species;
 ``(iv) protect marine and wildlife 
 habitats;
 ``(v) protect, restore, and conserve 
 forests, wetlands, riparian zones, and 
 nearshore waters;
 ``(vi) promote resilience to climate change 
 and ocean acidification effects;
 ``(vii) restore fisheries so that they are 
 sustainable and productive;
 ``(viii) preserve biodiversity;
 ``(ix) restore and protect ecosystem 
 services that provide clean water, filter toxic 
 chemicals, and increase ecosystem resilience; 
 and
 ``(x) improve water quality, including by 
 preventing and managing stormwater runoff, 
 incorporating erosion control techniques and 
 trash capture devices, using sustainable 
 stormwater practices, and mitigating and 
 minimizing nonpoint source pollution, including 
 marine litter.
 ``(4) Participation of state advisory committee and puget 
 sound tribal management conference.--The Puget Sound Federal 
 Leadership Task Force shall carry out its duties with input 
 from, and in collaboration with, the State Advisory Committee 
 and the Puget Sound Tribal Management Conference, including by 
 seeking advice and recommendations on the actions, progress, 
 and issues pertaining to the restoration and protection of the 
 Puget Sound.
 ``(5) Meetings.--
 ``(A) Initial meeting.--The Puget Sound Federal 
 Leadership Task Force shall meet not later than 180 
 days after the date of enactment of this section--
 ``(i) to determine if all Federal agencies 
 are properly represented;
 ``(ii) to establish the bylaws of the Puget 
 Sound Federal Leadership Task Force;
 ``(iii) to establish necessary working 
 groups or committees; and
 ``(iv) to determine subsequent meeting 
 times, dates, and logistics.
 ``(B) Subsequent meetings.--After the initial 
 meeting, the Puget Sound Federal Leadership Task Force 
 shall meet, at a minimum, twice per year to carry out 
 the duties of the Puget Sound Federal Leadership Task 
 Force.
 ``(C) Working group meetings.--A meeting of any 
 established working group or committee of the Puget 
 Sound Federal Leadership Task Force shall not be 
 considered a biannual meeting for purposes of 
 subparagraph (B).
 ``(D) Joint meetings.--The Puget Sound Federal 
 Leadership Task Force--
 ``(i) shall offer to meet jointly with the 
 Puget Sound National Estuary Program Management 
 Conference and the Puget Sound Tribal 
 Management Conference, at a minimum, once per 
 year; and
 ``(ii) may consider such a joint meeting to 
 be a biannual meeting of the Puget Sound 
 Federal Leadership Task Force for purposes of 
 subparagraph (B).
 ``(E) Quorum.--A simple majority of the members of 
 the Puget Sound Federal Leadership Task Force shall 
 constitute a quorum.
 ``(F) Voting.--For the Puget Sound Federal 
 Leadership Task Force to take an official action, a 
 quorum shall be present, and at least a two-thirds 
 majority of the members present shall vote in the 
 affirmative.
 ``(6) Puget sound federal leadership task force procedures 
 and advice.--
 ``(A) Advisors.--The Puget Sound Federal Leadership 
 Task Force may seek advice and input from any 
 interested, knowledgeable, or affected party as the 
 Puget Sound Federal Leadership Task Force determines 
 necessary to perform its duties.
 ``(B) Compensation.--A member of the Puget Sound 
 Federal Leadership Task Force shall receive no 
 additional compensation for service as a member on the 
 Puget Sound Federal Leadership Task Force.
 ``(C) Travel expenses.--Travel expenses incurred by 
 a member of the Puget Sound Federal Leadership Task 
 Force in the performance of service on the Puget Sound 
 Federal Leadership Task Force may be paid by the agency 
 that the member represents.
 ``(7) Puget sound federal task force.--
 ``(A) In general.--On the date of enactment of this 
 section, the 2016 memorandum of understanding 
 establishing the Puget Sound Federal Task Force shall 
 cease to be effective.
 ``(B) Use of previous work.--The Puget Sound 
 Federal Leadership Task Force shall, to the extent 
 practicable, use the work product produced, relied 
 upon, and analyzed by the Puget Sound Federal Task 
 Force in order to avoid duplicating the efforts of the 
 Puget Sound Federal Task Force.
 ``(d) State Advisory Committee.--
 ``(1) Establishment.--There is established a State Advisory 
 Committee.
 ``(2) Membership.--The State Advisory Committee shall 
 consist of up to seven members designated by the governing body 
 of the Puget Sound Partnership, in consultation with the 
 Governor of Washington, who will represent Washington State 
 agencies that have significant roles and responsibilities 
 related to the restoration and protection of the Puget Sound.
 ``(e) Federal Advisory Committee Act.--The Puget Sound Federal 
Leadership Task Force, State Advisory Committee, and any working group 
or committee of the Puget Sound Federal Leadership Task Force, shall 
not be considered an advisory committee under the Federal Advisory 
Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App.).
 ``(f) Puget Sound Federal Leadership Task Force Biennial Report on 
Puget Sound Restoration and Protection Activities.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this section, and biennially thereafter, the Puget 
 Sound Federal Leadership Task Force, in collaboration with the 
 Puget Sound Tribal Management Conference and the State Advisory 
 Committee, shall submit to the President, Congress, the 
 Governor of Washington, and the governing body of the Puget 
 Sound Partnership a report that summarizes the progress, 
 challenges, and milestones of the Puget Sound Federal 
 Leadership Task Force relating to the restoration and 
 protection of the Puget Sound.
 ``(2) Contents.--The report submitted under paragraph (1) 
 shall include a description of the following:
 ``(A) The roles and progress of each State, local 
 government entity, and Federal agency that has 
 jurisdiction in the Puget Sound region relating to 
 meeting the identified objectives and priorities of the 
 Action Agenda, the Salmon Recovery Plans, the Treaty 
 Rights at Risk Initiative, and the Coastal Nonpoint 
 Pollution Control Program.
 ``(B) If available, the roles and progress of 
 Tribal governments that have jurisdiction in the Puget 
 Sound region relating to meeting the identified 
 objectives and priorities of the Action Agenda, the 
 Salmon Recovery Plans, the Treaty Rights at Risk 
 Initiative, and the Coastal Nonpoint Pollution Control 
 Program.
 ``(C) A summary of specific recommendations 
 concerning implementation of the Action Agenda and the 
 Federal Action Plan, including challenges, barriers, 
 and anticipated milestones, targets, and timelines.
 ``(D) A summary of progress made by Federal 
 agencies toward the priorities identified in the 
 Federal Action Plan.
 ``(g) Tribal Rights and Consultation.--
 ``(1) Preservation of tribal treaty rights.--Nothing in 
 this section affects, or is intended to affect, any right 
 reserved by treaty between the United States and one or more 
 Indian tribes.
 ``(2) Consultation.--Nothing in this section affects any 
 authorization or obligation of a Federal agency to consult with 
 an Indian tribe under any other provision of law.
 ``(h) Consistency.--
 ``(1) In general.--Actions authorized or implemented under 
 this section shall be consistent with--
 ``(A) the Salmon Recovery Plans;
 ``(B) the Coastal Nonpoint Pollution Control 
 Program; and
 ``(C) the water quality standards of the State of 
 Washington approved by the Administrator under section 
 303.
 ``(2) Federal actions.--All Federal agencies represented on 
 the Puget Sound Federal Leadership Task Force shall act 
 consistently with the protection of Tribal, treaty-reserved 
 rights and, to the greatest extent practicable given such 
 agencies' existing obligations under Federal law, act 
 consistently with the objectives and priorities of the Action 
 Agenda, the Salmon Recovery Plans, the Treaty Rights at Risk 
 Initiative, and the Coastal Nonpoint Pollution Control Program, 
 when--
 ``(A) conducting Federal agency activities within 
 or outside the Puget Sound that affect any land or 
 water use or natural resources of the Puget Sound 
 region, including activities performed by a contractor 
 for the benefit of a Federal agency;
 ``(B) interpreting and enforcing regulations that 
 impact the restoration and protection of the Puget 
 Sound;
 ``(C) issuing Federal licenses or permits that 
 impact the restoration and protection of the Puget 
 Sound; and
 ``(D) granting Federal assistance to State, local, 
 and Tribal governments for activities related to the 
 restoration and protection of the Puget Sound.''.
 (c) Lake Pontchartrain Basin Restoration Program.--
 (1) Review of comprehensive management plan.--Section 121 
 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1273) is 
 amended--
 (A) in subsection (c)--
 (i) in paragraph (5), by striking ``; and'' 
 and inserting a semicolon;
 (ii) in paragraph (6), by striking the 
 period and inserting ``; and''; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(7) ensure that the comprehensive conservation and 
 management plan approved for the Basin under section 320 is 
 reviewed and revised in accordance with section 320 not less 
 often than once every 5 years, beginning on the date of 
 enactment of this paragraph.''.
 (B) in subsection (d), by striking ``recommended by 
 a management conference convened for the Basin under 
 section 320'' and inserting ``identified in the 
 comprehensive conservation and management plan approved 
 for the Basin under section 320''.
 (2) Definitions.--Section 121(e)(1) of the Federal Water 
 Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1273(e)(1)) is amended by 
 striking ``, a 5,000 square mile''.
 (3) Administrative costs.--Section 121(f) of the Federal 
 Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1273(f)) is amended by 
 adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Administrative expenses.--Not more than 5 percent of 
 the amounts appropriated to carry out this section may be used 
 for administrative expenses.''.
 (4) Application to existing appropriations.--Amounts 
 appropriated for Lake Pontchartrain by title VI of division J 
 of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act under the heading 
 ``Environmental Protection Agency--Environmental Programs and 
 Management'' (Public Law 117-58; 135 Stat. 1396) shall be 
 considered to be appropriated pursuant to section 121 of the 
 Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by this 
 subsection, including with respect to the use of such funds for 
 administrative expenses under subsection (f)(3) of such section 
 121.

SEC. 5857. LIMITATION ON LICENSES AND OTHER AUTHORIZATIONS FOR EXPORT 
 OF CERTAIN ITEMS REMOVED FROM THE JURISDICTION OF THE 
 UNITED STATES MUNITIONS LIST AND MADE SUBJECT TO THE 
 JURISDICTION OF THE EXPORT ADMINISTRATION REGULATIONS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Commerce may not grant a license 
or other authorization for the export of covered items unless before 
granting the license or other authorization the Secretary submits to 
the chairman and ranking member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs of 
the House of Representatives and the chairman and ranking member of the 
Committee on Foreign Affairs of the Senate a written certification with 
respect to such proposed export license or other authorization 
containing--
 (1) the name of the person applying for the license or 
 other authorization;
 (2) the name of the person who is the proposed recipient of 
 the export;
 (3) the name of the country or international organization 
 to which the export will be made;
 (4) a description of the items proposed to be exported; and
 (5) the value of the items proposed to be exported.
 (b) Form.--A certification required under subsection (a) shall be 
submitted in unclassified form, except that information regarding the 
dollar value and number of items proposed to be exported may be 
restricted from public disclosure if such disclosure would be 
detrimental to the security of the United States.
 (c) Deadlines; Waiver.--A certification required under subsection 
(a) shall be submitted--
 (1) at least 15 calendar days before a proposed export 
 license or other authorization is granted in the case of a 
 transfer of items to a country which is a member of the North 
 Atlantic Treaty Organization or Australia, Japan, the Republic 
 of Korea, Israel, or New Zealand, and
 (2) at least 30 calendar days before a proposed export 
 license or other authorization is issued in the case of a 
 transfer of items to any other country.
 (d) Congressional Resolution of Disapproval.--A proposed export 
license or other authorization described in paragraph (1) of subsection 
(c) shall become effective after the end of the 15-day period described 
in such paragraph, and a proposed export license or other authorization 
described in paragraph (2) of subsection (c) shall become effective 
after the end of the 30-day period specified in such paragraph, only if 
the Congress does not enact, within the applicable time period, a joint 
resolution prohibiting the export of items with respect to the proposed 
export license.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Covered items.--The term ``covered items'' means items 
 that--
 (A) were included in category I of the United 
 States Munitions List (as in effect on January 1, 
 2020);
 (B) were removed from the United States Munitions 
 List and made subject to the jurisdiction of the Export 
 Administration Regulations through publication in the 
 Federal Register on January 23, 2020; and
 (C) are valued at $1,000,000 or more.
 (2) Export administration regulations.--The term ``Export 
 Administration Regulations'' means the regulations set forth in 
 subchapter C of chapter VII of title 15, Code of Federal 
 Regulations, or successor regulations.
 (3) United states munitions list.--The term ``United States 
 Munitions List'' means the list maintained pursuant to part 121 
 of title 22, Code of Federal Regulations.

SEC. 5858. REVIEW OF STANDARD OCCUPATIONAL CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM.

 The Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall, not 
later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
categorize public safety telecommunicators as a protective service 
occupation under the Standard Occupational Classification System.

SEC. 5859. UNITED STATES FIRE ADMINISTRATION ON-SITE INVESTIGATIONS OF 
 MAJOR FIRES.

 The Federal Fire Prevention and Control Act of 1974 (15 U.S.C. 2201 
et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 38. INVESTIGATION AUTHORITIES.

 ``(a) In General.--In the case of any major fire, the Administrator 
may send incident investigators, which may include safety specialists, 
fire protection engineers, codes and standards experts, researchers, 
and fire training specialists, to the site of the fire to conduct an 
investigation as described in subsection (b).
 ``(b) Investigation Required.--A fire investigation conducted under 
this section--
 ``(1) shall be conducted in coordination and cooperation 
 with appropriate Federal, State, and local authorities, 
 including Federal agencies that are authorized to investigate a 
 major fire or an incident of which the major fire is a part; 
 and
 ``(2) shall examine the determined cause and origin of the 
 fire and assess broader systematic matters to include use of 
 codes and standards, demographics, structural characteristics, 
 smoke and fire dynamics (movement) during the event, and costs 
 of associated injuries and deaths.
 ``(c) Report.--Upon concluding any fire investigation under this 
section, the Administrator shall issue a public report to local, State, 
and Federal authorities on the findings of such investigation, or 
collaborate with another investigating Federal agency on that agency's 
report, including recommendations on--
 ``(1) any other buildings with similar characteristics that 
 may bear similar fire risks;
 ``(2) improving tactical response to similar fires;
 ``(3) improving civilian safety practices;
 ``(4) assessing the costs and benefits to the community of 
 adding fire safety features; and
 ``(5) how to mitigate the causes of such fire.
 ``(d) Discretionary Authority.--In addition to investigations 
conducted pursuant to subsection (a), the Administrator may send fire 
investigators to conduct investigations at the site of any fire with 
unusual or remarkable context that results in losses less severe than 
those occurring as a result of a major fire, in coordination with 
appropriate Federal, State, and local authorities, including Federal 
agencies that are authorized to investigate a major fire or an incident 
of which the major fire is a part.
 ``(e) Major Fire Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term 
`major fire' shall have the meaning given such term under regulations 
to be issued by the Administrator.''.

SEC. 5860. MULTILATERAL AGREEMENT TO ESTABLISH AN INDEPENDENT 
 INTERNATIONAL CENTER FOR RESEARCH ON THE INFORMATION 
 ENVIRONMENT.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State shall take such action as 
may be necessary to seek to initiate negotiations to obtain an 
agreement on a multilateral basis with countries that are allies or 
partners of the United States, including countries that are members of 
the Group of Seven (G7), to establish an independent international 
center for research on the information environment (in this section 
referred to as the ``research center'').
 (b) Consultation.--As part of the negotiations to obtain an 
agreement described in subsection (a), the Secretary of State should 
consult with--
 (1) representatives from providers of prominent online 
 platforms;
 (2) researchers from the fields of information science, 
 media studies, international data governance, and other similar 
 fields;
 (3) privacy and human and civil rights advocates;
 (4) technologists, including individuals with training and 
 expertise in the state of the art in the fields of information 
 technology, information security, network security, software 
 development, computer science, computer engineering, and other 
 related fields;
 (5) representatives from international standards-setting 
 organizations; and
 (6) experts in mechanisms for enabling access to online 
 platform data which is compliant with data protection 
 frameworks.
 (c) Purposes, Functions, and Related Administrative Provisions of 
Research Center.--An agreement obtained under subsection (a) should 
include provisions relating to the following:
 (1) The purposes and functions of the research center, 
 including its mandate to ensure the widest possible cooperation 
 among member countries of the research center to ensure such 
 purposes are achieved and such functions are carried out, 
 including to--
 (A) enable international collaboration to gain 
 understanding and measure the impacts of foreign state 
 and non-state propaganda and disinformation efforts 
 aimed at undermining or influencing the policies, 
 security, or stability of the United States and 
 countries that are allies or partners of the United 
 States;
 (B) enable international collaboration to gain 
 understanding and measure the impacts of the content 
 moderation, product design decisions, and algorithms of 
 online platforms on society, politics, the spread of 
 hate, harassment, and extremism, security, privacy, and 
 physical or mental health, including considerations for 
 youth development;
 (C) conduct research projects with a focus on the 
 global information environment that require information 
 from or about multiple online platforms and multi-year 
 time horizons;
 (D) conduct research projects that explore the 
 impact of published media, such as television, 
 podcasts, radio, and newspapers, on so-ciety, politics, 
 the spread of hate, harassment, and extremism, 
 security, privacy, and physical or mental health, 
 including considerations for youth development;
 (E) facilitate secure information sharing between 
 online platforms and researchers affiliated with the 
 research center;
 (F) disseminate findings to the public; and
 (G) offer recommendations to online platforms and 
 governments regarding ways to ensure a safe and 
 resilient online information environment.
 (2) The governance structure and process for adding and 
 removing member countries of the research center.
 (3) The process by which a researcher can become affiliated 
 with or join the research center, including provisions to 
 ensure the researcher is not working on behalf of a business 
 enterprise.
 (4) A proposed budget and contributions to be provided by 
 member countries of the research center.
 (d) Proposal for Secure Information Sharing With Research Center.--
 (1) In general.--An agreement obtained under subsection (a) 
 should include provisions relating to the following:
 (A) Best practices regarding what types of 
 information from an online platform should be made 
 available, and under what circumstances, to the 
 research center.
 (B) A code of conduct for researchers working with 
 information made available as described in subparagraph 
 (A).
 (2) Matters to be included.--
 (A) Review by research center prior to 
 publication.--The provisions described in paragraph (1) 
 should include the circumstances under which the 
 research center will review a publication based on 
 information made available to the research center prior 
 to publication to determine whether the publication 
 violates the privacy of a user of the online platform 
 or other information outlet that made available the 
 information or would reveal trade secrets of the 
 provider of the online platform or other information 
 outlet.
 (B) User privacy.--The provisions described in 
 paragraph (1) should--
 (i) ensure that the making available of 
 information to the research center and the 
 provision of access to the information by the 
 research center do not infringe upon reasonable 
 expectations of personal privacy of users of 
 online platforms or of other individuals; and
 (ii) ensure that information is made 
 available to the research center consistent 
 with any applicable privacy and data security 
 laws of member countries.
 (C) Code of conduct for researchers.--The code of 
 conduct included under paragraph (1)(B) in the 
 provisions described in paragraph (1) should require 
 researchers described in such paragraph to commit to 
 the following:
 (i) To use information made available to 
 the research center only for research purposes 
 specified in the agreement establishing the 
 research center.
 (ii) Not to re-identify, or to attempt to 
 re-identify, an individual to whom information 
 made available to the research center relates.
 (iii) Not to publish personal information 
 derived from information made available to the 
 research center.
 (iv) To comply with limits on commercial 
 use of information made available to the 
 research center or research conducted using 
 such information, as specified by the research 
 center.
 (e) Online Platform Defined.--In this section, the term ``online 
platform'' means a service provided over the internet that enables two 
or more distinct but interdependent sets of users (which may be firms 
or individuals) to interact with each other.
 (f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to the Secretary of State to carry out this section 
$10,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2023 and 2024.

SEC. 5861. PRIORITIZATION OF EFFORTS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE TO 
 COMBAT INTERNATIONAL TRAFFICKING IN COVERED SYNTHETIC 
 DRUGS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of State shall prioritize efforts of 
the Department of State to combat international trafficking in covered 
synthetic drugs by carrying out programs and activities including the 
following:
 (1) Supporting increased data collection by the United 
 States and foreign countries through increased drug use surveys 
 among populations, increased use of wastewater testing where 
 appropriate, and multilateral sharing of that data.
 (2) Engaging in increased consultation and partnership with 
 international drug agencies, including the European Monitoring 
 Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction, and regulatory agencies in 
 foreign countries.
 (3) Carrying out the program to provide assistance to build 
 the capacity of foreign law enforcement agencies with respect 
 to covered synthetic drugs.
 (4) Carrying out exchange programs for governmental and 
 nongovernmental personnel in the United States and in foreign 
 countries to provide educational and professional development 
 on demand reduction matters relating to the illicit use of 
 narcotics and other drugs.
 (b) Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than one year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State shall submit 
 to the appropriate congressional committees a report on the 
 implementation of this section.
 (2) Appropriate congressional committees defined.--In this 
 subsection, the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the 
 Committee on Appropriations of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the 
 Committee on Appropriations of the Senate.
 (c) Program to Provide Assistance to Build the Capacity of Foreign 
Law Enforcement Agencies With Respect to Covered Synthetic Drugs.--
 (1) In general.--Notwithstanding section 660 of the Foreign 
 Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2420), the Secretary of State 
 shall establish a program to provide assistance to build the 
 capacity of law enforcement agencies of the countries described 
 in paragraph (3) to help such agencies to identify, track, and 
 improve their forensics detection capabilities with respect to 
 covered synthetic drugs.
 (2) Priority.--The Secretary of State shall prioritize 
 assistance under paragraph (1) among those countries described 
 in paragraph (3) in which such assistance would have the most 
 impact in reducing illicit use of covered synthetic drugs in 
 the United States.
 (3) Countries described.--The foreign countries described 
 in this paragraph are--
 (A) countries that are producers of covered 
 synthetic drugs;
 (B) countries whose pharmaceutical and chemical 
 industries are known to be exploited for development or 
 procurement of precursors of covered synthetic drugs; 
 or
 (C) major drug-transit countries as defined by the 
 President.
 (4) Authorization of additional appropriations.--In 
 addition to amounts otherwise authorized for the purposes 
 described in this subsection, there is authorized to be 
 appropriated to the Secretary $4,000,000 for each of the fiscal 
 years 2023 through 2027 to carry out this subsection.
 (d) Exchange Program for Governmental and Nongovernmental Personnel 
to Provide Educational and Professional Development on Demand Reduction 
Matters Relating to Illicit Use of Narcotics and Other Drugs.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of State shall establish or 
 continue and strengthen, as appropriate, an exchange program 
 for governmental and nongovernmental personnel in the United 
 States and in foreign countries to provide educational and 
 professional development on demand reduction matters relating 
 to the illicit use of narcotics and other drugs.
 (2) Program requirements.--The program required by 
 paragraph (1)--
 (A) shall be limited to individuals who have 
 expertise and experience in matters described in 
 paragraph (1);
 (B) in the case of inbound exchanges, may be 
 carried out as part of exchange programs and 
 international visitor programs administered by the 
 Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs of the 
 Department of State, including the International 
 Visitor Leadership Program in consultation or 
 coordination with the Bureau of International Narcotics 
 and Law Enforcement Affairs; and
 (C) shall include outbound exchanges for 
 governmental or nongovernmental personnel in the United 
 States.
 (3) Authorization of additional appropriations.--In 
 addition to amounts otherwise authorized for the purposes 
 described in this subsection, there is authorized to be 
 appropriated to the Secretary $1,000,000 for each of the fiscal 
 years 2023 through 2027 to carry out this subsection.
 (e) Amendments to International Narcotics Control Program.--
 (1) International narcotics control strategy report.--
 Section 489(a) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 
 2291h(a)) is amended--
 (A) by redesignating the second paragraph (10) 
 (relating to an identification of the countries that 
 are the most significant sources of illicit fentanyl 
 and fentanyl analogues) as paragraph (11); and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(12) Information that contains an assessment of the 
 countries significantly involved in the manufacture, 
 production, or transshipment of synthetic opioids, including 
 fentanyl and fentanyl analogues, including the following:
 ``(A) The scale of legal domestic production and 
 any available information on the number of 
 manufacturers and producers of such opioids in such 
 countries.
 ``(B) Information on any law enforcement 
 assessments of the scale of illegal production, 
 including a description of the capacity of illegal 
 laboratories to produce such opioids.
 ``(C) The types of inputs used and a description of 
 the primary methods of synthesis employed by illegal 
 producers of such opioids.
 ``(D) An assessment of the policies of such 
 countries to regulate licit manufacture and interdict 
 illicit manufacture, diversion, distribution, and 
 shipment of such opioids and an assessment of the 
 effectiveness of the policies' implementation.
 ``(13) Information on, to the extent practicable, any 
 policies of responding to a substance described in section 
 [__](g)(2) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
 Year 2023, including the following:
 ``(A) Which governments have articulated policies 
 on scheduling of such substances.
 ``(B) Any data on impacts of such policies and 
 other responses to such substances.
 ``(C) An assessment of any policies the United 
 States could adopt to improve its response to such 
 substances.''.
 (2) Modifications to definitions.--Section 481(e) of the 
 Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2291(e)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (2)(D), by inserting ``or a 
 significant direct source of illicit narcotic or 
 psychotropic drugs or other controlled substances'' 
 after ``opioids''; and
 (B) by amending paragraph (5) to read as follows:
 ``(5) the term `major drug-transit country' means a country 
 through which are transported illicit narcotic or psychotropic 
 drugs or other controlled substances significantly affecting 
 the United States.''.
 (f) Covered Synthetic Drug.--In this section, the term ``covered 
synthetic drug'' means--
 (1) a synthetic controlled substance (as defined in section 
 102(6) of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802(6))), 
 including fentanyl or a fentanyl analogue; or
 (2) a substance of abuse, or any preparation thereof, 
 that--
 (A) is not--
 (i) included in any schedule as a 
 controlled substance under the Controlled 
 Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 801 et seq.); or
 (ii) controlled by the Single Convention on 
 Narcotic Drugs signed at New York, New York, on 
 March 30, 1961, or the Convention on 
 Psychotropic Substances signed at Vienna, 
 Austria, on February 21, 1971;
 (B) is new or has reemerged on the illicit market; 
 and
 (C) poses a threat to the public health and safety.

SEC. 5862. ISOLATE RUSSIAN GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS ACT OF 2022.

 (a) Statement of Policy.--It is the policy of the United States to 
seek to exclude government officials of the Russian Federation, to the 
maximum extent practicable, from participation in meetings, 
proceedings, and other activities of the following organizations:
 (1) Group of 20.
 (2) Bank for International Settlements.
 (3) Basel Committee for Banking Standards.
 (4) Financial Stability Board.
 (5) International Association of Insurance Supervisors.
 (6) International Organization of Securities Commissions.
 (b) Implementation.--The Secretary of the Treasury, the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and the Securities and 
Exchange Commission, as the case may be, shall take all necessary steps 
to advance the policy set forth in subsection (a).
 (c) Termination.--This section shall have no force or effect on the 
earlier of--
 (1) the date that is 5 years after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act; or
 (2) the date that is 30 days after the date on which the 
 President reports to Congress that the Government of the 
 Russian Federation has ceased its destabilizing activities with 
 respect to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of 
 Ukraine.
 (d) Waiver.--The President may waive the application of this 
section if the President reports to the Congress that the waiver is in 
the national interest of the United States and includes an explanation 
of the reasons therefor.

SEC. 5863. PROHIBITION ON CERTAIN ASSISTANCE TO THE PHILIPPINES.

 (a) In General.--No funds authorized to be appropriated or 
otherwise made available to the Department of State are authorized to 
be made available to provide assistance for the Philippine National 
Police, including assistance in the form of equipment or training, 
until the Secretary of State certifies to the Committee on Foreign 
Affairs of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign 
Relations of the Senate that the Government of the Philippines has--
 (1) investigated and successfully prosecuted members of the 
 Philippine National Police who have violated human rights, 
 ensured that police personnel cooperated with judicial 
 authorities in such cases, and affirmed that such violations 
 have ceased;
 (2) established that the Philippine National Police 
 effectively protects the rights of trade unionists, 
 journalists, human rights defenders, critics of the government, 
 faith and religious leaders, and other civil society activists 
 to operate without interference;
 (3) taken effective steps to guarantee a judicial system 
 that is capable of investigating, prosecuting, and bringing to 
 justice members of the police and military who have committed 
 human rights abuses; and
 (4) fully complied with domestic and United States audits 
 and investigations regarding the improper use of prior security 
 assistance.
 (b) Waiver.--The President may, on a case-by-case basis and for 
periods not to exceed 180 days each, waive the prohibition under 
subsection (a) if the President certifies to the Committee on Foreign 
Affairs of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign 
Relations of the Senate not later than 15 days before such waiver is to 
take effect that such waiver is vital to the national security 
interests of the United States or its partners and allies.

SEC. 5864. GENDER ANALYSIS IN FOREIGN TRAINING PROGRAMS.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the 
President should encourage the increased participation of women in 
existing programs funded by the United States Government that provide 
training to foreign nationals regarding law enforcement, the rule of 
law, or professional military education, and should expand and apply 
gender analysis to improve program design and implementation.
 (b) Gender Analysis of International Training Programs.--The 
Department of Defense, in coordination with the Department of State and 
other relevant departments, shall conduct a gender analysis of 
International Education and Training Programs offered to allied and 
partner forces to ensure the programs are equitable and address issues 
experienced by all participants.
 (c) Gender Analysis Training.--The Department of Defense, in 
coordination with the Department of State, shall develop and include 
gender analysis training to be included in the International Education 
and Training Programs at United States military schools and training 
institutions.
 (d) Briefing Required.--No later than two years after enactment of 
this act, the Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the Secretary 
of State, shall brief the appropriate congressional committees on the 
Department of Defense and Department of State's actions and progress in 
implementing the requirements under subsection (b) and subsection (c).
 (e) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Foreign Relations of the Senate.
 (f) Gender Analysis Defined.--In this section, the term ``gender 
analysis'' has the meaning given such term in section 3 of the Women's 
Entrepreneurship and Economic Empowerment Act (22 U.S.C. 2151-2).

SEC. 5865. REPORT ON COLUMBIAN MILITARY FORCES.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of State shall submit to Congress a 
report--
 (1) documenting knowledge and intelligence from 1980-2010 
 regarding--
 (A) Colombian military involvement in 
 assassinations and disappearances, and collaboration in 
 paramilitary offensives;
 (B) military conduct in the false positives 
 initiative from 2002-2008; and
 (C) any gross violations of human rights resulting 
 from the Colombian military's partnerships with private 
 companies for security; and
 (2) including an overview of the United States--Colombia 
 military partnership during 1980-2010, specifying periods of 
 deepened collaboration and coordination; and
 (3) a discussion of the specifics regarding increases in 
 military support, training, logistics, and weapons transfers on 
 the part of the United States during such time period and the 
 manner and extent of compliance on the part of Colunbian forces 
 with the requirements of section 620M of the Foreign Assistance 
 Act of 1961, section 362 of title 10, United States Code, and 
 other prohibitions on the provision of security assistance to 
 units of foreign forces on the basis of gross violations of 
 human rights.
 (b) Form.--The report required by subsection (a) shall be submitted 
in unclassified form but may include a classified annex.

SEC. 5866. FEDERAL CONTRACTING FOR PEACE AND SECURITY.

 (a) Purpose.--It is the policy of the Federal Government not to 
conduct business with companies that undermine United States national 
security interests by continuing to operate in the Russian Federation 
during its ongoing war of aggression against Ukraine.
 (b) Contracting Prohibition.--
 (1) Prohibition.--The head of an executive agency may not 
 enter into, extend, or renew a covered contract with a company 
 that continues to conduct business operations in territory 
 internationally recognized as the Russian Federation during the 
 covered period.
 (2) Exceptions.--
 (A) Good faith exemption.--The Office of Management 
 and Budget, in consultation with the General Services 
 Administration, may exempt a contractor from the 
 prohibition in paragraph (1) if the contractor has--
 (i) pursued and continues to pursue all 
 reasonable steps in demonstrating a good faith 
 effort to comply with the requirements of this 
 Act; and
 (ii) provided to the executive agency a 
 reasonable, written plan to achieve compliance 
 with such requirements.
 (B) Permissible operations.--The prohibition in 
 paragraph (1) shall not apply to business operations in 
 Russia authorized by a license issued by the Office of 
 Foreign Assets Control or the Bureau of Industry and 
 Security or is otherwise allowed to operate 
 notwithstanding the imposition of sanctions.
 (C) American diplomatic mission in russia.--The 
 prohibition in paragraph (1) shall not apply to 
 contracts related to the operation and maintenance of 
 the United States Government's consular offices and 
 diplomatic posts in Russia.
 (D) Individual contracts.--The prohibition under 
 paragraph (1) shall not apply to any contract that is 
 any of the following:
 (i) For the benefit, either directly or 
 through the efforts of regional allies, of the 
 country of Ukraine.
 (ii) For humanitarian purposes to meet 
 basic human needs.
 (3) National security and public interest waivers.--
 (A) In general.--The head of an executive agency is 
 authorized to waive the prohibition under paragraph (1) 
 with respect to a covered contract if the head of the 
 agency certifies in writing to the President that such 
 waiver is for the national security of the United 
 States or in the public interest of the United States, 
 and includes in such certification a justification for 
 the waiver and description of the contract to which the 
 waiver applies. The authority in this subparagraph may 
 not be delegated below the level of the senior 
 procurement executive of the agency.
 (B) Congressional notification.--The head of an 
 executive agency shall, not later than 7 days before 
 issuing a waiver described in subparagraph (A), submit 
 to the appropriate congressional committees the 
 certification described in such subparagraph.
 (4) Emergency rulemaking authority.--Not later than 60 days 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director of 
 the Office of Management and Budget, in consultation with the 
 Administrator of General Services and the Secretary of Defense, 
 shall promulgate regulations for agency implementation of this 
 Act using emergency rulemaking procedures while considering 
 public comment to the greatest extent practicable, that 
 includes the following:
 (A) A list of equipment, facilities, personnel, 
 products, services, or other items or activities, the 
 engagement with which would be considered business 
 operations, subject to the prohibition under paragraph 
 (1).
 (B) A requirement for a contractor or offeror to 
 represent whether such contractor or offeror uses any 
 of the items on the list described in subparagraph (A).
 (C) A description of the process for determining a 
 good faith exemption described under paragraph (2).
 (5) Definitions.--In this section:
 (A) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term 
 ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the 
 Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs 
 of the Senate and the Committee on Oversight and Reform 
 of the House of Representatives.
 (B) Business operations.--
 (i) In general.--Except as provided in 
 clauses (ii) and (iii), the term ``business 
 operations'' means engaging in commerce in any 
 form, including acquiring, developing, selling, 
 leasing, or operating equipment, facilities, 
 personnel, products, services, personal 
 property, real property, or any other apparatus 
 of business or commerce.
 (ii) Exceptions.--The term ``business 
 operations'' does not include any of the 
 following:
 (I) Action taken for the benefit of 
 the country of Ukraine.
 (II) Action serving humanitarian 
 purposes to meet basic human needs, 
 including through a hospital, school, 
 or non-profit organization.
 (III) The provision of products or 
 services for compliance with legal, 
 reporting, or other requirements of the 
 laws or standards of countries other 
 than the Russian Federation.
 (IV) Journalistic and publishing 
 activities, news reporting, or the 
 gathering and dissemination of 
 information, informational materials, 
 related services, or transactions 
 ordinarily incident to journalistic and 
 publishing activities.
 (iii) Exception for suspension or 
 termination actions.--The term ``business 
 operations'' does not include action taken to 
 support the suspension or termination of 
 business operations (as described in clause 
 (i)) for the duration of the covered period, 
 including--
 (I) an action to secure or divest 
 from facilities, property, or 
 equipment;
 (II) the provision of products or 
 services provided to reduce or 
 eliminate operations in territory 
 internationally recognized as the 
 Russian Federation or to comply with 
 sanctions relating to the Russian 
 Federation; and
 (III) activities that are incident 
 to liquidating, dissolving, or winding 
 down a subsidiary or legal entity in 
 Russia through which operations had 
 been conducted.
 (C) Covered contract.--The term ``covered 
 contract'' means a prime contract entered into by an 
 executive agency with a company conducting business 
 operations in territory internationally recognized as 
 the Russian Federation during the covered period.
 (D) Covered period.--The term ``covered period'' 
 means the period of time beginning 90 days after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act and ending on a date 
 that is determined by the Secretary of State based on 
 steps taken by the Russian Federation to restore the 
 safety, sovereignty, and condition of the country of 
 Ukraine, or 10 years after the date of the enactment of 
 this Act, whichever is sooner.
 (E) Executive agency.--The term ``executive 
 agency'' has the meaning given the term in section 133 
 of title 41, United States Code.

SEC. 5867. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE CYBER AND DIGITAL SERVICE ACADEMY.

 (a) Establishment.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense, in consultation 
 with the Secretary of Homeland Security and the Director of the 
 Office of Personnel Management, shall establish a program to 
 provide financial support for pursuit of programs of education 
 at institutions of higher education that have been designated 
 as a Center of Academic Excellence in Cyber Education as 
 defined in section 2200e of title 10, United States Code, in 
 covered disciplines.
 (2) Designation.--The program established under paragraph 
 (1) shall be known as the ``Department of Defense Cyber and 
 Digital Service Academy'' (in this section the ``Program'').
 (3) Covered disciplines.--For purposes of the Program, a 
 covered discipline is a discipline that the Secretary of 
 Defense determines is critically needed and is cyber- or 
 digital technology-related, including the following:
 (A) Cyber-related arts and sciences.
 (B) Cyber-related engineering.
 (C) Cyber-related law and policy.
 (D) Applied analysts-related sciences, data 
 management, and digital engineering, including 
 artificial intelligence and machine learning.
 (E) Such other disciplines relating to cyber, 
 cybersecurity, digital technology, or supporting 
 functions as the Secretary of Defense considers 
 appropriate.
 (b) Program Description and Components.--The Program shall--
 (1) provide scholarships through institutions of higher 
 education described in subsection (a)(1) to students who are 
 enrolled in programs of education at such institutions leading 
 to degrees or specialized program certifications in covered 
 disciplines;
 (2) prioritize the placement of scholarship recipients 
 fulfilling the post-award employment obligation under this 
 section; and
 (3) coordinate with the Cyber Scholarship Program as 
 authorized in chapter 112 of title 10, United States Code.
 (c) Scholarship Amounts.--
 (1) Amount of assistance.--Each scholarship under the 
 Program shall be in such amount as the Secretary determines is 
 necessary to pay all educational expenses incurred by that 
 person, including tuition, fees, cost of books, laboratory 
 expenses, and expenses of room and board, for the pursuit of 
 the program of education for which the assistance is provided 
 under the Program. The Secretary shall ensure that expenses 
 paid are limited to those educational expenses normally 
 incurred by students at the institution of higher education 
 involved.
 (2) Support for internship activities.--The financial 
 assistance for a person under this section may also be provided 
 to support internship activities of the person in the 
 Department of Defense in periods between the academic years 
 leading to the degree for which assistance is provided the 
 person under the Program.
 (3) Period of support.--Each scholarship under the Program 
 shall be for not more than 5 years.
 (4) Additional stipend.--Students demonstrating financial 
 need, as determined by the Secretary, may be provided with an 
 additional stipend under the Program.
 (d) Post-award Employment Obligations.--Each scholarship recipient, 
as a condition of receiving a scholarship under the Program, shall 
enter into an agreement under which the recipient agrees to work for a 
period equal to the length of the scholarship, following receipt of the 
student's degree or specialized program certification, in the cyber- 
and digital technology-related missions of the Department, in 
accordance with the terms and conditions specified by the Secretary in 
regulations the Secretary shall promulgate to carry out this 
subsection.
 (e) Hiring Authority.--In carrying out this section, specifically 
with respect to enforcing the obligations and conditions of employment 
under subsection (d), the Secretary may use an authority otherwise 
available to the Secretary for the recruitment, employment, and 
retention of civilian personnel within the Department, including 
authority under section 1588f of title 10, United States Code.
 (f) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a scholarship under 
this section, an individual shall--
 (1) be a citizen or lawful permanent resident of the United 
 States;
 (2) demonstrate a commitment to a career in improving the 
 security of information technology;
 (3) have demonstrated a high level of competency in 
 relevant knowledge, skills, and abilities, as defined by the 
 national cybersecurity awareness and education program under 
 section 303 of the Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2014 (15 
 U.S.C. 7443);
 (4) be a full-time student, or have been accepted as a 
 full-time student, in a program leading to a degree or 
 specialized program certification in a covered discipline at an 
 institution of higher education;
 (5) enter into an agreement accepting and acknowledging the 
 post award employment obligations, pursuant to section (d);
 (6) accept and acknowledge the conditions of support under 
 section (g); and
 (7) accept all terms and conditions of a scholarship under 
 this section and meet such other requirements for a scholarship 
 as determined by the Secretary.
 (g) Conditions of Support.--
 (1) In general.--As a condition of receiving a scholarship 
 under this section, a recipient shall agree to provide the 
 Office of Personnel Management (in coordination with the 
 Department of Defense) and the institutions of higher education 
 described in subsection (a)(1) with annual verifiable 
 documentation of post-award employment and up-to-date contact 
 information.
 (2) Terms.--A scholarship recipient under the Program shall 
 be liable to the United States as provided in subsection (i) if 
 the individual--
 (A) fails to maintain an acceptable level of 
 academic standing at the applicable institution of 
 higher education, as determined by the Secretary;
 (B) is dismissed from the applicable institution of 
 higher education for disciplinary reasons;
 (C) withdraws from the eligible degree program 
 before completing the Program;
 (D) declares that the individual does not intend to 
 fulfill the post-award employment obligation under this 
 section;
 (E) fails to maintain or fulfill any of the post-
 graduation or post-award obligations or requirements of 
 the individual; or
 (F) fails to fulfill the requirements of paragraph 
 (1).
 (h) Monitoring Compliance.--As a condition of participating in the 
Program, an institution of higher education described in subsection 
(a)(1) shall--
 (1) enter into an agreement with the Secretary to monitor 
 the compliance of scholarship recipients with respect to their 
 post-award employment obligations; and
 (2) provide to the Secretary and the Director of the Office 
 of Personnel Management, on an annual basis, the post-award 
 employment documentation required under subsection (g)(1) for 
 scholarship recipients through the completion of their post-
 award employment obligations.
 (i) Amount of Repayment.--
 (1) Less than 1 year of service.--If a circumstance 
 described in subsection (g)(2) occurs before the completion of 
 1 year of a post-award employment obligation under the Program, 
 the total amount of scholarship awards received by the 
 individual under the Program shall be considered a debt to the 
 Government and repaid in its entirety.
 (2) 1 or more years of service.--If a circumstance 
 described in subparagraph (D) or (E) of subsection (g)(2) 
 occurs after the completion of 1 or more years of a post-award 
 employment obligation under the Program, the total amount of 
 scholarship awards received by the individual under the 
 Program, reduced by the ratio of the number of years of service 
 completed divided by the number of years of service required, 
 shall be considered a debt to the Government and repaid in 
 accordance with subsection (j).
 (j) Repayments.--A debt described in subsection (i) shall be 
subject to repayment, together with interest thereon accruing from the 
date of the scholarship award, in accordance with terms and conditions 
specified by the Secretary in regulations promulgated to carry out this 
subsection.
 (k) Collection of Repayment.--
 (1) In general.--In the event that a scholarship recipient 
 is required to repay the scholarship award under the Program, 
 the institution of higher education providing the scholarship 
 shall--
 (A) determine the repayment amounts and notify the 
 recipient, the Secretary, and the Director of the 
 Office of Personnel Management of the amounts owed; and
 (B) collect the repayment amounts within a period 
 of time as determined by the Secretary.
 (2) Returned to treasury.--Except as provided in paragraph 
 (3), any repayment under this subsection shall be returned to 
 the Treasury of the United States.
 (3) Retain percentage.--An institution of higher education 
 may retain a percentage of any repayment the institution 
 collects under this subsection to defray administrative costs 
 associated with the collection. The Secretary shall establish a 
 single, fixed percentage that will apply to all eligible 
 entities.
 (l) Public Information.--
 (1) Evaluation.--The Secretary, in coordination with the 
 Director of the Office of Personnel Management, shall 
 periodically evaluate and make public, in a manner that 
 protects the personally identifiable information of scholarship 
 recipients, information on the success of recruiting 
 individuals for scholarships under the Program and on hiring 
 and retaining those individuals in the Department of Defense 
 workforce, including information on--
 (A) placement rates;
 (B) where students are placed, including job titles 
 and descriptions;
 (C) salary ranges for students not released from 
 obligations under this section;
 (D) how long after graduation students are placed;
 (E) how long students stay in the positions they 
 enter upon graduation;
 (F) how many students are released from 
 obligations; and
 (G) what, if any, remedial training is required.
 (2) Reports.--The Secretary, in coordination with the 
 Office of Personnel Management, shall submit, not less 
 frequently than once every two years, to Congress a report, 
 including--
 (A) the results of the evaluation under paragraph 
 (1);
 (B) the disparity in any reporting between 
 scholarship recipients and their respective 
 institutions of higher education; and
 (C) any recent statistics regarding the size, 
 composition, and educational requirements of the 
 relevant Department of Defense workforce.
 (3) Resources.--The Secretary, in coordination with the 
 Director of the Office of Personnel Management, shall provide 
 consolidated and user-friendly online resources for prospective 
 scholarship recipients, including, to the extent practicable--
 (A) searchable, up-to-date, and accurate 
 information about participating institutions of higher 
 education and job opportunities related to the field of 
 cybersecurity; and
 (B) a modernized description of cybersecurity 
 careers.
 (m) Allocation of Funding.--
 (1) In general.--Not less than 50 percent of the amount 
 available for financial assistance under this section for a 
 fiscal year shall be available only for providing financial 
 assistance for the pursuit of programs of education referred to 
 in subsection (b)(1) at institutions of higher education that 
 have established, improved, or are administering programs of 
 education in cyber disciplines under the grant program 
 established in section 2200b of title 10, United States Code, 
 as determined by the Secretary of Defense.
 (2) Associates degrees.--Not less than five percent of the 
 amount available for financial assistance under this section 
 for a fiscal year shall be available for providing financial 
 assistance for the pursuit of an associate degree at an 
 institution described in paragraph (1).
 (n) Board of Directors.--In order to help identify workforce needs 
and trends relevant to the Program, the Secretary may establish a board 
of directors for the Program that consists of representatives of 
Federal departments and agencies.
 (o) Commencement of Program.--The Secretary shall commence the 
Program as early as practicable, with the first scholarships awarded 
under the Program for the academic year beginning not later than the 
Fall semester of 2024.

SEC. 5868. DEMOCRACY DISRUPTION IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND AFRICA.

 (a) In General.-- Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, and every year thereafter for 5 fiscal years, 
the Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary of Defense 
and Director of National Intelligence, shall submit to the appropriate 
congressional committees a report describing actions by relevant 
foreign governments that act to undermine democracy in the United 
States Central Command or United States Africa Command area of 
responsibility, including through the disruption of nascent democratic 
movements, transnational repression, or bolstering authoritarian 
governments in countries other than their own.
 (b) Matters to Be Included.--The report required by subsection (a) 
shall include the following:
 (1) An assessment of whether and the extent to which 
 relevant governments provide financial or other economic 
 support, or technical assistance, to authoritarian leaders with 
 the purpose of supporting--
 (A) the short, medium, and long-term viability of 
 authoritarians as head of states; or
 (B) heads of states who have--
 (i) conducted a coup d'etat or other 
 seizure of power in which the military played a 
 decisive role;
 (ii) undermined the independence of the 
 judiciary;
 (iii) facilitated the unconstitutional 
 removal of a portion or entirety of a 
 democratically elected government or 
 legislature; or
 (iv) removed term limits or consolidated 
 executive authority through the unilateral 
 cancellation or revision of a country's 
 constitution.
 (2) A determination of whether relevant governments either 
 directly or through third parties, throughout the United States 
 Central Command or United States Africa Command area of 
 responsibility--
 (A) undermine electoral systems or act to discredit 
 or overturn the results of democratic elections in 
 other countries;
 (B) assist authoritarian governments in 
 intimidating or harassing members of civil society or 
 in limiting the ability of members of civil society to 
 operate without fear of criminal charges or detention; 
 or
 (C) violate international principles of 
 nonrefoulment and the rights of asylum seekers.
 (3) A list of armed groups, including militias, private 
 military corporations, mercenaries, or paramilitaries, that 
 receive monetary, military, or other material support from 
 relevant foreign governments.
 (4) An assessment of whether actors in the list in 
 paragraph (3) have committed gross violations of international 
 recognized human rights.
 (5) A detailed analysis of relevant foreign governments' 
 diplomatic support, whether bilaterally or in international 
 organizations, for military or civilian leaders who meet 
 criteria in paragraph (1)(B).
 (6) An assessment of whether relevant foreign governments 
 engage in a consistent pattern of acts of transnational 
 repression and intimidation or harassment directed against 
 individuals in the United States, including--
 (A) funding, either directly or through third 
 parties, the use of inauthentic social media accounts 
 which target specific individuals in an attempt to 
 silence, intimidate, or harass nonviolent critics or 
 dissenters;
 (B) targeted imprisonment of family members on 
 politically motivated charges; or
 (C) any other form of intimidation or harassment.
 (c) Form.--The report required by subsection (a) shall be submitted 
in unclassified form, but the portions of the report described in 
section (b) may contain a classified annex, so long as such annex is 
provided separately from the unclassified report.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section--
 (1) the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Committee 
 on Armed Services, and the Permanent Select Committee 
 on Intelligence of the House of Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Foreign Relations, the 
 Committee on Armed Services, and the Select Committee 
 on Intelligence of the Senate; and
 (2) the term ``relevant foreign government'' means the 
 government of a country in the United States Central Command or 
 United States Africa Command area of responsibility that--
 (A) received United States security assistance, 
 including under authorities of title 10, United States 
 Code, during the previous 10 fiscal years; or
 (B) hosts United States military personnel other 
 than those permanently assigned to a United States 
 Embassy in their respective countries.

SEC. 5869. FEASIBILITY STUDY ON UNITED STATES SUPPORT FOR AND 
 PARTICIPATION IN THE INTERNATIONAL COUNTERTERRORISM 
 ACADEMY IN COTE D'IVOIRE.

 (a) Statement of Policy.--It is the policy of the United States to 
partner with West African governments where possible to mitigate and 
counter growing regional insecurity resulting from the spread of armed 
conflict and terrorism, including by providing assistance to train, 
equip, and mentor West African security services to counter threats to 
regional and national security through a whole-of-government approach.
 (b) Feasibility Study.--Not later than 90 days after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State, in consultation with 
the Secretary of Defense, shall conduct a feasibility study regarding 
the provision of U.S. assistance for infrastructure, training, 
equipment, and other forms of support to institutionalize the 
International Counterterrorism Academy (Academie Internationale de 
Lutte Contre le Terrorisme or AILCT) in Jacqueville, Cote D'Ivoire 
that--
 (1) Provides a legal analysis of existing authorities to 
 provide U.S. foreign assistance dedicated to the development 
 and establishment of AILCT programs, initiatives, and 
 infrastructure for the purposes of training, equipping, and 
 mentoring eligible West African security services bilaterally 
 or in coordination with partners and allies;
 (2) Identifies opportunities for the United States to 
 leverage and support the AILCT facility to pursue national 
 security interests in West Africa, the Sahel, Sub-Saharan 
 Africa, and the strategic Atlantic Ocean coastal and maritime 
 environments, including through training and research 
 activities, infrastructure development, combatting 
 transnational terrorist and organized crime threats, and 
 countering foreign malign influence throughout the region;
 (3) Assesses any planned and pledged contributions from 
 other countries to ensure appropriate sustainment of the 
 facilities and burden sharing.
 (c) Forms.--The feasibility study required under subsection (b) 
shall be submitted in unclassified form, but may contain a classified 
annex.
 (d) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and 
 the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives;
 (2) the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and of 
 the House of Representatives; and
 (3) the Committees on Appropriations of the Senate and of 
 the House of Representatives.

SEC. 5870. MEMORIAL FOR THOSE WHO LOST THEIR LIVES IN THE ATTACK ON 
 HAMID KARZAI INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT ON AUGUST 26, 2021.

 Section 1087 of National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
2022 (40 U.S.C. 8903 note) is amended by striking ``The Secretary of 
Defense may'' and inserting ``The Secretary of Defense shall, not later 
than 1 year after the date of enactment of the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023,''.

SEC. 5871. REPORTS ON SUBSTANCE ABUSE IN THE ARMED FORCES.

 (a) Inspector General of the Department of Defense.--Not later than 
180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of 
the Army, the Secretary of the Navy, the Secretary of the Air Force, 
and the Commandant of the Marine Corp shall each submit to the 
Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and of the House of 
Representatives a report on substance abuse disorder treatment concerns 
related to service members and their dependents.
 (b) Comptroller General of the United States.--Not later than 180 
days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the 
Army, the Secretary of the Navy, the Secretary of the Air Force, and 
the Commandant of the Marine Corp shall submit to Congress a report 
regarding the use of substance abuse disorder treatment programs 
located at or around each installation. The report shall detail the 
number of service members and dependents that are referred to treatment 
programs, either residential or outpatient, and either internal or 
contracted, the absence of treatment capabilities within an 
installation or grouping of military installations, and the costs 
associated with sending service members or their dependents away from 
the immediate area for substance use disorder treatment. The report 
shall also set forth how the individual branches of the Armed Forces 
are incorporating substance abuse disorder treatment into mental health 
services both internal and contracted.

SEC. 5872. GAO REPORT ON CIVILIAN SUPPORT POSITIONS AT REMOTE MILITARY 
 INSTALLATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Comptroller General shall assess and submit a report 
to the Secretary of Defense on the following:
 (1) The average number of vacancies for civilian support 
 services positions at remote or isolated military installations 
 in comparison to vacancies for such positions at other military 
 installations. In carrying out this paragraph, the Comptroller 
 General shall account for the differences in military 
 population size.
 (2) The average number of days required to fill such a 
 vacancy at a remote and isolated military installation in 
 comparison to filling a vacancy of a position with the same 
 duties (to the greatest extent practicable) at such other 
 installations.
 (3) Any recommendations on additional hiring incentives for 
 civilian support services positions described in subsection 
 (b)(1)(A) at a remote or isolated installations, and any 
 recommendations on ways to ensure that such positions described 
 in subsection (b)(1)(B) are able to effectively staff positions 
 in order to meet the mission of their applicable military 
 installation.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section--
 (1) the term ``civilian support services positions'' 
 means--
 (A) any position within the civil service (as that 
 term is defined in section 2101 of title 5, United 
 States Code), including any nonappropriated fund (NAF) 
 position; and
 (B) any Federal contractor (or subcontractor at any 
 tier); and
 (2) the term ``military installation'' has the meaning 
 given that term in section 2801 of title 10, United States 
 Code.

SEC. 5873. GAO STUDY ON FOREIGN SERVICE INSTITUTE'S SCHOOL OF LANGUAGE 
 STUDIES.

 (a) In General.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall 
conduct a study on whether the Foreign Service Institute's School of 
Language Studies curriculum and instruction effectively prepares United 
States Government employees to advance United States diplomatic and 
national security priorities abroad.
 (b) Matters to Be Included.--The report required by subsection (a) 
shall include--
 (1) an analysis of the teaching methods used at the Foreign 
 Service Institute's School of Language Studies;
 (2) a comparative analysis on the benefits of language 
 proficiency compared to practical job oriented language 
 learning;
 (3) an analysis of whether the testing regiment at the 
 School of Language Studies is an effective measure of ability 
 to communicate and carry out an employee's duties abroad; and
 (4) an analysis of qualifications for training specialists 
 and language and culture instructors at the School of Language 
 Studies.

SEC. 5874. REPORT ON WAIVERS UNDER SECTION 907 OF THE FREEDOM FOR 
 RUSSIA AND EMERGING EURASIAN DEMOCRACIES AND OPEN MARKETS 
 SUPPORT ACT OF 1992.

 (a) Report Required.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State, in coordination with the 
Secretary of Defense, shall submit a report to the appropriate 
congressional committees on United States security assistance provided 
to the Government of Azerbaijan pursuant to a waiver under section 907 
of the FREEDOM Support Act (22 U.S.C. 5812 note).
 (b) Elements.--The report under subsection (a) shall address the 
following:
 (1) Documentation of the Department of State's 
 consideration of all section 907 waiver requirements during the 
 5-year period ending on the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) Further program-level detail and end-use monitoring 
 reports of security assistance provided to the Government of 
 Azerbaijan under a section 907 waiver during such 5-year 
 period.
 (3) The impact of United States security assistance 
 provided to Azerbaijan on the negotiation of a peaceful 
 settlement between Armenia and Azerbaijan over all disputed 
 regions during such 5-year period.
 (4) The impact of United States security assistance 
 provided to Azerbaijan on the military balance between 
 Azerbaijan and Armenia during such 5-year period.
 (5) An assessment of Azerbaijan's use of offensive force 
 against Armenia or violations of Armenian sovereign territory 
 from November 11, 2020, to the date of the enactment of this 
 Act.
 (c) Briefing.--The Secretary of State, in coordination with the 
Secretary of Defense, shall brief the appropriate congressional 
committees not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of 
this Act on the contents of the report required under subsection (a).
 (d) Appropriate Congressional Committees.--In this section, the 
term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on 
 Foreign Relations of the Senate.

SEC. 5875. AMENDMENTS TO THE UKRAINE FREEDOM SUPPORT ACT OF 2014.

 The Ukraine Freedom Support Act of 2014 (22 U.S.C. 8921 et seq.) is 
amended--
 (1) by redesignating section 11 as section 13; and
 (2) by inserting after section 10 the following new 
 sections:

``SEC. 11. WORKING GROUP ON SEMICONDUCTOR SUPPLY DISRUPTIONS.

 ``(a) In General.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the 
enactment of this section, the President shall establish an interagency 
working group to address semiconductor supply chain issues caused by 
Russia's illegal and unprovoked attack on Ukraine.
 ``(b) Membership.--The interagency working group established 
pursuant to subsection (a) shall be comprised of the head, or designee 
of the head, of each of the following:
 ``(1) The Department of State.
 ``(2) The Department of Defense.
 ``(3) The Department of Commerce.
 ``(4) The Department of the Treasury.
 ``(5) The Office of the United States Trade Representative.
 ``(6) The Department of Interior.
 ``(7) The Department of Energy.
 ``(8) The Department of Homeland Security.
 ``(9) The Department of Labor.
 ``(10) Any other Federal department or agency the President 
 determines appropriate.
 ``(c) Chair.--The Secretary of State shall serve as the chair of 
the working group established pursuant to subsection (a).

``SEC. 12. REPORTS ON SEMICONDUCTOR SUPPLY CHAIN DISRUPTIONS.

 ``(a) Report on Impact of Russia's Invasion of Ukraine.--Not later 
than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this section, the 
Secretary of State shall submit to the committees listed in subsection 
(b) a report of the interagency working group that--
 ``(1) reviews and analyzes--
 ``(A) the impact of Russia's unprovoked attack on 
 Ukraine on the supply of palladium, neon gas, helium, 
 and hexafluorobutadiene (C4F6); and
 ``(B) the impact, if any, on supply chains and the 
 global economy;
 ``(2) recounts diplomatic efforts by the United States to 
 work with other countries that mine, synthesize, or purify 
 palladium, neon gas, helium, or hexafluorobutadiene (C4F6);
 ``(3) quantifies the actions resulting from these efforts 
 to diversify sources of supply of these items;
 ``(4) sets forth steps the United States has taken to 
 bolster its production or secure supply of palladium or other 
 compounds and elements listed in paragraph (1)(A);
 ``(5) lists any other important elements, compounds, or 
 products in the semiconductor supply chain that have been 
 affected by Russia's illegal attack on Ukraine; and
 ``(6) recommends any potential legislative steps that could 
 be taken by Congress to further bolster the supply of elements, 
 compounds, or products for the semiconductor supply chain that 
 have been curtailed as a result of Russia's actions.
 ``(b) Committees Listed.--The committees listed in this subsection 
are--
 ``(1) the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Committee on 
 Armed Services, and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the 
 House of Representatives; and
 ``(2) the Committee on Foreign Relations, the Committee on 
 Armed Services, and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate.
 ``(c) Annual Report on Potential Future Shocks to Semiconductor 
Supply Chains.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date 
 of the enactment of this section, and annually thereafter for 5 
 years, the Secretary of State shall submit to the Committee on 
 Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives and the 
 Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate a report of the 
 interagency working group that--
 ``(A) outlines and plans for the most likely future 
 geopolitical developments that could severely disrupt 
 global semiconductor supply chains in ways that could 
 harm the national security or economic interests of the 
 United States;
 ``(B) forecasts the various potential impacts on 
 the global supply chain for semiconductors, and 
 products that use semiconductors, from the developments 
 outlined pursuant to subparagraph (A), as well as the 
 following contingencies--
 ``(i) an invasion of Taiwan or geopolitical 
 instability or conflict in East Asia;
 ``(ii) a broader war or geopolitical 
 instability in Europe;
 ``(iii) strategic competitors dominating 
 parts of the supply chain and leveraging that 
 dominance coercively;
 ``(iv) a future international health 
 crisis; and
 ``(v) natural disasters or shortages of 
 natural resources and raw materials;
 ``(C) describes the kind of continency plans that 
 would be needed for the safe evacuation of individuals 
 with deep scientific and technical knowledge of 
 semiconductors and their supply chain from areas under 
 risk from conflict or natural disaster; and
 ``(D) evaluates the current technical and supply 
 chain work force expertise within the Federal 
 government to carry out these assessments.''.

SEC. 5876. GAO STUDY ON END USE MONITORING.

 Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit the 
congressional defense committees, the Committee on Foreign Affairs of 
the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Foreign Relations of 
the Senate a review of the implementation by the Department of Defense 
and the Department of State of end-use monitoring, including--
 (1) how well end-use monitoring deters misuse or 
 unauthorized use of equipment;
 (2) how the Departments identify persistent geographic 
 areas of concern for closer monitoring; and
 (3) how the Departments identify trends, learn from those 
 trends, and implement best practices.

SEC. 5877. SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING THE LIFE AND LEGACY OF SENATOR 
 JOSEPH MAXWELL CLELAND.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) Joseph Maxwell Cleland was born August 24, 1942, in 
 Atlanta, Georgia, the child of Juanita Kesler Cleland and 
 Joseph Hughie Cleland, a World War II veteran, and grew up in 
 Lithonia, Georgia.
 (2) Joseph Maxwell Cleland graduated from Stetson 
 University in Florida in 1964, and received his Master's Degree 
 in history from Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia.
 (3) Following his graduation from Stetson University, 
 Joseph Maxwell Cleland received a Second Lieutenant's 
 Commission in the Army through its Reserve Officers' Training 
 Corps program.
 (4) Joseph Maxwell Cleland volunteered for duty in the 
 Vietnam War in 1967, serving with the 1st Cavalry Division.
 (5) On April 8, 1968, during combat at the mountain base at 
 Khe Sanh, Joseph Maxwell Cleland was gravely injured by the 
 blast of a grenade, eventually losing both his legs and right 
 arm.
 (6) Joseph Maxwell Cleland was awarded the Bronze Star for 
 meritorious service and the Silver Star for gallantry in 
 action.
 (7) In 1970, Joseph Maxwell Cleland was elected to the 
 Georgia Senate as the youngest member and the only Vietnam 
 veteran, where he served until 1975.
 (8) As a Georgia State Senator, Joseph Maxwell Cleland 
 authored and advanced legislation to ensure access to public 
 facilities in Georgia for elderly and handicapped individuals.
 (9) In 1976, Joseph Maxwell Cleland began serving as a 
 staffer on the Committee on Veterans Affairs of the Senate.
 (10) In 1977, Joseph Maxwell Cleland was appointed by 
 President Jimmy Carter to lead the Veterans Administration.
 (11) He was the youngest Administrator of the Veterans 
 Administration ever and the first Vietnam veteran to head the 
 agency.
 (12) He served as a champion for veterans and led the 
 Veterans Administration to recognize, and begin to treat, post-
 traumatic stress disorder in veterans suffering the invisible 
 wounds of war.
 (13) Joseph Maxwell Cleland was elected in 1982 as 
 Georgia's Secretary of State, the youngest individual to hold 
 the office, and served in that position for 14 years.
 (14) in 1996, Joseph Maxwell Cleland was elected to the 
 United States Senate representing Georgia.
 (15) As a member of the Committee on Armed Services, Joseph 
 Maxwell Cleland advocated for Georgia's military bases, 
 servicemembers, and veterans, including by championing key 
 personnel issues, playing a critical role in the effort to 
 allow servicemembers to pass their GI Bill education benefits 
 to their children, and establishing a new veterans cemetery in 
 Canton, Georgia.
 (16) In 2002, Joseph Maxwell Cleland was appointed to the 
 9/11 Commission.
 (17) In 2003, Joseph Maxwell Cleland was appointed by 
 President George W. Bush to the Board of Directors for the 
 Export-Import Bank of the United States, where he served until 
 2007.
 (18) In 2009, Joseph Maxwell Cleland was appointed by 
 President Barack Obama as Secretary of the American Battle 
 Monuments Commission overseeing United States military 
 cemeteries and monuments overseas, where he served until 2017.
 (19) Joseph Maxwell Cleland authored 3 books: Strong at the 
 Broken Places, Going for the Max: 12 Principles for Living Life 
 to the Fullest, and Heart of a Patriot.
 (20) Joseph Maxwell Cleland received numerous honors and 
 awards over the course of his long and distinguished career.
 (21) Joseph Maxwell Cleland was a patriot, veteran, and 
 lifelong civil servant who proudly served Georgia, the United 
 States, and all veterans and servicemembers of the United 
 States.
 (22) On November 9, 2021, at the age of 79, Joseph Maxwell 
 Cleland died, leaving behind a legacy of service, sacrifice, 
 and joy.
 (b) Death of the Honorable Joseph Maxwell Cleland.--Congress has 
heard with profound sorrow of the death of the Honorable Joseph Maxwell 
Cleland, who served--
 (1) with courage and sacrifice in combat in the Vietnam 
 War;
 (2) with unwavering dedication to Georgia as a State 
 Senator, Secretary of State, and Senator; and
 (3) with honorable service to the United States and 
 veterans of the United States through his lifetime of public 
 service and tenure as Administrator of the Veterans 
 Administration.

SEC. 5878. REPEAL OF 1991 AUTHORIZATION FOR USE OF MILITARY FORCE 
 AGAINST IRAQ RESOLUTION.

 The Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution 
(Public Law 102-1; 50 U.S.C. 1541 note) is repealed.

SEC. 5879. ONDCP SUPPLEMENTAL STRATEGIES.

 Section 706(h) of the Office of National Drug Control Policy 
Reauthorization Act of 1998 (21 U.S.C. 1705(h)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (5), by striking ``; and'' and inserting a 
 semicolon;
 (2) in paragraph (6), by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(7) develops performance measures and targets for the 
 National Drug Control Strategy for supplemental strategies (the 
 Southwest Border, Northern Border, and Caribbean Border 
 Counternarcotics Strategies) to effectively evaluate region-
 specific goals, to the extent the performance measurement 
 system does not adequately measure the effectiveness of the 
 strategies, as determined by the Director, such strategies may 
 evaluate interdiction efforts at and between ports of entry, 
 interdiction technology, intelligence sharing, diplomacy, and 
 other appropriate metrics, specific to each supplemental 
 strategies region, as determined by the Director.''.

SEC. 5880. SUPPORT FOR AFGHANS APPLYING FOR STUDENT VISAS.

 (a) Exception With Respect to Residence.--To be eligible as a 
nonimmigrant described in section 101(a)(15)(F) of the Immigration and 
Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(15)(F)), a national of Afghanistan or 
a person with no nationality who last habitually resided in Afghanistan 
shall meet all requirements for such nonimmigrant status except they 
shall not need to demonstrate residence in Afghanistan or an intention 
not to abandon such residence.
 (b) Applicability.--
 (1) In general.--The exception under subsection (a) shall 
 apply beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act and 
 ending on the date that is two years after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.
 (2) Extension.--The Secretary of Homeland Security, in 
 consultation with the Secretary of State, shall periodically 
 review the country conditions in Afghanistan and may renew the 
 exception under subsection (a) in 18 month increments based on 
 such conditions.

SEC. 5881. IMMIGRATION AGE-OUT PROTECTIONS.

 (a) Age-out Protections for Immigrants.--
 (1) In general.--Section 101(b) of the Immigration and 
 Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(b)) is amended by adding at the 
 end the following:
 ``(6) A determination of whether an alien is a child shall 
 be made as follows:
 ``(A) For purposes of a petition under section 204 
 and a subsequent application for an immigrant visa or 
 adjustment of status, such determination shall be made 
 using the age of the alien on the date that is the 
 priority date for the principal beneficiary and all 
 derivative beneficiaries under section 203(h).
 ``(B) For purposes of a petition under section 
 214(d) and a subsequent application for adjustment of 
 status under section 245(d), such determination shall 
 be made using the age of the alien on the date on which 
 the petition is filed with the Secretary of Homeland 
 Security.
 ``(C) In the case of a petition under section 204 
 filed for an alien's classification as a married son or 
 daughter of a United States citizen under section 
 203(a)(3), if the petition is later converted, due to 
 the legal termination of the alien's marriage, to a 
 petition to classify the alien as an immediate relative 
 under section 201(b)(2)(A)(i) or as an unmarried son or 
 daughter of a United States citizen under section 
 203(a)(1), the determination of the alien's age shall 
 be made using the age of the alien on the date of the 
 termination of the marriage.
 ``(D) For an alien who was in status as a dependent 
 child of a nonimmigrant pursuant to an approved 
 employment-based petition under section 214 or an 
 approved application under section 101(a)(15)(E) for an 
 aggregate period of eight years prior to the age of 21, 
 notwithstanding subparagraphs (A) through (C), the 
 alien's age shall be based on the date that such 
 initial nonimmigrant employment-based petition or 
 application was filed.
 ``(E) For an alien who has not sought to acquire 
 status of an alien lawfully admitted for permanent 
 residence within two years of an immigrant visa number 
 becoming available to such alien, the alien's age shall 
 be their biological age unless the failure to seek to 
 acquire status was due to extraordinary circumstances.
 ``(7) An alien who has reached 21 years of age and has been 
 admitted under section 203(d) as a lawful permanent resident on 
 a conditional basis as the child of an alien lawfully admitted 
 for permanent residence under section 203(b)(5), whose lawful 
 permanent resident status on a conditional basis is terminated 
 under section 216A or section 203(b)(5)(M), shall continue to 
 be considered a child of the principal alien for the purpose of 
 a subsequent immigrant petition by such alien under section 
 203(b)(5) if the alien remains unmarried and the subsequent 
 petition is filed by the principal alien not later than 1 year 
 after the termination of conditional lawful permanent resident 
 status. No alien shall be considered a child under this 
 paragraph with respect to more than 1 petition filed after the 
 alien reaches 21 years of age.''.
 (2) Technical and conforming amendment.--Section 201 of the 
 Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1151) is amended by 
 striking subsection (f).
 (3) Effective date.--
 (A) In general.--The amendments made by this 
 section shall be effective as if included in the Child 
 Status Protection Act (Public Law 107-208).
 (B) Motion to reopen or reconsider.--
 (i) In general.--A motion to reopen or 
 reconsider the denial of a petition or 
 application described in paragraph (6) of 
 section 101(b), as amended in paragraph (1), 
 may be granted if--
 (I) such petition or application 
 would have been approved if the 
 amendments described in such paragraph 
 had been in effect at the time of 
 adjudication of the petition or 
 application;
 (II) the individual seeking relief 
 pursuant to such motion was in the 
 United States at the time the 
 underlying petition or application was 
 filed; and
 (III) such motion is filed with the 
 Secretary of Homeland Security or the 
 Attorney General not later than the 
 date that is 2 years after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act.
 (ii) Numerical limitations.--
 Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an 
 individual granted relief pursuant to such 
 motion to reopen or reconsider shall be exempt 
 from numerical limitations in sections 201, 
 202, and 203 of the Immigration and Nationality 
 Act (8 U.S.C. 1151, 1152, and 1153).
 (b) Age Out Protections for Nonimmigrant Dependent Children.--
Section 214 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1184) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(s)(1) Except as described in paragraph (2), the determination of 
whether an alien who is the derivative beneficiary of a properly filed 
pending or approved immigrant petition under section 204 is eligible to 
be a dependent child of a nonimmigrant admitted pursuant to an approved 
employer petition under this section or approved application under 
section 101(a)(15)(E), shall be based on whether the alien is 
determined to be a child under section 101(b)(6) of the Immigration and 
Nationality Act.
 ``(2) If otherwise eligible, an alien who is determined to be a 
child pursuant to section 101(b)(6)(D) may change status to or extend 
status as a dependent child of a nonimmigrant with an approved 
employment based petition under this section or an approved application 
under section 101(a)(15)(E), notwithstanding such alien's marital 
status.
 ``(3) An alien who is admitted to the United States as a dependent 
child of a nonimmigrant who is described in this section is authorized 
to engage in employment in the United States incident to status.''.
 (c) Priority Date Retention.--Section 203(h) of the Immigration and 
Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1153(h)) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(h) Retention of Priority Dates.--
 ``(1) Priority date.--The priority date for an alien shall 
 be the date that is the earliest of--
 ``(A) the date that a petition under section 204 is 
 filed with the Secretary of Homeland Security (or the 
 Secretary of State, if applicable); or
 ``(B) the date on which a labor certification is 
 filed with the Secretary of Labor.
 ``(2) Retention.--The principal beneficiary and all 
 derivative beneficiaries shall retain the priority date 
 associated with the earliest of any approved petition or labor 
 certification and such priority date shall be applicable to any 
 subsequently approved petition.''.

SEC. 5882. MEDICARE IMPROVEMENT FUND.

 Section 1898(b)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1395iii(b)(1)) is amended by striking ``$7,500,000,000'' and inserting 
``$7,279,000,000''.

SEC. 5883. CLEAN WATER ACT EFFLUENT LIMITATIONS GUIDELINES AND 
 STANDARDS AND WATER QUALITY CRITERIA FOR PFAS.

 (a) Deadlines.--
 (1) Water quality criteria.--Not later than the date that 
 is 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
 Administrator shall publish in the Federal Register human 
 health water quality criteria under section 304(a)(1) of the 
 Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1314(a)(1)) to 
 address each measurable perfluoroalkyl substance, 
 polyfluoroalkyl substance, and class of those substances.
 (2) Effluent limitations guidelines and standards for 
 priority industry categories.--Not later than the following 
 dates, the Administrator shall publish in the Federal Register 
 a final rule establishing effluent limitations guidelines and 
 standards, in accordance with the Federal Water Pollution 
 Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), for each of the following 
 industry categories for the discharge (including a discharge 
 into a publicly owned treatment works) of each measurable 
 perfluoroalkyl substance, polyfluoroalkyl substance, or class 
 of those substances:
 (A) During calendar year 2024.--Not later than June 
 30, 2024, for the following point source categories:
 (i) Organic chemicals, plastics, and 
 synthetic fibers, as identified in part 414 of 
 title 40, Code of Federal Regulations (or 
 successor regulations).
 (ii) Electroplating, as identified in part 
 413 of title 40, Code of Federal Regulations 
 (or successor regulations).
 (iii) Metal finishing, as identified in 
 part 433 of title 40, Code of Federal 
 Regulations (or successor regulations).
 (B) During calendar year 2025.--Not later than June 
 30, 2025, for the following point source categories:
 (i) Textile mills, as identified in part 
 410 of title 40, Code of Federal Regulations 
 (or successor regulations).
 (ii) Electrical and electronic components, 
 as identified in part 469 of title 40, Code of 
 Federal Regulations (or successor regulations).
 (iii) Landfills, as identified in part 445 
 of title 40, Code of Federal Regulations (or 
 successor regulations).
 (C) During calendar year 2026.--Not later than 
 December 31, 2026, for the following point source 
 categories:
 (i) Leather tanning and finishing, as 
 identified in part 425 of title 40, Code of 
 Federal Regulations (or successor regulations).
 (ii) Paint formulating, as identified in 
 part 446 of title 40, Code of Federal 
 Regulations (or successor regulations).
 (iii) Plastics molding and forming, as 
 identified in part 463 of title 40, Code of 
 Federal Regulations (or successor regulations).
 (b) Additional Monitoring Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--Effective beginning on the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall require 
 monitoring of the discharges (including discharges into a 
 publicly owned treatment works) of each measurable 
 perfluoroalkyl substance, polyfluoroalkyl substance, and class 
 of those substances for the point source categories and 
 entities described in paragraph (2). The monitoring 
 requirements under this paragraph shall be included in any 
 permits issued under section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution 
 Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1342) after the date of enactment of 
 this Act.
 (2) Categories described.--The point source categories and 
 entities referred to in paragraphs (1) and (3) are each of the 
 following:
 (A) Pulp, paper, and paperboard, as identified in 
 part 430 of title 40, Code of Federal Regulations (or 
 successor regulations).
 (B) Airports (as defined in section 47102 of title 
 49, United States Code).
 (3) Determination.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than December 31, 2023, 
 the Administrator shall make a determination--
 (i) to commence developing effluent 
 limitations and standards for the point source 
 categories and entities listed in paragraph 
 (2); or
 (ii) that effluent limitations and 
 standards are not feasible for those point 
 source categories and entities, including an 
 explanation of the reasoning for this 
 determination.
 (B) Requirement.--Any effluent limitations and 
 standards for the point source categories and entities 
 listed in paragraph (2) shall be published in the 
 Federal Register by not later than December 31, 2027.
 (c) Notification.--The Administrator shall notify the Committee on 
Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and 
the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate of each 
publication made under this section.
 (d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to the Administrator to carry out this section $12,000,000 
for fiscal year 2023, to remain available until expended.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of 
 the Environmental Protection Agency.
 (2) The term ``effluent limitation'' has the meaning given 
 the term in section 502 of the Federal Water Pollution Control 
 Act (33 U.S.C. 1362).
 (3) The term ``measurable'', with respect to a chemical 
 substance or class of chemical substances, means capable of 
 being measured using test procedures established under section 
 304(h) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 
 1314(h)).
 (4) The term ``perfluoroalkyl substance'' means a chemical 
 of which all of the carbon atoms are fully fluorinated carbon 
 atoms.
 (5) The term ``polyfluoroalkyl substance'' means a chemical 
 containing at least 1 fully fluorinated carbon atom and at 
 least 1 carbon atom that is not a fully fluorinated carbon 
 atom.
 (6) The term ``treatment works'' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 212 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act 
 (33 U.S.C. 1292).

SEC. 5884. AMENDMENTS TO THE MAINE INDIAN CLAIMS SETTLEMENT ACT OF 
 1980.

 (a) Application of State Laws.--The Maine Indian Claims Settlement 
Act of 1980 (Public Law 96-420) is amended--
 (1) in section 3--
 (A) in subsection (m), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) in subsection (n), by striking the period and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(o) `Mi'kmaq Nation' means the sole successor to the Micmac 
Nation as constituted in aboriginal times in what is now the State of 
Maine, and all its predecessors and successors in interest, and which 
is represented, as of the date of enactment of this subsection, as to 
lands within the United States, by the Mi'kmaq Council.''; and
 (2) in section 6--
 (A) in subsection (a), by striking ``provided in 
 section 8(e) and section 5(d)(4)'' and inserting 
 ``otherwise provided in this Act''; and
 (B) in subsection (h)--
 (i) by striking ``Except as other wise 
 provided in this Act, the'' and inserting 
 ``The'';
 (ii) in the first sentence, by inserting 
 ``or enacted for the benefit of'' before 
 ``Indians, Indian nations'';
 (iii) by inserting ``that is in effect as 
 of the date of the enactment of the Advancing 
 Equality for Wabanaki Nations Act, (2)'' after 
 ``United States (1)'';
 (iv) by striking ``also (2)'' and inserting 
 ``also (3)''; and
 (v) by striking ``within the State'' and 
 inserting ``within the State, unless Federal 
 law or the State laws of Maine provide for the 
 application of such Federal law or 
 regulation''.
 (b) Implementation of the Indian Child Welfare Act.--Section 8 of 
the Maine Indian Claims Settlement Act of 1980 (Public Law 96-420) is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by striking ``or'' after ``Passamaquoddy 
 Tribe'' and inserting a comma;
 (B) by inserting ``, the Houlton Band of Maliseet 
 Indians, or the Mi'kmaq Nation'' after ``Penobscot 
 Nation''; and
 (C) in the second sentence, by striking 
 ``respective tribe or nation'' each place it appears 
 and inserting ``respective tribe, nation, or band'';
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) by striking ``or'' after ``Passamaquoddy 
 Tribe'' and inserting a comma; and
 (B) by inserting ``, the Houlton Band of Maliseet 
 Indians, or the Mi'kmaq Nation'' after ``Penobscot 
 Nation'';
 (3) by striking subsection (e);
 (4) by redesignating subsection (f) as subsection (e); and
 (5) in subsection (e), as so redesignated--
 (A) by striking ``or'' after ``Passamaquoddy 
 Tribe'' and inserting a comma;
 (B) by inserting ``, the Houlton Band of Maliseet 
 Indians, or the Mi'kmaq Nation'' after ``Penobscot 
 Nation''; and
 (C) by striking ``or nation'' and inserting ``, 
 nation, or band''.
 (c) Construction.--Section 16 of the Maine Indian Claims Settlement 
Act of 1980 (Public Law 96-420) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``(a)'' at the beginning; and
 (2) by striking subsection (b).
 (d) Aroostook Band of Micmacs Settlement Act.--Section 8 of the 
Aroostook Band of Micmacs Settlement Act (Public Law 102-171) is 
repealed.

SEC. 5885. SENSE OF CONGRESS THAT THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS 
 SHOULD BE PROHIBITED FROM DENYING HOME LOANS FOR VETERANS 
 WHO LEGALLY WORK IN THE MARIJUANA INDUSTRY.

 It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) veterans who have served our country honorably should 
 not be denied access to Department of Veterans Affairs home 
 loans on the basis of income derived from State-legalized 
 cannabis activities;
 (2) while the Department of Veterans Affairs has clarified 
 that no statute or regulation specifically prohibits a veteran 
 whose income is derived from State-legalized cannabis 
 activities from obtaining a certificate of eligibility for 
 Department of Veterans Affairs home loan benefits, many 
 veterans continue to be denied access to home loans on the 
 basis of income derived from State-legalized cannabis 
 activities; and
 (3) the Department of Veterans Affairs should improve 
 communication with eligible lending institutions to reduce 
 confusion among lenders and borrowers on this matter.

SEC. 5886. HERMIT'S PEAK/CALF CANYON FIRE ASSISTANCE.

 (a) Findings and Purposes.--
 (1) Findings.--Congress finds that--
 (A) on April 6, 2022, the Forest Service initiated 
 the Las Dispensas-Gallinas prescribed burn on Federal 
 land in the Santa Fe National Forest in San Miguel 
 County, New Mexico, when erratic winds were prevalent 
 in the area that was also suffering from severe drought 
 after many years of insufficient precipitation;
 (B) on April 6, 2022, the prescribed burn, which 
 became known as the ``Hermit's Peak Fire'', exceeded 
 the containment capabilities of the Forest Service, was 
 declared a wildfire, and spread to other Federal and 
 non-Federal land;
 (C) on April 19, 2022, the Calf Canyon Fire, also 
 in San Miguel County, New Mexico, began burning on 
 Federal land and was later identified as the result of 
 a pile burn in January 2022 that remained dormant under 
 the surface before reemerging;
 (D) on April 27, 2022, the Hermit's Peak Fire and 
 the Calf Canyon Fire merged, and both fires were 
 reported as the Hermit's Peak Fire or the Hermit's 
 Peak/Calf Canyon Fire, (referred hereafter in this 
 subsection as the ``Hermit's Peak/Calf Canyon Fire'');
 (E) by May 2, 2022, the fire had grown in size and 
 caused evacuations in multiple villages and communities 
 in San Miguel County and Mora County, including in the 
 San Miguel county jail, the State's psychiatric 
 hospital, the United World College, and New Mexico 
 Highlands University;
 (F) on May 4, 2022, the President issued a major 
 disaster declaration for the counties of Colfax, Mora, 
 and San Miguel, New Mexico;
 (G) on May 20, 2022, U.S. Forest Service Chief 
 Randy Moore ordered a 90-day review of prescribed burn 
 policies to reduce the risk of wildfires and ensure the 
 safety of the communities involved;
 (H) the U.S. Forest Service has assumed 
 responsibility for the Hermit's Peak/Calf Canyon Fire;
 (I) the fire resulted in the loss of Federal, 
 State, local, Tribal, and private property; and
 (J) the United States should compensate the victims 
 of the Hermit's Peak/Calf Canyon Fire.
 (2) Purposes.--The purposes of this section are--
 (A) to compensate victims of the Hermit's Peak/Calf 
 Canyon Fire, for injuries resulting from the fire; and
 (B) to provide for the expeditious consideration 
 and settlement of claims for those injuries.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means--
 (A) the Administrator of the Federal Emergency 
 Management Agency; or
 (B) if a Manager is appointed under subsection 
 (c)(1)(C), the Manager.
 (2) Hermit's peak/calf canyon fire.--The term ``Hermit's 
 Peak/Calf Canyon Fire'' means--
 (A) the fire resulting from the initiation by the 
 Forest Service of a prescribed burn in the Santa Fe 
 National Forest in San Miguel County, New Mexico, on 
 April 6, 2022;
 (B) the pile burn holdover resulting from the 
 prescribed burn by the Forest Service, which reemerged 
 on April 19, 2022; and
 (C) the merger of the two fires described in 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B), reported as the Hermit's 
 Peak Fire or the Hermit's Peak Fire/Calf Canyon Fire.
 (3) Indian tribe.--The term ``Indian Tribe'' means the 
 recognized governing body of any Indian or Alaska Native Tribe, 
 band, nation, pueblo, village, community, component band, or 
 component reservation individually identified (including 
 parenthetically) in the list published most recently as of the 
 date of enactment of this Act pursuant to section 104 of the 
 Federally Recognized Indian Tribe List Act of 1994 (25 U.S.C. 
 5131).
 (4) Injured person.--The term ``injured person'' means--
 (A) an individual, regardless of the citizenship or 
 alien status of the individual; or
 (B) an Indian Tribe, corporation, Tribal 
 corporation, partnership, company, association, county, 
 township, city, State, school district, or other non-
 Federal entity (including a legal representative) that 
 suffered injury resulting from the Hermit's Peak/Calf 
 Canyon Fire.
 (5) Injury.--The term ``injury'' has the same meaning as 
 the term ``injury or loss of property, or personal injury or 
 death'' as used in section 1346(b)(1) of title 28, United 
 States Code.
 (6) Manager.--The term ``Manager'' means an Independent 
 Claims Manager appointed under subsection (c)(1)(C).
 (7) Office.--The term ``Office'' means the Office of 
 Hermit's Peak/Calf Canyon Fire Claims established by subsection 
 (c)(1)(B).
 (8) Tribal entity.--The term ``Tribal entity'' includes any 
 Indian Tribe, tribal organization, Indian-controlled 
 organization serving Indians, Native Hawaiian organization, or 
 Alaska Native entity, as such terms are defined or used in 
 section 166 of the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (25 
 U.S.C. 5304).
 (c) Compensation for Victims of Hermit's Peak/Calf Canyon Fire.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) Compensation.--Each injured person shall be 
 entitled to receive from the United States compensation 
 for injury suffered by the injured person as a result 
 of the Hermit's Peak/Calf Canyon Fire.
 (B) Office of hermit's peak/calf canyon fire 
 claims.--
 (i) In general.--There is established 
 within the Federal Emergency Management Agency 
 an Office of Hermit's Peak/Calf Canyon Fire 
 Claims.
 (ii) Purpose.--The Office shall receive, 
 process, and pay claims in accordance with this 
 section.
 (iii) Funding.--The Office--
 (I) shall be funded from funds made 
 available to the Administrator under 
 this section;
 (II) may appoint and fix the 
 compensation of such temporary 
 personnel as may be necessary, without 
 regard to the provisions of title 5, 
 United States Code, governing 
 appointments in competitive service; 
 and
 (III) may reimburse other Federal 
 agencies for claims processing support 
 and assistance.
 (C) Option to appoint independent claims manager.--
 The Administrator may appoint an Independent Claims 
 Manager to--
 (i) head the Office; and
 (ii) assume the duties of the Administrator 
 under this section.
 (2) Submission of claims.--Not later than 2 years after the 
 date on which regulations are first promulgated under paragraph 
 (6), an injured person may submit to the Administrator a 
 written claim for 1 or more injuries suffered by the injured 
 person in accordance with such requirements as the 
 Administrator determines to be appropriate.
 (3) Investigation of claims.--
 (A) In general.--The Administrator shall, on behalf 
 of the United States, investigate, consider, ascertain, 
 adjust, determine, grant, deny, or settle any claim for 
 money damages asserted under paragraph (2).
 (B) Applicability of state law.--Except as 
 otherwise provided in this section, the laws of the 
 State of New Mexico shall apply to the calculation of 
 damages under paragraph (4)(D).
 (C) Extent of damages.--Any payment under this 
 section--
 (i) shall be limited to actual compensatory 
 damages measured by injuries suffered; and
 (ii) shall not include--
 (I) interest before settlement or 
 payment of a claim; or
 (II) punitive damages.
 (4) Payment of claims.--
 (A) Determination and payment of amount.--
 (i) In general.--
 (I) Payment.--Not later than 180 
 days after the date on which a claim is 
 submitted under this section, the 
 Administrator shall determine and fix 
 the amount, if any, to be paid for the 
 claim.
 (II) Priority.--The Administrator, 
 to the maximum extent practicable, 
 shall pay subrogation claims submitted 
 under this section only after paying 
 claims submitted by injured parties 
 that are not insurance companies 
 seeking payment as subrogees.
 (ii) Parameters of determination.--In 
 determining and settling a claim under this 
 section, the Administrator shall determine 
 only--
 (I) whether the claimant is an 
 injured person;
 (II) whether the injury that is the 
 subject of the claim resulted from the 
 fire;
 (III) the amount, if any, to be 
 allowed and paid under this section; 
 and
 (IV) the person or persons entitled 
 to receive the amount.
 (iii) Insurance and other benefits.--
 (I) In general.--In determining the 
 amount of, and paying, a claim under 
 this section, to prevent recovery by a 
 claimant in excess of actual 
 compensatory damages, the Administrator 
 shall reduce the amount to be paid for 
 the claim by an amount that is equal to 
 the total of insurance benefits 
 (excluding life insurance benefits) or 
 other payments or settlements of any 
 nature that were paid, or will be paid, 
 with respect to the claim.
 (II) Government loans.--This 
 subparagraph shall not apply to the 
 receipt by a claimant of any government 
 loan that is required to be repaid by 
 the claimant.
 (B) Partial payment.--
 (i) In general.--At the request of a 
 claimant, the Administrator may make 1 or more 
 advance or partial payments before the final 
 settlement of a claim, including final 
 settlement on any portion or aspect of a claim 
 that is determined to be severable.
 (ii) Judicial decision.--If a claimant 
 receives a partial payment on a claim under 
 this section, but further payment on the claim 
 is subsequently denied by the Administrator, 
 the claimant may--
 (I) seek judicial review under 
 paragraph (9); and
 (II) keep any partial payment that 
 the claimant received, unless the 
 Administrator determines that the 
 claimant--
 (aa) was not eligible to 
 receive the compensation; or
 (bb) fraudulently procured 
 the compensation.
 (C) Rights of insurer or other third party.--If an 
 insurer or other third party pays any amount to a 
 claimant to compensate for an injury described in 
 paragraph (1), the insurer or other third party shall 
 be subrogated to any right that the claimant has to 
 receive any payment under this section or any other 
 law.
 (D) Allowable damages.--
 (i) Loss of property.--A claim that is paid 
 for loss of property under this section may 
 include otherwise uncompensated damages 
 resulting from the Hermit's Peak/Calf Canyon 
 Fire for--
 (I) an uninsured or underinsured 
 property loss;
 (II) a decrease in the value of 
 real property;
 (III) damage to physical 
 infrastructure, including irrigation 
 infrastructure such as acequia systems;
 (IV) a cost resulting from lost 
 subsistence from hunting, fishing, 
 firewood gathering, timbering, grazing, 
 or agricultural activities conducted on 
 land damaged by the Hermit's Peak/Calf 
 Canyon Fire;
 (V) a cost of reforestation or 
 revegetation on Tribal or non-Federal 
 land, to the extent that the cost of 
 reforestation or revegetation is not 
 covered by any other Federal program; 
 and
 (VI) any other loss that the 
 Administrator determines to be 
 appropriate for inclusion as loss of 
 property.
 (ii) Business loss.--A claim that is paid 
 for injury under this section may include 
 damages resulting from the Hermit's Peak/Calf 
 Canyon Fire for the following types of 
 otherwise uncompensated business loss:
 (I) Damage to tangible assets or 
 inventory.
 (II) Business interruption losses.
 (III) Overhead costs.
 (IV) Employee wages for work not 
 performed.
 (V) Any other loss that the 
 Administrator determines to be 
 appropriate for inclusion as business 
 loss.
 (iii) Financial loss.--A claim that is paid 
 for injury under this section may include 
 damages resulting from the Hermit's Peak/Calf 
 Canyon Fire for the following types of 
 otherwise uncompensated financial loss:
 (I) Increased mortgage interest 
 costs.
 (II) An insurance deductible.
 (III) A temporary living or 
 relocation expense.
 (IV) Lost wages or personal income.
 (V) Emergency staffing expenses.
 (VI) Debris removal and other 
 cleanup costs.
 (VII) Costs of reasonable efforts, 
 as determined by the Administrator, to 
 reduce the risk of wildfire, flood, or 
 other natural disaster in the counties 
 impacted by the Hermit's Peak/Calf 
 Canyon Fire to risk levels prevailing 
 in those counties before the Hermit's 
 Peak/Calf Canyon Fire, that are 
 incurred not later than the date that 
 is 3 years after the date on which the 
 regulations under paragraph (6) are 
 first promulgated.
 (VIII) A premium for flood 
 insurance that is required to be paid 
 on or before May 31, 2024, if, as a 
 result of the Hermit's Peak/Calf Canyon 
 Fire, a person that was not required to 
 purchase flood insurance before the 
 Hermit's Peak/Calf Canyon Fire is 
 required to purchase flood insurance.
 (IX) A disaster assistance loan 
 received from the Small Business 
 Administration.
 (X) Any other loss that the 
 Administrator determines to be 
 appropriate for inclusion as financial 
 loss.
 (5) Acceptance of award.--The acceptance by a claimant of 
 any payment under this section, except an advance or partial 
 payment made under paragraph (4)(B), shall--
 (A) be final and conclusive on the claimant, with 
 respect to all claims arising out of or relating to the 
 same subject matter; and
 (B) constitute a complete release of all claims 
 against the United States (including any agency or 
 employee of the United States) under chapter 171 of 
 title 28, United States Code (commonly known as the 
 ``Federal Tort Claims Act''), or any other Federal or 
 State law, arising out of or relating to the same 
 subject matter.
 (6) Regulations and public information.--
 (A) Regulations.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of law, not later than 45 days after the date 
 of enactment of this section, the Administrator shall 
 promulgate and publish in the Federal Register interim 
 final regulations for the processing and payment of 
 claims under this section.
 (B) Public information.--
 (i) In general.--At the time at which the 
 Administrator promulgates regulations under 
 subparagraph (A), the Administrator shall 
 publish, online and in print, in newspapers of 
 general circulation in the State of New Mexico, 
 a clear, concise, and easily understandable 
 explanation, in English and Spanish, of--
 (I) the rights conferred under this 
 section; and
 (II) the procedural and other 
 requirements of the regulations 
 promulgated under subparagraph (A).
 (ii) Dissemination through other media.--
 The Administrator shall disseminate the 
 explanation published under clause (i) through 
 websites, blogs, social media, brochures, 
 pamphlets, radio, television, and other media 
 that the Administrator determines are likely to 
 reach prospective claimants.
 (7) Consultation.--In administering this section, the 
 Administrator shall consult with the Secretary of the Interior, 
 the Secretary of Energy, the Secretary of Agriculture, the 
 Administrator of the Small Business Administration, other 
 Federal agencies, and State, local, and Tribal authorities, as 
 determined to be necessary by the Administrator, to--
 (A) ensure the efficient administration of the 
 claims process; and
 (B) provide for local concerns.
 (8) Election of remedy.--
 (A) In general.--An injured person may elect to 
 seek compensation from the United States for 1 or more 
 injuries resulting from the Hermit's Peak/Calf Canyon 
 Fire by--
 (i) submitting a claim under this section;
 (ii) filing a claim or bringing a civil 
 action under chapter 171 of title 28, United 
 States Code (commonly known as the ``Federal 
 Tort Claims Act''); or
 (iii) bringing an authorized civil action 
 under any other provision of law.
 (B) Effect of election.--An election by an injured 
 person to seek compensation in any manner described in 
 subparagraph (A) shall be final and conclusive on the 
 claimant with respect to all injuries resulting from 
 the Hermit's Peak/Calf Canyon Fire that are suffered by 
 the claimant.
 (C) Arbitration.--
 (i) In general.--Not later than 45 days 
 after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
 Administrator shall establish by regulation 
 procedures under which a dispute regarding a 
 claim submitted under this section may be 
 settled by arbitration.
 (ii) Arbitration as remedy.--On 
 establishment of arbitration procedures under 
 clause (i), an injured person that submits a 
 disputed claim under this section may elect to 
 settle the claim through arbitration.
 (iii) Binding effect.--An election by an 
 injured person to settle a claim through 
 arbitration under this subparagraph shall--
 (I) be binding; and
 (II) preclude any exercise by the 
 injured person of the right to judicial 
 review of a claim described in 
 paragraph (9).
 (D) No effect on entitlements.--Nothing in this 
 section affects any right of a claimant to file a claim 
 for benefits under any Federal entitlement program.
 (9) Judicial review.--
 (A) In general.--Any claimant aggrieved by a final 
 decision of the Administrator under this section may, 
 not later than 60 days after the date on which the 
 decision is issued, bring a civil action in the United 
 States District Court for the District of New Mexico, 
 to modify or set aside the decision, in whole or in 
 part.
 (B) Record.--The court shall hear a civil action 
 under subparagraph (A) on the record made before the 
 Administrator.
 (C) Standard.--The decision of the Administrator 
 incorporating the findings of the Administrator shall 
 be upheld if the decision is supported by substantial 
 evidence on the record considered as a whole.
 (10) Attorney's and agent's fees.--
 (A) In general.--No attorney or agent, acting alone 
 or in combination with any other attorney or agent, 
 shall charge, demand, receive, or collect, for services 
 rendered in connection with a claim submitted under 
 this section, fees in excess of the limitations 
 established under section 2678 of title 28, United 
 States Code.
 (B) Violation.--An attorney or agent who violates 
 subparagraph (A) shall be fined not more than $10,000.
 (11) Waiver of requirement for matching funds.--
 (A) State and local project.--
 (i) In general.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of law, a State or local project that 
 is determined by the Administrator to be 
 carried out in response to the Hermit's Peak/
 Calf Canyon Fire under any Federal program that 
 applies to an area affected by the Hermit's 
 Peak/Calf Canyon Fire shall not be subject to 
 any requirement for State or local matching 
 funds to pay the cost of the project under the 
 Federal program.
 (ii) Federal share.--The Federal share of 
 the costs of a project described in clause (i) 
 shall be 100 percent.
 (B) Other needs program assistance.--
 Notwithstanding section 408(g)(2) of the Robert T. 
 Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act 
 (42 U.S.C. 5174(g)(2)), for any emergency or major 
 disaster declared by the President under that Act for 
 the Hermit's Peak/Calf Canyon Fire, the Federal share 
 of assistance provided under that section shall be 100 
 percent.
 (12) Applicability of debt collection requirements.--
 Section 3711(a) of title 31, United States Code, shall not 
 apply to any payment under this section, unless--
 (A) there is evidence of civil or criminal fraud, 
 misrepresentation, presentation of a false claim; or
 (B) a claimant was not eligible under paragraph 
 (4)(B) of this section to any partial payment.
 (13) Indian compensation.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of law, in the case of an Indian Tribe, a Tribal 
 entity, or a member of an Indian Tribe that submits a claim 
 under this section--
 (A) the Bureau of Indian Affairs shall have no 
 authority over, or any trust obligation regarding, any 
 aspect of the submission of, or any payment received 
 for, the claim;
 (B) the Indian Tribe, Tribal entity, or member of 
 an Indian Tribe shall be entitled to proceed under this 
 section in the same manner and to the same extent as 
 any other injured person; and
 (C) except with respect to land damaged by the 
 Hermit's Peak/Calf Canyon Fire that is the subject of 
 the claim, the Bureau of Indian Affairs shall have no 
 responsibility to restore land damaged by the Hermit's 
 Peak/Calf Canyon Fire.
 (14) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 promulgation of regulations under paragraph (6)(A), and 
 annually thereafter, the Administrator shall submit to Congress 
 a report that describes the claims submitted under this section 
 during the year preceding the date of submission of the report, 
 including, for each claim--
 (A) the amount claimed;
 (B) a brief description of the nature of the claim; 
 and
 (C) the status or disposition of the claim, 
 including the amount of any payment under this section.
 (15) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized 
 to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this 
 section.

SEC. 5887. OPEN TECHNOLOGY FUND GRANTS.

 (a) In General.--In addition to grants made to the Open Technology 
Fund of the United States Agency for Global Media pursuant to section 
305 of the United States International Broadcasting Act of 1994 (22 
U.S.C. 6204) to make grants for the purposes specified in section 309A 
of such Act (22 U.S.C. 6208a), the Open Technology Fund may make grants 
to eligible entities to surge and sustain support for internet freedom 
technologies to counter acute escalations in censorship in closed 
countries.
 (b) Methodology.--Grants under this section shall be made 
competitively, and shall be subject to audits by the Open Technology 
Fund to ensure that technologies described in subsection (a) are secure 
and have not been compromised in a manner detrimental to the interests 
of the United States or to individuals or organizations benefitting 
from programs supported by such grants.
 (c) Reporting.--The Open Technology Fund shall annually submit to 
the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Committee on Appropriations, and 
the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of 
Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations, the Committee 
on Appropriations, and the Select Committee on Intelligence of the 
Senate a report on grants made and activities carried out pursuant to 
such grants during the immediately preceding fiscal year.
 (d) Authorization of Appropriations.--
 (1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated 
 $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2023 through 2027 to carry 
 out this section.
 (2) Availability.--Amounts authorized to be appropriated 
 pursuant to this subsection are authorized to remain available 
 until expended.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Closed countries.--The term ``closed countries'' means 
 countries in which democratic participation, free expression, 
 freedom of movement, or access to information is suppressed or 
 explicitly prohibited through political, judicial, social, or 
 technical means, or as otherwise determined by the Secretary of 
 State, the Chief Executive Officer for the United States Agency 
 for Global Media, or the President of the Open Technology Fund.
 (2) Eligible entities.--The term ``eligible entities'' 
 means public or private sector entities with proven and 
 already-deployed technology relating to surging and sustaining 
 support for internet freedom technologies to counter acute 
 escalations in censorship in closed countries.

SEC. 5888. STRATEGIC TRANSFORMER RESERVE AND RESILIENCE.

 (a) Plan and Report.--Not later than 18 months after the date of 
enactment of this section, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee 
on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives and the 
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate a report 
containing--
 (1) a plan for reducing the vulnerability of the electric 
 grid to physical attack, cyber attack, electromagnetic pulse, 
 geomagnetic disturbances, severe weather, climate change, and 
 seismic events, including by--
 (A) establishing a strategic transformer reserve 
 that ensures that large power transformers, generator 
 step-up transformers, power conversion equipment, and 
 other critical electric grid equipment are 
 strategically located to ensure timely replacement of 
 such equipment as may be necessary to restore electric 
 grid function rapidly in the event of severe damage to 
 the electric grid due to physical attack, cyber attack, 
 electromagnetic pulse, geomagnetic disturbances, severe 
 weather, climate change, or seismic events; and
 (B) establishing a coordinated plan to facilitate 
 transportation of large power transformers, generator 
 step-up transformers, power conversion equipment, and 
 other critical electric grid equipment; and
 (2) an evaluation of the benefits of establishing such a 
 strategic transformer reserve, including the benefits of 
 purchasing critical electric grid equipment that is made of 
 iron and steel products produced in the United States.
 (b) Transformer Resilience.--The Secretary shall--
 (1) improve large power transformers, generator step-up 
 transformers, power conversion equipment, and other critical 
 electric grid equipment by reducing their vulnerabilities;
 (2) develop, test, and deploy innovative equipment designs 
 that are more flexible and offer greater resiliency of electric 
 grid functions;
 (3) coordinate with industry and manufacturers to 
 standardize large power transformers, generator step-up 
 transformers, power conversion equipment, and other critical 
 electric grid equipment;
 (4) monitor and test large power transformers, generator 
 step-up transformers, power conversion equipment, and other 
 critical electric grid equipment that the Secretary determines 
 may pose a risk to the bulk-power system or national security; 
 and
 (5) facilitate the domestic manufacturing of large power 
 transformers, generator step-up transformers, power conversion 
 equipment, and other critical electric grid equipment through 
 the issuance of grants and loans, and through the provision of 
 technical support.
 (c) Consultation.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary 
shall consult with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, the 
Electricity Subsector Coordinating Council, the Electric Reliability 
Organization, manufacturers, and owners and operators of critical 
electric infrastructure and defense and military installations.
 (d) Prevailing Wages.--Any laborer or mechanic employed by any 
contractor or subcontractor in the performance of work funded directly, 
or assisted in whole or in part, by the Federal Government pursuant to 
this section shall be paid wages at rates not less than those 
prevailing on work of a similar character in the locality, as 
determined by the Secretary of Labor under subchapter IV of chapter 31 
of title 40, United States Code (commonly referred to as the Davis-
Bacon Act). With respect to the labor standards in this subsection, the 
Secretary of Labor shall have the authority and functions set forth in 
Reorganization Plan Numbered 14 of 1950 (64 Stat. 1267; 5 U.S.C. App.) 
and section 3145 of title 40, United States Code.
 (e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $75,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2022 through 2026, and such amounts shall remain available until 
expended.
 (f) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The terms ``bulk-power system'' and ``Electric 
 Reliability Organization'' have the meaning given such terms in 
 section 215 of the Federal Power Act (16 U.S.C. 824o).
 (2) The term ``critical electric infrastructure'' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 215A of the Federal Power 
 Act (16 U.S.C. 824o-1).
 (3) The term ``iron and steel products'' includes 
 electrical steel used in the manufacture of--
 (A) transformers; and
 (B) laminations, cores, and other transformer 
 components.
 (4) The term ``produced in the United States'' means, with 
 respect to iron and steel products, that all manufacturing 
 processes, from the initial melting stage through the 
 application of coatings, occurred in the United States.
 (1) The terms ``Regional Transmission Organization'', 
 ``Independent System Operator'', and ``State regulatory 
 authority'' have the meaning given such terms in section 3 of 
 the Federal Power Act (16 U.S.C. 796).
 (2) The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Energy.

SEC. 5889. AI IN COUNTERTERRORISM OVERSIGHT ENHANCEMENT.

 (a) Short Title.--This section may be cited as the ``AI in 
Counterterrorism Oversight Enhancement Act''.
 (b) Oversight of Use of Artificial Intelligence-enabled 
Technologies by Executive Branch for Counterterrorism Purposes.--
 (1) Amendments to authorities and responsibilities of 
 privacy and civil liberties officers.--Section 1062 of the 
 Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 (42 
 U.S.C. 2000ee-1) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)--
 (i) by redesignating paragraphs (3) and (4) 
 as paragraphs (4) and (5);
 (ii) by inserting after paragraph (2) the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(3) provide to the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight 
 Board, with respect to covered artificial intelligence-enabled 
 technologies--
 ``(A) not later than 180 days after the date on 
 which this paragraph takes effect, and every 6 months 
 thereafter, written notice of the use of such 
 technologies or the planned evaluation, use, 
 development, acquisition, retention of services for, or 
 repurposing of such technologies;
 ``(B) access to associated impact statements, 
 including system of record notices, privacy impact 
 assessments, and civil liberties impact assessments;
 ``(C) access to associated information and 
 materials documenting--
 ``(i) the processes for data collection 
 related to such technologies, for obtaining 
 consent related to the use of such 
 technologies, or for the disclosure of the use 
 of such technologies;
 ``(ii) the algorithms and models of such 
 technologies;
 ``(iii) the data resources used, or to be 
 used, in the training of such technologies, 
 including a comprehensive listing of any data 
 assets or public data assets (or any 
 combination thereof) used, or to be used, in 
 the training of such technologies;
 ``(iv) data governance processes and 
 procedures, including acquisition, protection, 
 retention, sharing, and access, related to data 
 resources associated with such technologies; 
 and
 ``(v) processes for training and testing, 
 evaluating, validating, and modifying such 
 technologies; and
 ``(D) access to all other associated information 
 and materials.'';
 (B) in subsection (d)(1), by inserting ``(including 
 as described under subsection (a)(3))'' after 
 ``officer''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(i) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Artificial intelligence.--The term `artificial 
 intelligence' has the meaning given that term in section 238(g) 
 of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for 
 Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115-232; 10 U.S.C. 2358 note).
 ``(2) Covered artificial intelligence-enabled technology.--
 The term `covered artificial intelligence-enabled technology' 
 means an artificial intelligence-enabled technology (including 
 a classified technology)--
 ``(A) in use by the applicable department, agency, 
 or element to protect the Nation from terrorism; or
 ``(B) that the applicable department, agency, or 
 element plans to evaluate, develop, acquire, retain, or 
 repurpose to protect the Nation from terrorism.
 ``(3) Data asset; public data asset.--The terms `data 
 asset' and `public data asset' have the meaning given those 
 terms in section 3502 of title 44, United States Code.''.
 (2) Self-assessment by privacy and civil liberties 
 oversight board.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Privacy and Civil Liberties 
 Oversight Board under section 1061 of the Intelligence Reform 
 and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 (42 U.S.C. 2000ee) shall 
 provide to the appropriate committees (as described in 
 subsection (e) of such section) a self-assessment of any change 
 in authorities, resources, or organizational structure that may 
 be necessary to carry out the functions described in subsection 
 (d) of such section related to artificial intelligence-enabled 
 technologies.
 (3) Definition.--In this section, the term ``artificial 
 intelligence'' has the meaning given that term in section 
 238(g) of the John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act 
 for Fiscal Year 2019 (Public Law 115-232; 10 U.S.C. 2358 note).
 (4) Effective date.--Paragraphs (1) and (2), and the 
 amendments made by such paragraphs, shall take effect on the 
 date that is one year after the date of the enactment of this 
 Act.

SEC. 5890. ELIMINATION OF TERMINATION CLAUSE FOR GLOBAL ENGAGEMENT 
 CENTER.

 Section 1287 of Public Law 114-328 is amended by striking 
subsection (j).

SEC. 5891. RESOLUTION OF CONTROVERSIES UNDER SERVICEMEMBERS CIVIL 
 RELIEF ACT.

 (a) In General.--Section 102 of the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act 
(50 U.S.C. 3912) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection:
 ``(d) Written Consent Required for Arbitration.--Notwithstanding 
any other provision of law, whenever a contract with a servicemember, 
or a servicemember and the servicemember's spouse jointly, provides for 
the use of arbitration to resolve a controversy subject to a provision 
of this Act and arising out of or relating to such contract, 
arbitration may be used to settle such controversy only if, after such 
controversy arises, all parties to such controversy consent in writing 
to use arbitration to settle such controversy.''.
 (b) Applicability.--Subsection (d) of such section, as added by 
subsection (a), shall apply with respect to contracts entered into, 
amended, altered, modified, renewed, or extended after the date of the 
enactment of this Act.

SEC. 5892. LIMITATION ON WAIVER OF RIGHTS AND PROTECTIONS UNDER 
 SERVICEMEMBERS CIVIL RELIEF ACT.

 (a) In General.--Section 107(a) of the Servicemembers Civil Relief 
Act (50 U.S.C. 3918(a)) is amended--
 (1) in the second sentence, by inserting ``and if it is 
 made after a specific dispute has arisen and the dispute is 
 identified in the waiver'' after ``to which it applies''; and
 (2) in the third sentence, by inserting ``and if it is made 
 after a specific dispute has arisen and the dispute is 
 identified in the waiver'' after ``period of military 
 service''.
 (b) Applicability.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
apply with respect to waivers made on or after the date of the 
enactment of this Act.

SEC. 5893. CLARIFICATION OF PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION UNDER 
 SERVICEMEMBERS CIVIL RELIEF ACT.

 Section 802(a) of the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act (50 U.S.C. 
4042(a)) is amended--
 (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by inserting ``, 
 notwithstanding any previous agreement to the contrary,'' after 
 ``may''; and
 (2) in paragraph (3), by striking ``, notwithstanding any 
 previous agreement to the contrary''.

SEC. 5894. DEFINITION OF LAND USE REVENUE UNDER WEST LOS ANGELES 
 LEASING ACT OF 2016.

 Section 2(d)(2) of the West Los Angeles Leasing Act of 2016 (Public 
Law 114-226) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``; and'' and 
 inserting a semicolon;
 (2) by redesignating subparagraph (B) as subparagraph (C); 
 and
 (3) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(B) to the extent specified in advance in an 
 appropriations Act for a fiscal year, any funds 
 received as compensation for an easement described in 
 subsection (e); and''.

SEC. 5895. REPORT ON THE USE OF DATA AND DATA SCIENCE AT THE DEPARTMENT 
 OF STATE AND USAID.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Comptroller General shall submit to the Committee on Foreign 
Affairs of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign 
Relations of the Senate a report containing the results of a study 
regarding--
 (1) the use of data in foreign policy, global issues policy 
 analysis, and decision-making at the Department of State;
 (2) the use of data in development, development assistance 
 policy, and development program design and execution at the 
 United States Agency for International Development; and
 (3) the use of data in recruitment, hiring, retention, and 
 personnel decisions at the Department of State and the United 
 States Agency for International Development, including the 
 accuracy and use of data for comprehensive strategic workforce 
 planning across all career and non-career hiring mechanisms.

SEC. 5896. MODIFICATION OF REPORTS TO CONGRESS UNDER GLOBAL MAGNITSKY 
 HUMAN RIGHTS ACCOUNTABILITY ACT.

 Section 1264(a) of the Global Magnitsky Human Rights Accountability 
Act (subtitle F of title XII of Public Law 114-328; 22 U.S.C. 24 2656 
note) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (5), by striking ``; and'' and inserting a 
 semicolon;
 (2) in paragraph (6), by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(7) a description of additional steps taken by the 
 President through diplomacy, international engagement, and 
 assistance to foreign or security sectors to address persistent 
 underlying causes of conduct that is sanctionable under section 
 1263 in countries where those sanctioned are located; and
 ``(8) a description of additional steps taken by the 
 President to ensure the pursuit of judicial accountability in 
 appropriate jurisdictions with respect to those foreign persons 
 subject to sanctions under section 1263.''.

SEC. 5897. DEPARTMENT OF STATE FELLOWSHIPS FOR RULE OF LAW ACTIVITIES 
 IN CENTRAL AMERICA.

 (a) Establishment.--The Secretary of State shall establish a 
fellowship program, to be known as the ``Central American Network for 
Democracy'', to support a regional corps of civil society activists, 
lawyers (including members of the judiciary and prosecutors' offices), 
journalists, and investigators.
 (b) Elements.--This fellowship program shall--
 (1) provide a temporary respite for members of the regional 
 corps in a safe environment;
 (2) allow the members to continue to work via engagement 
 with universities, think tanks, government actors, and 
 international organizations; and
 (3) aid the members in leveraging lessons learned in order 
 to contribute to regional democracy and rule of law activities 
 in Central America, including electoral and transition support, 
 institutional reform, anti-corruption investigations, and local 
 engagement.
 (c) Regional and International Support.--The Secretary of State 
shall take such steps as may be necessary--
 (1) to obtain support for the fellowship program from 
 international foundations, regional and United States 
 governmental and nongovernmental organizations, and regional 
 and United States universities; and
 (2) to ensure the fellowship program is well coordinated 
 with and complementary of existing mechanisms such as the 
 Lifeline Embattled CSO Assistance Fund.
 (d) Focus; Safety.--Activities carried out under the fellowship 
program--
 (1) should focus on coordination and consultation with key 
 agencies and international bodies to continue their democracy 
 efforts, including the Department of State, the United States 
 Agency for International Development, the Organization of 
 American States, the Inter-American Court for Human Rights, the 
 United Nations, the Department of Justice, and the Department 
 of the Treasury; and
 (2) may include strengthened protection for the physical 
 safety of individuals who must leave their home country to 
 participate in the program, including assistance for temporary 
 relocation, English language learning, and mental health 
 support.
 (e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $10,000,000 for fiscal year 
2023.

SEC. 5898. REPORT ON ALL COMPREHENSIVE SANCTIONS IMPOSED ON FOREIGN 
 GOVERNMENTS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States, in 
consultation with the Secretary of State, the Secretary of the 
Treasury, and the head of any other relevant Federal department or 
agency that the Comptroller General determines necessary, shall submit 
to the appropriate congressional committees a report on all 
comprehensive sanctions imposed on de jure or de facto governments of 
foreign countries, and all comprehensive sanctions imposed on non-state 
actors that exercise significant de facto governmental control over a 
foreign civilian population, under any provision of law.
 (b) Matters to Be Included.--The report required by subsection (a) 
shall include--
 (1) an assessment of the effect of sanctions imposed on the 
 government of each foreign country and each non-state actor 
 that exercises significant de facto governmental control over a 
 foreign civilian population described in subsection (a) on--
 (A) the ability of civilian population of the 
 country to access water, food, sanitation, and public 
 health services, including all humanitarian aid and 
 supplies related to the prevention, diagnosis, and 
 treatment of COVID-19;
 (B) the changes to the general mortality rate, 
 maternal mortality rate, life expectancy, and literacy;
 (C) the extent to which there is an increase in 
 refugees or migration to or from the country or an 
 increase in internally displaced people in the country;
 (D) the degree of international compliance and non-
 compliance of the country; and
 (E) the licensing of transactions to allow access 
 to essential goods and services to vulnerable 
 populations, including the number of licenses applied 
 for, approved, or denied and reasons why such licenses 
 were denied, and average time to receive a decision; 
 and
 (2) a description of the purpose of sanctions imposed on 
 the government of each foreign country and each non-state actor 
 that exercises significant de facto governmental control over a 
 foreign civilian population described in subsection (a) and the 
 required legal or political authority, including--
 (A) an assessment of United States national 
 security;
 (B) an assessment of whether the stated foreign 
 policy goals of the sanctions are being met;
 (C) the degree of international support or 
 opposition to the sanctions; and
 (D) an assessment of such sanctions on United 
 States businesses, consumers, and financial 
 institutions.
 (c) Form.--The report required by subsection (a) shall be submitted 
in unclassified form, but may contain a classified annex. The 
unclassified portion of the report shall be published on a publicly-
available website of the Government of the United States.
 (d) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Committee on 
 Financial Services, and the Committee on Ways and Means of the 
 House of Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations, the Committee on 
 Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, and the Committee on 
 Finance of the Senate.

SEC. 5899. WASTEWATER ASSISTANCE TO COLONIAS.

 Section 307 of the Safe Drinking Water Act Amendments of 1996 (33 
U.S.C. 1281 note) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (2) and (3) as 
 paragraphs (3) and (4), respectively; and
 (B) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following:
 ``(2) Covered entity.--The term `covered entity' means each 
 of the following:
 ``(A) A border State.
 ``(B) A local government with jurisdiction over an 
 eligible community.'';
 (2) in subsection (b), by striking ``border State'' and 
 inserting ``covered entity'';
 (3) in subsection (d), by striking ``shall not exceed 50 
 percent'' and inserting ``may not be less than 80 percent''; 
 and
 (4) in subsection (e)--
 (A) by striking ``$25,000,000'' and inserting 
 ``$100,000,000''; and
 (B) by striking ``1997 through 1999'' and inserting 
 ``2023 through 2027''.

SEC. 5900. CONTRACTS BY THE PRESIDENT, THE VICE PRESIDENT, OR A CABINET 
 MEMBER.

 (a) Amendment.--Section 431 of title 18, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) in the section heading, by inserting ``the President, 
 the Vice President, a Cabinet Member, or a'' after ``Contracts 
 by''; and
 (2) in the first undesignated paragraph, by inserting ``the 
 President, the Vice President, or any member of the Cabinet,'' 
 after ``Whoever, being''.
 (b) Table of Sections Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 
23 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking the item 
relating to section 431 and inserting the following:

``431. Contracts by the President, the Vice President, a Cabinet 
 Member, or a Member of Congress.''.

SEC. 5901. STATEMENT OF POLICY AND REPORT ON ENGAGING WITH NIGER.

 (a) Statement of Policy.--It is the policy of the United States 
to--
 (1) continue to support Niger's efforts to advance 
 democracy, good governance, human rights, and regional security 
 within its borders through bilateral assistance and 
 multilateral initiatives;
 (2) enhance engagement and cooperation with the Nigerien 
 government at all levels as a key component of stabilizing the 
 Sahel, where frequent coups and other anti-democratic 
 movements, food insecurity, violent extremism, and armed 
 conflict threaten to further weaken governments throughout the 
 region; and
 (3) work closely with partners and allies throughout the 
 international community to elevate Niger, which experienced its 
 first democratic transition of power in 2021, as an example of 
 transitioning from longstanding military governance and a cycle 
 of coups to a democratic, civilian-led form of government.
 (b) Report Required.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State, in consultation with the 
heads of relevant departments and agencies, shall submit to the 
appropriate congressional committees a report on interagency efforts to 
enhance United States engagement with Niger as a key component of the 
United States Strategy toward the Sahel. Such report shall also include 
the following information with respect to the 2 fiscal years preceding 
the date of the submission of the report:
 (1) A description of United States efforts to promote 
 democracy, political pluralism, fiscal transparency and other 
 good governance initiatives, human rights and the rule of law, 
 and a robust and engaged civil society.
 (2) A full, detailed breakdown of United States assistance 
 provided to help the Nigerien Government develop a 
 comprehensive national security strategy, including to counter 
 terrorism, regional and transnational organized crime, 
 intercommunal violence, and other forms of armed conflict, 
 criminal activity, and other threats to United States and 
 Nigerien national security.
 (3) An analysis of relevant resources at United States 
 Embassy Niamey, including whether staff in place by the end of 
 the current fiscal year will be sufficient to meet various 
 country and regional strategic objectives.
 (4) An overview of foreign partner support for Niger's 
 intelligence and security sector.
 (5) A detailed description of United States and 
 international efforts to address food insecurity in Niger, 
 including that which is caused by deforestation, 
 desertification, and other climate change-related issues.
 (6) A breakdown of United States funds obligated for 
 humanitarian assistance in Niger, and an analysis of how the 
 security situation in Niger has affected humanitarian 
 operations and diplomatic engagement throughout the country.
 (7) An assessment of foreign malign influence in Niger, 
 with a specific focus on the People's Republic of China, the 
 Russian Federation, and their proxies.
 (c) Form.--The report required by section (b) shall be submitted in 
unclassified form and may include a classified annex.
 (d) Appropriate Congressional Committees.--In this section, the 
term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on 
 Financial Services of the House of Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on 
 Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate.

SEC. 5902. INTERAGENCY TASK FORCE.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the People's Republic of China's (PRC) increasing use 
 of economic coercion against foreign governments, companies, 
 organizations, other entities, and individuals requires that 
 the United States better understand these measures in order to 
 devise a comprehensive, effective, and multilateral response;
 (2) the private sector is a crucial partner in helping the 
 United States Government understand the PRC's coercive economic 
 measures and hold the PRC accountable, and that additional 
 business transparency would help the United States Government 
 and private sector stakeholders conduct early assessments of 
 potential pressure points and vulnerabilities; and
 (3) PRC coercive economic measures creates pressures for 
 the private sector to behave in ways antithetical to United 
 States national interests and competitiveness.
 (b) Establishment.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the President shall establish an interagency 
task force to be known as the ``Countering Economic Coercion Task 
Force'' (referred to in this section as the ``Task Force'').
 (c) Duties.--
 (1) In general.--The Task Force shall--
 (A) oversee the development and implementation of 
 an integrated United States Government strategy to 
 respond to People's Republic of China (PRC) coercive 
 economic measures, which shall include--
 (i) systematically monitoring and 
 evaluating--
 (I) the costs of such measures on 
 United States businesses and overall 
 United States economic performance;
 (II) instances in which such 
 measures taken against a non-PRC entity 
 has benefitted other parties; and
 (III) the impacts such measures 
 have had on United States national 
 interests; and
 (ii) facilitating coordination among 
 Federal departments and agencies when 
 responding to such measures as well as 
 proactively deterring such economic coercion, 
 including by clarifying the roles for 
 departments and agencies identified in 
 subsection (d) in implementing the strategy;
 (B) consult with United States allies and partners 
 on the feasibility and desirability of collectively 
 identifying, assessing, and responding to PRC coercive 
 economic measures, as well as actions that could be 
 taken to expand coordination with the goal of ensuring 
 a consistent, coherent, and collective response to such 
 measures and establishing long-term deterrence to such 
 measures;
 (C) effectively engage the United States private 
 sector, particularly sectors, groups, or other entities 
 that are susceptible to such PRC coercive economic 
 measures, on concerns related to such measures; and
 (D) develop and implement a process for regularly 
 sharing relevant information, including classified 
 information to the extent appropriate and practicable, 
 on such PRC coercive economic measures with United 
 States allies, partners, and the private sector.
 (2) Consultation.--In carrying out its duties under this 
 subsection, the Task Force should regularly consult, to the 
 extent necessary and appropriate, with the following:
 (A) Relevant stakeholders in the private sector.
 (B) Federal departments and agencies that are not 
 represented on the Task Force.
 (C) United States allies and partners.
 (d) Membership.--The President shall--
 (1) appoint the chair of the Task Force from among the 
 staff of the National Security Council;
 (2) appoint the vice chair of the Task Force from among the 
 staff of the National Economic Council; and
 (3) direct the head of each of the following Federal 
 departments and agencies to appoint personnel at the level of 
 Assistant Secretary or above to participate in the Task Force:
 (A) The Department of State.
 (B) The Department of Commerce.
 (C) The Department of the Treasury.
 (D) The Department of Justice.
 (E) The Office of the United States Trade 
 Representative.
 (F) The Department of Agriculture.
 (G) The Office of the Director of National 
 Intelligence and other appropriate elements of the 
 intelligence community (as defined in section 3 of the 
 National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3003)).
 (H) The Securities and Exchange Commission.
 (I) The United States International Development 
 Finance Corporation.
 (J) Any other department or agency designated by 
 the President.
 (e) Reports.--
 (1) Initial report.--Not later than one year after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, the Task Force shall submit to 
 the appropriate congressional committees a report that includes 
 the following elements:
 (A) A comprehensive review of the array of economic 
 tools the Government of the People's Republic of China 
 (PRC) employs or could employ in the future to coerce 
 other governments, non-PRC companies (including United 
 States companies), and multilateral institutions and 
 organizations, including the Government of the PRC's 
 continued efforts to codify informal practices into its 
 domestic law.
 (B) The strategy required by subsection (c)(1)(A).
 (C) An interagency definition of PRC coercive 
 economic measures that captures both--
 (i) the use of informal or extralegal PRC 
 coercive economic measures; and
 (ii) the illegitimate use of formal 
 economic tools.
 (D) A comprehensive review of the array of economic 
 and diplomatic tools the United States Government 
 employs or could employ to respond to economic coercion 
 against the United States and United States allies and 
 partners.
 (E) A list of unilateral or multilateral--
 (i) proactive measures to defend or deter 
 against PRC coercive economic measures; and
 (ii) actions taken in response to the 
 Government of the PRC's general use of coercive 
 economic measures, including the imposition of 
 reputational costs on the PRC.
 (F) An assessment of areas in which United States 
 allies and partners are vulnerable to PRC coercive 
 economic measures.
 (G) A description of gaps in existing resources or 
 capabilities for United States Government departments 
 and agencies to respond effectively to PRC coercive 
 economic measures directed at United States entities 
 and assist United States allies and partners in their 
 responses to PRC coercive economic measures.
 (H) An analysis of the circumstances under which 
 the PRC employs different types of economic coercion 
 and against what kinds of targets.
 (I) An assessment, as appropriate, of international 
 norms and regulations as well as any treaty obligations 
 the PRC has stretched, circumvented, or broken through 
 its economically coercive practices.
 (2) Interim reports.--
 (A) First interim report.--Not later than one year 
 after the date on which the report required by 
 paragraph (1) is submitted to the appropriate 
 congressional committees, the Task Force shall submit 
 to the appropriate congressional committees a report 
 that includes the following elements:
 (i) Updates to information required by 
 subparagraphs (A) through (G) of paragraph (1).
 (ii) A description of activities conducted 
 by the Task Force to implement the strategy 
 required by subsection (c)(1)(A).
 (iii) An assessment of the implementation 
 and effectiveness of the strategy, lessons 
 learned from the past year, and planned changes 
 to the strategy.
 (B) Second interim report.--Not later than one year 
 after the date on which the report required by 
 subparagraph (A) is submitted to the appropriate 
 congressional committees, the Task Force shall submit 
 to the appropriate congressional committees a report 
 that includes an update to the elements required under 
 the report required by subparagraph (A).
 (3) Final report.--Not later than 30 days after the date on 
 which the report required by paragraph (2)(B) is submitted to 
 the appropriate congressional committees, the Task Force shall 
 submit to the appropriate congressional committees and also 
 make available to the public on the website of the Executive 
 Office of the President a final report that includes the 
 following elements:
 (A) An analysis of PRC coercive economic measures 
 and the cost of such coercive measures to United States 
 businesses.
 (B) A description of areas of possible 
 vulnerability for United States businesses and 
 businesses of United States partners and allies.
 (C) Recommendations on how to continue the effort 
 to counter PRC coercive economic measures, including 
 through further coordination with United States allies 
 and partners.
 (D) A list of cases made public under subsection 
 (f).
 (4) Form.--
 (A) Initial and interim reports.--The reports 
 required by paragraphs (1), (2)(A), and (2)(B) shall be 
 submitted in unclassified form, but may include a 
 classified annex.
 (B) Final report.--The report required by paragraph 
 (3) shall be submitted in unclassified form, but may 
 include a classified annex.
 (f) Publicly Available List.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 120 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Task Force shall to the extent 
 practicable make available to the public on the website of the 
 Executive Office of the President a list of cases in the past 
 six months in which open source reporting indicates that the 
 PRC has directed coercive economic measures against a non-PRC 
 entity.
 (2) Updates.--The list required by paragraph (1) should be 
 updated every 180 days, and shall be managed by the Department 
 of State after the termination of the Task Force under 
 subsection (g).
 (g) Sunset.--
 (1) In general.--The Task Force shall terminate at the end 
 of the 60-day period beginning on the date on which the final 
 report required by subsection (e)(3) is submitted to the 
 appropriate congressional committees and made publicly 
 available.
 (2) Additional actions.--The Task force may use the 60-day 
 period referred to in paragraph (1) for the purposes of 
 concluding its activities, including providing testimony to 
 Congress concerning the final report required by subsection 
 (e)(3).
 (h) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term 
 ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (A) the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House 
 of Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Foreign Relations of the 
 Senate.
 (2) Coercive economic measures.--The term ``coercive 
 economic measures'' includes formal or informal restrictions or 
 conditions, such as on trade, investment, development aid, and 
 financial flows, intended to impose economic costs on a non-
 People's Republic of China target in order to achieve strategic 
 political objectives, including influence over the policy 
 decisions of a foreign government, company, organization, or 
 individual.

SEC. 5903. MODIFICATION OF DUTIES OF UNITED STATES-CHINA ECONOMIC AND 
 SECURITY REVIEW COMMISSION.

 Section 1238(c)(2)(H) of the Floyd D. Spence National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2001 (22 U.S.C. 7002(c)(2)(H)) is 
amended by adding at the end before the period the following: ``, and 
the People's Republic of China's use of such relations to economically 
or politically coerce other countries, regions, and international and 
regional entities, particularly treaty allies and major partners, to 
achieve China's objectives in the preceding year''.

SEC. 5904. TAIWAN FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Agency head.--The term ``agency head'' means, in the 
 case of the executive branch of United States Government, or in 
 the case of a legislative branch agency specified in paragraph 
 (2), the head of the respective agency.
 (2) Agency of the united states government.--The term 
 ``agency of the United States Government'' includes the 
 Government Accountability Office, the Congressional Budget 
 Office, the Congressional Research Service, and the United 
 States-China Economic and Security Review Commission of the 
 legislative branch, as well as any agency of the executive 
 branch.
 (3) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term 
 ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (A) the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate;
 (B) the Committee on Foreign Relations of the 
 Senate;
 (C) the Committee on Appropriations of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (D) the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House 
 of Representatives.
 (4) Detailee.--The term ``detailee'' means an employee of 
 an agency of the United States Government on loan to the 
 American Institute in Taiwan, without a change of position from 
 the agency at which such employee is employed.
 (5) Implementing partner.--The term ``implementing 
 partner'' means any United States organization described in 
 section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and 
 exempt from tax under section 501(a) of such Code that--
 (A) is selected through a competitive process;
 (B) performs logistical, administrative, and other 
 functions, as determined by the Department of State and 
 the American Institute of Taiwan, in support of the 
 Taiwan Fellowship Program; and
 (C) enters into a cooperative agreement with the 
 American Institute in Taiwan to administer the Taiwan 
 Fellowship Program.
 (b) Establishment of Taiwan Fellowship Program.--
 (1) Establishment.--The Secretary of State shall establish 
 the ``Taiwan Fellowship Program'' (hereafter referred to in 
 this section as the ``Program'') to provide a fellowship 
 opportunity in Taiwan of up to two years for eligible United 
 States citizens through the cooperative agreement established 
 in paragraph (2). The Department of State, in consultation with 
 the American Institute in Taiwan and the implementing partner, 
 may modify the name of the Program.
 (2) Cooperative agreements.--
 (A) In general.--The American Institute in Taiwan 
 shall use amounts authorized to be appropriated 
 pursuant to subsection (f)(1) to enter into an annual 
 or multi-year cooperative agreement with an appropriate 
 implementing partner.
 (B) Fellowships.--The Department of State, in 
 consultation with the American Institute in Taiwan and, 
 as appropriate, the implementing partner, shall award 
 to eligible United States citizens, subject to 
 available funding--
 (i) not fewer than five fellowships during 
 the first two years of the Program; and
 (ii) not fewer than ten fellowships during 
 each of the remaining years of the Program.
 (3) International agreement; implementing partner.--Not 
 later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
 the American Institute in Taiwan, in consultation with the 
 Department of State, shall--
 (A) begin negotiations with the Taipei Economic and 
 Cultural Representative Office, or with another 
 appropriate entity, for the purpose of entering into an 
 agreement to facilitate the placement of fellows in an 
 agency of the governing authorities on Taiwan; and
 (B) begin the process of selecting an implementing 
 partner, which--
 (i) shall agree to meet all of the legal 
 requirements required to operate in Taiwan; and
 (ii) shall be composed of staff who 
 demonstrate significant experience managing 
 exchange programs in the Indo-Pacific region.
 (4) Curriculum.--
 (A) First year.--During the first year of each 
 fellowship under this subsection, each fellow should 
 study--
 (i) the Mandarin Chinese language;
 (ii) the people, history, and political 
 climate on Taiwan; and
 (iii) the issues affecting the relationship 
 between the United States and the Indo-Pacific 
 region.
 (B) Second year.--During the second year of each 
 fellowship under this section, each fellow, subject to 
 the approval of the Department of State, the American 
 Institute in Taiwan, and the implementing partner, and 
 in accordance with the purposes of this Act, shall work 
 in--
 (i) a parliamentary office, ministry, or 
 other agency of the governing authorities on 
 Taiwan; or
 (ii) an organization outside of the 
 governing authorities on Taiwan, whose 
 interests are associated with the interests of 
 the fellow and the agency of the United States 
 Government from which the fellow had been 
 employed.
 (5) Flexible fellowship duration.--Notwithstanding any 
 requirement under this section, the Secretary of State, in 
 consultation with the American Institute in Taiwan and, as 
 appropriate, the implementing partner, may award fellowships 
 that have a duration of between nine months and two years, and 
 may alter the curriculum requirements under paragraph (4) for 
 such purposes.
 (6) Sunset.--The Program shall terminate ten years after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (c) Program Requirements.--
 (1) Eligibility requirements.--A United States citizen is 
 eligible for a fellowship under this section if he or she--
 (A) is an employee of the United States Government;
 (B) has received at least one exemplary performance 
 review in his or her current United States Government 
 role within at least the last three years prior to the 
 beginning the fellowship;
 (C) has at least two years of experience in any 
 branch of the United States Government;
 (D) has a demonstrated professional or educational 
 background in the relationship between the United 
 States and countries in the Indo-Pacific region; and
 (E) has demonstrated his or her commitment to 
 further service in the United States Government.
 (2) Responsibilities of fellows.--Each recipient of a 
 fellowship under this section shall agree, as a condition of 
 such fellowship--
 (A) to maintain satisfactory progress in language 
 training and appropriate behavior in Taiwan, as 
 determined by the Department of State, the American 
 Institute in Taiwan and, as appropriate, its 
 implementing partner;
 (B) to refrain from engaging in any intelligence or 
 intelligence-related activity on behalf of the United 
 States Government; and
 (C) to continue Federal Government employment for a 
 period of not less than four years after the conclusion 
 of the fellowship or for not less than two years for a 
 fellowship that is one year or shorter.
 (3) Responsibilities of implementing partner.--
 (A) Selection of fellows.--The implementing 
 partner, in close coordination with the Department of 
 State and the American Institute in Taiwan, shall--
 (i) make efforts to recruit fellowship 
 candidates who reflect the diversity of the 
 United States;
 (ii) select fellows for the Program based 
 solely on merit, with appropriate supervision 
 from the Department of State and the American 
 Institute in Taiwan; and
 (iii) prioritize the selection of 
 candidates willing to serve a fellowship 
 lasting one year or longer.
 (B) First year.--The implementing partner should 
 provide each fellow in the first year (or shorter 
 duration, as jointly determined by the Department of 
 State and the American Institute in Taiwan for those 
 who are not serving a two-year fellowship) with--
 (i) intensive Mandarin Chinese language 
 training; and
 (ii) courses in the politic, culture, and 
 history of Taiwan, China, and the broader Indo-
 Pacific.
 (C) Waiver of required training.--The Department of 
 State, in coordination with the American Institute in 
 Taiwan and, as appropriate, the implementing partner, 
 may waive any of the training required under 
 subparagraph (B) to the extent that a fellow has 
 Mandarin Chinese language skills, knowledge of the 
 topic described in subparagraph (B)(ii), or for other 
 related reasons approved by the Department of State and 
 the American Institute in Taiwan. If any of the 
 training requirements are waived for a fellow serving a 
 two-year fellowship, the training portion of his or her 
 fellowship may be shortened to the extent appropriate.
 (D) Office; staffing.--The implementing partner, in 
 consultation with the Department of State and the 
 American Institute in Taiwan, shall maintain an office 
 and at least one full-time staff member in Taiwan--
 (i) to liaise with the American Institute 
 in Taiwan and the governing authorities on 
 Taiwan; and
 (ii) to serve as the primary in-country 
 point of contact for the recipients of 
 fellowships under this section and their 
 dependents.
 (E) Other functions.--The implementing partner 
 should perform other functions in association in 
 support of the Program, including logistical and 
 administrative functions, as prescribed by the 
 Department of State and the American Institute in 
 Taiwan.
 (4) Noncompliance.--
 (A) In general.--Any fellow who fails to comply 
 with the requirements under this section shall 
 reimburse the American Institute in Taiwan for--
 (i) the Federal funds expended for the 
 fellow's participation in the fellowship, as 
 set forth in subparagraphs (B) and (C); and
 (ii) interest accrued on such funds 
 (calculated at the prevailing rate).
 (B) Full reimbursement.--Any fellow who violates 
 subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (2) shall 
 reimburse the American Institute in Taiwan in an amount 
 equal to the sum of--
 (i) all of the Federal funds expended for 
 the fellow's participation in the fellowship; 
 and
 (ii) interest on the amount specified in 
 clause (i), which shall be calculated at the 
 prevailing rate.
 (C) Pro rata reimbursement.--Any fellow who 
 violates paragraph (2)(C) shall reimburse the American 
 Institute in Taiwan in an amount equal to the 
 difference between--
 (i) the amount specified in subparagraph 
 (B); and
 (ii) the product of--
 (I) the amount the fellow received 
 in compensation during the final year 
 of the fellowship, including the value 
 of any allowances and benefits received 
 by the fellow; multiplied by
 (II) the percentage of the period 
 specified in paragraph (2)(C) during 
 which the fellow did not remain 
 employed by the United States 
 Government.
 (5) Annual report.--Not later than 90 days after the 
 selection of the first class of fellows under this Act, and 
 annually thereafter for ten years, the Department of State 
 shall offer to brief the appropriate congressional committees 
 regarding the following issues:
 (A) An assessment of the performance of the 
 implementing partner in fulfilling the purposes of this 
 section.
 (B) The number of applicants each year, the number 
 of applicants willing to serve a fellowship lasting one 
 year or longer, and the number of such applicants 
 selected for the fellowship.
 (C) The names and sponsoring agencies of the 
 fellows selected by the implementing partner and the 
 extent to which such fellows represent the diversity of 
 the United States.
 (D) The names of the parliamentary offices, 
 ministries, other agencies of the governing authorities 
 on Taiwan, and nongovernmental institutions to which 
 each fellow was assigned.
 (E) Any recommendations, as appropriate, to improve 
 the implementation of the Program, including added 
 flexibilities in the administration of the program.
 (F) An assessment of the Program's value upon the 
 relationship between the United States and Taiwan or 
 the United States and Asian countries.
 (6) Annual financial audit.--
 (A) In general.--The financial records of any 
 implementing partner shall be audited annually in 
 accordance with generally accepted auditing standards 
 by independent certified public accountants or 
 independent licensed public accountants who are 
 certified or licensed by a regulatory authority of a 
 State or another political subdivision of the United 
 States.
 (B) Location.--Each audit under subparagraph (A) 
 shall be conducted at the place or places where the 
 financial records of the implementing partner are 
 normally kept.
 (C) Access to documents.--The implementing partner 
 shall make available to the accountants conducting an 
 audit under subparagraph (A)--
 (i) all books, financial records, files, 
 other papers, things, and property belonging 
 to, or in use by, the implementing partner that 
 are necessary to facilitate the audit; and
 (ii) full facilities for verifying 
 transactions with the balances or securities 
 held by depositories, fiscal agents, and 
 custodians.
 (D) Report.--
 (i) In general.--Not later than six months 
 after the end of each fiscal year, the 
 implementing partner shall provide a report of 
 the audit conducted for such fiscal year under 
 subparagraph (A) to the Department of State and 
 the American Institute in Taiwan.
 (ii) Contents.--Each audit report shall--
 (I) set forth the scope of the 
 audit;
 (II) include such statements, along 
 with the auditor's opinion of those 
 statements, as may be necessary to 
 present fairly the implementing 
 partner's assets and liabilities, 
 surplus or deficit, with reasonable 
 detail;
 (III) include a statement of the 
 implementing partner's income and 
 expenses during the year; and
 (IV) include a schedule of--
 (aa) all contracts and 
 cooperative agreements 
 requiring payments greater than 
 $5,000; and
 (bb) any payments of 
 compensation, salaries, or fees 
 at a rate greater than $5,000 
 per year.
 (iii) Copies.--Each audit report shall be 
 produced in sufficient copies for distribution 
 to the public.
 (d) Taiwan Fellows on Detail From Government Service.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) Detail authorized.--With the approval of the 
 Secretary of State, an agency head may detail, for a 
 period of not more than two years, an employee of the 
 agency of the United States Government who has been 
 awarded a fellowship under this Act, to the American 
 Institute in Taiwan for the purpose of assignment to 
 the governing authorities on Taiwan or an organization 
 described in subsection (b)(4)(B)(ii).
 (B) Agreement.--Each detailee shall enter into a 
 written agreement with the Federal Government before 
 receiving a fellowship, in which the fellow shall 
 agree--
 (i) to continue in the service of the 
 sponsoring agency at the end of fellowship for 
 a period of at least four years (or at least 
 two years if the fellowship duration is one 
 year or shorter) unless such detailee is 
 involuntarily separated from the service of 
 such agency; and
 (ii) to pay to the American Institute in 
 Taiwan any additional expenses incurred by the 
 United States Government in connection with the 
 fellowship if the detailee voluntarily 
 separates from service with the sponsoring 
 agency before the end of the period for which 
 the detailee has agreed to continue in the 
 service of such agency.
 (C) Exception.--The payment agreed to under 
 subparagraph (B)(ii) may not be required of a detailee 
 who leaves the service of the sponsoring agency to 
 enter into the service of another agency of the United 
 States Government unless the head of the sponsoring 
 agency notifies the detailee before the effective date 
 of entry into the service of the other agency that 
 payment will be required under this subsection.
 (2) Status as government employee.--A detailee--
 (A) is deemed, for the purpose of preserving 
 allowances, privileges, rights, seniority, and other 
 benefits, to be an employee of the sponsoring agency;
 (B) is entitled to pay, allowances, and benefits 
 from funds available to such agency, which is deemed to 
 comply with section 5536 of title 5, United States 
 Code; and
 (C) may be assigned to a position with an entity 
 described in subsection (b)(4)(B)(i) if acceptance of 
 such position does not involve--
 (i) the taking of an oath of allegiance to 
 another government; or
 (ii) the acceptance of compensation or 
 other benefits from any foreign government by 
 such detailee.
 (3) Responsibilities of sponsoring agency.--
 (A) In general.--The agency of the United States 
 Government from which a detailee is detailed should 
 provide the fellow allowances and benefits that are 
 consistent with Department of State Standardized 
 Regulations or other applicable rules and regulations, 
 including--
 (i) a living quarters allowance to cover 
 the cost of housing in Taiwan;
 (ii) a cost of living allowance to cover 
 any possible higher costs of living in Taiwan;
 (iii) a temporary quarters subsistence 
 allowance for up to seven days if the fellow is 
 unable to find housing immediately upon 
 arriving in Taiwan;
 (iv) an education allowance to assist 
 parents in providing the fellow's minor 
 children with educational services ordinarily 
 provided without charge by public schools in 
 the United States;
 (v) moving expenses to transport personal 
 belongings of the fellow and his or her family 
 in their move to Taiwan, which is comparable to 
 the allowance given for American Institute in 
 Taiwan employees assigned to Taiwan; and
 (vi) an economy-class airline ticket to and 
 from Taiwan for each fellow and the fellow's 
 immediate family.
 (B) Modification of benefits.--The American 
 Institute in Taiwan and its implementing partner, with 
 the approval of the Department of State, may modify the 
 benefits set forth in subparagraph (A) if such 
 modification is warranted by fiscal circumstances.
 (4) No financial liability.--The American Institute in 
 Taiwan, the implementing partner, and any governing authorities 
 on Taiwan or nongovernmental entities in Taiwan at which a 
 fellow is detailed during the second year of the fellowship may 
 not be held responsible for the pay, allowances, or any other 
 benefit normally provided to the detailee.
 (5) Reimbursement.--Fellows may be detailed under paragraph 
 (1)(A) without reimbursement to the United States by the 
 American Institute in Taiwan.
 (6) Allowances and benefits.--Detailees may be paid by the 
 American Institute in Taiwan for the allowances and benefits 
 listed in paragraph (3).
 (e) GAO Report.--Not later than one year prior to the sunset of the 
Program pursuant to subsection (b)(6), the Comptroller General of the 
United States shall transmit to the Committee on Foreign Relations of 
the Senate and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
Representatives a report that includes the following:
 (1) An analysis of United States Government participants in 
 the Program, including the number of applicants and the number 
 of fellowships undertaken, the places of employment.
 (2) An assessment of the costs and benefits for 
 participants in the Program and for the United States 
 Government of such fellowships.
 (3) An analysis of the financial impact of the fellowship 
 on United States Government offices that have detailed fellows 
 to participate in the Program.
 (4) Recommendations, if any, on how to improve the Program.
 (f) Funding.--
 (1) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized 
 to be appropriated to the American Institute in Taiwan--
 (A) for fiscal year 2023, $2,900,000, of which 
 $500,000 should be used by an appropriate implementing 
 partner to launch the Program; and
 (B) for fiscal year 2024, and each succeeding 
 fiscal year, $2,400,000.
 (2) Private sources.--Subject to appropriation, the 
 implementing partner selected to implement the Program may 
 accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or 
 property in carrying out such program, subject to the review 
 and approval of the American Institute in Taiwan.

SEC. 5905. TREATMENT OF PAYCHECK PROTECTION PROGRAM LOAN FORGIVENESS OF 
 PAYROLL COSTS UNDER HIGHWAY AND PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION 
 PROJECT COST-REIMBURSEMENT CONTRACTS.

 (a) In General.--Notwithstanding section 31.201-5 of title 48, Code 
of Federal Regulations (or successor regulations), for the purposes of 
any cost-reimbursement contract awarded in accordance with section 112 
of title 23, United States Code, or section 5325 of title 49, United 
States Code, or any subcontract under such a contract, no cost 
reduction or cash refund (including through a reduced indirect cost 
rate) shall be due to the Department of Transportation or to a State 
transportation department, transit agency, or other recipient of 
assistance under chapter 1 of title 23, United States Code, or chapter 
53 of title 49, United States Code, on the basis of forgiveness of the 
payroll costs of a covered loan (as those terms are defined in section 
7A(a) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 636m(a))) issued under the 
paycheck protection program under section 7(a)(36) of that Act (15 
U.S.C. 636(a)(36)).
 (b) Saving Provision.--Nothing in this section amends or exempts 
the prohibitions and liabilities under section 3729 of title 31, United 
States Code.
 (c) Termination.--This section ceases to be effective on June 30, 
2025.

SEC. 5906. BILITERACY EDUCATION SEAL AND TEACHING ACT.

 (a) Department of Education Grants for State Seal of Biliteracy 
Programs.--
 (1) Establishment of program.--
 (A) In general.--From amounts made available under 
 paragraph (6), the Secretary of Education shall award 
 grants, on a competitive basis, to States to enable the 
 States to establish or improve, and carry out, Seal of 
 Biliteracy programs to recognize student proficiency in 
 speaking, reading, and writing in both English and a 
 second language.
 (B) Inclusion of native american languages.--
 Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), each Seal of 
 Biliteracy program shall contain provisions allowing 
 the use of Native American languages, including 
 allowing speakers of any Native American language 
 recognized as official by any American government, 
 including any Tribal government, to use equivalent 
 proficiency in speaking, reading, and writing in the 
 Native American language in lieu of proficiency in 
 speaking, reading, and writing in English.
 (C) Duration.--A grant awarded under this 
 subsection shall be for a period of 2 years, and may be 
 renewed at the discretion of the Secretary.
 (D) Renewal.--At the end of a grant term, a State 
 that receives a grant under this subsection may reapply 
 for a grant under this subsection.
 (E) Limitations.--A State shall not receive more 
 than 1 grant under this subsection at any time.
 (F) Return of unspent grant funds.--Each State that 
 receives a grant under this subsection shall return any 
 unspent grant funds not later than 6 months after the 
 date on which the term for the grant ends.
 (2) Grant application.--A State that desires a grant under 
 this subsection shall submit an application to the Secretary at 
 such time, in such manner, and containing such information and 
 assurances as the Secretary may require, including--
 (A) a description of the criteria a student must 
 meet to demonstrate the proficiency in speaking, 
 reading, and writing in both languages necessary for 
 the State Seal of Biliteracy program;
 (B) a detailed description of the State's plan--
 (i) to ensure that English learners and 
 former English learners are included in the 
 State Seal of Biliteracy program;
 (ii) to ensure that--
 (I) all languages, including Native 
 American languages, can be tested for 
 the State Seal of Biliteracy program; 
 and
 (II) Native American language 
 speakers and learners are included in 
 the State Seal of Biliteracy program, 
 including students at tribally 
 controlled schools and at schools 
 funded by the Bureau of Indian 
 Education; and
 (iii) to reach students, including eligible 
 students described in paragraph (3)(B) and 
 English learners, their parents, and schools 
 with information regarding the State Seal of 
 Biliteracy program;
 (C) an assurance that a student who meets the 
 requirements under subparagraph (A) and paragraph (3) 
 receives--
 (i) a permanent seal or other marker on the 
 student's secondary school diploma or its 
 equivalent; and
 (ii) documentation of proficiency on the 
 student's official academic transcript; and
 (D) an assurance that a student is not charged a 
 fee for providing information under paragraph (3)(A).
 (3) Student participation in a seal of biliteracy 
 program.--
 (A) In general.--To participate in a Seal of 
 Biliteracy program, a student shall provide information 
 to the State that serves the student at such time, in 
 such manner, and including such information and 
 assurances as the State may require, including an 
 assurance that the student has met the criteria 
 established by the State under paragraph (2)(A).
 (B) Student eligibility for participation.--A 
 student who gained proficiency in a second language 
 outside of school may apply under subparagraph (A) to 
 participate in a Seal of Biliteracy program.
 (4) Use of funds.--Grant funds made available under this 
 subsection shall be used for--
 (A) the administrative costs of establishing or 
 improving, and carrying out, a Seal of Biliteracy 
 program that meets the requirements of paragraph (2); 
 and
 (B) public outreach and education about the Seal of 
 Biliteracy program.
 (5) Report.--Not later than 18 months after receiving a 
 grant under this subsection, a State shall issue a report to 
 the Secretary describing the implementation of the Seal of 
 Biliteracy program for which the State received the grant.
 (6) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized 
 to be appropriated to carry out this subsection $10,000,000 for 
 each of fiscal years 2023 through 2027.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The terms ``English learner'', ``secondary school'', 
 and ``State'' have the meanings given those terms in section 
 8101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 7801).
 (2) The term ``Native American languages'' has the meaning 
 given the term in section 103 of the Native American Languages 
 Act (25 U.S.C. 2902).
 (3) The term ``Seal of Biliteracy program'' means any 
 program described in subsection (b)(1) that is established or 
 improved, and carried out, with funds received under this 
 section.
 (4) The term ``second language'' means any language other 
 than English (or a Native American language, pursuant to 
 subsection (b)(1)(B)), including Braille, American Sign 
 Language, or a Classical language.
 (5) The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of 
 Education.

SEC. 5907. PRESUMPTION OF CAUSE OF DISABILITY OR DEATH DUE TO 
 EMPLOYMENT IN FIRE PROTECTION ACTIVITIES.

 (a) Certain Diseases Presumed to Be Work-related Cause of 
Disability or Death for Federal Employees in Fire Protection 
Activities.--
 (1) Presumption relating to employees in fire protection 
 activities.--Subchapter I of chapter 81 of title 5, United 
 States Code, is amended by inserting after section 8143a the 
 following:
``Sec. 8143b. Employees in fire protection activities.
 ``(a) Certain Diseases Deemed to Be Proximately Caused by 
Employment in Fire Protection Activities.--
 ``(1) In general.--For a claim under this subchapter of 
 disability or death of an employee who has been employed for a 
 minimum of 5 years in aggregate as an employee in fire 
 protection activities, a disease specified on the list 
 established under paragraph (2) shall be deemed to be 
 proximately caused by the employment of such employee.
 ``(2) Establishment of initial list.--There is established 
 under this section the following list of diseases:
 ``(A) Bladder cancer.
 ``(B) Brain cancer.
 ``(C) Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
 ``(D) Colorectal cancer.
 ``(E) Esophageal cancer.
 ``(F) Kidney cancer.
 ``(G) Leukemias.
 ``(H) Lung cancer.
 ``(I) Mesothelioma.
 ``(J) Multiple myeloma.
 ``(K) Non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
 ``(L) Prostate cancer.
 ``(M) Skin cancer (melanoma).
 ``(N) A sudden cardiac event or stroke while, or 
 not later than 24 hours after, engaging in the 
 activities described in subsection (b)(1)(C).
 ``(O) Testicular cancer.
 ``(P) Thyroid cancer.
 ``(3) Additions to the list.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall periodically 
 review the list established under this section in 
 consultation with the Director of the National 
 Institute on Occupational Safety and Health and shall 
 add a disease to the list by rule, upon a showing by a 
 petitioner or on the Secretary's own determination, in 
 accordance with this paragraph.
 ``(B) Basis for determination.--The Secretary shall 
 add a disease to the list upon a showing by a 
 petitioner or the Secretary's own determination, based 
 on the weight of the best available scientific 
 evidence, that there is a significant risk to employees 
 in fire protection activities of developing such 
 disease.
 ``(C) Available expertise.--In determining 
 significant risk for purposes of subparagraph (B), the 
 Secretary may accept as authoritative and may rely upon 
 recommendations, risk assessments, and scientific 
 studies (including analyses of National Firefighter 
 Registry data pertaining to Federal firefighters) by 
 the National Institute for Occupational Safety and 
 Health, the National Toxicology Program, the National 
 Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, and 
 the International Agency for Research on Cancer.
 ``(4) Petitions to add to the list.--
 ``(A) In general.--Any person may petition the 
 Secretary to add a disease to the list under this 
 section.
 ``(B) Content of petition.--Such petition shall 
 provide information to show that there is sufficient 
 evidence of a significant risk to employees in fire 
 protection activities of developing such illness or 
 disease from their employment.
 ``(C) Timely and substantive decisions.--Not later 
 than 18 months after receipt of a petition, the 
 Secretary shall either grant or deny the petition by 
 publishing in the Federal Register a written 
 explanation of the reasons for the Secretary's 
 decision. The Secretary may not deny a petition solely 
 on the basis of competing priorities, inadequate 
 resources, or insufficient time for review.
 ``(D) Notification to congress.--Not later than 30 
 days after making any decision to approve or deny a 
 petition under this paragraph, the Secretary shall 
 notify the Committee on Education and Labor of the 
 House of Representatives and the Committee on Homeland 
 Security and Government Affairs of the Senate of such 
 decision.
 ``(b) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Employee in fire protection activities.--The term 
 `employee in fire protection activities' means an employee 
 employed as a firefighter, paramedic, emergency medical 
 technician, rescue worker, ambulance personnel, or hazardous 
 material worker, who--
 ``(A) is trained in fire suppression;
 ``(B) has the legal authority and responsibility to 
 engage in fire suppression;
 ``(C) is engaged in the prevention, control, and 
 extinguishment of fires or response to emergency 
 situations where life, property, or the environment is 
 at risk, including the prevention, control, 
 suppression, or management of wildland fires; and
 ``(D) performs such activities as a primary 
 responsibility of his or her job.
 ``(2) Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means Secretary of 
 Labor.''.
 (2) Research cooperation.--Not later than 120 days after 
 the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Labor shall 
 establish a process by which a Federal employee in fire 
 protection activities filing a claim related to a disease on 
 the list established by section 8143b of title 5, United States 
 Code, will be informed about and offered the opportunity to 
 contribute to science by voluntarily enrolling in the National 
 Firefighter Registry or a similar research or public health 
 initiative conducted by the Centers for Disease Control and 
 Prevention.
 (3) Agenda for further review.--Not later than 3 years 
 after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall--
 (A) evaluate the best available scientific evidence 
 of the risk to an employee in fire protection 
 activities of developing breast cancer, gynecological 
 cancer, and rhabdomyolysis;
 (B) add breast cancer, gynecological cancer, and 
 rhabdomyolysis to the list established under section 
 8143b of title 5, United States Code, by rule in 
 accordance with subsection (a)(3) of such section, if 
 the Secretary determines that such evidence supports 
 such addition; and
 (C) submit a report of the Secretary's findings 
 under subparagraph (A) and the Secretary's 
 determination under subparagraph (B) to the Committee 
 on Education and Labor of the House and the Committee 
 on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the 
 Senate.
 (4) Report on federal wildland firefighters.--The Director 
 of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
 shall conduct a comprehensive study on long-term health effects 
 that Federal wildland firefighters who are eligible to receive 
 workers' compensation under chapter 81 of title 5, United 
 States Code, experience after being exposed to fires, smoke, 
 and toxic fumes when in service. Such study shall include--
 (A) the race, ethnicity, age, gender, and time of 
 service of such Federal wildland firefighters 
 participating in the study; and
 (B) recommendations to Congress on what legislative 
 actions are needed to support such Federal wildland 
 firefighters in preventing health issues from this 
 toxic exposure, similar to veterans that are exposed to 
 burn pits.
 (5) Application.--The amendments made by this section shall 
 apply to claims for compensation filed on or after the date of 
 enactment of this Act.
 (6) Report on affected employees.--Beginning 1 year after 
 the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall include 
 in each annual report on implementation of the Federal 
 Employees' Compensation Act program and issues arising under it 
 that the Secretary makes pursuant to section 8152 of title 5, 
 United States Code, the total number and demographics of 
 employees with diseases and conditions described in the 
 amendments made by this Act as of the date of such annual 
 report, disaggregated by the specific condition or conditions, 
 for the purposes of understanding the scope of the problem. The 
 Secretary may include any information they deem necessary and, 
 as appropriate, may make recommendations for additional actions 
 that could be taken to minimize the risk of adverse health 
 impacts for Federal employees in fire protection activities.
 (b) Subrogation of Continuation of Pay.--
 (1) Subrogation of the united states.--Section 8131 of 
 title 5, United States Code, is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a), by inserting ``continuation 
 of pay or'' before ``compensation''; and
 (B) in subsection (c), by inserting ``continuation 
 of pay or'' before ``compensation already paid''.
 (2) Adjustment after recovery from a third person.--Section 
 8132 of title 5, United States Code, is amended--
 (A) by inserting ``continuation of pay or'' before 
 ``compensation'' the first and second place it appears;
 (B) by striking ``in his behalf'' and inserting 
 ``on his behalf'';
 (C) by inserting ``continuation of pay and'' before 
 ``compensation'' the third place it appears; and
 (D) by striking the 4th sentence and inserting the 
 following: ``If continuation of pay or compensation has 
 not been paid to the beneficiary, the money or property 
 shall be credited against continuation of pay or 
 compensation payable to him by the United States for 
 the same injury.''.
 (c) Protection of Firefighters From Toxic Chemicals and Other 
Contaminants.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the 
 United States shall submit to the Committee on Education and 
 Labor of the House of Representatives and the Committee on 
 Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate a report 
 that evaluates the health and safety impacts on employees 
 engaged in fire protection activities that result from the 
 employees' exposure to toxic chemicals and other contaminants 
 that could cause human health problems. The report may include 
 information on--
 (A) the degree to which such programs and policies 
 include consideration of the possibility of toxic 
 exposure of such employees who may come into contact 
 with residue from fibers, combusted building materials 
 such as asbestos, household chemicals, polymers, flame-
 retardant chemicals, and other potentially toxic 
 contaminants;
 (B) the availability and proper maintenance of 
 professional protective equipment and secure storage of 
 such equipment in employees' homes and automotive 
 vehicles;
 (C) the availability of home instructions for 
 employees regarding toxins and contaminants, and the 
 appropriate procedures to counteract exposure to same;
 (D) the employees' interests in protecting the 
 health and safety of family members from exposure to 
 toxic chemicals and other contaminants to which the 
 employees may have been exposed; and
 (E) other related factors.
 (2) Context.--In preparing the report required under 
 paragraph (1), the Comptroller General of the United States 
 may, as appropriate, provide information in a format that 
 delineates high risk urban areas from rural communities.
 (3) Department of labor consideration.--After issuance of 
 the report required under paragraph (1), the Secretary of Labor 
 shall consider such report's findings and assess its 
 applicability for purposes of the amendments made by subsection 
 (b).
 (d) Increase in Time-period for FECA Claimant to Supply Supporting 
Documentation to Office of Worker's Compensation.--Not later than 60 
days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Labor 
shall--
 (1) amend section 10.121 of title 20, Code of Federal 
 Regulations, by striking ``30 days'' and inserting ``60 days''; 
 and
 (2) modify the Federal Employees Compensation Act manual to 
 reflect the changes to such section made by the Secretary 
 pursuant to paragraph (1).

SEC. 5908. DOCUMENTING AND RESPONDING TO DISCRIMINATION AGAINST 
 MIGRANTS ABROAD.

 (a) Information to Include in Annual Country Reports on Human 
Rights Practices.--The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2151 
et seq.) is amended--
 (1) in section 116(d) (22 U.S.C. 2151n(d))--
 (A) in paragraph (11)(C), by striking ``and'' at 
 the end;
 (B) in paragraph (12)(C)(ii), by striking the 
 period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(13) wherever applicable, violence or discrimination that 
 affects the fundamental freedoms or human rights of migrants 
 located in a foreign country.''; and
 (2) in section 502B(b) (22 U.S.C. 2304(b)), by inserting 
 after the ninth sentence the following: ``Wherever applicable, 
 such report shall also include information regarding violence 
 or discrimination that affects the fundamental freedoms or 
 human rights of migrants permanently or temporarily located in 
 a foreign country.''.
 (b) Review at Diplomatic and Consular Posts.--In preparing the 
annual country reports on human rights practices required under section 
116 or 502B of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2151n and 
2304), as amended by subsection (a), the Secretary of State shall 
obtain information from each diplomatic and consular post with respect 
to--
 (1) incidents of violence against migrants located in the 
 country in which such post is located;
 (2) an analysis of the factors enabling or aggravating such 
 incidents, such as government policy, societal pressure, or the 
 actions of external actors; and
 (3) the response, whether public or private, of the 
 personnel of such post with respect to such incidents.
 (c) Migrant.--For the purposes of this section and the amendments 
made by this section, the term ``migrant'' includes economic migrants, 
guest workers, refugees, asylum-seekers, stateless persons, trafficked 
persons, undocumented migrants, and unaccompanied children, in addition 
to other individuals who change their country of usual residence 
temporarily or permanently.

SEC. 5909. EXTENDING THE STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS FOR CERTAIN MONEY 
 LAUNDERING OFFENSES.

 Section 1956 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding 
at the end the following:
 ``(j) Seven-year Limitation.--Notwithstanding section 3282, no 
person shall be prosecuted, tried, or punished for a violation of this 
section or section 1957 if the specified unlawful activity constituting 
the violation is the activity defined in subsection (c)(7)(B) of this 
section, unless the indictment is found or the information is 
instituted not later than 7 years after the date on which the offense 
was committed.''.

SEC. 5910. FOREIGN CORRUPTION ACCOUNTABILITY SANCTIONS AND CRIMINAL 
 ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (A) When public officials and their allies use the 
 mechanisms of government to engage in extortion or 
 bribery, they impoverish their countries' economic 
 health and harm citizens.
 (B) By empowering the United States Government to 
 hold to account foreign public officials and their 
 associates who engage in extortion or bribery, the 
 United States can deter malfeasance and ultimately 
 serve the citizens of fragile countries suffocated by 
 corrupt bureaucracies.
 (C) The Special Inspector General for Afghan 
 Reconstruction's 2016 report ``Corruption in Conflict: 
 Lessons from the U.S. Experience in Afghanistan'' 
 included the recommendation, ``Congress should consider 
 enacting legislation that authorizes sanctions against 
 foreign government officials or their associates who 
 engage in corruption.''.
 (2) Authorization of imposition of sanctions.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary of State may impose 
 the sanctions described in subparagraph (B) with 
 respect to any foreign person who is an individual the 
 Secretary of State determines--
 (i) engages in public corruption activities 
 against a United States person, including--
 (I) soliciting or accepting bribes;
 (II) using the authority of the 
 state to extort payments; or
 (III) engaging in extortion; or
 (ii) conspires to engage in, or knowingly 
 and materially assists, sponsors, or provides 
 significant financial, material, or 
 technological support for any of the activities 
 described in clause (i).
 (B) Sanctions described.--
 (i) Inadmissibility to united states.--A 
 foreign person who is subject to sanctions 
 under this subsection shall be--
 (I) inadmissible to the United 
 States;
 (II) ineligible to receive a visa 
 or other documentation to enter the 
 United States; and
 (III) otherwise ineligible to be 
 admitted or paroled into the United 
 States or to receive any other benefit 
 under the Immigration and Nationality 
 Act (8 U.S.C. 1101 et seq.).
 (ii) Current visas revoked.--
 (I) In general.--The visa or other 
 entry documentation of a foreign person 
 who is subject to sanctions under this 
 subsection shall be revoked regardless 
 of when such visa or other entry 
 documentation is issued.
 (II) Effect of revocation.--A 
 revocation under subclause (I) shall--
 (aa) take effect 
 immediately; and
 (bb) automatically cancel 
 any other valid visa or entry 
 documentation that is in the 
 foreign person's possession.
 (C) Exception to comply with law enforcement 
 objectives and agreement regarding headquarters of 
 united nations.--Sanctions described under subparagraph 
 (B) shall not apply to a foreign person if admitting 
 the person into the United States--
 (i) would further important law enforcement 
 objectives; or
 (ii) is necessary to permit the United 
 States to comply with the Agreement regarding 
 the Headquarters of the United Nations, signed 
 at Lake Success June 26, 1947, and entered into 
 force November 21, 1947, between the United 
 Nations and the United States, or other 
 applicable international obligations of the 
 United States.
 (D) Termination of sanctions.--The Secretary of 
 State may terminate the application of sanctions under 
 this paragraph with respect to a foreign person if the 
 Secretary of State determines and reports to the 
 appropriate congressional committees not later than 15 
 days before the termination of the sanctions that--
 (i) the person is no longer engaged in the 
 activity that was the basis for the sanctions 
 or has taken significant verifiable steps 
 toward stopping the activity;
 (ii) the Secretary of State has received 
 reliable assurances that the person will not 
 knowingly engage in activity subject to 
 sanctions under this part in the future; or
 (iii) the termination of the sanctions is 
 in the national security interests of the 
 United States.
 (E) Regulatory authority.--The Secretary of State 
 shall issue such regulations, licenses, and orders as 
 are necessary to carry out this paragraph.
 (F) Appropriate congressional committees defined.--
 In this paragraph, the term ``appropriate congressional 
 committees'' means--
 (i) the Committee on the Judiciary and the 
 Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (ii) the Committee on the Judiciary and the 
 Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate.
 (3) Reports to congress.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary of State shall 
 submit to the appropriate congressional committees, in 
 accordance with subparagraph (B), a report that 
 includes--
 (i) a list of each foreign person with 
 respect to whom the Secretary of State imposed 
 sanctions pursuant to paragraph (2) during the 
 year preceding the submission of the report;
 (ii) the number of foreign persons with 
 respect to which the Secretary of State--
 (I) imposed sanctions under 
 paragraph (2)(A) during that year; and
 (II) terminated sanctions under 
 paragraph (2)(D) during that year;
 (iii) the dates on which such sanctions 
 were imposed or terminated, as the case may be;
 (iv) the reasons for imposing or 
 terminating such sanctions;
 (v) the total number of foreign persons 
 considered under paragraph (2)C) for whom 
 sanctions were not imposed; and
 (vi) recommendations as to whether the 
 imposition of additional sanctions would be an 
 added deterrent in preventing public 
 corruption.
 (B) Dates for submission.--
 (i) Initial report.--The Secretary of State 
 shall submit the initial report under 
 subparagraph (A) not later than 120 days after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (ii) Subsequent reports.--The Secretary of 
 State shall submit a subsequent report under 
 subparagraph (A) on December 10, or the first 
 day thereafter on which both Houses of Congress 
 are in session, of--
 (I) the calendar year in which the 
 initial report is submitted if the 
 initial report is submitted before 
 December 10 of that calendar year; and
 (II) each calendar year thereafter.
 (C) Form of report.--
 (i) In general.--Each report required by 
 subparagraph (A) shall be submitted in 
 unclassified form, but may include a classified 
 annex.
 (ii) Exception.--The name of a foreign 
 person to be included in the list required by 
 subparagraph (A)(i) may be submitted in the 
 classified annex authorized by clause (i) only 
 if the Secretary of State--
 (I) determines that it is vital for 
 the national security interests of the 
 United States to do so; and
 (II) uses the annex in a manner 
 consistent with congressional intent 
 and the purposes of this subsection.
 (D) Public availability.--
 (i) In general.--The unclassified portion 
 of the report required by subparagraph (A) 
 shall be made available to the public, 
 including through publication in the Federal 
 Register.
 (ii) Nonapplicability of confidentiality 
 requirement with respect to visa records.--The 
 Secretary of State shall publish the list 
 required by subparagraph (A)(i) without regard 
 to the requirements of section 222(f) of the 
 Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 
 1202(f)) with respect to confidentiality of 
 records pertaining to the issuance or refusal 
 of visas or permits to enter the United States.
 (E) Appropriate congressional committees defined.--
 In this paragraph, the term ``appropriate congressional 
 committees'' means--
 (i) the Committee on Foreign Affairs, and 
 the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (ii) the Committee on Foreign Relations, 
 and the Committee on the Judiciary of the 
 Senate.
 (4) Sunset.--
 (A) In general.--The authority to impose sanctions 
 under paragraph (2) and the requirements to submit 
 reports under paragraph (3) shall terminate on the date 
 that is 6 years after the date of enactment of this 
 Act.
 (B) Continuation in effect of sanctions.--Sanctions 
 imposed under paragraph (2) on or before the date 
 specified in subparagraph (A), and in effect as of such 
 date, shall remain in effect until terminated in 
 accordance with the requirements of paragraph (2)(D).
 (5) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) Entity.--The term ``entity'' means a 
 partnership, association, trust, joint venture, 
 corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization.
 (B) Foreign person.--The term ``foreign person'' 
 means a person that is not a United States person.
 (C) United states person.--The term ``United States 
 person'' means a person that is a United States 
 citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized 
 under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction 
 within the United States (including foreign branches), 
 or any person in the United States.
 (D) Person.--The term ``person'' means an 
 individual or entity.
 (E) Public corruption.--The term ``public 
 corruption'' means the unlawful exercise of entrusted 
 public power for private gain, including by bribery, 
 nepotism, fraud, or embezzlement.
 (b) Justice for Victims of Kleptocracy.--
 (1) Forfeited property.--
 (A) In general.--Chapter 46 of title 18, United 
 States Code, is amended by adding at the end the 
 following:
``Sec. 988. Accounting of certain forfeited property
 ``(a) Accounting.--The Attorney General shall make available to the 
public an accounting of any property relating to foreign government 
corruption that is forfeited to the United States under section 981 or 
982.
 ``(b) Format.--The accounting described under subsection (a) shall 
be published on the website of the Department of Justice in a format 
that includes the following:
 ``(1) A heading as follows: `Assets stolen from the people 
 of ______ and recovered by the United States', the blank space 
 being filled with the name of the foreign government that is 
 the target of corruption.
 ``(2) The total amount recovered by the United States on 
 behalf of the foreign people that is the target of corruption 
 at the time when such recovered funds are deposited into the 
 Department of Justice Asset Forfeiture Fund or the Department 
 of the Treasury Forfeiture Fund.
 ``(c) Updated Website.--The Attorney General shall update the 
website of the Department of Justice to include an accounting of any 
new property relating to foreign government corruption that has been 
forfeited to the United States under section 981 or 982 not later than 
14 days after such forfeiture, unless such update would compromise an 
ongoing law enforcement investigation.''.
 (B) Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for 
 chapter 46 of title 18, United States Code, is amended 
 by adding at the end the following:

``988. Accounting of certain forfeited property.''.
 (2) Sense of congress.--It is the sense of Congress that 
 recovered assets be returned for the benefit of the people 
 harmed by the corruption under conditions that reasonably 
 ensure the transparent and effective use, administration and 
 monitoring of returned proceeds.

SEC. 5911. FEDRAMP AUTHORIZATION ACT.

 (a) Short Title.--This section may be cited as the ``FedRAMP 
Authorization Act''.
 (b) Amendment.--Chapter 36 of title 44, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 3607. Definitions
 ``(a) In General.--Except as provided under subsection (b), the 
definitions under sections 3502 and 3552 apply to this section through 
section 3616.
 ``(b) Additional Definitions.--In this section through section 
3616:
 ``(1) Administrator.--The term `Administrator' means the 
 Administrator of General Services.
 ``(2) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term 
 `appropriate congressional committees' means the Committee on 
 Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate and 
 the Committee on Oversight and Reform of the House of 
 Representatives.
 ``(3) Authorization to operate; federal information.--The 
 terms `authorization to operate' and `Federal information' have 
 the meaning given those term in Circular A-130 of the Office of 
 Management and Budget entitled `Managing Information as a 
 Strategic Resource', or any successor document.
 ``(4) Cloud computing.--The term `cloud computing' has the 
 meaning given the term in Special Publication 800-145 of the 
 National Institute of Standards and Technology, or any 
 successor document.
 ``(5) Cloud service provider.--The term `cloud service 
 provider' means an entity offering cloud computing products or 
 services to agencies.
 ``(6) FedRAMP.--The term `FedRAMP' means the Federal Risk 
 and Authorization Management Program established under section 
 3608.
 ``(7) FedRAMP authorization.--The term `FedRAMP 
 authorization' means a certification that a cloud computing 
 product or service has--
 ``(A) completed a FedRAMP authorization process, as 
 determined by the Administrator; or
 ``(B) received a FedRAMP provisional authorization 
 to operate, as determined by the FedRAMP Board.
 ``(8) Fedramp authorization package.--The term `FedRAMP 
 authorization package' means the essential information that can 
 be used by an agency to determine whether to authorize the 
 operation of an information system or the use of a designated 
 set of common controls for all cloud computing products and 
 services authorized by FedRAMP.
 ``(9) FedRAMP board.--The term `FedRAMP Board' means the 
 board established under section 3610.
 ``(10) Independent assessment service.--The term 
 `independent assessment service' means a third-party 
 organization accredited by the Administrator to undertake 
 conformity assessments of cloud service providers and the 
 products or services of cloud service providers.
 ``(11) Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the Secretary 
 of Homeland Security.
``Sec. 3608. Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program
 ``There is established within the General Services Administration 
the Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program. The 
Administrator, subject to section 3614, shall establish a Government-
wide program that provides a standardized, reusable approach to 
security assessment and authorization for cloud computing products and 
services that process unclassified information used by agencies.
``Sec. 3609. Roles and responsibilities of the General Services 
 Administration
 ``(a) Roles and Responsibilities.--The Administrator shall--
 ``(1) in consultation with the Secretary, develop, 
 coordinate, and implement a process to support agency review, 
 reuse, and standardization, where appropriate, of security 
 assessments of cloud computing products and services, 
 including, as appropriate, oversight of continuous monitoring 
 of cloud computing products and services, pursuant to guidance 
 issued by the Director pursuant to section 3614;
 ``(2) establish processes and identify criteria consistent 
 with guidance issued by the Director under section 3614 to make 
 a cloud computing product or service eligible for a FedRAMP 
 authorization and validate whether a cloud computing product or 
 service has a FedRAMP authorization;
 ``(3) develop and publish templates, best practices, 
 technical assistance, and other materials to support the 
 authorization of cloud computing products and services and 
 increase the speed, effectiveness, and transparency of the 
 authorization process, consistent with standards and guidelines 
 established by the Director of the National Institute of 
 Standards and Technology and relevant statutes;
 ``(4) establish and update guidance on the boundaries of 
 FedRAMP authorization packages to enhance the security and 
 protection of Federal information and promote transparency for 
 agencies and users as to which services are included in the 
 scope of a FedRAMP authorization;
 ``(5) grant FedRAMP authorizations to cloud computing 
 products and services consistent with the guidance and 
 direction of the FedRAMP Board;
 ``(6) establish and maintain a public comment process for 
 proposed guidance and other FedRAMP directives that may have a 
 direct impact on cloud service providers and agencies before 
 the issuance of such guidance or other FedRAMP directives;
 ``(7) coordinate with the FedRAMP Board, the Director of 
 the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, and other 
 entities identified by the Administrator, with the concurrence 
 of the Director and the Secretary, to establish and regularly 
 update a framework for continuous monitoring under section 
 3553;
 ``(8) provide a secure mechanism for storing and sharing 
 necessary data, including FedRAMP authorization packages, to 
 enable better reuse of such packages across agencies, including 
 making available any information and data necessary for 
 agencies to fulfill the requirements of section 3613;
 ``(9) provide regular updates to applicant cloud service 
 providers on the status of any cloud computing product or 
 service during an assessment process;
 ``(10) regularly review, in consultation with the FedRAMP 
 Board--
 ``(A) the costs associated with the independent 
 assessment services described in section 3611; and
 ``(B) the information relating to foreign interests 
 submitted pursuant to section 3612;
 ``(11) in coordination with the Director of the National 
 Institute of Standards and Technology, the Director, the 
 Secretary, and other stakeholders, as appropriate, determine 
 the sufficiency of underlying standards and requirements to 
 identify and assess the provenance of the software in cloud 
 services and products;
 ``(12) support the Federal Secure Cloud Advisory Committee 
 established pursuant to section 3616; and
 ``(13) take such other actions as the Administrator may 
 determine necessary to carry out FedRAMP.
 ``(b) Website.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Administrator shall maintain a 
 public website to serve as the authoritative repository for 
 FedRAMP, including the timely publication and updates for all 
 relevant information, guidance, determinations, and other 
 materials required under subsection (a).
 ``(2) Criteria and process for fedramp authorization 
 priorities.--The Administrator shall develop and make publicly 
 available on the website described in paragraph (1) the 
 criteria and process for prioritizing and selecting cloud 
 computing products and services that will receive a FedRAMP 
 authorization, in consultation with the FedRAMP Board and the 
 Chief Information Officers Council.
 ``(c) Evaluation of Automation Procedures.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Administrator, in coordination with 
 the Secretary, shall assess and evaluate available automation 
 capabilities and procedures to improve the efficiency and 
 effectiveness of the issuance of FedRAMP authorizations, 
 including continuous monitoring of cloud computing products and 
 services.
 ``(2) Means for automation.--Not later than 1 year after 
 the date of enactment of this section, and updated regularly 
 thereafter, the Administrator shall establish a means for the 
 automation of security assessments and reviews.
 ``(d) Metrics for Authorization.--The Administrator shall establish 
annual metrics regarding the time and quality of the assessments 
necessary for completion of a FedRAMP authorization process in a manner 
that can be consistently tracked over time in conjunction with the 
periodic testing and evaluation process pursuant to section 3554 in a 
manner that minimizes the agency reporting burden.
``Sec. 3610. FedRAMP Board
 ``(a) Establishment.--There is established a FedRAMP Board to 
provide input and recommendations to the Administrator regarding the 
requirements and guidelines for, and the prioritization of, security 
assessments of cloud computing products and services.
 ``(b) Membership.--The FedRAMP Board shall consist of not more than 
7 senior officials or experts from agencies appointed by the Director, 
in consultation with the Administrator, from each of the following:
 ``(1) The Department of Defense.
 ``(2) The Department of Homeland Security.
 ``(3) The General Services Administration.
 ``(4) Such other agencies as determined by the Director, in 
 consultation with the Administrator.
 ``(c) Qualifications.--Members of the FedRAMP Board appointed under 
subsection (b) shall have technical expertise in domains relevant to 
FedRAMP, such as--
 ``(1) cloud computing;
 ``(2) cybersecurity;
 ``(3) privacy;
 ``(4) risk management; and
 ``(5) other competencies identified by the Director to 
 support the secure authorization of cloud services and 
 products.
 ``(d) Duties.--The FedRAMP Board shall--
 ``(1) in consultation with the Administrator, serve as a 
 resource for best practices to accelerate the process for 
 obtaining a FedRAMP authorization;
 ``(2) establish and regularly update requirements and 
 guidelines for security authorizations of cloud computing 
 products and services, consistent with standards and guidelines 
 established by the Director of the National Institute of 
 Standards and Technology, to be used in the determination of 
 FedRAMP authorizations;
 ``(3) monitor and oversee, to the greatest extent 
 practicable, the processes and procedures by which agencies 
 determine and validate requirements for a FedRAMP 
 authorization, including periodic review of the agency 
 determinations described in section 3613(b);
 ``(4) ensure consistency and transparency between agencies 
 and cloud service providers in a manner that minimizes 
 confusion and engenders trust; and
 ``(5) perform such other roles and responsibilities as the 
 Director may assign, with concurrence from the Administrator.
 ``(e) Determinations of Demand for Cloud Computing Products and 
Services.--The FedRAMP Board may consult with the Chief Information 
Officers Council to establish a process, which may be made available on 
the website maintained under section 3609(b), for prioritizing and 
accepting the cloud computing products and services to be granted a 
FedRAMP authorization.
``Sec. 3611. Independent assessment
 ``The Administrator may determine whether FedRAMP may use an 
independent assessment service to analyze, validate, and attest to the 
quality and compliance of security assessment materials provided by 
cloud service providers during the course of a determination of whether 
to use a cloud computing product or service.
``Sec. 3612. Declaration of foreign interests
 ``(a) In General.--An independent assessment service that performs 
services described in section 3611 shall annually submit to the 
Administrator information relating to any foreign interest, foreign 
influence, or foreign control of the independent assessment service.
 ``(b) Updates.--Not later than 48 hours after there is a change in 
foreign ownership or control of an independent assessment service that 
performs services described in section 3611, the independent assessment 
service shall submit to the Administrator an update to the information 
submitted under subsection (a).
 ``(c) Certification.--The Administrator may require a 
representative of an independent assessment service to certify the 
accuracy and completeness of any information submitted under this 
section.
``Sec. 3613. Roles and responsibilities of agencies
 ``(a) In General.--In implementing the requirements of FedRAMP, the 
head of each agency shall, consistent with guidance issued by the 
Director pursuant to section 3614--
 ``(1) promote the use of cloud computing products and 
 services that meet FedRAMP security requirements and other 
 risk-based performance requirements as determined by the 
 Director, in consultation with the Secretary;
 ``(2) confirm whether there is a FedRAMP authorization in 
 the secure mechanism provided under section 3609(a)(8) before 
 beginning the process of granting a FedRAMP authorization for a 
 cloud computing product or service;
 ``(3) to the extent practicable, for any cloud computing 
 product or service the agency seeks to authorize that has 
 received a FedRAMP authorization, use the existing assessments 
 of security controls and materials within any FedRAMP 
 authorization package for that cloud computing product or 
 service; and
 ``(4) provide to the Director data and information required 
 by the Director pursuant to section 3614 to determine how 
 agencies are meeting metrics established by the Administrator.
 ``(b) Attestation.--Upon completing an assessment or authorization 
activity with respect to a particular cloud computing product or 
service, if an agency determines that the information and data the 
agency has reviewed under paragraph (2) or (3) of subsection (a) is 
wholly or substantially deficient for the purposes of performing an 
authorization of the cloud computing product or service, the head of 
the agency shall document as part of the resulting FedRAMP 
authorization package the reasons for this determination.
 ``(c) Submission of Authorizations to Operate Required.--Upon 
issuance of an agency authorization to operate based on a FedRAMP 
authorization, the head of the agency shall provide a copy of its 
authorization to operate letter and any supplementary information 
required pursuant to section 3609(a) to the Administrator.
 ``(d) Submission of Policies Required.--Not later than 180 days 
after the date on which the Director issues guidance in accordance with 
section 3614(1), the head of each agency, acting through the chief 
information officer of the agency, shall submit to the Director all 
agency policies relating to the authorization of cloud computing 
products and services.
 ``(e) Presumption of Adequacy.--
 ``(1) In general.--The assessment of security controls and 
 materials within the authorization package for a FedRAMP 
 authorization shall be presumed adequate for use in an agency 
 authorization to operate cloud computing products and services.
 ``(2) Information security requirements.--The presumption 
 under paragraph (1) does not modify or alter--
 ``(A) the responsibility of any agency to ensure 
 compliance with subchapter II of chapter 35 for any 
 cloud computing product or service used by the agency; 
 or
 ``(B) the authority of the head of any agency to 
 make a determination that there is a demonstrable need 
 for additional security requirements beyond the 
 security requirements included in a FedRAMP 
 authorization for a particular control implementation.
``Sec. 3614. Roles and responsibilities of the Office of Management and 
 Budget
 ``The Director shall--
 ``(1) in consultation with the Administrator and the 
 Secretary, issue guidance that--
 ``(A) specifies the categories or characteristics 
 of cloud computing products and services that are 
 within the scope of FedRAMP;
 ``(B) includes requirements for agencies to obtain 
 a FedRAMP authorization when operating a cloud 
 computing product or service described in subparagraph 
 (A) as a Federal information system; and
 ``(C) encompasses, to the greatest extent 
 practicable, all necessary and appropriate cloud 
 computing products and services;
 ``(2) issue guidance describing additional responsibilities 
 of FedRAMP and the FedRAMP Board to accelerate the adoption of 
 secure cloud computing products and services by the Federal 
 Government;
 ``(3) in consultation with the Administrator, establish a 
 process to periodically review FedRAMP authorization packages 
 to support the secure authorization and reuse of secure cloud 
 products and services;
 ``(4) oversee the effectiveness of FedRAMP and the FedRAMP 
 Board, including the compliance by the FedRAMP Board with the 
 duties described in section 3610(d); and
 ``(5) to the greatest extent practicable, encourage and 
 promote consistency of the assessment, authorization, adoption, 
 and use of secure cloud computing products and services within 
 and across agencies.
``Sec. 3615. Reports to Congress; GAO report
 ``(a) Reports to Congress.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of this section, and annually thereafter, the Director shall 
submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report that 
includes the following:
 ``(1) During the preceding year, the status, efficiency, 
 and effectiveness of the General Services Administration under 
 section 3609 and agencies under section 3613 and in supporting 
 the speed, effectiveness, sharing, reuse, and security of 
 authorizations to operate for secure cloud computing products 
 and services.
 ``(2) Progress towards meeting the metrics required under 
 section 3609(d).
 ``(3) Data on FedRAMP authorizations.
 ``(4) The average length of time to issue FedRAMP 
 authorizations.
 ``(5) The number of FedRAMP authorizations submitted, 
 issued, and denied for the preceding year.
 ``(6) A review of progress made during the preceding year 
 in advancing automation techniques to securely automate FedRAMP 
 processes and to accelerate reporting under this section.
 ``(7) The number and characteristics of authorized cloud 
 computing products and services in use at each agency 
 consistent with guidance provided by the Director under section 
 3614.
 ``(8) A review of FedRAMP measures to ensure the security 
 of data stored or processed by cloud service providers, which 
 may include--
 ``(A) geolocation restrictions for provided 
 products or services;
 ``(B) disclosures of foreign elements of supply 
 chains of acquired products or services;
 ``(C) continued disclosures of ownership of cloud 
 service providers by foreign entities; and
 ``(D) encryption for data processed, stored, or 
 transmitted by cloud service providers.
 ``(b) GAO Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this section, the Comptroller General of the United States 
shall report to the appropriate congressional committees an assessment 
of the following:
 ``(1) The costs incurred by agencies and cloud service 
 providers relating to the issuance of FedRAMP authorizations.
 ``(2) The extent to which agencies have processes in place 
 to continuously monitor the implementation of cloud computing 
 products and services operating as Federal information systems.
 ``(3) How often and for which categories of products and 
 services agencies use FedRAMP authorizations.
 ``(4) The unique costs and potential burdens incurred by 
 cloud computing companies that are small business concerns (as 
 defined in section 3(a) of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 
 632(a)) as a part of the FedRAMP authorization process.
``Sec. 3616. Federal Secure Cloud Advisory Committee
 ``(a) Establishment, Purposes, and Duties.--
 ``(1) Establishment.--There is established a Federal Secure 
 Cloud Advisory Committee (referred to in this section as the 
 `Committee') to ensure effective and ongoing coordination of 
 agency adoption, use, authorization, monitoring, acquisition, 
 and security of cloud computing products and services to enable 
 agency mission and administrative priorities.
 ``(2) Purposes.--The purposes of the Committee are the 
 following:
 ``(A) To examine the operations of FedRAMP and 
 determine ways that authorization processes can 
 continuously be improved, including the following:
 ``(i) Measures to increase agency reuse of 
 FedRAMP authorizations.
 ``(ii) Proposed actions that can be adopted 
 to reduce the burden, confusion, and cost 
 associated with FedRAMP authorizations for 
 cloud service providers.
 ``(iii) Measures to increase the number of 
 FedRAMP authorizations for cloud computing 
 products and services offered by small 
 businesses concerns (as defined by section 3(a) 
 of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 632(a)).
 ``(iv) Proposed actions that can be adopted 
 to reduce the burden and cost of FedRAMP 
 authorizations for agencies.
 ``(B) Collect information and feedback on agency 
 compliance with and implementation of FedRAMP 
 requirements.
 ``(C) Serve as a forum that facilitates 
 communication and collaboration among the FedRAMP 
 stakeholder community.
 ``(3) Duties.--The duties of the Committee include 
 providing advice and recommendations to the Administrator, the 
 FedRAMP Board, and agencies on technical, financial, 
 programmatic, and operational matters regarding secure adoption 
 of cloud computing products and services.
 ``(b) Members.--
 ``(1) Composition.--The Committee shall be comprised of not 
 more than 15 members who are qualified representatives from the 
 public and private sectors, appointed by the Administrator, in 
 consultation with the Director, as follows:
 ``(A) The Administrator or the Administrator's 
 designee, who shall be the Chair of the Committee.
 ``(B) At least 1 representative each from the 
 Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency and 
 the National Institute of Standards and Technology.
 ``(C) At least 2 officials who serve as the Chief 
 Information Security Officer within an agency, who 
 shall be required to maintain such a position 
 throughout the duration of their service on the 
 Committee.
 ``(D) At least 1 official serving as Chief 
 Procurement Officer (or equivalent) in an agency, who 
 shall be required to maintain such a position 
 throughout the duration of their service on the 
 Committee.
 ``(E) At least 1 individual representing an 
 independent assessment service.
 ``(F) At least 5 representatives from unique 
 businesses that primarily provide cloud computing 
 services or products, including at least 2 
 representatives from a small business concern (as 
 defined by section 3(a) of the Small Business Act (15 
 U.S.C. 632(a))).
 ``(G) At least 2 other representatives of the 
 Federal Government as the Administrator determines 
 necessary to provide sufficient balance, insights, or 
 expertise to the Committee.
 ``(2) Deadline for appointment.--Each member of the 
 Committee shall be appointed not later than 90 days after the 
 date of enactment of this section.
 ``(3) Period of appointment; vacancies.--
 ``(A) In general.--Each non-Federal member of the 
 Committee shall be appointed for a term of 3 years, 
 except that the initial terms for members may be 
 staggered 1-, 2-, or 3-year terms to establish a 
 rotation in which one-third of the members are selected 
 each year. Any such member may be appointed for not 
 more than 2 consecutive terms.
 ``(B) Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the Committee 
 shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the 
 same manner in which the original appointment was made. 
 Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before 
 the expiration of the term for which the member's 
 predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for 
 the remainder of that term. A member may serve after 
 the expiration of that member's term until a successor 
 has taken office.
 ``(c) Meetings and Rules of Procedures.--
 ``(1) Meetings.--The Committee shall hold not fewer than 3 
 meetings in a calendar year, at such time and place as 
 determined by the Chair.
 ``(2) Initial meeting.--Not later than 120 days after the 
 date of enactment of this section, the Committee shall meet and 
 begin the operations of the Committee.
 ``(3) Rules of procedure.--The Committee may establish 
 rules for the conduct of the business of the Committee if such 
 rules are not inconsistent with this section or other 
 applicable law.
 ``(d) Employee Status.--
 ``(1) In general.--A member of the Committee (other than a 
 member who is appointed to the Committee in connection with 
 another Federal appointment) shall not be considered an 
 employee of the Federal Government by reason of any service as 
 such a member, except for the purposes of section 5703 of title 
 5, relating to travel expenses.
 ``(2) Pay not permitted.--A member of the Committee covered 
 by paragraph (1) may not receive pay by reason of service on 
 the Committee.
 ``(e) Applicability to the Federal Advisory Committee Act.--Section 
14 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App.) shall not 
apply to the Committee.
 ``(f) Detail of Employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be 
detailed to the Committee without reimbursement from the Committee, and 
such detailee shall retain the rights, status, and privileges of his or 
her regular employment without interruption.
 ``(g) Postal Services.--The Committee may use the United States 
mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as agencies.
 ``(h) Reports.--
 ``(1) Interim reports.--The Committee may submit to the 
 Administrator and Congress interim reports containing such 
 findings, conclusions, and recommendations as have been agreed 
 to by the Committee.
 ``(2) Annual reports.--Not later than 540 days after the 
 date of enactment of this section, and annually thereafter, the 
 Committee shall submit to the Administrator and Congress a 
 report containing such findings, conclusions, and 
 recommendations as have been agreed to by the Committee.''.
 (c) Technical and Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for 
chapter 36 of title 44, United States Code, is amended by adding at the 
end the following new items:

``3607. Definitions.
``3608. Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program.
``3609. Roles and responsibilities of the General Services 
 Administration.
``3610. FedRAMP Board.
``3611. Independent assessment.
``3612. Declaration of foreign interests.
``3613. Roles and responsibilities of agencies.
``3614. Roles and responsibilities of the Office of Management and 
 Budget.
``3615. Reports to Congress; GAO report.
``3616. Federal Secure Cloud Advisory Committee.''.
 (d) Sunset.--
 (1) In general.--Effective on the date that is 5 years 
 after the date of enactment of this Act, chapter 36 of title 
 44, United States Code, is amended by striking sections 3607 
 through 3616.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Effective on the date that is 5 
 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the table of 
 sections for chapter 36 of title 44, United States Code, is 
 amended by striking the items relating to sections 3607 through 
 3616.
 (e) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section or any amendment 
made by this section shall be construed as altering or impairing the 
authorities of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget or 
the Secretary of Homeland Security under subchapter II of chapter 35 of 
title 44, United States Code.

SEC. 5912. AMENDMENT.

 Section 1115 of title 31, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by amending subsection (b)(5) to read as follows:
 ``(5) provide a description of how the performance goals 
 are to be achieved, including--
 ``(A) the human capital, training, data and 
 evidence, information technology, and skill sets 
 required to meet the performance goals;
 ``(B) the technology modernization investments, 
 system upgrades, staff technology skills and expertise, 
 stakeholder input and feedback, and other resources and 
 strategies needed and required to meet the performance 
 goals;
 ``(C) clearly defined milestones;
 ``(D) an identification of the organizations, 
 program activities, regulations, policies, operational 
 processes, and other activities that contribute to each 
 performance goal, both within and external to the 
 agency;
 ``(E) a description of how the agency is working 
 with other agencies and the organizations identified in 
 subparagraph (D) to measure and achieve its performance 
 goals as well as relevant Federal Government 
 performance goals; and
 ``(F) an identification of the agency officials 
 responsible for the achievement of each performance 
 goal, who shall be known as goal leaders;''; and
 (2) by amending subsection (g) to read as follows:
 ``(g) Preparation of Performance Plan.--The Performance Improvement 
Officer of each agency (or the functional equivalent) shall collaborate 
with the Chief Human Capital Officer (or the functional equivalent), 
the Chief Information Officer (or the functional equivalent), the Chief 
Data Officer (or the functional equivalent), and the Chief Financial 
Officer (or the functional equivalent) of that agency to prepare that 
portion of the annual performance plan described under subsection 
(b)(5) for that agency.''.

SEC. 5913. IMPROVING INVESTIGATION AND PROSECUTION OF CHILD ABUSE 
 CASES.

 The Victims of Child Abuse Act of 1990 (34 U.S.C. 20301 et seq.) is 
amended--
 (1) in section 211 (34 U.S.C. 20301)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by striking ``3,300,000'' and inserting 
 ``3,400,000''; and
 (ii) by striking ``, and drug abuse is 
 associated with a significant portion of 
 these'';
 (B) by redesignating paragraphs (3) through (8) as 
 paragraphs (4) through (9), respectively;
 (C) by inserting afer paragraph (2) the following:
 ``(3) a key to a child victim healing from abuse is access 
 to supportive and healthy families and communities;''; and
 (D) in paragraph (9)(B), as so redesignated, by 
 inserting ``, and operations of centers'' before the 
 period at the end;
 (2) in section 212 (34 U.S.C. 20302)--
 (A) in paragraph (5), by inserting ``coordinated 
 team'' before ``response''; and
 (B) in paragraph (8), by inserting ``organizational 
 capacity'' before ``support'';
 (3) in section 213 (34 U.S.C. 20303)--
 (A) in subsection (a)--
 (i) in the heading, by inserting ``and 
 Maintenance'' after ``Establishment'';
 (ii) in the matter preceding paragraph 
 (1)--
 (I) by striking ``, in coordination 
 with the Director of the Office of 
 Victims of Crime,''; and
 (II) by inserting ``and maintain'' 
 after ``establish'';
 (iii) in paragraph (3)--
 (I) by striking ``and victim 
 advocates'' and inserting ``victim 
 advocates, multidisciplinary team 
 leadership, and children's advocacy 
 center staff''; and
 (II) by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (iv) by redesignating paragraph (4) as 
 paragraph (5);
 (v) by inserting after paragraph (3) the 
 following:
 ``(4) provide technical assistance, training, coordination, 
 and organizational capacity support for State chapters; and''; 
 and
 (vi) in paragraph (5), as so redesignated, 
 by striking ``and oversight to'' and inserting 
 ``organizational capacity support, and 
 oversight of'';
 (B) in subsection (b)--
 (i) in paragraph (1)--
 (I) in subparagraph (A), by 
 inserting ``and maintain'' after 
 ``establish''; and
 (II) in the matter following 
 subparagraph (B), by striking ``and 
 technical assistance to aid communities 
 in establishing'' and inserting 
 ``training and technical assistance to 
 aid communities in establishing and 
 maintaining''; and
 (ii) in paragraph (2)--
 (I) in subparagraph (A)--
 (aa) in clause (ii), by 
 inserting ``Center'' after 
 ``Advocacy''; and
 (bb) in clause (iii), by 
 striking ``of, assessment of, 
 and intervention in'' and 
 inserting ``and intervention in 
 child''; and
 (II) in subparagraph (B), by 
 striking ``centers and interested 
 communities'' and inserting ``centers, 
 interested communities, and chapters''; 
 and
 (C) in subsection (c)--
 (i) in paragraph (2)--
 (I) in subparagraph (B), by 
 striking ``evaluation, intervention, 
 evidence gathering, and counseling'' 
 and inserting ``investigation and 
 intervention in child abuse''; and
 (II) in subparagraph (E), by 
 striking ``judicial handling of child 
 abuse and neglect'' and inserting 
 ``multidisciplinary response to child 
 abuse'';
 (ii) in paragraph (3)(A)(i), by striking 
 ``so that communities can establish 
 multidisciplinary programs that respond to 
 child abuse'' and inserting ``and chapters so 
 that communities can establish and maintain 
 multidisciplinary programs that respond to 
 child abuse and chapters can establish and 
 maintain children's advocacy centers in their 
 State'';
 (iii) in paragraph (4)(B)--
 (I) in clause (iii), by striking 
 ``and'' at the end;
 (II) in by redesignating clause 
 (iv) as clause (v); and
 (III) by inserting after clause 
 (iii) the following:
 ``(iv) best result in supporting chapters 
 in each State; and''; and
 (iv) in paragraph (6), by inserting ``under 
 this Act'' after ``recipients'';
 (4) in section 214 (34 U.S.C. 20304)--
 (A) by striking subsection (a) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(a) In General.--The Administrator shall make grants to--
 ``(1) establish and maintain a network of care for child 
 abuse victims where investigation, prosecutions, and 
 interventions are continually occurring and coordinating 
 activities within local children's advocacy centers and 
 multidisciplinary teams;
 ``(2) develop, enhance, and coordinate multidisciplinary 
 child abuse investigations, intervention, and prosecution 
 activities;
 ``(3) promote the effective delivery of the evidence-based, 
 trauma-informed Children's Advocacy Center Model and the 
 multidisciplinary response to child abuse; and
 ``(4) develop and disseminate practice standards for care 
 and best practices in programmatic evaluation, and support 
 State chapter organizational capacity and local children's 
 advocacy center organizational capacity and operations in order 
 to meet such practice standards and best practices.'';
 (B) in subsection (b), by striking ``, in 
 coordination with the Director of the Office of Victims 
 of Crime,'';
 (C) in subsection (c)(2)--
 (i) in subparagraph (C), by inserting ``to 
 the greatest extent practicable, but in no case 
 later than 72 hours,'' after ``hours''; and
 (ii) by striking subparagraphs (D) through 
 (I) and inserting the following:
 ``(D) Forensic interviews of child victims by 
 trained personnel that are used by law enforcement, 
 health, and child protective service agencies to 
 interview suspected abuse victims about allegations of 
 abuse.
 ``(E) Provision of needed follow up services such 
 as medical care, mental healthcare, and victims 
 advocacy services.
 ``(F) A requirement that, to the extent 
 practicable, all interviews and meetings with a child 
 victim occur at the children's advocacy center or an 
 agency with which there is a linkage agreement 
 regarding the delivery of multidisciplinary child abuse 
 investigation, prosecution, and intervention services.
 ``(G) Coordination of each step of the 
 investigation process to eliminate duplicative forensic 
 interviews with a child victim.
 ``(H) Designation of a director for the children's 
 advocacy center.
 ``(I) Designation of a multidisciplinary team 
 coordinator.
 ``(J) Assignment of a volunteer or staff advocate 
 to each child in order to assist the child and, when 
 appropriate, the child's family, throughout each step 
 of intervention and judicial proceedings.
 ``(K) Coordination with State chapters to assist 
 and provide oversight, and organizational capacity that 
 supports local children's advocacy centers, 
 multidisciplinary teams, and communities working to 
 implement a multidisciplinary response to child abuse 
 in the provision of evidence-informed initiatives, 
 including mental health counseling, forensic 
 interviewing, multidisciplinary team coordination, and 
 victim advocacy.
 ``(L) Such other criteria as the Administrator 
 shall establish by regulation.''; and
 (D) by striking subsection (f) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(f) Grants to State Chapters for Assistance to Local Children's 
Advocacy Centers.--In awarding grants under this section, the 
Administrator shall ensure that a portion of the grants is distributed 
to State chapters to enable State chapters to provide oversight, 
training, and technical assistance to local centers on evidence-
informed initiatives including mental health, counseling, forensic 
interviewing, multidisciplinary team coordination, and victim 
advocacy.'';
 (5) in section 214A (34 U.S.C. 20305)--
 (A) in subsection (a)--
 (i) in paragraph (1), by striking 
 ``attorneys and other allied'' and inserting 
 ``prosecutors and other attorneys and allied''; 
 and
 (ii) in paragraph (2)(B), by inserting 
 ``Center'' after ``Advocacy''; and
 (B) in subsection (b)(1), by striking subparagraph 
 (A) and inserting the following:
 ``(A) a significant connection to prosecutors who 
 handle child abuse cases in State courts, such as a 
 membership organization or support service providers; 
 and''; and
 (6) by striking section 214B (34 U.S.C. 20306) and 
 inserting the following:

``SEC. 214B. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 ``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out sections 
213, 214, and 214A, $40,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2023 through 
2029.''.

SEC. 5914. REPORT ON HUMANITARIAN SITUATION AND FOOD SECURITY IN 
 LEBANON.

 (a) Report Required.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the President, acting through the Secretary of 
State and the Secretary of Defense and in coordination with the 
Administrator of the United States Agency for International 
Development, shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a 
report that contains an evaluation of the humanitarian situation in 
Lebanon, as well as the impact of the deficit of wheat imports due to 
Russia's further invasion of Ukraine, initiated on February 24, 2022.
 (b) Elements.--The report required by subsection (a) shall include 
the following elements:
 (1) The projected increase in malnutrition in Lebanon.
 (2) The estimated increase in the number of food insecure 
 individuals in Lebanon.
 (3) The estimated number of individuals who will be faced 
 with acute malnutrition due to food price inflation in Lebanon.
 (4) Actions the United States Government is taking to 
 address the aforementioned impacts.
 (5) Any cooperation between the United States Government 
 with allies and partners to address the aforementioned impacts.
 (6) The potential impact of food insecurity on Department 
 of Defense goals and objectives in Lebanon.
 (c) Appropriate Congressional Committees.--In this section, the 
term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on 
 Foreign Relations, and the Committee on Appropriations of the 
 Senate; and
 (2) the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on 
 Foreign Affairs, and the Committee on Appropriations of the 
 House of Representatives.

SEC. 5915. DESIGNATION OF EL PASO COMMUNITY HEALING GARDEN NATIONAL 
 MEMORIAL.

 (a) Designation.--The Healing Garden located at 6900 Delta Drive, 
El Paso, Texas, is designated as the ``El Paso Community Healing Garden 
National Memorial''.
 (b) Effect of Designation.--The national memorial designated by 
this section is not a unit of the National Park System and the 
designation of the El Paso Community Healing Garden National Memorial 
shall not require or authorize Federal funds to be expended for any 
purpose related to that national memorial.

SEC. 5916. ADMINISTRATOR OF GENERAL SERVICES STUDY ON COUNTERFEIT ITEMS 
 ON E-COMMERCE PLATFORMS OF THE GENERAL SERVICES 
 ADMINISTRATION.

 The Administrator of General Services shall--
 (1) conduct a study that tracks the number of counterfeit 
 items on e-commerce platforms of the General Services 
 Administration annually to ensure that the products being 
 advertised are from legitimate vendors; and
 (2) submit an annual report on the findings of such study 
 to the Committees on Armed Services, Oversight and Reform, 
 Small Business, and Homeland Security of the House of 
 Representatives.

SEC. 5917. REPORT ON REMOVAL OF SERVICE MEMBERS.

 (a) Report Required.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act and monthly thereafter, the Secretary of Homeland 
Security, in coordination with the Secretary of Veteran Affairs, the 
Secretary of Defense, and the Secretary of State shall submit to the 
Committees on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives and the 
Senate, the Committees on Veteran Affairs of the House of 
Representatives and the Senate, and the Committees on Appropriations of 
the House of Representatives and the Senate a report detailing how many 
noncitizen service members, veterans and immediate family members of 
service members were removed during the period beginning on January 1, 
2010, and ending on the date of the report.
 (b) Elements.--The report required by subsection (a) shall include 
the following for each person removed:
 (1) the individual's name;
 (2) the individual's address;
 (3) the individual's contact information;
 (4) any known U.S. citizen family members in the U.S.;
 (5) where the individual was removed to; and
 (6) the reason for removal.
 (c) GAO Report.--Not later than 120 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States 
shall update GAO report number-19-416 to identify progress made and 
further actions needed to better handle, identify, and track cases 
involving veterans.
 (d) Confidentiality.--The report under subsection (a) may not be 
published and shall be exempt from disclosure under section 
552(b)(3)(B) of title 5, United States Code.

SEC. 5918. LIMITATION ON AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS FOR CERTAIN CONTRACTORS 
 OR GRANTEES THAT REQUIRE NONDISPARAGEMENT OR 
 NONDISCLOSURE CLAUSE RELATED TO SEXUAL HARASSMENT AND 
 SEXUAL ASSAULT.

 None of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this Act or 
otherwise made available for fiscal year 2023 for the Department of 
Defense or any other Federal agency may be obligated or expended for 
any Federal contract or grant in excess of $1,000,000, awarded after 
the date of enactment of this Act, unless the contractor or grantee 
agrees not to--
 (1) enter into any agreement with any of its employees or 
 independent contractors that requires the employee or 
 contractor to agree to a nondisparagement or nondisclosure 
 clause related to sexual harassment and sexual assault, as 
 defined under any applicable Federal, State, or Tribal law--
 (A) as a condition of employment, promotion, 
 compensation, benefits, or change in employment status 
 or contractual relationship; or
 (B) as a term, condition, or privilege of 
 employment; or
 (2) take any action to enforce any predispute nondisclosure 
 or nondisparagement provision of an existing agreement with an 
 employee or independent contractor that covers sexual 
 harassment and sexual assault, as defined under any applicable 
 Federal, State, or Tribal law.

SEC. 5919. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY OFFICE FOR CIVIL RIGHTS AND 
 CIVIL LIBERTIES AUTHORIZATION.

 (a) Officer for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties.--
 (1) In general.--Section 705 of the Homeland Security Act 
 of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 345) is amended--
 (A) in the section heading, by striking 
 ``establishment of''; and
 (B) by striking subsections (a) and (b) and 
 inserting the following new subsections:
 ``(a) Establishment.--
 ``(1) In general.--There is established within the 
 Department an Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties 
 (referred to in this section as the `Office'). The head of the 
 Office is the Officer for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties 
 (referred to in this section as the `Officer'), who shall 
 report directly to the Secretary.
 ``(2) Duties.--The Secretary and the head of each component 
 shall--
 ``(A) ensure that the Officer for Civil Rights and 
 Civil Liberties of the Department and the Officer for 
 Civil Rights and Civil Liberties of such component--
 ``(i) have the information, materials, and 
 resources necessary to carry out the functions 
 of the Office;
 ``(ii) are consulted in advance of new or 
 proposed changes to policies, programs, 
 initiatives, and activities impacting civil 
 rights and civil liberties; and
 ``(iii) are given full and complete access 
 to all materials and personnel necessary to 
 carry out the functions of the Office; and
 ``(B) consider advice and recommendations from the 
 Officer for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties of the 
 Department in the development and implementation of 
 policies, programs, initiatives, and activities 
 impacting civil rights and civil liberties.
 ``(b) Responsibilities.--The Officer shall carry out the following 
responsibilities:
 ``(1) Oversee compliance with constitutional, statutory, 
 regulatory, policy, and other requirements relating to the 
 civil rights and civil liberties of individuals affected by the 
 policies, programs, initiatives, and activities of the 
 Department.
 ``(2) Review and assess information concerning abuses of 
 civil rights and civil liberties, and profiling on the basis of 
 race, ethnicity, or religion, by employees and officials of the 
 Department.
 ``(3) Integrate civil rights and civil liberties 
 protections into all policies, programs, initiatives, and 
 activities of the Department.
 ``(4) Conduct civil rights and civil liberties impact 
 assessments, as appropriate, including such assessments prior 
 to the implementation of new Department regulations, policies, 
 programs, initiatives, and activities.
 ``(5) Conduct periodic reviews and assessments of policies, 
 programs, initiatives, and activities of the Department 
 relating to civil rights and civil liberties, including reviews 
 and assessments initiated by the Officer.
 ``(6) Provide policy advice, recommendations, and other 
 technical assistance relating to civil rights and civil 
 liberties to the Secretary, and the heads of components, and 
 other personnel within the Department.
 ``(7) Review, assess, and investigate complaints, including 
 complaints filed by members of the public, and information 
 indicating possible abuses of civil rights or civil liberties 
 at the Department, unless the Inspector General of the 
 Department determines that any such complaint should be 
 investigated by the Inspector General.
 ``(8) Initiate reviews, investigations, and assessments of 
 the administration of the policies, programs, initiatives, and 
 activities of the Department relating to civil rights and civil 
 liberties.
 ``(9) Coordinate with the Privacy Officer to ensure that--
 ``(A) policies, programs, initiatives, and 
 activities involving civil rights, civil liberties, and 
 privacy considerations are addressed in an integrated 
 and comprehensive manner; and
 ``(B) Congress receives appropriate reports 
 regarding such policies, programs, initiatives, and 
 activities.
 ``(10) Lead the equal employment opportunity programs of 
 the Department, including complaint management and 
 adjudication, workforce diversity, and promotion of the merit 
 system principles.
 ``(11) Make publicly available through accessible 
 communications channels, including the website of the 
 Department--
 ``(A) information on the responsibilities and 
 functions of, and how to contact, the Office;
 ``(B) summaries of the investigations carried out 
 pursuant to paragraphs (7) and (8) that result in 
 recommendations; and
 ``(C) summaries of impact assessments and periodic 
 reviews and assessments carried out pursuant to 
 paragraphs (4) and (5), respectively, that are issued 
 by the Officer.
 ``(12) Engage with individuals, stakeholders, and 
 communities the civil rights and civil liberties of which may 
 be affected by the policies, programs, initiatives, and 
 activities of the Department, including by--
 ``(A) informing such individuals, stakeholders, and 
 communities concerning such policies, programs, 
 initiatives, and activities;
 ``(B) providing information for how to report and 
 access redress processes; and
 ``(C) providing Department leadership and other 
 personnel within the Department feedback from such 
 individuals, stakeholders, and communities on the civil 
 rights and civil liberties impacts of such policies, 
 programs, initiatives, and activities, and working with 
 State, local, Tribal, and territorial homeland security 
 partners to enhance the Department's policymaking and 
 program implementation.
 ``(13) Lead a language access program for the Department to 
 ensure the Department effectively communicates with all 
 individuals impacted by programs and activities of the 
 Department, including those with limited English proficiency.
 ``(14) Participate in the hiring or designation of a civil 
 rights and civil liberties officer within each component and 
 participate in the performance review process for such officer.
 ``(c) Authority to Investigate.--
 ``(1) In general.--For the purposes of subsection (b), the 
 Officer shall--
 ``(A) have access to all materials and personnel 
 necessary to carry out the functions of the Office 
 under this subsection;
 ``(B) make such investigations and reports relating 
 to the administration of the programs and operations of 
 the Department as are necessary or appropriate; and
 ``(C) administer to or take from any person an 
 oath, affirmation, or affidavit, whenever necessary to 
 performance of the responsibilities of the Officer 
 under this section.
 ``(2) Effect of oaths.--Any oath, affirmation, or affidavit 
 administered or taken pursuant to paragraph (1)(C) by or before 
 an employee of the Office designated for that purpose by the 
 Officer shall have the same force and effect as if administered 
 or taken by or before an officer having a seal of office.
 ``(d) Notification Requirement.--In the case of a complaint made 
concerning allegations of abuses of civil rights and civil liberties 
under paragraph (7) of subsection (b), the Officer shall--
 ``(1) provide to the individual who made the complaint 
 notice of the receipt of such complaint within 30 days of 
 receiving the complaint; and
 ``(2) inform the complainant of the determination of the 
 Office regarding--
 ``(A) the initiation of a review, assessment, or 
 investigation by the Office;
 ``(B) a referral to the Inspector General of the 
 Department; or
 ``(C) any other action taken.
 ``(e) Coordination With Inspector General.--
 ``(1) In general.--
 ``(A) Referral.--Before initiating an investigation 
 initiated by the Officer pursuant to paragraph (7) or 
 (8) of subsection (b), the Officer shall refer the 
 matter at issue to the Inspector General of the 
 Department.
 ``(B) Determinations and notifications by inspector 
 general.--Not later than seven days after the receipt 
 of a matter at issue under subparagraph (A), the 
 Inspector General shall--
 ``(i) make a determination regarding 
 whether the Inspector General intends to 
 initiate an investigation of such matter; and
 ``(ii) notify the Officer of such 
 determination.
 ``(C) Investigations.--If the Secretary determines 
 that a complaint warrants both the Officer and the 
 Inspector General conducting investigations 
 concurrently, jointly, or in some other manner, the 
 Secretary may authorize the Officer to conduct an 
 investigation in such manner as the Secretary directs.
 ``(D) Notification by the officer.--If the Officer 
 does not receive notification of a determination 
 pursuant to subparagraph (B)(ii), the Officer shall 
 notify the Inspector General of whether the Officer 
 intends to initiate an investigation into the matter at 
 issue.
 ``(f) Recommendations; Response.--
 ``(1) In general.--In the case of an investigation 
 initiated by the Officer pursuant to paragraph (7) or (8) of 
 subsection (b), if such an investigation results in the 
 issuance of recommendations,the Officer shall produce a report 
 that--
 ``(A) includes the final findings and 
 recommendations of the Officer;
 ``(B) is made publicly available in summary form;
 ``(C) does not include any personally identifiable 
 information; and
 ``(D) may include a classified annex.
 ``(2) Transmission.--The Officer shall transmit to the 
 Secretary and the head of the relevant component a copy of each 
 report under paragraph (1).
 ``(3) Response.--
 ``(A) In general.--Not later than 45 days after the 
 date on which the Officer transmits to the head of a 
 component a copy of a report pursuant to paragraph (2), 
 such head shall submit to the Secretary and the Officer 
 a response to such report.
 ``(B) Rule of construction.--In the response 
 submitted pursuant to subparagraph (A), each 
 recommendation contained in the report transmitted 
 pursuant to paragraph (2) with which the head of the 
 component at issue concurs shall be deemed an accepted 
 recommendation of the Department.
 ``(C) Nonconcurrence; appeal.--If the head of a 
 component does not concur with a recommendation 
 contained in the report transmitted pursuant to 
 paragraph (2), or if such head does not respond to a 
 recommendation within 45 days in accordance with 
 subparagraph (A), the Officer may appeal to the 
 Secretary.
 ``(D) Result.--If the Officer appeals to the 
 Secretary pursuant to subparagraph (C), the Secretary 
 shall, not later than 60 days after the date on which 
 the Officer appeals--
 ``(i) accept the Officer's recommendation, 
 which recommendation shall be deemed the 
 accepted recommendation of the Department; or
 ``(ii) accept the nonconcurrence of the 
 head of the component at issue if transmitted 
 in accordance with subparagraph (A).
 ``(g) Reporting.--
 ``(1) In general.--In the case of an investigation 
 initiated by the Officer pursuant to paragraph (7) or (8) of 
 subsection (b), if such an investigation resulted in the 
 issuance of recommendations, the Officer shall, on an annual 
 basis, make publicly available through accessible 
 communications channels, including the website of the 
 Department--
 ``(A) a summary of investigations that are 
 completed, consistent with section 1062(f)(1) of the 
 Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 
 2004 (42 U.S.C. 2000ee-1(f)(2));
 ``(B) the accepted recommendations of the 
 Department, if any; and
 ``(C) a summary of investigations that result in 
 final recommendations that are issued by the Officer.
 ``(2) Prohibition.--Materials made publicly available 
 pursuant to paragraph (1) may not include any personally 
 identifiable information related to any individual involved in 
 the investigation at issue.
 ``(h) Component Civil Rights and Civil Liberties Officers.--
 ``(1) In general.--Any component that has an Officer for 
 Civil Rights and Civil Liberties of such component shall ensure 
 that such Officer for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties of such 
 component shall coordinate with and provide information to the 
 Officer for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties of the Department 
 on matters related to civil rights and civil liberties within 
 each such component.
 ``(2) Officers of operational components.--The head of each 
 operational component, in consultation with the Officer for 
 Civil Rights and Civil Liberties of the Department, shall hire 
 or designate a career appointee (as such term is defined in 
 section 3132 of title 5, United States Code) from such 
 component as the Officer for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties 
 of such operational component.
 ``(3) Responsibilities.--Each Officer for Civil Rights and 
 Civil Liberties of each component--
 ``(A) shall have access in a timely manner to the 
 information, materials, and information necessary to 
 carry out the functions of such officer;
 ``(B) shall be consulted in advance of new or 
 proposed changes to component policies, programs, 
 initiatives, and activities impacting civil rights and 
 civil liberties;
 ``(C) shall be given full and complete access to 
 all component materials and component personnel 
 necessary to carry out the functions of such officer;
 ``(D) may, to the extent the Officer for Civil 
 Rights and Civil Liberties of the Department determines 
 necessary, and subject to the approval of the 
 Secretary, administer to or take from any person an 
 oath, affirmation, or affidavit, whenever necessary in 
 the performance of the responsibilities of each such 
 component Officer under this section; and
 ``(E) may administer any oath, affirmation, or 
 affidavit, and such oath, affirmation, shall have the 
 same force and effect as if administered or taken by or 
 before an officer having a seal of office.
 ``(i) Annual Report.--Not later than March 31 of each year, the 
Officer shall submit to the Committee on Homeland Security of the House 
of Representatives, the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental 
Affairs of the Senate, and any other Committee of the House of 
Representatives or the Senate, as the case may be, the Officer 
determines relevant, a report on the implementation of this section 
during the immediately preceding fiscal year. Each such annual report 
shall be prepared and submitted for supervisory review and appropriate 
comment or amendment by the Secretary prior to submission to such 
committees, and the Officer shall consider and incorporate any comments 
or amendments as a result of such review. Each such report shall 
include, for the year covered by such report, the following:
 ``(1) A list of Department regulations, policies, programs, 
 initiatives, and activities for which civil rights and civil 
 liberties impact assessments were conducted, or policy advice, 
 recommendations, or other technical assistance was provided.
 ``(2) An assessment of the efforts of the Department to 
 effectively communicate with all individuals impacted by 
 programs and activities of the Department, including those with 
 limited English proficiency through the language access program 
 referred to in subsection (b)(13).
 ``(3) A summary of investigations under paragraph (7) or 
 (8) of subsection (b) resulting in recommendations issued 
 pursuant to subsection (f), together with information on the 
 status of the implementation of such recommendations by the 
 component at issue.
 ``(4) Information on the diversity and equal employment 
 opportunity activities of the Department, including information 
 on complaint management and adjudication of equal employment 
 opportunity complaints, and efforts to ensure compliance 
 throughout the Department with equal employment opportunity 
 requirements.
 ``(5) A description of any efforts, including public 
 meetings, to engage with individuals, stakeholders, and 
 communities the civil rights and civil liberties of which may 
 be affected by policies, programs, initiatives, and activities 
 of the Department.
 ``(6) Information on total staffing for the Office, 
 including--
 ``(A) the number of full-time, part-time, and 
 contract support personnel; and
 ``(B) information on the number of employees whose 
 primary responsibilities include supporting the Officer 
 in carrying out paragraph (10) of subsection (b).
 ``(7) If required, a classified annex.
 ``(j) Definition.--In this section, the term `component' means any 
operational component, non-operational component, directorate, or 
office of the Department.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The item relating to section 705 
 in section 1(b) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 is amended 
 to read as follows:

``Sec. 705. Officer for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties''.
 (3) Reporting to congress.--Section 1062(f)(1)(A)(i) of the 
 Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 (42 
 U.S.C. 2000ee-1(f)(1)(A)(i)) is amended by striking ``the 
 Committee on Oversight and Government Reform of the House of 
 Representatives'' and inserting ``the Committee on Homeland 
 Security of the House of Representatives, the Committee on 
 Oversight and Reform of the House of Representatives''.
 (b) Comptroller General Review.--Not later than two years after the 
date of the enactment of this section, the Comptroller General of the 
United States shall submit to Congress a report on the implementation 
of subsection (b)(12) of section 705 of the Homeland Security Act of 
2002 (6 U.S.C. 345), as amended by subsection (a).

SEC. 5920. MODIFICATION TO PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS REPORT.

 Section 6502 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2022 (135 Stat. 2422) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by amendment paragraph (4) to read as follows:
 ``(4) As applicable, description of specific training on 
 monitoring and adhering to international human rights and 
 humanitarian law provided to the foreign country or entity 
 receiving the assistance.''; and
 (B) by striking paragraphs (7) and (8);
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) by amending the heading to read as follows: 
 ``Reports''; and
 (B) in paragraph (1), in the matter preceding 
 subparagraph (A)--
 (i) by inserting ``authorized under section 
 551 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 
 U.S.C. 2348) and'' after ``security 
 assistance''; and
 (ii) by striking ``foreign countries'' and 
 all that follows through the colon and 
 inserting ``foreign countries for any of the 
 following purposes:'';
 (3) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d); and
 (4) by inserting after subsection (b), as amended, the 
 following:
 ``(c) Coordination of Submission.--The Secretary of State is 
authorized to integrate the elements of the report required by 
subsection (b) into other reports required to be submitted annually to 
the appropriate congressional committees.''.

SEC. 5921. REPORT TO CONGRESS BY SECRETARY OF STATE ON GOVERNMENT-
 ORDERED INTERNET OR TELECOMMUNICATIONS SHUTDOWNS.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of State shall submit to the Committee on Armed 
Services and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of 
Representatives and the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee 
on Foreign Relations of the Senate a report that--
 (1) describes incidents, occurring during the 5-year period 
 preceding the date of the submission of the report, of 
 government-ordered internet or telecommunications shutdowns in 
 foreign countries;
 (2) analyzes the impact of such shutdowns on global 
 security and the human rights of those affected; and
 (3) contains a strategy for engaging with the international 
 community to respond to such shutdowns.

SEC. 5922. SURVIVORS' BILL OF RIGHTS.

 (a) Definition of Covered Formula Grant.--In this section, the term 
``covered formula grant'' means a grant under part T of title I of the 
Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (34 U.S.C. 10441 et 
seq.) (commonly referred to as the ``STOP Violence Against Women 
Formula Grant Program'').
 (b) Grant Increase.--The Attorney General shall increase the amount 
of the covered formula grant provided to a State in accordance with 
this section if the State has in effect a law that provides to sexual 
assault survivors the rights, at a minimum, under section 3772 of title 
18, United States Code.
 (c) Application.--A State seeking an increase to a covered formula 
grant under this section shall submit an application to the Attorney 
General at such time, in such manner, and containing such information 
as the Attorney General may reasonably require, including information 
about the law described in subsection (b).
 (d) Period of Increase.--The Attorney General may not provide an 
increase in the amount of the covered formula grant provided to a State 
under this section more than 4 times.

SEC. 5923. ADMISSION OF ESSENTIAL SCIENTISTS AND TECHNICAL EXPERTS TO 
 PROMOTE AND PROTECT NATIONAL SECURITY INNOVATION BASE.

 (a) Special Immigrant Status.--In accordance with the procedures 
established under subsection (f)(1), and subject to subsection (c)(1), 
the Secretary of Homeland Security may provide an alien described in 
subsection (b) (and the spouse and each child of the alien if 
accompanying or following to join the alien) with the status of a 
special immigrant under section 101(a)(27) of the Immigration and 
Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(27)), if the alien--
 (1) submits a classification petition under section 
 204(a)(1)(G)(i) of such Act (8 U.S.C. 1154(a)(1)(G)(i)); and
 (2) is otherwise eligible to receive an immigrant visa and 
 is otherwise admissible to the United States for lawful 
 permanent residence.
 (b) Aliens Described.--An alien is described in this subsection 
if--
 (1) the alien--
 (A) is employed by a United States employer and 
 engaged in work to promote and protect the National 
 Security Innovation Base;
 (B) is engaged in basic or applied research, funded 
 by the Department of Defense, through a United States 
 institution of higher education (as defined in section 
 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 1001)); or
 (C) possesses scientific or technical expertise 
 that will advance the development of critical 
 technologies identified in the National Defense 
 Strategy or the National Defense Science and Technology 
 Strategy, required by section 218 of the John S. McCain 
 National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019 
 (Public Law 115-232; 132 Stat. 1679 ); and
 (2) the Secretary of Defense issues a written statement to 
 the Secretary of Homeland Security confirming that the 
 admission of the alien is essential to advancing the research, 
 development, testing, or evaluation of critical technologies 
 described in paragraph (1)(C) or otherwise serves national 
 security interests.
 (c) Numerical Limitations.--
 (1) In general.--The total number of principal aliens who 
 may be provided special immigrant status under this section may 
 not exceed--
 (A) 10 in each of fiscal years 2023 through 2032; 
 and
 (B) 100 in fiscal year 2033 and each fiscal year 
 thereafter.
 (2) Exclusion from numerical limitation.--Aliens provided 
 special immigrant status under this section shall not be 
 counted against the numerical limitations under sections 
 201(d), 202(a), and 203(b)(4) of the Immigration and 
 Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1151(d), 1152(a), and 1153(b)(4)).
 (d) Defense Competition for Scientists and Technical Experts.--Not 
later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
Secretary of Defense shall develop and implement a process to select, 
on a competitive basis from among individuals described in subsection 
(b), individuals for recommendation to the Secretary of Homeland 
Security for special immigrant status described in subsection (a).
 (e) Authorities.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary of 
Defense shall authorize appropriate personnel of the Department of 
Defense to use all personnel and management authorities available to 
the Department, including the personnel and management authorities 
provided to the science and technology reinvention laboratories, the 
Major Range and Test Facility Base (as defined in 196(i) of title 10, 
United States Code), and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.
 (f) Procedures.--Not later than 360 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security and Secretary 
of Defense shall jointly establish policies and procedures implementing 
the provisions in this section, which shall include procedures for--
 (1) processing of petitions for classification submitted 
 under subsection (a)(1) and applications for an immigrant visa 
 or adjustment of status, as applicable; and
 (2) thorough processing of any required security 
 clearances.
 (g) Fees.--The Secretary of Homeland Security shall establish a 
fee--
 (1) to be charged and collected to process an application 
 filed under this section; and
 (2) that is set at a level that will ensure recovery of the 
 full costs of such processing and any additional costs 
 associated with the administration of the fees collected.
 (h) Implementation Report Required.--Not later than 180 days after 
the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland 
Security and Secretary of Defense shall jointly submit to the 
appropriate congressional committees a report that includes--
 (1) a plan for implementing the authorities provided under 
 this section; and
 (2) identification of any additional authorities that may 
 be required to assist the Secretaries in fully implementing 
 section.
 (i) Program Evaluation and Report.--
 (1) Evaluation.--The Comptroller General of the United 
 States shall conduct an evaluation of the competitive program 
 and special immigrant program described in subsections (a) 
 through (g).
 (2) Report.--Not later than October 1, 2026, the 
 Comptroller General shall submit to the appropriate 
 congressional committees a report on the results of the 
 evaluation conducted under paragraph (1).
 (j) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the Committee on Armed Services and the 
 Committee on the Judiciary of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Armed Services and the 
 Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate.
 (2) The term ``National Security Innovation Base'' means 
 the network of persons and organizations, including Federal 
 agencies, institutions of higher education, Federally funded 
 research and development centers, defense industrial base 
 entities, nonprofit organizations, commercial entities, and 
 venture capital firms that are engaged in the military and non-
 military research, development, funding, and production of 
 innovative technologies that support the national security of 
 the United States.

SEC. 5924. DELAWARE RIVER BASIN CONSERVATION REAUTHORIZATION.

 (a) Cost Sharing.--Section 3504(c)(1) of the Water Infrastructure 
Improvements for the Nation Act (Public Law 114-322; 130 Stat. 1775) is 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``The Federal share'' and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), the Federal share''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(B) Small, rural, and disadvantaged 
 communities.--
 ``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), 
 the Federal share of the cost of a project 
 funded under the grant program that serves a 
 small, rural, or disadvantaged community shall 
 be 90 percent of the total cost of the project, 
 as determined by the Secretary.
 ``(ii) Waiver.--The Secretary may increase 
 the Federal share under clause (i) to 100 
 percent of the total cost of the project if the 
 Secretary determines that the grant recipient 
 is unable to pay, or would experience 
 significant financial hardship if required to 
 pay, the non-Federal share.''.
 (b) Repeal of Prohibition on Use of Funds for Federal Acquisition 
of Interests in Land.--Section 3506 of the Water Infrastructure 
Improvements for the Nation Act (Public Law 114-322; 130 Stat. 1775) is 
repealed.
 (c) Sunset.--Section 3507 of the Water Infrastructure Improvements 
for the Nation Act (Public Law 114-322; 130 Stat. 1775) is amended by 
striking ``2023'' and inserting ``2030''.

 Subtitle B--Rights for the TSA Workforce Act of 2022

SEC. 5931. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Rights for the Transportation 
Security Administration Workforce Act of 2022'' or the ``Rights for the 
TSA Workforce Act of 2022''.

SEC. 5932. DEFINITIONS.

 For purposes of this subtitle--
 (1) the term ``adjusted basic pay'' means--
 (A) the rate of pay fixed by law or administrative 
 action for the position held by a covered employee 
 before any deductions; and
 (B) any regular, fixed supplemental payment for 
 non-overtime hours of work creditable as basic pay for 
 retirement purposes, including any applicable locality 
 payment and any special rate supplement;
 (2) the term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of 
 the Transportation Security Administration;
 (3) the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means 
 the Committees on Homeland Security and Oversight and Reform of 
 the House of Representatives and the Committees on Commerce, 
 Science, and Transportation and Homeland Security and 
 Governmental Affairs of the Senate;
 (4) the term ``at-risk employee'' means a Transportation 
 Security Officer, Federal Air Marshal, canine handler, or any 
 other employee of the Transportation Security Administration 
 carrying out duties that require substantial contact with the 
 public during the COVID-19 national emergency;
 (5) the term ``conversion date'' means the date as of which 
 subparagraphs (A) through (F) of section 5933(c)(1) take 
 effect;
 (6) the term ``covered employee'' means an employee who 
 holds a covered position;
 (7) the term ``covered position'' means a position within 
 the Transportation Security Administration;
 (8) the term ``COVID-19 national emergency'' means the 
 national emergency declared by the President under the National 
 Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) on March 13, 2020, 
 with respect to the coronavirus;
 (9) the term ``employee'' has the meaning given such term 
 by section 2105 of title 5, United States Code;
 (10) the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Homeland 
 Security;
 (11) the term ``TSA personnel management system'' means any 
 personnel management system established or modified under--
 (A) section 111(d) of the Aviation and 
 Transportation Security Act (49 U.S.C. 44935 note); or
 (B) section 114(n) of title 49, United States Code;
 (12) the term ``TSA'' means the Transportation Security 
 Administration; and
 (13) the term ``2019 Determination'' means the publication, 
 entitled ``Determination on Transportation Security Officers 
 and Collective Bargaining'', issued on July 13, 2019, by 
 Administrator David P. Pekoske, as modified, or any superseding 
 subsequent determination.

SEC. 5933. CONVERSION OF TSA PERSONNEL.

 (a) Restrictions on Certain Personnel Authorities.--
 (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 law, and except as provided in paragraph (2), effective as of 
 the date of the enactment of this Act--
 (A) any TSA personnel management system in use for 
 covered employees and covered positions on the day 
 before such date of enactment, and any TSA personnel 
 management policy, letter, guideline, or directive in 
 effect on such day may not be modified;
 (B) no TSA personnel management policy, letter, 
 guideline, or directive that was not established before 
 such date issued pursuant to section 111(d) of the 
 Aviation and Transportation Security Act (49 U.S.C. 
 44935 note) or section 114(n) of title 49, United 
 States Code, may be established; and
 (C) any authority to establish or adjust a human 
 resources management system under chapter 97 of title 
 5, United States Code, shall terminate with respect to 
 covered employees and covered positions.
 (2) Exceptions.--
 (A) Pay.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1)(A), the 
 limitation in that paragraph shall not apply to any TSA 
 personnel management policy, letter, guideline, or 
 directive related to annual adjustments to pay 
 schedules and locality-based comparability payments in 
 order to maintain parity with such adjustments 
 authorized under section 5303, 5304, 5304a, and 5318 of 
 title 5, United States Code; and
 (B) Additional policy.--Notwithstanding paragraph 
 (1)(B), new TSA personnel management policy may be 
 issued if--
 (i) such policy is needed to resolve a 
 matter not specifically addressed in policy in 
 effect on the date of enactment of this Act; 
 and
 (ii) the Secretary provides such policy, 
 with an explanation of its necessity, to the 
 appropriate congressional committees not later 
 than 7 days of issuance.
 (C) Emerging threats to transportation security 
 during transition period.--Notwithstanding paragraph 
 (1), any TSA personnel management policy, letter, 
 guideline, or directive related to an emerging threat 
 to transportation security, including national 
 emergencies or disasters and public health threats to 
 transportation security, may be modified or established 
 until the conversion date. The Secretary shall provide 
 to the appropriate congressional committees any 
 modification or establishment of such a TSA personnel 
 management policy, letter, guideline, or directive, 
 with an explanation of its necessity, not later than 7 
 days of such modification or establishment.
 (b) Personnel Authorities During Transition Period.--Any TSA 
personnel management system in use for covered employees and covered 
positions on the day before the date of enactment of this Act and any 
TSA personnel management policy, letter, guideline, or directive in 
effect on the day before the date of enactment of this Act shall remain 
in effect until the conversion date.
 (c) Transition to Title 5.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), 
 effective as of the date determined by the Secretary, but in no 
 event later than December 31, 2022--
 (A) the TSA personnel management system shall cease 
 to be in effect;
 (B) section 114(n) of title 49, United States Code, 
 is repealed;
 (C) section 111(d) of the Aviation and 
 Transportation Security Act (49 U.S.C. 44935 note) is 
 repealed;
 (D) any TSA personnel management policy, letter, 
 guideline, and directive, including the 2019 
 Determination, shall cease to be effective;
 (E) any human resources management system 
 established or adjusted under chapter 97 of title 5, 
 United States Code, with respect to covered employees 
 or covered positions shall cease to be effective; and
 (F) covered employees and covered positions shall 
 be subject to the provisions of title 5, United States 
 Code.
 (2) Chapters 71 and 77 of title 5.--Not later than 90 days 
 after the date of enactment of this Act--
 (A) chapter 71 and chapter 77 of title 5, United 
 States Code, shall apply to covered employees carrying 
 out screening functions pursuant to section 44901 of 
 title 49, United States Code; and
 (B) any policy, letter, guideline, or directive 
 issued under section 111(d) of the Aviation and 
 Transportation Security Act (49 U.S.C. 44935 note) 
 related to matters otherwise covered by such chapter 71 
 or 77 shall cease to be in effect.
 (3) Assistance of other agencies.--Not later than 180 days 
 after the date of enactment of this Act or December 31, 2022, 
 whichever is earlier--
 (A) the Office of Personnel Management shall 
 establish a position series and classification standard 
 for the positions of Transportation Security Officer, 
 Federal Air Marshal, Transportation Security Inspector, 
 and other positions requested by the Administrator; and
 (B) the Department of Agriculture's National 
 Finance Center shall make necessary changes to its 
 Financial Management Services and Human Resources 
 Management Services to ensure payroll, leave, and other 
 personnel processing systems for TSA personnel are 
 commensurate with chapter 53 of title 5, United States 
 Code, and provide functions as needed to implement this 
 subtitle.
 (d) Safeguards on Grievances and Appeals.--
 (1) In general.--Each covered employee with a grievance or 
 appeal pending within TSA on the date of the enactment of this 
 Act or initiated during the transition period described in 
 subsection (c) shall have the right to have such grievance or 
 appeal removed to proceedings pursuant to title 5, United 
 States Code, or continued within the TSA.
 (2) Authority.--With respect to any grievance or appeal 
 continued within the TSA pursuant to paragraph (1), the 
 Administrator may consider and finally adjudicate such 
 grievance or appeal notwithstanding any other provision of this 
 subtitle.
 (3) Preservation of rights.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of law, any appeal or grievance continued pursuant to 
 this section that is not finally adjudicated pursuant to 
 paragraph (2) shall be preserved and all timelines tolled until 
 the rights afforded by application of chapters 71 and 77 of 
 title 5, United States Code, are made available pursuant to 
 section 5933(c)(2) of this subtitle.

SEC. 5934. TRANSITION RULES.

 (a) Nonreduction in Pay and Compensation.--Under pay conversion 
rules as the Secretary may prescribe to carry out this subtitle, a 
covered employee converted from a TSA personnel management system to 
the provisions of title 5, United States Code, pursuant to section 
5933(c)(1)(F)--
 (1) shall not be subject to any reduction in either the 
 rate of adjusted basic pay payable or law enforcement 
 availability pay payable to such covered employee; and
 (2) shall be credited for years of service in a specific 
 pay band under a TSA personnel management system as if the 
 employee had served in an equivalent General Schedule position 
 at the same grade, for purposes of determining the appropriate 
 step within a grade at which to establish the employee's 
 converted rate of pay.
 (b) Retirement Pay.--Not later than 90 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the appropriate 
congressional committees a proposal, including proposed legislative 
changes if needed, for determining a covered employee's average pay for 
purposes of calculating the employee's retirement annuity, consistent 
with title 5, United States Code, for any covered employee who retires 
within three years of the conversion date, in a manner that 
appropriately accounts for time in service and annual rate of basic pay 
following the conversion date.
 (c) Limitation on Premium Pay.--Notwithstanding section 5547 of 
title 5, United States Code, or any other provision of law, a Federal 
Air Marshal or criminal investigator hired prior to the date of 
enactment of this Act may be eligible for premium pay up to the maximum 
level allowed by the Administrator prior to the date of enactment of 
this Act. The Office of Personnel Management shall recognize such 
premium pay as fully creditable for the purposes of calculating pay and 
retirement benefits.
 (d) Preservation of Law Enforcement Availability Pay and Overtime 
Pay Rates for Federal Air Marshals.--
 (1) Leap.--Section 5545a of title 5, United States Code, is 
 amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(l) The provisions of subsections (a)-(h) providing for 
availability pay shall apply to any Federal Air Marshal who is an 
employee of the Transportation Security Administration.''.
 (2) Overtime.--Section 5542 of such title is amended by 
 adding at the end the following:
 ``(i) Notwithstanding any other provision 
 of law, a Federal Air Marshal who is an 
 employee of the Transportation Security 
 Administration shall receive overtime pay under 
 this section, at such a rate and in such a 
 manner, so that such Federal Air Marshal does 
 not receive less overtime pay than such Federal 
 Air Marshal would receive were that Federal Air 
 Marshal subject to the overtime pay provisions 
 of section 7 of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 
 1938.''.
 (3) Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraphs (1) 
 and (2) shall begin to apply on the conversion date (as that 
 term is defined in section 5932 of the Rights for the TSA 
 Workforce Act of 2022).
 (e) Collective Bargaining Unit.--Notwithstanding section 7112 of 
title 5, United States Code, following the application of chapter 71 
pursuant to section 5933(c)(2) of this subtitle, full- and part-time 
non-supervisory Transportation Security Administration personnel 
carrying out screening functions under section 44901 of title 49, 
United States Code, shall remain eligible to form a collective 
bargaining unit.
 (f) Preservation of Other Rights.--The Secretary shall take any 
actions necessary to ensure that the following rights are preserved and 
available for each covered employee as of the conversion date and any 
covered employee appointed after the conversion date, and continue to 
remain available to covered employees after the conversion date:
 (1) Any annual leave, sick leave, or other paid leave 
 accrued, accumulated, or otherwise available to a covered 
 employee immediately before the conversion date shall remain 
 available to the employee until used, subject to any limitation 
 on accumulated leave under chapter 63 of title 5, United States 
 Code.
 (2) Part-time personnel carrying out screening functions 
 under section 44901 of title 49, United States Code, pay 
 Federal Employees Health Benefits premiums on the same basis as 
 full-time TSA employees.
 (3) Covered employees are provided appropriate leave during 
 national emergencies to assist the covered employees and ensure 
 TSA meets mission requirements, notwithstanding section 6329a 
 of title 5, United States Code.
 (4) Eligible covered employees carrying out screening 
 functions under section 44901 of title 49, United States Code, 
 receive a split-shift differential for regularly scheduled 
 split-shift work as well as regularly scheduled overtime and 
 irregular and occasional split-shift work.
 (5) Eligible covered employees receive group retention 
 incentives, as appropriate, notwithstanding sections 5754(c), 
 (e), and (f) of title 5, United States Code.

SEC. 5935. CONSULTATION REQUIREMENT.

 (a) Exclusive Representative.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) Beginning on the date chapter 71 of title 5, 
 United States Code, begins to apply to covered 
 employees pursuant to section 5933(c)(2), the labor 
 organization certified by the Federal Labor Relations 
 Authority on June 29, 2011, or any successor labor 
 organization, shall be treated as the exclusive 
 representative of full- and part-time non-supervisory 
 TSA personnel carrying out screening functions under 
 section 44901 of title 49, United States Code, and 
 shall be the exclusive representative for such 
 personnel under chapter 71 of title 5, United States 
 Code, with full rights under such chapter.
 (B) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed 
 to prevent covered employees from selecting an 
 exclusive representative other than the labor 
 organization described under paragraph (1) for purposes 
 of collective bargaining under such chapter 71.
 (2) National level.--Notwithstanding any provision of such 
 chapter 71, collective bargaining for any unit of covered 
 employees shall occur at the national level, but may be 
 supplemented by local level bargaining and local level 
 agreements in furtherance of elements of a national agreement 
 or on local unit employee issues not otherwise covered by a 
 national agreement. Such local-level bargaining and local-level 
 agreements shall occur only by mutual consent of the exclusive 
 representative of full and part-time non-supervisory TSA 
 personnel carrying out screening functions under section 44901 
 of title 49, United States Code, and a TSA Federal Security 
 Director or their designee.
 (3) Current agreement.--Any collective bargaining agreement 
 covering such personnel in effect on the date of enactment of 
 this Act shall remain in effect until a collective bargaining 
 agreement is entered into under such chapter 71, unless the 
 Administrator and exclusive representative mutually agree to 
 revisions to such agreement.
 (b) Consultation Process.--Not later than seven days after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall consult with the 
exclusive representative for the personnel described in subsection (a) 
under chapter 71 of title 5, United States Code, on the formulation of 
plans and deadlines to carry out the conversion of full- and part-time 
non-supervisory TSA personnel carrying out screening functions under 
section 44901 of title 49, United States Code, under this subtitle. 
Prior to the date such chapter 71 begins to apply pursuant to section 
5933(c)(2), the Secretary shall provide (in writing) to such exclusive 
representative the plans for how the Secretary intends to carry out the 
conversion of such personnel under this subtitle, including with 
respect to such matters as--
 (1) the anticipated conversion date; and
 (2) measures to ensure compliance with sections 5933 and 
 5934.
 (c) Required Agency Response.--If any views or recommendations are 
presented under subsection (b) by the exclusive representative, the 
Secretary shall consider the views or recommendations before taking 
final action on any matter with respect to which the views or 
recommendations are presented and provide the exclusive representative 
a written statement of the reasons for the final actions to be taken.

SEC. 5936. NO RIGHT TO STRIKE.

 Nothing in this subtitle may be considered--
 (1) to repeal or otherwise affect--
 (A) section 1918 of title 18, United States Code 
 (relating to disloyalty and asserting the right to 
 strike against the Government); or
 (B) section 7311 of title 5, United States Code 
 (relating to loyalty and striking); or
 (2) to otherwise authorize any activity which is not 
 permitted under either provision of law cited in paragraph (1).

SEC. 5937. PROPOSAL ON HIRING AND CONTRACTING BACKGROUND CHECK 
 REQUIREMENTS.

 Not later than one year after the date of enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary shall submit a plan to the appropriate congressional 
committees on a proposal to harmonize and update, for the purposes of 
hiring and for authorizing or entering into any contract for service, 
the restrictions in section 70105(c) of title 46, United States Code, 
(relating to the issuance of transportation security cards) and section 
44936 of title 49, United States Code, (relating to security screener 
employment investigations and restrictions).

SEC. 5938. COMPTROLLER GENERAL REVIEWS.

 (a) Review of Recruitment.--Not later than one year after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall submit to 
Congress a report on the efforts of the TSA regarding recruitment, 
including recruitment efforts relating to veterans and the dependents 
of veterans and members of the Armed Forces and the dependents of such 
members. Such report shall also include recommendations regarding how 
the TSA may improve such recruitment efforts.
 (b) Review of Implementation.--Not later than 60 days after the 
conversion date, the Comptroller General shall commence a review of the 
implementation of this subtitle. The Comptroller General shall submit 
to Congress a report on its review no later than one year after such 
conversion date.
 (c) Review of Promotion Policies and Leadership Diversity.--Not 
later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
Comptroller General shall submit to Congress a report on the efforts of 
the TSA to ensure that recruitment, hiring, promotion, and advancement 
opportunities are equitable and provide for demographics among senior 
leadership that are reflective of the United States' workforce 
demographics writ large. Such report shall, to the extent possible, 
include an overview and analysis of the current demographics of TSA 
leadership and, as appropriate, recommendations to improve hiring and 
promotion procedures and diversity in leadership roles that may include 
recommendations for how TSA can better promote from within and retain 
and advance its workers.
 (d) Review of Harassment and Assault Policies and Protections.--Not 
later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
Comptroller General shall submit to Congress a report on the efforts of 
the TSA to ensure the safety of its staff with regards to harassment 
and assault in the workplace, such as incidents of sexual harassment 
and violence and harassment and violence motivated by an individual's 
perceived race, ethnicity, religion, gender identity or sexuality, and 
including incidents where the alleged perpetrator or perpetrators are 
members of the general public. Such report shall include an overview 
and analysis of the current TSA policies and response procedures, a 
detailed description of if, when, and how these policies fail to 
adequately protect TSA personnel, and, as appropriate, recommendations 
for steps the TSA can take to better protect its employees from 
harassment and violence in their workplace. In conducting its review, 
the Comptroller General shall provide opportunities for TSA employees 
of all levels and positions, and unions and associations representing 
such employees, to submit comments, including in an anonymous form, and 
take those comments into account in its final recommendations.

SEC. 5939. SENSE OF CONGRESS.

 It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the TSA's personnel system provides insufficient 
 benefits and workplace protections to the workforce that 
 secures the nation's transportation systems and that the TSA's 
 workforce should be provided protections and benefits under 
 title 5, United States Code; and
 (2) the provision of these title 5 protections and benefits 
 should not result in a reduction of pay or benefits to current 
 TSA employees.

SEC. 5940. ASSISTANCE FOR FEDERAL AIR MARSHAL SERVICE.

 The Administrator may communicate with organizations representing a 
significant number of Federal Air Marshals, to the extent provided by 
law, to address concerns regarding Federal Air Marshals related to the 
following:
 (1) Mental health.
 (2) Suicide rates.
 (3) Morale and recruitment.
 (4) Equipment and training.
 (5) Work schedules and shifts, including mandated periods 
 of rest.
 (6) Any other personnel issues the Administrator determines 
 appropriate.

SEC. 5941. PREVENTION AND PROTECTION AGAINST CERTAIN ILLNESS.

 The Administrator, in coordination with the Director of the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention and the Director of the National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, shall ensure that covered 
employees are provided proper guidance regarding prevention and 
protections against the COVID-19 National Emergency, including 
appropriate resources.

SEC. 5942. HAZARDOUS DUTY PAYMENTS.

 Subject to the availability of appropriations, and not later than 
90 days after receiving such appropriations, the Administrator shall 
provide a one-time bonus payment of $3,000 to each at-risk employee.

SEC. 5943. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be 
necessary, to remain available until expended, to carry out this 
subtitle.

SEC. 5944. STUDY ON FEASIBILITY OF COMMUTING BENEFITS.

 Not later than 270 days after the enactment of this Act, the 
Administrator shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees 
a feasibility study on allowing covered employees carrying out 
screening functions under section 44901 of title 49, United States 
Code, to treat as hours of employment time spent by such employees 
regularly traveling between airport parking lots and bus and transit 
stops and screening checkpoints before and after the regular work day. 
In conducting such study, the Administrator shall consider--
 (1) the amount of time needed to travel to and from airport 
 parking lots and bus and transit stops at representative 
 airports of various sizes;
 (2) the feasibility of using mobile phones and location 
 data to allow employees to report their arrival to and 
 departure from airport parking lots and bus and transit stops; 
 and
 (3) the estimated costs of providing such benefits.

SEC. 5945. BRIEFING ON ASSAULTS AND THREATS ON TSA EMPLOYEES.

 Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
the Administrator shall brief the appropriate congressional committees 
regarding the following:
 (1) Reports to the Administrator of instances of physical 
 or verbal assault or threat made by a member of the general 
 public against a covered employee engaged in carrying out 
 screening functions under section 44901 of title 49, United 
 States Code, since January 1, 2019.
 (2) Procedures for reporting such assaults and threats, 
 including information on how the Administrator communicates the 
 availability of such procedures.
 (3) Any steps taken by TSA to prevent and respond to such 
 assaults and threats.
 (4) Any related civil actions and criminal referrals made 
 annually since January 1, 2019.
 (5) Any additional authorities needed by the Administrator 
 to better prevent or respond to such assaults and threats.

SEC. 5946. ANNUAL REPORTS ON TSA WORKFORCE.

 Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act 
and annually thereafter, the Administrator shall submit to the 
appropriate congressional committees a report that contains the 
following:
 (1) An analysis of the Office of Personnel Management's 
 Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey (FEVS) to determine job 
 satisfaction rates of covered employees.
 (2) Information relating to retention rates of covered 
 employees at each airport, including transfers, in addition to 
 aggregate retention rates of covered employees across the TSA 
 workforce.
 (3) Information relating to actions taken by the TSA 
 intended to improve workforce morale and retention.

 DIVISION F--OTHER MATTERS

 TITLE LX--TAIWAN PEACE AND STABILITY ACT

SEC. 6001. SHORT TITLE.

 This title may be cited as the ``Taiwan Peace and Stability Act''.

SEC. 6002. FINDINGS AND STATEMENT OF POLICY.

 (a) Findings.--Congress makes the following findings:
 (1) The United States has consistently sought to advance 
 peace and stability in East Asia as a central element of U.S. 
 foreign policy toward the region.
 (2) The Government of the People's Republic of China (PRC), 
 especially since the election of Tsai Ing-Wen in 2016, has 
 conducted a coordinated campaign to weaken Taiwan 
 diplomatically, economically, and militarily in a manner that 
 threatens to erode U.S. policy and create a fait accompli on 
 questions surrounding Taiwan's future.
 (3) In order to ensure the longevity of U.S. policy and 
 preserve the ability of the people of Taiwan to determine their 
 future independently, it is necessary to reinforce Taiwan's 
 diplomatic, economic, and physical space.
 (b) Statement of Policy.--It is the policy of the United States 
to--
 (1) maintain the position that peace and stability in the 
 Western Pacific are in the political, security, and economic 
 interests of the United States, and are matters of 
 international concern; and
 (2) work with allies and partners to promote peace and 
 stability in the Indo-Pacific and deter military acts or other 
 forms of coercive behavior that would undermine regional 
 stability.

SEC. 6003. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title--
 (1) the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House 
 of Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Foreign Relations of the 
 Senate;
 (2) the term ``international organization'' includes United 
 Nations funds, programs, specialized agencies, entities, and 
 bodies, and other organizations outside of the United Nations 
 system, as the Secretary of State or the Secretary's designee 
 deems appropriate, and in consultation with other Federal 
 departments and agencies;
 (3) the term `One-China Principle' means the PRC's policy 
 toward Taiwan;
 (4) the term ``civil society organizations'' means 
 international civil society organizations that are critical to 
 maintaining Taiwan's international space and enabling Taiwan to 
 play a positive and constructive role in the global community; 
 and
 (5) the term ``potential PLA campaigns'' means--
 (A) a naval blockade of Taiwan;
 (B) an amphibious assault and ground invasion of 
 Taiwan, especially such invasion designed to accomplish 
 a fiat accompli before intervention is possible; and
 (C) a seizure of one or more of Taiwan's outlying 
 islands.

 Subtitle A--Supporting Taiwan's Meaningful Participation in the 
 International Community

SEC. 6011. FINDINGS.

 Congress makes the following findings:
 (1) Taiwan has provided monetary, humanitarian, and medical 
 assistance to combat diseases such as AIDS, tuberculosis, 
 Ebola, and dengue fever in countries around the world. During 
 the COVID-19 pandemic, Taiwan donated millions of pieces of 
 personal protective equipment and COVID-19 tests to countries 
 in need.
 (2) Since 2016, the Gambia, Sao Tome and Principe, Panama, 
 the Dominican Republic, Burkina Faso, El Salvador, the Solomon 
 Islands, and Kiribati have severed diplomatic relations with 
 Taiwan in favor of diplomatic relations with China.
 (3) Taiwan was invited to participate in the World Health 
 Assembly, the decision-making body of the World Health 
 Organization (WHO), as an observer annually between 2009 and 
 2016. Since the 2016 election of President Tsai, the PRC has 
 increasingly resisted Taiwan's participation in the WHA. Taiwan 
 was not invited to attend the WHA in 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, or 
 2021.
 (4) The Taipei Flight Information Region reportedly served 
 1.75 million flights and 68.9 million passengers in 2018 and is 
 home to Taiwan Taoyuan International airport, the eleventh 
 busiest airport in the world. Taiwan has been excluded from 
 participating at the International Civil Aviation Organization 
 (ICAO) since 2013.
 (5) United Nations (UN) General Assembly Resolution 2758 
 does not address the issue of representation of Taiwan and its 
 people at the United Nations, nor does it give the PRC the 
 right to represent the people of Taiwan.

SEC. 6012. SENSE OF CONGRESS ON TAIWAN'S MEANINGFUL PARTICIPATION IN 
 THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY.

 It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) Taiwan is free, democratic, and prosperous, and is home 
 to 23.5 million people. It is an important contributor to the 
 global community, as a model for democracy, and by providing 
 expertise in global health, international aviation security, 
 emerging technology development, and with forward looking 
 environmental policies;
 (2) multiple United States Government administrations of 
 both political parties have taken important steps to advance 
 Taiwan's meaningful participation in international 
 organizations;
 (3) existing efforts to enhance U.S. cooperation with 
 Taiwan to provide global public goods, including through 
 development assistance, humanitarian assistance, and disaster 
 relief in trilateral and multilateral fora is laudable and 
 should continue;
 (4) nonetheless, significant structural, policy, and legal 
 barriers remain to advancing Taiwan's meaningful participation 
 in the international community; and
 (5) efforts to share Taiwan's expertise with other parts of 
 the global community could be further enhanced through a 
 systematic approach, along with greater attention from Congress 
 and the American public to such efforts.

SEC. 6013. STRATEGY TO SUPPORT TAIWAN'S MEANINGFUL PARTICIPATION IN 
 INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State, in consultation with 
other Federal departments and agencies as appropriate, shall submit to 
the appropriate congressional committees a strategy--
 (1) to advance Taiwan's meaningful participation in a 
 prioritized set of international organizations (IOs); and
 (2) that responds to growing pressure from the PRC on 
 foreign governments, IOs, commercial actors, and civil society 
 organizations to comply with its ``One-China Principle'', with 
 respect to Taiwan.
 (b) Matters To Be Included.--
 (1) In general.--The strategy required in paragraph (a) 
 shall include:
 (A) An assessment of the methods the PRC uses to 
 coerce actors to into adhering to its ``One-China 
 Principle.'' The methods shall include those employed 
 against governments, IOs, and civil society 
 organizations. The assessment shall also include 
 pressure on commercial actors, to the extent it is 
 relevant in the context of Taiwan's meaningful 
 participation in IOs.
 (B) An assessment of the policies of foreign 
 governments toward the PRC and Taiwan, to identify 
 likeminded allies and partners who might become public 
 or private partners in the strategy.
 (C) A systematic analysis of all IOs, as 
 practicable, to identify IOs that best lend themselves 
 to advancing Taiwan's participation. The analysis shall 
 include, but is not limited to the IOs'--
 (i) policy on the requirements to obtain 
 membership and observer status, as well as the 
 foundational documents defining membership 
 requirements and observer status within the IO;
 (ii) participation rules;
 (iii) processes for developing membership 
 requirements and participation rules;
 (iv) policies of current members regarding 
 Taiwan's political status; and
 (v) relative reliance on contributions from 
 the PRC and how it may affect internal decision 
 making.
 (D) An evaluation of the feasibility and 
 advisability of expanding economic, security, and 
 diplomatic engagement with nations that have 
 demonstrably strengthened, enhanced, or upgraded 
 relations with Taiwan, where it aligns with U.S. 
 interests.
 (E) A survey of IOs that have allowed Taiwan's 
 meaningful participation, including an assessment of 
 whether any erosion in Taiwan's engagement has occurred 
 within those organizations and how Taiwan's 
 participation has positively strengthened the capacity 
 and activity of these organizations, thereby providing 
 positive models for Taiwan's inclusion in other similar 
 forums.
 (F) A list of no more than 20 IOs at which the U.S. 
 Government will prioritize for using its voice, vote, 
 and influence to advance Taiwan's meaningful 
 participation over the three-year period following the 
 date of enactment of this Act. The list shall be 
 derived from the IOs identified in paragraph (1)(C).
 (G) A description of the diplomatic strategies and 
 the coalitions the U.S. Government plans to develop to 
 implement paragraph (b)(1)(F).
 (c) Form of Report.--The strategy required in subsection (a) shall 
be classified, but it may include an unclassified summary, if the 
Secretary of State determines it appropriate.
 (d) Consultation.--The Secretary of State or his or her designee, 
shall consult with the appropriate congressional committees--
 (1) no later than 90 days after the date of enactment of 
 this Act, on the list of IOs identified in subsection 
 (b)(1)(C); and
 (2) 180 days after submitting the strategy required in 
 subsection (a), and 180 days thereafter for two years, 
 regarding the development and implementation of the strategy.

SEC. 6014. EXPANDING UNITED STATES-TAIWAN DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION.

 (a) In General.--No later than 120 days following the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the United States Agency 
for International Development (USAID), in consultation with the U.S. 
International Development Finance Corporation (DFC), shall submit to 
the appropriate congressional committees a report on cooperation with 
Taiwan on trilateral and multilateral development initiatives through 
the American Institute in Taiwan as appropriate.
 (b) Matters To Be Included.--The report required by subsection (a) 
shall include:
 (1) A comprehensive review of existing cooperation 
 mechanisms and initiatives between USAID or DFC, and relevant 
 departments and agencies in Taiwan, including, but not limited 
 to Taiwan's International Cooperation and Development Fund 
 (ICDF).
 (2) An assessment of how USAID and DFC development 
 cooperation with relevant departments and agencies in Taiwan 
 compares to comparable cooperation with partners of similar 
 economic size and foreign assistance capacity.
 (3) An analysis of the opportunities and challenges the 
 cooperation reviewed in paragraph (1) has offered to date. The 
 analysis shall include, but is not limited to--
 (A) opportunities collaboration has offered to 
 expand USAID's and DFC's ability to deliver assistance 
 into a wider range communities;
 (B) sectors where USAID, DFC, ICDF, other relevant 
 agencies and departments in Taiwan, or the 
 organizations' implementing partners have a comparative 
 advantage in providing assistance;
 (C) opportunities to transition virtual capacity 
 building events with relevant departments and agencies 
 in Taiwan, through the Global Cooperation and Training 
 Framework (GCTF) as well as other forums, into in-
 person, enduring forms of development cooperation.
 (4) An assessment of any legal, policy, logistical, 
 financial, or administrative barriers to expanding cooperation 
 in trilateral or multilateral development. The analysis shall 
 include, but is not limited to--
 (A) availability of personnel at the American 
 Institute in Taiwan (AIT) responsible for coordinating 
 development assistance cooperation;
 (B) volume of current cooperation initiatives and 
 barriers to expanding it;
 (C) diplomatic, policy, or legal barriers facing 
 the United States or other partners to including Taiwan 
 in formal and informal multilateral development 
 cooperation mechanisms;
 (D) resource or capacity barriers to expanding 
 cooperation facing the United States or Taiwan; and
 (E) geopolitical barriers that complicate U.S.-
 Taiwan cooperation in third countries.
 (5) Recommendations to address the challenges identified in 
 paragraph (b)(4).
 (6) A description of any additional resources or 
 authorities that expanding cooperation might require.
 (c) Form of Report.--The strategy required in subsection (a) shall 
be unclassified, but it may include a classified annex if the 
Administrator of USAID determines it appropriate.

 Subtitle B--Advancing Taiwan's Economic Space

SEC. 6021. SENSE OF CONGRESS ON EXPANDING U.S. ECONOMIC RELATIONS WITH 
 TAIWAN.

 It is the sense of the Congress that--
 (1) expanding U.S. economic relations with Taiwan has 
 benefited the people of both the United States and Taiwan. 
 Taiwan is now the United States 10th largest goods trading 
 partner, 13th largest export market, 13th largest source of 
 imports, and a key destination for U.S. agricultural exports;
 (2) further integration, consistent with robust 
 environmental standard and labor rights, would benefit both 
 peoples and is in the strategic and diplomatic interests of the 
 United States; and
 (3) the United States should explore opportunities to 
 expand economic agreements between Taiwan and the United 
 States, through dialogue, and by developing the legal templates 
 required to support potential future agreements.

 Subtitle C--Enhancing Deterrence Over Taiwan

SEC. 6031. SENSE OF CONGRESS ON PEACE AND STABILITY IN THE TAIWAN 
 STRAIT.

 It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) PRC attempts to intimidate Taiwan, including through 
 high rates of PRC sorties into air space near Taiwan, and PRC 
 amphibious assault exercises near Taiwan, jeopardizes the long-
 standing U.S. position that differences in cross-Strait 
 relations must be resolved peacefully;
 (2) given the potential for a cross-Strait conflict to be 
 highly destructive and destabilizing, any increase in the risk 
 of conflict demands attention and obligates leaders to 
 reinforce deterrence, as the most viable means to prevent war;
 (3) Taiwan should continue to implement its asymmetric 
 defense strategy, including investing in cost-effective and 
 resilient capabilities, while also strengthening recruitment 
 and training of its reserve and civil defense forces, and those 
 capabilities include coastal defense cruise missiles; and
 (4) while enhancing deterrence, it is also essential to 
 maintain open and effective crisis communication and risk 
 reduction mechanisms, as a means to reduce the risk of 
 misunderstanding and ultimately, conflict.

SEC. 6032. STRATEGY TO ENHANCE DETERRENCE OVER A CROSS-STRAIT CONFLICT.

 (a) In General.--No later than 90 days after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the President shall submit to the appropriate 
congressional committees a whole-of-government strategy to enhance 
deterrence over a cross-Strait military conflict between the PRC and 
Taiwan.
 (b) Matters To Be Included.--The strategy shall include:
 (1) A comprehensive review of existing diplomatic, 
 economic, and military tools to establish deterrence over a 
 cross-Strait conflict and an assessment of their efficacy.
 (2) An examination of the present and future capabilities 
 of the United States and Taiwan to respond to the potential PLA 
 campaigns against Taiwan in 5, 10, and 15 years. The analysis 
 shall include an assessment of the progress Taiwan has made in 
 developing the cost-effective and resilient capabilities needed 
 to respond to its strategic environment, as well as any 
 additional personnel, procurement, or training reforms 
 required.
 (3) An evaluation of the feasibility of expanding 
 coordination with U.S. allies and partners to enhance 
 deterrence over a cross-Strait conflict. The review shall 
 include, but is not limited to, a review of the following 
 matters:
 (A) Expanding coordination of public or private 
 messaging on deterrence vis-a-vis Taiwan.
 (B) Coordinating use of economic tools to raise the 
 costs of PRC military action that could precipitate a 
 cross-Strait conflict.
 (C) Enhancing co-development and co-deployment of 
 military capabilities related to deterrence over a 
 cross-Strait conflict, or enhancing coordinated 
 training of Taiwan's military forces.
 (4) Recommendations on significant additional diplomatic, 
 economic, and military steps available to the U.S. Government, 
 unilaterally and in concert with U.S. allies and partners, to 
 enhance the clarity and credibility of deterrence over a cross-
 Strait conflict.
 (5) A description of any additional resources or 
 authorities needed to implement the recommendations identified 
 in paragraph (5).
 (c) Form of Report.--The strategy required in subsection (b) shall 
be classified, but it may include an unclassified annex, if determined 
appropriate by the President.
 (d) Consultation.--No later than 90 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, and not less frequently than every 180 days 
thereafter for seven years, the President or his or her designee, as 
well as representatives from the agencies and departments involved in 
developing the strategy required in paragraph (a) shall consult with 
the appropriate congressional committees regarding the development and 
implementation of the strategy required in this section. The 
representatives shall be at the Undersecretary level or above.

SEC. 6033. STRENGTHENING TAIWAN'S CIVILIAN DEFENSE PROFESSIONALS.

 (a) In General.--No later than 180 days following enactment of this 
Act, the Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary of 
Defense, shall present to the appropriate congressional committees a 
plan for strengthening the community of civilian defense professionals 
in Taiwan, facilitated through the American Institute in Taiwan as 
appropriate.
 (b) Matters To Be Included.--The report shall include the 
following:
 (1) A comprehensive review of existing U.S. Government and 
 non-U.S. Government programmatic and funding modalities to 
 support Taiwan's civilian defense professionals in pursuing 
 professional development, educational, and cultural exchanges 
 in the United States. The review shall include, but is not 
 limited to--
 (A) opportunities through U.S. Department of State-
 supported programs, such as the International Visitor 
 Leaders Program; and
 (B) opportunities offered through non-governmental 
 institutions, such as think tanks, to the extent the 
 review can practicably make such an assessment.
 (2) A description of the frequency that civilian defense 
 professionals from Taiwan pursue or are selected for the 
 programs reviewed in paragraph (1).
 (3) An analysis of any funding, policy, administrative, or 
 other barriers preventing greater participation from Taiwan's 
 civilian defense professionals in the opportunities identified 
 in paragraph (1).
 (4) An evaluation of the value expanding the opportunities 
 reviewed in paragraph (1) would offer for strengthening 
 Taiwan's existing civilian defense community, and for 
 increasing the perceived value of the field for young 
 professionals in Taiwan.
 (5) An assessment of options the United States Government 
 could take individually, with partners in Taiwan, or with 
 foreign governments or non-governmental partners, to expand the 
 opportunities reviewed in paragraph (1).
 (6) A description of additional resources and authorities 
 that may be required to execute the options in paragraph (5).
 (c) Form of Report.--The report required in subsection (a) shall be 
unclassified, but it may include a classified annex, if determined 
appropriate.

 TITLE LXI--LIBYA STABILIZATION ACT

SEC. 6101. SHORT TITLE.

 This title may be cited as the ``Libya Stabilization Act''.

SEC. 6102. STATEMENT OF POLICY.

 It is the policy of the United States--
 (1) to advance a peaceful resolution to the conflict in 
 Libya through a United Nations-facilitated Libyan-led and 
 Libyan-owned political process as the best way to secure United 
 States interests and to ensure the sovereignty, independence, 
 territorial integrity, and national unity of Libya;
 (2) to engage regularly at the senior-most levels in 
 support of the continued observance of the ceasefire in Libya, 
 the fair and transparent allocation of Libya's resources, the 
 reunification of security and economic institutions, and 
 agreement among Libyans on a consensual constitutional basis 
 that would lead to credible presidential and parliamentary 
 elections as soon as possible;
 (3) to support the implementation of United Nations 
 Security Council Resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011), which 
 established an arms embargo on Libya, and subsequent 
 resolutions modifying and extending the embargo;
 (4) to enforce Executive Order 13726 (81 Fed. Reg. 23559; 
 relating to blocking property and suspending entry into the 
 United States of persons contributing to the situation in Libya 
 (April 19, 2016)), designed to target individuals or entities 
 who ``threaten the peace, security, and stability of Libya'';
 (5) to oppose attacks on civilians, medical workers, and 
 critical infrastructure, including water supplies, in Libya, 
 and to support accountability for those engaged in such heinous 
 actions;
 (6) to support Libya's sovereignty, independence, 
 territorial integrity, and national unity consistent with 
 United Nations Security Council Resolution 2510 (2020) and all 
 predecessor resolutions with respect to Libya, including by--
 (A) taking action to end the violence and flow of 
 arms;
 (B) rejecting attempts by any party to illicitly 
 export Libya's oil; and
 (C) urging the withdrawal of foreign military and 
 mercenary forces;
 (7) to engage in diplomacy to convince parties to conflict 
 and political dispute in Libya to support the continuity of the 
 October 2020 ceasefire and persuade foreign powers to withdraw 
 personnel, including mercenaries, weapons, and financing that 
 may reignite or exacerbate conflict;
 (8) to support political dialogue among Libyans and advance 
 an inclusive Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political process;
 (9) to support the nearly 2.8 million Libyans who 
 registered to vote;
 (10) to help protect Libya's civilian population and 
 implementing humanitarian and international organizations from 
 the risk of harm resulting from explosive hazards such as 
 landmines, improvised explosive devices (IEDs), and unexploded 
 ordnance (UXO);
 (11) to support constant, unimpeded, and reliable 
 humanitarian access to those in need and to hold accountable 
 those who impede or threaten the delivery of humanitarian 
 assistance;
 (12) to seek to bring an end to severe forms of trafficking 
 in persons such as slavery, forced labor, and sexual 
 exploitation, including with respect to migrants;
 (13) to advocate for the immediate release and safe 
 evacuations of detained refugees and migrants trapped by the 
 fighting in Libya;
 (14) to encourage implementation of UNSMIL's plan for the 
 organized and gradual closure of migrant detention centers in 
 Libya;
 (15) to support greater defense institutional capacity 
 building after a comprehensive political settlement;
 (16) to discourage all parties from heightening tensions in 
 Libya and its environs, through unhelpful and provocative 
 actions.
 (17) to support current and future democratic development 
 and economic recovery of Libya both during and after a 
 negotiated peaceful political solution, pursuant to Libya's 
 status as a Global Fragility Act partner state; and
 (18) to partner with various U.S. government agencies, 
 multilateral organizations, and local partners to strengthen 
 security, prosperity, and stability in Libya, pursuant to 
 Libya's status as a Global Fragility Act partner state.

 Subtitle A--Identifying Challenges to Stability in Libya

SEC. 6111. REPORT ON ACTIVITIES OF CERTAIN FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS AND 
 ACTORS IN LIBYA.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State, in consultation with the 
Secretary of the Treasury and the Director of National Intelligence, 
should submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report that 
includes--
 (1) a description of the full extent of involvement in 
 Libya by foreign governments, including the Governments of 
 Russia, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, Egypt, Sudan, Chad, 
 China, Saudi Arabia, and Qatar, including--
 (A) a description of which governments have 
 conducted or facilitated drone and aircraft strikes in 
 Libya since April 2019 not related to efforts to combat 
 Al Qaeda, the Islamic State, or affiliated entities;
 (B) a list of the types and estimated amounts of 
 equipment transferred since April 2019 by each 
 government described in this paragraph to the parties 
 to conflict in Libya, including foreign military 
 contractors, mercenaries, or paramilitary forces 
 operating in Libya;
 (C) an estimate of the financial support provided 
 since April 2019 by each government described in this 
 paragraph to the parties to conflict in Libya, 
 including foreign military contractors, mercenaries, or 
 paramilitary forces operating in Libya; and
 (D) a description of the activities of any regular, 
 irregular, or paramilitary forces, including foreign 
 military contractors, mercenary groups, and militias 
 operating inside Libya, at the direction or with the 
 consent of the governments described in this paragraph;
 (2) an analysis of whether the actions by the governments 
 described in paragraph (1)--
 (A) violate the arms embargo on Libya established 
 under United Nations Security Council Resolution 1970 
 (2011) as reaffirmed by subsequent Security Council 
 resolutions;
 (B) may contribute to violations of international 
 humanitarian law; or
 (C) involve weapons of United States origin or were 
 in violation of United States end user agreements;
 (3) a description of United States diplomatic engagement 
 with any governments found to be in violation of the arms 
 embargo regarding strengthened implementation of the embargo;
 (4) a list of the specific offending materiel, training, or 
 financial support transfers provided by a government described 
 in paragraph (1) that violate the arms embargo on Libya under 
 United Nations Security Council Resolution 2571 (2021) and 
 predecessor Security Council resolutions;
 (5) an analysis of the activities of foreign armed groups, 
 including the Russian Wagner Group, military contractors and 
 mercenaries employed or engaged by the governments of Turkey 
 and the United Arab Emirates, affiliates of the Islamic State 
 (ISIS), al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), and other 
 extremist groups, in Libya;
 (6) a discussion of whether and to what extent conflict or 
 instability in Libya is enabling the recruitment and training 
 efforts of armed groups, including affiliates of ISIS, AQIM, 
 and other extremist groups;
 (7) a description of efforts by the European Union, North 
 Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), and the Arab League, and 
 their respective member states, to implement and enforce the 
 arms embargo and maintain a sustainable ceasefire;
 (8) a description of any violations of the arms embargo by 
 European Union member states; and
 (9) a description of United States diplomatic engagement 
 with the European Union, NATO, and the Arab League regarding 
 implementation and enforcement of the United Nations arms 
 embargo, ceasefire monitoring, and election support.
 (b) Form.--The report required by subsection (a) shall be submitted 
in unclassified form, but may contain a classified annex.
 (c) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Permanent 
 Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Select 
 Committee on Intelligence of the Senate.

SEC. 6112. REPORT OF RUSSIAN ACTIVITIES AND OBJECTIVES IN LIBYA.

 (a) Report.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary 
of the Treasury and the Secretary of Defense, shall submit to the 
Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives and the 
Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate a report that contains an 
assessment of Russian activities and objectives in Libya, including--
 (1) an assessment of Russian influence and objectives in 
 Libya;
 (2) the potential threat such activities pose to the United 
 States, southern Europe, NATO, and partners in the 
 Mediterranean Sea and North African region;
 (3) the direct role of Russia in Libyan financial affairs, 
 to include issuing and printing currency;
 (4) Russia's use of mercenaries, military contractors, 
 equipment, and paramilitary forces in Libya;
 (5) an assessment of sanctions and other policies adopted 
 by United States partners and allies against the Wagner Group 
 and its destabilizing activities in Libya, including sanctions 
 on Yevgeny Prigozhin; and
 (6) an identification of foreign companies and persons that 
 have provided transportation, logistical, administrative, air 
 transit, border crossing, or money transfer services to Russian 
 mercenaries or armed forces operating on behalf of the Russian 
 Government in Libya, and an analysis of whether such entities 
 meet the criteria for imposition of sanctions under section 
 1(a) of Executive Order 13726 (81 Fed. Reg. 23559; relating to 
 blocking property and suspending entry into the United States 
 of persons contributing to the situation in Libya).
 (b) Form.--The report required by subsection (a) shall be submitted 
in unclassified form, but may contain a classified annex.

SEC. 6113. DETERMINATION OF SANCTIONABLE ACTIVITIES OF THE LIBYAN 
 NATIONAL ARMY WITH RESPECT TO SYRIA.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
Act, the President shall submit to the Committee on Foreign Affairs of 
the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of 
the Senate a list of any members of the Libyan National Army (LNA), and 
details of their activities, which the President has determined are 
knowingly responsible for sanctionable offenses pursuant to--
 (1) section 7412 of the Caesar Syria Civilian Protection 
 Act of 2019 (22 U.S.C. 8791 note; 133 Stat. 2292); or
 (2) Executive Order 13582 (76 Fed. Reg. 52209; relating to 
 blocking property of the Government of Syria and prohibiting 
 certain transactions with respect to Syria (August 17, 2011)).

 Subtitle B--Actions to Address Foreign Intervention in Libya

SEC. 6121. SANCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO FOREIGN PERSONS LEADING, 
 DIRECTING, OR SUPPORTING CERTAIN FOREIGN GOVERNMENT 
 INVOLVEMENT IN LIBYA.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the President shall impose each of the sanctions 
described in section 6124 with respect to each foreign person who the 
President determines knowingly engages in an activity described in 
subsection (b).
 (b) Activities Described.--A foreign person engages in an activity 
described in this subsection if the person leads, directs, or provides 
significant financial, material, or technological support to, or 
knowingly engages in a significant transaction with, a non-Libyan 
foreign person who is--
 (1) in Libya in a military or commercial capacity as a 
 military contractor, mercenary, or part of a paramilitary 
 force; and
 (2) engaged in significant actions that threaten the peace, 
 security, or stability of Libya.

SEC. 6122. SANCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO FOREIGN PERSONS THREATENING THE 
 PEACE OR STABILITY OF LIBYA.

 (a) Imposition of Sanctions.--The President shall impose each of 
the sanctions described in section 6124 with respect to each foreign 
person on the list required by subsection (b).
 (b) List.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the President shall submit to the appropriate 
congressional committees a list of--
 (1) foreign persons, including senior government officials, 
 militia leaders, paramilitary leaders, and other persons who 
 provide significant support to militia or paramilitary groups 
 in Libya, that the President determines are knowingly--
 (A) engaged in significant actions or policies that 
 threaten the peace, security, or stability of Libya, 
 including any supply of significant arms or related 
 materiel in violation of a United Nations Security 
 Council resolution on Libya;
 (B) engaged in significant actions or policies that 
 obstruct, undermine, delay, or impede, or pose a 
 significant risk of obstructing, undermining, delaying, 
 or impeding the United Nations-mediated political 
 processes that seek a negotiated and peaceful solution 
 to the Libyan crisis, including a consensual 
 constitutional basis that would lead to credible 
 presidential and parliamentary elections as soon as 
 possible and ongoing maintenance of the October 2020 
 ceasefire;
 (C) engaged in significant actions that may lead to 
 or result in the misappropriation of significant state 
 assets of Libya;
 (D) involved in the significant illicit 
 exploitation of crude oil or any other natural 
 resources in Libya, including the significant illicit 
 production, disruption of production, refining, 
 brokering, sale, purchase, or export of Libyan oil;
 (E) significantly threatening or coercing Libyan 
 state financial institutions or disrupting the 
 operations of the Libyan National Oil Company; or
 (F) significantly responsible for actions or 
 policies that are intended to undermine efforts to 
 maintain peace and promote stabilization and economic 
 recovery in Libya;
 (2) foreign persons who the President determines are 
 successor entities to persons designated for engaging in 
 activities described in subparagraphs (A) through (F) of 
 paragraph (1); and
 (c) Updates of List.--The President shall submit to the appropriate 
congressional committees an updated list under subsection (b)--
 (1) not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment 
 of this Act and annually thereafter for a period of 5 years; or
 (2) as new information becomes available.
 (d) Form.--The list required by subsection (b) shall be submitted 
in unclassified form, but may include a classified annex.
 (e) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on 
 Financial Services of the House of Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on 
 Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate.

SEC. 6123. SANCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO FOREIGN PERSONS WHO ARE 
 RESPONSIBLE FOR OR COMPLICIT IN GROSS VIOLATIONS OF 
 INTERNATIONALLY RECOGNIZED HUMAN RIGHTS COMMITTED IN 
 LIBYA.

 (a) Imposition of Sanctions.--The President may impose 5 out of the 
12 sanctions described in section 235 of Countering America's 
Adversaries Through Sanctions Act (Public Law 115-44) with respect to 
each foreign person on the list required by subsection (b).
 (b) List of Persons.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the President shall submit to the 
 appropriate congressional committees a list of senior foreign 
 persons, including senior government officials, militia 
 leaders, para-military leaders, and other persons who provide 
 significant support to militia or paramilitary groups in Libya, 
 that the President determines are each knowingly responsible 
 for or complicit in, or have directly or in- directly engaged 
 in, on or after the date of enactment gross violations of 
 internationally recognized human rights committed in Libya.
 (2) Updates of list.--The President shall submit to the 
 appropriate congressional committees an updated list under 
 paragraph (1)--
 (A) not later than 180 days after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act and annually thereafter for a 
 period of 5 years; or
 (B) as new information becomes available.
 (3) Form.--The list required by paragraph (1) shall be 
 submitted in unclassified form, but may include a classified 
 annex.
 (c) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on 
 Financial Services of the House of Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on 
 Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate.

SEC. 6124. SANCTIONS DESCRIBED.

 (a) Sanctions Described.--The sanctions described in this section 
are the following:
 (1) Blocking of property.--The President may exercise all 
 of the powers granted to the President by the International 
 Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (except 
 that the requirements of section 202 of such Act (50 U.S.C. 
 1701) shall not apply) to the extent necessary to block and 
 prohibit all transactions in property and interests in property 
 of the person if such property and interests in property are in 
 the United States, come within the United States, or are or 
 come within the possession or control of a United States 
 person.
 (2) Inadmissibility of certain individuals.--
 (A) Ineligibility for visas, admission,or parole.--
 A foreign person who is an individual and who meets any 
 of the criteria described section 6121 or 6122 may be 
 determined by the Secretary of State to be--
 (i) inadmissible to the United States;
 (ii) ineligible to receive a visa or other 
 documentation to enter the United States; and
 (iii) otherwise ineligible to be admitted 
 or paroled into the United States or to receive 
 any other benefit under the Immigration and 
 Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101 et seq.).
 (B) Current visas revoked.--A foreign person who is 
 an individual and who meets any of the criteria 
 described section 6121 or 6122 may be subject to the 
 following:
 (i) Revocation of any visa or other entry 
 documentation by the Secretary of State 
 regardless of when the visa or other entry 
 documentation is or was issued.
 (ii) A revocation under clause (i) shall--
 (I) take effect immediately in 
 accordance with section 221(i) of the 
 Immigration and Nationality Act, (8 
 U.S.C. 1201(i)); and
 (II) cancel any other valid visa or 
 entry documentation that is in the 
 foreign person's possession.
 (b) Penalties.--The penalties provided for in subsections (b) and 
(c) of section 206 of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act 
(50 U.S.C. 1705) shall apply to a person who violates, attempts to 
violate, conspires to violate, or causes a violation of regulations 
issued under section 6126(2) of this title to carry out subsection 
(a)(1) to the same extent that such penalties apply to a person who 
commits an unlawful act described in section 206(a) of the 
International Emergency Economic Powers Act.
 (c) Exception.--Sanctions under subsection (a)(2) shall not apply 
to an alien if admitting or paroling the alien into the United States 
is necessary to permit the United States to comply with the Agreement 
regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations, signed at Lake 
Success June 26, 1947, and entered into force November 21, 1947, 
between the United Nations and the United States, or other applicable 
international obligations of the United States.
 (d) Exception to Comply With National Security.--The following 
activities shall be exempt from sanctions under this section:
 (1) Activities subject to the reporting requirements under 
 title V of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3091 et 
 seq.).
 (2) Any authorized intelligence or law enforcement 
 activities of the United States.

SEC. 6125. WAIVER.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of State may waive, for one or more 
periods not to exceed 90 days, the application of sanctions imposed on 
a foreign person under this subtitle if the President--
 (1) determines and reports to Congress that such a waiver 
 is in the national security interest of the United States; and
 (2) thereafter submits to the appropriate congressional 
 committees a justification for such waiver.
 (b) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on 
 Financial Services of the House of Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on 
 Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate.

SEC. 6126. IMPLEMENTATION AND REGULATORY AUTHORITY.

 The President--
 (1) is authorized to exercise all authorities provided to 
 the President under sections 203 and 205 of the International 
 Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1702 and 1704) to 
 carry out this title; and
 (2) shall issue such regulations, licenses, and orders as 
 are necessary to carry out this title.

SEC. 6127. EXCEPTION RELATING TO IMPORTATION OF GOODS.

 (a) In General.--The authorities and requirements to impose 
sanctions under this subtitle shall not include the authority or 
requirement to impose sanctions on the importation of goods.
 (b) Good Defined.--In this section, the term ``good'' means any 
article, natural or man-made substance, material, supply or 
manufactured product, including inspection and test equipment and 
excluding technical data.

SEC. 6128. DEFINITIONS.

 In this subtitle:
 (1) Admitted; alien.--The terms ``admitted'' and ``alien'' 
 have the meanings given those terms in section 101 of the 
 Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101).
 (2) Foreign person.--The term ``foreign person'' means an 
 individual or entity who is not a United States person.
 (3) Foreign government.--The term ``foreign government'' 
 means any government of a country other than the United States.
 (4) Knowingly.--The term ``knowingly'' with respect to 
 conduct, a circumstance, or a result, means that a person has 
 actual knowledge, or should have known, of the conduct, the 
 circumstance, or the result.
 (5) United states person.--The term ``United States 
 person'' means--
 (A) an individual who is a United States citizen or 
 an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence to 
 the United States;
 (B) an entity organized under the laws of the 
 United States or any jurisdiction within the United 
 States, including a foreign branch of such an entity; 
 or
 (C) any person in the United States.
 (6) Gross violations of internationally recognized human 
 rights.--The term ``gross vio- lations of internationally 
 recognized human rights'' has the meaning given such term in 
 section 502B(d)(1) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 
 U.S.C. 2304(d)(1)).

SEC. 6129. SUSPENSION OF SANCTIONS.

 (a) In General.--The President may suspend in whole or in part the 
imposition of sanctions otherwise required under this subtitle for 
periods not to exceed 90 days if the President determines that the 
parties to the conflict in Libya have agreed to and are upholding a 
sustainable, good-faith ceasefire in support of a lasting political 
solution in Libya.
 (b) Notification Required.--Not later than 30 days after the date 
on which the President makes a determination to suspend the imposition 
of sanctions as described in subsection (a), the President shall submit 
to the appropriate congressional committees a notification of the 
determination.
 (c) Reimposition of Sanctions.--Any sanctions suspended under 
subsection (a) shall be reimposed if the President determines that the 
criteria described in that subsection are no longer being met.

SEC. 6130. SUNSET.

 The requirement to impose sanctions under this subtitle shall cease 
to be effective on December 31, 2026.

 Subtitle C--Assistance for Libya

SEC. 6131. HUMANITARIAN RELIEF FOR THE PEOPLE OF LIBYA AND 
 INTERNATIONAL REFUGEES AND MIGRANTS IN LIBYA.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the United States Government should, including in 
 alignment with Libya's status inclusion in the U.S. Global 
 Fragility Act Strategy--
 (A) continue senior-level efforts to address 
 humanitarian needs in Libya, which has been exacerbated 
 by conflict and the COVID-19 pandemic;
 (B) engage diplomatically with Libyan entities to 
 guarantee constant, reliable humanitarian access by 
 frontline providers in Libya;
 (C) engage diplomatically with the Libyan entities, 
 the United Nations, and the European Union to encourage 
 the voluntary safe passage of detained vulnerable 
 migrants and refugees from the conflict zones in Libya; 
 and
 (D) support efforts to document and publicize gross 
 violations of internationally recognized human rights 
 and international humanitarian law, including efforts 
 related to severe forms of trafficking in persons such 
 as slavery, forced labor, and sexual exploitation, and 
 hold perpetrators accountable; and
 (2) deliver humanitarian assistance targeted toward those 
 most in need and delivered through partners that uphold 
 internationally recognized humanitarian principles, with robust 
 monitoring to ensure assistance is reaching intended 
 beneficiaries.
 (b) Assistance Authorized.--The Administrator of the United States 
Agency for International Development, in coordination with the 
Secretary of State, should continue to support humanitarian assistance 
to individuals and communities in Libya, including--
 (1) health assistance, including logistical and technical 
 assistance to hospitals, ambulances, and health clinics in 
 affected communities, including migrant communities, and 
 provision of basic public health commodities, including support 
 for an effective response to the COVID-19 pandemic;
 (2) services, such as medicines and medical supplies and 
 equipment;
 (3) assistance to provide--
 (A) protection, food, and shelter, including to 
 migrant communities;
 (B) water, sanitation, and hygiene (commonly 
 referred to as ``WASH''); and
 (C) resources and training to increase 
 communications and education to help communities slow 
 the spread of COVID-19 and to increase vaccine 
 acceptance; and
 (4) technical assistance to ensure health, food, and 
 commodities are appropriately selected, procured, targeted, 
 monitored, and distributed.
 (c) Strategy.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State, in coordination with the 
Administrator of the United States Agency for International 
Development, shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a 
strategy on the following:
 (1) How the United States, working with relevant foreign 
 governments and multilateral organizations, plans to address 
 the humanitarian situation in Libya.
 (2) Diplomatic efforts by the United States to encourage 
 strategic burden-sharing and the coordination of donations with 
 international donors, including foreign governments and 
 multilateral organizations to advance the provision of 
 humanitarian assistance to the people of Libya and 
 international migrants and refugees in Libya.
 (3) How to address humanitarian access challenges and 
 ensure protection for vulnerable refugees and migrants, 
 including protection from severe forms of trafficking in 
 persons such as slavery, forced labor, and sexual exploitation.
 (4) How the United States is mitigating risk, utilizing 
 third party monitors, and ensuring effective delivery of 
 assistance.
 (5) How to address the tragic and persistent deaths of 
 migrants and refugees at sea and human trafficking.
 (d) Integration of Department of State-led Stabilization Efforts.--
 (1) Sense of congress.--It is the sense of Congress that 
 the Secretary of State, working with United States allies, 
 international organizations, and implementing partners, 
 including local implementing partners, to the extent 
 practicable, should continue coordinated international 
 stabilization efforts in Libya to--
 (A) build up the capacity of implementers and 
 national mine action authorities engaged in 
 conventional weapons destruction efforts and mine risk 
 education training and programs; and
 (B) conduct operational clearance of explosive 
 remnants of war resulting from the 2011 revolution and 
 current military conflict in Libya, including in 
 territory previously occupied by ISIS-Libya, and 
 particularly in areas where unexploded ordnance, booby 
 traps, and anti-personnel and anti-vehicle mines 
 contaminate areas of critical infrastructure and large 
 housing districts posing a risk of civilian casualties.
 (2) In general.--To the maximum extent practicable, 
 humanitarian assistance authorized under subsection (b) and the 
 strategy required by subsection (c) shall take into account and 
 integrate Department of State-led stabilization efforts--
 (A) to address--
 (i) contamination from landmines and other 
 explosive remnants of war left from the 2011 
 revolution and current military conflict in 
 Libya, including in territory previously 
 occupied by ISIS-Libya; and
 (ii) proliferation of illicit small arms 
 and light weapons resulting from such conflict 
 and the destabilizing impact the proliferation 
 of such weapons has in Libya and neighboring 
 countries; and
 (B) to mitigate the threat that destruction of 
 conventional weapons poses to development, the delivery 
 of humanitarian assistance, and the safe and secure 
 return of internally displaced persons.
 (e) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on 
 Appropriations of the House of Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on 
 Appropriations of the Senate.

SEC. 6132. SUPPORT FOR DEMOCRATIC GOVERNANCE, ELECTIONS, AND CIVIL 
 SOCIETY.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of State should coordinate United 
States Government efforts to--
 (1) work with the United Nations Support Mission in Libya 
 and transitional authorities in Libya to prepare for national 
 elections, as called for by the Libyan Political Dialogue, and 
 a subsequent political transition;
 (2) support efforts to resolve the current civil conflict 
 in Libya;
 (3) work to help the people of Libya and a future Libyan 
 government develop functioning, unified Libyan economic, 
 security, and governing institutions;
 (4) work to ensure free, fair, inclusive, and credible 
 elections organized by an independent and effective High 
 National Elections Commission in Libya, including through 
 supporting electoral security and international election 
 observation and by providing training and technical assistance 
 to institutions with election-related responsibilities, as 
 appropriate;
 (5) work with the people of Libya, nongovernmental 
 organizations, and Libya institutions to strengthen democratic 
 governance, reinforce civilian institutions and support 
 decentralization, in line with relevant Libyan laws and 
 regulations, in order to address community grievances, promote 
 social cohesion, mitigate drivers of violent extremism, and 
 help communities recover from Islamic State occupation;
 (6) defend against gross violations of internationally 
 recognized human rights in Libya, including by supporting 
 efforts to document such violations;
 (7) to combat corruption and improve the transparency and 
 accountability of Libyan government institutions; and
 (8) to support the efforts of independent media outlets to 
 broadcast, distribute, and share information with the Libyan 
 people.
 (b) Risk Mitigation and Assistance Monitoring.--The Secretary of 
State and Administrator of the United States Agency for International 
Development should ensure that appropriate steps are taken to mitigate 
risk of diversion of assistance for Libya and ensure reliable third-
party monitoring is utilized for projects in Libya that United States 
Government personnel are unable to access and monitor.
 (c) Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after enactment of 
 this Act, the Secretary of State, in coordination with the 
 Administrator of the United States Agency for International 
 Development, should submit to the appropriate congressional 
 committees a report on the activities carried out under 
 subsection (a).
 (2) Appropriate congressional committees defined.--In this 
 subsection, the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Committee 
 on Financial Services, and the Committee on 
 Appropriations of the House of Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the 
 Committee on Appropriations of the Senate.
 (d) Authorization of Appropriations.--
 (1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated 
 $30,000,000 for fiscal year 2022 to carry out subsection (a).
 (2) Notification requirements.--Any expenditure of amounts 
 made available to carry out subsection (a) shall be subject to 
 the notification requirements applicable to--
 (A) expenditures from the Economic Support Fund 
 under section 531(c) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 
 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2346(c)); and
 (B) expenditures from the Development Assistance 
 Fund under section 653(a) of the Foreign Assistance Act 
 of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 16 2413(a)).

SEC. 6133. ENGAGING INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS TO ADVANCE 
 LIBYAN ECONOMIC RECOVERY AND IMPROVE PUBLIC SECTOR 
 FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of the Treasury should instruct the 
United States Executive Director at each international financial 
institution to use the voice, vote, and influence of the United States 
to support, in a way that is consistent with broader United States 
national interests, a Libyan-led process to develop a framework for the 
economic recovery of Libya and improved public sector financial 
management, complementary to United Nations-led peace efforts and in 
support of democratic institutions and the rule of law in Libya.
 (b) Additional Elements.--To the extent consistent with broader 
United States national interests, the framework described in subsection 
(a) should include the following policy proposals:
 (1) To restore, respect, and safeguard the integrity, 
 unity, and lawful governance of Libya's key economic ministries 
 and institutions, in particular the Central Bank of Libya, the 
 Libya Investment Authority, the National Oi Corporation, and 
 the Audit Bureau (AB).
 (2) To improve the accountability and effectiveness of 
 Libyan authorities, including sovereign economic institutions, 
 in providing services and opportunity to the Libyan people.
 (3) To assist in improving public financial management and 
 reconciling the public accounts of national financial 
 institutions and letters of credit issued by private Libyan 
 financial institutions as needed pursuant to a political 
 process.
 (4) To restore the production, efficient management, and 
 development of Libya's oil and gas industries so such 
 industries are resilient against disruption, including malign 
 foreign influence, and can generate prosperity on behalf of the 
 Libyan people.
 (5) To promote the development of private sector 
 enterprise.
 (6) To improve the transparency and accountability of 
 public sector employment and wage distribution.
 (7) To strengthen supervision of and reform of Libyan 
 financial institutions.
 (8) To eliminate exploitation of price controls and market 
 distorting subsidies in the Libyan economy.
 (9) To support opportunities for United States businesses.
 (c) Consultation.--In supporting the framework described in 
subsection (a), the Secretary of the Treasury should instruct the 
United States Executive Director at each international financial 
institution to encourage the institution to consult with relevant 
stakeholders in the financial, governance, and energy sectors.
 (d) Definition of International Financial Institution.--In this 
section, the term ``international financial institution'' means the 
International Monetary Fund, International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, 
International Development Association, International Finance 
Corporation, Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, African 
Development Bank, African Development Fund, Asian Development Bank, 
Inter-American Development Bank, Bank for Economic Cooperation and 
Development in the Middle East and North Africa, and Inter-American 
Investment Corporation.
 (e) Termination.--The requirements of this section shall cease to 
be effective on December 31, 2026.

SEC. 6134. RECOVERING ASSETS STOLEN FROM THE LIBYAN PEOPLE.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the 
Secretary of State, the Secretary of the Treasury, and the Attorney 
General should, to the extent practicable, advance a coordinated 
international effort--
 (1) to carry out special financial investigations to 
 identify and track assets taken from the people and 
 institutions of Libya through theft, corruption, money 
 laundering, or other illicit means; and
 (2) to work with foreign governments--
 (A) to share financial investigations intelligence, 
 as appropriate;
 (B) to oversee the assets identified pursuant to 
 paragraph (1); and
 (C) to provide technical assistance to help 
 governments establish the necessary legal framework to 
 carry out asset forfeitures.
 (b) Additional Elements.--The coordinated international effort 
described in subsection (a) should include input from--
 (1) the Office of Terrorist Financing and Financial Crimes 
 of the Department of the Treasury;
 (2) the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network of the 
 Department of the Treasury; and
 (3) the Money Laundering and Asset Recovery Section of the 
 Department of Justice.

SEC. 6135. AUTHORITY TO EXPAND EDUCATIONAL AND CULTURAL EXCHANGE 
 PROGRAMS WITH LIBYA.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the United 
States should expand educational and cultural exchange programs with 
Libya to promote mutual understanding and people-to-people linkages 
between the United States and Libya.
 (b) Authority.--The President is authorized to expand educational 
and cultural exchange programs with Libya, including programs carried 
out under the following:
 (1) The J. William Fulbright Educational Exchange Program 
 referred to in paragraph (1) of section 112(a) of the Mutual 
 Educational and Cultural Exchange Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 
 2460(a)).
 (2) The International Visitors Program referred to in 
 paragraph (3) of such section.
 (3) The U.S.-Middle East Partnership Initiative (MEPI) 
 Student Leaders Program.
 (4) The Youth Exchange and Study Program.
 (5) Other related programs administered by the Department 
 of State.

 TITLE LXII--DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA NATIONAL GUARD HOME RULE

SEC. 6251. SHORT TITLE.

 This title may be cited as the ``District of Columbia National 
Guard Home Rule Act''.

SEC. 6252. EXTENSION OF NATIONAL GUARD AUTHORITIES TO MAYOR OF THE 
 DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.

 (a) Mayor as Commander-in-Chief.--Section 6 of the Act entitled 
``An Act to provide for the organization of the militia of the District 
of Columbia, and for other purposes'', approved March 1, 1889 (sec. 49-
409, D.C. Official Code), is amended by striking ``President of the 
United States'' and inserting ``Mayor of the District of Columbia''.
 (b) Reserve Corps.--Section 72 of such Act (sec. 49-407, D.C. 
Official Code) is amended by striking ``President of the United 
States'' each place it appears and inserting ``Mayor of the District of 
Columbia''.
 (c) Appointment of Commissioned Officers.--(1) Section 7(a) of such 
Act (sec. 49-301(a), D.C. Official Code) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``President of the United States'' and 
 inserting ``Mayor of the District of Columbia''; and
 (B) by striking ``President.'' and inserting ``Mayor.''.
 (2) Section 9 of such Act (sec. 49-304, D.C. Official Code) is 
amended by striking ``President'' and inserting ``Mayor of the District 
of Columbia''.
 (3) Section 13 of such Act (sec. 49-305, D.C. Official Code) is 
amended by striking ``President of the United States'' and inserting 
``Mayor of the District of Columbia''.
 (4) Section 19 of such Act (sec. 49-311, D.C. Official Code) is 
amended--
 (A) in subsection (a), by striking ``to the Secretary of 
 the Army'' and all that follows through ``which board'' and 
 inserting ``to a board of examination appointed by the 
 Commanding General, which''; and
 (B) in subsection (b), by striking ``the Secretary of the 
 Army'' and all that follows through the period and inserting 
 ``the Mayor of the District of Columbia, together with any 
 recommendations of the Commanding General.''.
 (5) Section 20 of such Act (sec. 49-312, D.C. Official Code) is 
amended--
 (A) by striking ``President of the United States'' each 
 place it appears and inserting ``Mayor of the District of 
 Columbia''; and
 (B) by striking ``the President may retire'' and inserting 
 ``the Mayor may retire''.
 (d) Call for Duty.--(1) Section 45 of such Act (sec. 49-103, D.C. 
Official Code) is amended by striking ``, or for the United States 
Marshal'' and all that follows through ``shall thereupon order'' and 
inserting ``to order''.
 (2) Section 46 of such Act (sec. 49-104, D.C. Official Code) is 
amended by striking ``the President'' and inserting ``the Mayor of the 
District of Columbia''.
 (e) General Courts Martial.--Section 51 of such Act (sec. 49-503, 
D.C. Official Code) is amended by striking ``the President of the 
United States'' and inserting ``the Mayor of the District of 
Columbia''.

SEC. 6253. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 10, UNITED STATES CODE.

 (a) Failure To Satisfactorily Perform Prescribed Training.--Section 
10148(b) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by striking ``the 
commanding general of the District of Columbia National Guard'' and 
inserting ``the Mayor of the District of Columbia''.
 (b) Appointment of Chief of National Guard Bureau.--Section 
10502(a)(1) of such title is amended by striking ``the commanding 
general of the District of Columbia National Guard'' and inserting 
``the Mayor of the District of Columbia''.
 (c) Vice Chief of National Guard Bureau.--Section 10505(a)(1)(A) of 
such title is amended by striking ``the commanding general of the 
District of Columbia National Guard'' and inserting ``the Mayor of the 
District of Columbia''.
 (d) Other Senior National Guard Bureau Officers.--Section 
10506(a)(1) of such title is amended by striking ``the commanding 
general of the District of Columbia National Guard'' both places it 
appears and inserting ``the Mayor of the District of Columbia''.
 (e) Consent for Active Duty or Relocation.--(1) Section 12301 of 
such title is amended--
 (A) in subsection (b), by striking ``commanding general of 
 the District of Columbia National Guard'' in the second 
 sentence and inserting ``Mayor of the District of Columbia''; 
 and
 (B) in subsection (d), by striking the period at the end 
 and inserting the following: ``, or, in the case of the 
 District of Columbia National Guard, the Mayor of the District 
 of Columbia.''.
 (2) Section 12406 of such title is amended by striking ``the 
commanding general of the National Guard of the District of Columbia'' 
and inserting ``the Mayor of the District of Columbia''.
 (f) Consent for Relocation of Units.--Section 18238 of such title 
is amended by striking ``the commanding general of the National Guard 
of the District of Columbia'' and inserting ``the Mayor of the District 
of Columbia''.

SEC. 6254. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 32, UNITED STATES CODE.

 (a) Maintenance of Other Troops.--Section 109(c) of title 32, 
United States Code, is amended by striking ``(or commanding general in 
the case of the District of Columbia)''.
 (b) Drug Interdiction and Counter-Drug Activities.--Section 
112(h)(2) of such title is amended by striking ``the Commanding General 
of the National Guard of the District of Columbia'' and inserting ``the 
Mayor of the District of Columbia''.
 (c) Additional Assistance.--Section 113 of such title is amended by 
adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(e) Inclusion of District of Columbia.--In this section, the term 
`State' includes the District of Columbia.''.
 (d) Appointment of Adjutant General.--Section 314 of such title is 
amended--
 (1) by striking subsection (b);
 (2) by redesignating subsections (c) and (d) as subsections 
 (b) and (c), respectively; and
 (3) in subsection (b) (as so redesignated), by striking 
 ``the commanding general of the District of Columbia National 
 Guard'' and inserting ``the Mayor of the District of 
 Columbia,''.
 (e) Relief From National Guard Duty.--Section 325(a)(2)(B) of such 
title is amended by striking ``commanding general of the District of 
Columbia National Guard'' and inserting ``the Mayor of the District of 
Columbia''.
 (f) Authority To Order To Perform Active Guard and Reserve Duty.--
 (1) Authority.--Subsection (a) of section 328 of such title 
 is amended by striking ``the commanding general of the District 
 of Columbia National Guard'' and inserting ``the Mayor of the 
 District of Columbia''.
 (2) Clerical amendments.--
 (A) Section heading.--The heading of such section 
 is amended to read as follows:
``Sec. 328. Active Guard and Reserve duty: authority of chief 
 executive''.
 (B) Table of sections.--The table of sections at 
 the beginning of chapter 3 of such title is amended by 
 striking the item relating to section 328 and inserting 
 the following new item:

``328. Active Guard and Reserve duty: authority of chief executive.''.
 (g) Personnel Matters.--Section 505 of such title is amended by 
striking ``commanding general of the National Guard of the District of 
Columbia'' in the first sentence and inserting ``Mayor of the District 
of Columbia''.
 (h) National Guard Challenge Program.--Section 509 of such title is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (c)(1), by striking ``the commanding 
 general of the District of Columbia National Guard, under which 
 the Governor or the commanding general'' and inserting ``the 
 Mayor of the District of Columbia, under which the Governor or 
 the Mayor'';
 (2) in subsection (g)(2), by striking ``the commanding 
 general of the District of Columbia National Guard'' and 
 inserting ``the Mayor of the District of Columbia'';
 (3) in subsection (j), by striking ``the commanding general 
 of the District of Columbia National Guard'' and inserting 
 ``the Mayor of the District of Columbia''; and
 (4) in subsection (k), by striking ``the commanding general 
 of the District of Columbia National Guard'' and inserting 
 ``the Mayor of the District of Columbia''.
 (i) Issuance of Supplies.--Section 702(a) of such title is amended 
by striking ``commanding general of the National Guard of the District 
of Columbia'' and inserting ``Mayor of the District of Columbia''.
 (j) Appointment of Fiscal Officer.--Section 708(a) of such title is 
amended by striking ``commanding general of the National Guard of the 
District of Columbia'' and inserting ``Mayor of the District of 
Columbia''.

SEC. 6255. CONFORMING AMENDMENT TO THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA HOME RULE 
 ACT.

 Section 602(b) of the District of Columbia Home Rule Act (sec. 1-
206.02(b), D.C. Official Code) is amended by striking ``the National 
Guard of the District of Columbia,''.

 TITLE LXIII--PREVENTING FUTURE PANDEMICS

SEC. 6301. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term 
 ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (A) the Committee on Foreign Relations of the 
 Senate;
 (B) the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate;
 (C) the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House 
 of Representatives; and
 (D) the Committee on Appropriations of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (2) Commercial trade in live wildlife.--The term 
 ``commercial trade in live wildlife''--
 (A) means commercial trade in live wildlife for 
 human consumption as food or medicine, whether the 
 animals originated in the wild or in a captive 
 environment; and
 (B) does not include--
 (i) fish;
 (ii) invertebrates;
 (iii) amphibians and reptiles; and
 (iv) the meat of ruminant game species--
 (I) traded in markets in countries 
 with effective implementation and 
 enforcement of scientifically based, 
 nationally implemented policies and 
 legislation for processing, trans-port, 
 trade, and marketing; and
 (II) sold after being slaughtered 
 and processed under sanitary 
 conditions.
 (3) One health.--The term ``One Health'' means a 
 collaborative, multi-sectoral, and transdisciplinary approach 
 working at the local, regional, national, and global levels 
 with the goal of achieving optimal health outcomes that 
 recognizes the interconnection between--
 (A) people, animals, both wild and domestic, and 
 plants; and
 (B) the environment shared by such people, animals, 
 and plants.
 (4) Wildlife market.--The term ``wildlife market''--
 (A) means a commercial market or subsection of a 
 commercial market--
 (i) where live mammalian or avian wildlife 
 is held, slaughtered, or sold for human 
 consumption as food or medicine whether the 
 animals originated in the wild or in a captive 
 environment; and
 (ii) that delivers a product in communities 
 where alternative nutritional or protein 
 sources are readily available and affordable; 
 and
 (B) does not include--
 (i) markets in areas where no other 
 practical alternative sources of protein or 
 meat exists, such as wildlife markets in rural 
 areas on which indigenous people and rural 
 local communities rely to feed them-selves and 
 their families; and
 (ii) processors of dead wild game and fish.

SEC. 6302. COUNTRY-DRIVEN APPROACH TO END THE COMMERCIAL TRADE IN LIVE 
 WILDLIFE AND ASSOCIATED WILDLIFE MARKETS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 120 days after the completion of 
the first report required under section 6305, the Secretary of State, 
in coordination with the Administrator of the United States Agency for 
International Development and the heads of other relevant Federal 
departments and agencies, including the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, the Secretary of Agriculture, and the Secretary of the 
Interior, and after consideration of the results of best available 
scientific findings of practices and behaviors occurring at the source 
of zoonoses spillover and spread, shall publicly release a list of 
countries the governments of which express willingness to end the 
domestic and international commercial trade in live wildlife and 
associated wildlife markets for human consumption, as defined for 
purposes of this title--
 (1) immediately;
 (2) after a transitional period; and
 (3) aspirationally, over a long-term period.
 (b) Global Health Security Zoonosis Plans.--The Secretary of State 
and the Administrator of the United States Agency for International 
Development shall work bilaterally with the governments of the 
countries listed pursuant to subsection (a) to establish Global Health 
Security Zoonoses Plans that--
 (1) outline actions to address novel pathogens of zoonotic 
 origin that have the potential to become epidemics or 
 pandemics;
 (2) identify incentives and strengthened policies; and
 (3) provide technical support to communities, policy 
 makers, civil society, law enforcement, and other stakeholders 
 to--
 (A) end the domestic and international commercial 
 trade in live wildlife and associated wildlife markets 
 for human consumption immediately, during a 
 transitional period, or aspirationally; and
 (B) improve the biosecurity and sanitation 
 conditions in markets.
 (c) Updates.--The list of countries required by subsection (a), the 
corresponding Global Health Security Zoonosis plans established 
pursuant to subsection (b), and any actions taken under such plans to 
end the commercial trade in live wildlife and associated wildlife 
markets for human consumption immediately, during a transitional 
period, or aspirationally, shall be reviewed, updated, and publicly 
released annually by the Secretary and Administrator, following review 
of the most recent scientific data.

SEC. 6303. SENSE OF CONGRESS.

 It is the sense of Congress that global institutions, including the 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World 
Organisation for Animal Health, the World Health Organization, and the 
United Nations Environment Programme, together with leading 
intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations, veterinary and 
medical colleges, the Department of State, and the United States Agency 
for International Development, should--
 (1) promote the paradigm of One Health as an effective and 
 integrated way to address the complexity of emerging disease 
 threats; and
 (2) support improved community health, biodiversity 
 conservation, forest conservation and management, sustainable 
 agriculture, and the safety of livestock, domestic animals, and 
 wildlife in developing countries, particularly in tropical 
 landscapes where there is an elevated risk of zoonotic disease 
 spill over.

SEC. 6304. STATEMENT OF POLICY.

 It is the policy of the United States to--
 (1) support the availability of scalable and sustainable 
 alternative sources of protein and nutrition for local 
 communities, where appropriate, in order to minimize human 
 reliance on the commercial trade in live wildlife for human 
 consumption;
 (2) support foreign governments to--
 (A) reduce commercial trade in live wildlife for 
 human consumption;
 (B) transition from the commercial trade in live 
 wildlife for human consumption to sustainably produced 
 alternate protein and nutritional sources;
 (C) establish and effectively manage and protect 
 natural habitat, including protected and conserved 
 areas and the lands of Indigenous peoples and local 
 communities, particularly in countries with tropical 
 forest hotspots for emerging diseases;
 (D) strengthen veterinary and agricultural 
 extension capacity to improve sanitation along the 
 value chain and biosecurity of live animal markets; and
 (E) strengthen public health capacity, particularly 
 in countries where there is a high risk of emerging 
 zoonotic viruses and other infectious diseases;
 (3) respect the rights and needs of indigenous peoples and 
 local communities dependent on such wildlife for nutritional 
 needs and food security; and
 (4) facilitate international cooperation by working with 
 international partners through intergovernmental, 
 international, and nongovernmental organizations such as the 
 United Nations to--
 (A) lead a resolution at the United Nations 
 Security Council or General Assembly and World Health 
 Assembly outlining the danger to human and animal 
 health from emerging zoonotic infectious diseases, with 
 recommendations for implementing the closure of 
 wildlife markets and prevention of the commercial trade 
 in live wildlife for human consumption, except where 
 the consumption of wildlife is necessary for local food 
 security or where such actions would significantly 
 disrupt a readily available and irreplaceable food 
 supply;
 (B) raise awareness and build stakeholder 
 engagement networks, including civil society, the 
 private sector, and local and regional governments on 
 the dangerous potential of wildlife markets as a source 
 of zoonotic diseases and reduce demand for the 
 consumption of wildlife through evidence-based behavior 
 change programs, while ensuring that existing wildlife 
 habitat is not encroached upon or destroyed as part of 
 this process;
 (C) encourage and support alternative forms of 
 sustainable food production, farming, and shifts to 
 sustainable sources of protein and nutrition instead of 
 terrestrial wildlife, where able and appropriate, and 
 reduce consumer demand for terrestrial and freshwater 
 wildlife through enhanced local and national food 
 systems, especially in areas where wildlife markets 
 play a significant role in meeting subsistence needs 
 while ensuring that existing wildlife habitat is not 
 encroached upon or destroyed as part of this process; 
 and
 (D) strive to increase biosecurity and hygienic 
 standards implemented in farms, gathering centers, 
 transport, and market systems around the globe, 
 especially those specializing in the provision of 
 products intended for human consumption.

SEC. 6305. PREVENTION OF FUTURE ZOONOTIC SPILLOVER EVENT.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of State and the Administrator of 
the United States Agency for International Development, in consultation 
with the Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, the 
Secretary of Agriculture, the Director of the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, and the heads of other relevant departments and 
agencies, shall work with foreign governments, multilateral entities, 
intergovernmental organizations, international partners, private sector 
partners, and nongovernmental organizations to carry out activities 
supporting the following objectives, recognizing that multiple 
interventions will likely be necessary to make an impact, and that 
interventions will need to be tailored to the situation to--
 (1) pursuant to section 6302, close wildlife markets and 
 prevent associated commercial trade in live wildlife, placing a 
 priority focus on countries with significant markets for live 
 wildlife for human consumption, high-volume commercial trade 
 and associated markets, trade in and across urban centers, and 
 trade for luxury consumption or where there is no dietary 
 necessity--
 (A) through existing treaties, conventions, and 
 agreements;
 (B) by amending existing protocols or agreements;
 (C) by pursuing new protocols; or
 (D) by other means of international coordination;
 (2) improve regulatory oversight and reduce commercial 
 trade in live wildlife and eliminate practices identified to 
 contribute to zoonotic spillover and emerging pathogens;
 (3) prevent commercial trade in live wildlife through 
 programs that combat wildlife trafficking and poaching, 
 including--
 (A) providing assistance to improve law 
 enforcement;
 (B) detecting and deterring the illegal import, 
 transit, sale, and export of wildlife;
 (C) strengthening such programs to assist countries 
 through legal reform;
 (D) improving information sharing and enhancing 
 capabilities of participating foreign governments;
 (E) supporting efforts to change behavior and 
 reduce demand for such wildlife products;
 (F) leveraging United States private sector 
 technologies and expertise to scale and enhance 
 enforcement responses to detect and prevent such trade; 
 and
 (G) strengthening collaboration with key private 
 sector entities in the transportation industry to 
 prevent and report the transport of such wildlife and 
 wildlife products;
 (4) leverage strong United States bilateral relationships 
 to support new and existing inter-Ministerial collaborations or 
 Task Forces that can serve as regional One Health models;
 (5) build local agricultural and food safety capacity by 
 leveraging expertise from the United States Department of 
 Agriculture (USDA) and institutions of higher education with 
 agricultural or natural resource expertise;
 (6) work through international organizations to help 
 develop a set of objective risk-based metrics that provide a 
 cross-country comparable measure of the level of risk posed by 
 wildlife trade and marketing and can be used to track progress 
 nations make in reducing risks, identify where resources should 
 be focused, and potentially leverage a peer influence effect;
 (7) increase efforts to prevent the degradation and 
 fragmentation of forests and other intact ecosystems to 
 minimize interactions between wildlife and human and livestock 
 populations that could contribute to spillover events and 
 zoonotic disease transmission, including by providing 
 assistance or supporting policies to, for example--
 (A) conserve, protect, and restore the integrity of 
 such ecosystems;
 (B) support the rights and needs of Indigenous 
 People and local communities and their ability to 
 continue their effective stewardship of their 
 traditional lands and territories;
 (C) support the establishment and effective 
 management of protected areas, prioritizing highly 
 intact areas; and
 (D) prevent activities that result in the 
 destruction, degradation, fragmentation, or conversion 
 of intact forests and other intact ecosystems and 
 biodiversity strongholds, including by governments, 
 private sector entities, and multilateral development 
 financial institutions;
 (8) offer appropriate alternative livelihood and worker 
 training programs and enterprise development to wildlife 
 traders, wildlife breeders, and local communities whose members 
 are engaged in the commercial trade in live wildlife for human 
 consumption;
 (9) ensure that the rights of indigenous peoples and local 
 communities are respected and their authority to exercise these 
 rights is protected;
 (10) strengthen global capacity for prevention, prediction, 
 and detection of novel and existing zoonoses with pandemic 
 potential, including the support of innovative technologies in 
 coordination with the United States Agency for International 
 Development, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
 and other relevant departments and agencies; and
 (11) support the development of One Health systems at the 
 local, regional, national, and global levels in coordination 
 with the United States Agency for International Development, 
 the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and other 
 relevant departments and agencies, particularly in emerging 
 infectious disease hotspots, through a collaborative, 
 multisectoral, and transdisciplinary approach that recognizes 
 the interconnections among people, animals, plants, and their 
 shared environment to achieve equitable and sustainable health 
 outcomes.
 (b) Activities May Include.--
 (1) Global cooperation.--The United States Government, 
 working through the United Nations and its components, as well 
 as international organization such as Interpol, the Food and 
 Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and the World 
 Organisation for Animal Health, and in furtherance of the 
 policies described in section 6304, shall--
 (A) collaborate with other member States, issue 
 declarations, statements, and communiques urging 
 countries to close wildlife markets, and prevent 
 commercial trade in live wildlife for human 
 consumption; and
 (B) urge increased enforcement of existing laws to 
 end wildlife trafficking.
 (2) International coalitions.--The Secretary of State shall 
 seek to build new, and support existing, international 
 coalitions focused on closing wildlife markets and preventing 
 commercial trade in live wildlife for human consumption, with a 
 focus on the following efforts:
 (A) Providing assistance and advice to other 
 governments in the adoption of legislation and 
 regulations to close wildlife markets and associated 
 trade over such timeframe and in such manner as to 
 minimize the increase of wildlife trafficking and 
 poaching.
 (B) Creating economic and enforcement pressure for 
 the immediate shut down of uncontrolled, unsanitary, or 
 illicit wildlife markets and their supply chains to 
 prevent their operation.
 (C) Providing assistance and guidance to other 
 governments on measures to prohibit the import, export, 
 and domestic commercial trade in live wildlife for the 
 purpose of human consumption.
 (D) Implementing risk reduction interventions and 
 control options to address zoonotic spillover along the 
 supply chain for the wildlife market system.
 (E) Engaging and receiving guidance from key 
 stakeholders at the ministerial, local government, and 
 civil society level, including Indigenous Peoples, in 
 countries that will be impacted by this title and where 
 wildlife markets and associated wildlife trade are the 
 predominant source of meat or protein, in order to 
 mitigate the impact of any international efforts on 
 food security, nutrition, local customs, conservation 
 methods, or cultural norms.
 (c) United States Agency for International Development.--
 (1) Sustainable food systems funding.--
 (A) Authorization of appropriations.--In addition 
 to any other amounts provided for such purposes, there 
 is authorized to be appropriated such sums as necessary 
 for each of fiscal years 2023 through 2032 to the 
 United States Agency for International Development to 
 reduce demand for consumption of wildlife from wildlife 
 markets and support shifts to diversified alternative 
 and sustainably produced sources of nutritious food and 
 protein in communities that rely upon the consumption 
 of wildlife for food security, while ensuring that 
 existing wildlife habitat is not encroached upon or 
 destroyed as part of this process, using a 
 multisectoral approach and including support for 
 demonstration programs.
 (B) Activities.--The Bureau for Development, 
 Democracy and Innovation (DDI), the Bureau for 
 Resilience and Food Security (RFS), and the Bureau for 
 Global Health (GH) of the United States Agency for 
 International Development shall, in partnership with 
 United States and international institutions of higher 
 education and nongovernmental organizations, co-develop 
 approaches focused on safe, sustainable food systems 
 that support and incentivize the replacement of 
 terrestrial wildlife in diets, while ensuring that 
 existing wildlife habitat is not encroached upon or 
 destroyed as part of this process.
 (2) Addressing threats and causes of zoonotic disease 
 outbreaks.--The Administrator of the United States Agency for 
 International Development, in consultation with the Secretary 
 of the Interior, shall increase activities in United States 
 Agency for International Development programs related to 
 conserving biodiversity, combating wildlife trafficking, 
 sustainable landscapes, global health, food security, and 
 resilience in order to address the threats and causes of 
 zoonotic disease outbreaks, including through--
 (A) education;
 (B) capacity building;
 (C) strengthening human, livestock, and wildlife 
 health monitoring systems of pathogens of zoonotic 
 origin to support early detection and reporting of 
 novel and known pathogens for emergence of zoonotic 
 disease and strengthening cross-sectoral collaboration 
 to align risk reduction approaches in consultation with 
 the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services;
 (D) improved domestic and wild animal disease 
 monitoring and control at production and market levels;
 (E) development of alternative livelihood 
 opportunities where possible;
 (F) preventing degradation and fragmentation of 
 forests and other intact ecosystems and restoring the 
 integrity of such ecosystems, particularly in tropical 
 countries, to prevent the creation of new pathways for 
 zoonotic pathogen transmission that arise from 
 interactions among wildlife, humans, and livestock 
 populations;
 (G) minimizing interactions between domestic 
 livestock and wild animals in markets and captive 
 production;
 (H) supporting shifts from wildlife markets to 
 diversified, safe, affordable, and accessible 
 alternative sources of protein and nutrition through 
 enhanced local and national food systems while ensuring 
 that existing wildlife habitat is not encroached upon 
 or destroyed as part of this process;
 (I) improving community health, forest management 
 practices, and safety of livestock production in 
 tropical landscapes, particularly in hotspots for 
 zoonotic spillover and emerging infectious diseases;
 (J) preventing degradation and fragmentation of 
 forests and other intact ecosystems, particularly in 
 tropical countries, to minimize interactions between 
 wildlife, human, and livestock populations that could 
 contribute to spillover events and zoonotic disease 
 transmission, including by providing assistance or 
 supporting policies to--
 (i) conserve, protect, and restore the 
 integrity of such ecosystems; and
 (ii) support the rights of Indigenous 
 People and local communities and their ability 
 to continue their effective steward ship of 
 their intact traditional lands and territories;
 (K) supporting development and use of multi-data 
 sourced predictive models and decisionmaking tools to 
 identify areas of highest probability of zoonotic 
 spillover and to determine cost-effective monitoring 
 and mitigation approaches; and
 (L) other relevant activities described in this 
 section that are within the mandate of the United 
 States Agency for International Development.
 (d) Staffing Requirements.--The Administrator of the United States 
Agency for International Development, in collaboration with the United 
States Fish and Wildlife Service, the United States Department of 
Agriculture Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, and other Federal entities as 
appropriate, is authorized to hire additional personnel--
 (1) to undertake programs aimed at reducing the risks of 
 endemic and emerging infectious diseases and exposure to 
 antimicrobial resistant pathogens;
 (2) to provide administrative support and resources to 
 ensure effective and efficient coordination of funding 
 opportunities and sharing of expertise from relevant United 
 States Agency for International Development bureaus and 
 programs, including emerging pandemic threats;
 (3) to award funding to on-the-ground projects;
 (4) to provide project oversight to ensure accountability 
 and transparency in all phases of the award process; and
 (5) to undertake additional activities under this title.
 (e) Reporting Requirements.--
 (1) Department of state and united states agency for 
 international development.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, and annually 
 thereafter until 2030, the Secretary of State and the 
 Administrator of the United States Agency for 
 International Development shall submit to the 
 appropriate congressional committees a report--
 (i) describing--
 (I) the actions taken pursuant to 
 this title and the provision of United 
 States technical assistance;
 (II) the impact and effectiveness 
 of international cooperation on 
 shutting down wildlife markets;
 (III) partnerships developed with 
 other institutions of higher learning 
 and nongovernmental organizations; and
 (IV) the impact and effectiveness 
 of international cooperation on 
 preventing the import, export, and 
 domestic commercial trade in live 
 wildlife for the purpose of human use 
 as food or medicine, while accounting 
 for the differentiated needs of 
 vulnerable populations who depend upon 
 such wildlife as a predominant source 
 of meat or protein;
 (ii) identifying--
 (I) foreign countries that continue 
 to enable the operation of wildlife 
 markets as defined by this title and 
 the associated trade of wildlife 
 products for human use as food or 
 medicine that feeds such markets;
 (II) recommendations for 
 incentivizing or enforcing compliance 
 with laws and policies to close 
 wildlife markets pursuant to section 
 6302 and uncontrolled, unsanitary, or 
 illicit wildlife markets and end the 
 associated commercial trade in live 
 wildlife for human use as food or 
 medicine, which may include visa 
 restrictions and other diplomatic or 
 economic tools; and
 (III) summarizing additional 
 personnel hired with funding authorized 
 under this title, including the number 
 hired in each bureau.
 (B) Initial report.--The first report submitted 
 under subparagraph (A) shall include, in addition to 
 the elements described in such subparagraph, a summary 
 of existing research and findings related to the risk 
 live wildlife markets pose to human health through the 
 emergence or reemergence of pathogens and activities to 
 reduce the risk of zoonotic spillover.
 (C) Form.--The report required under this paragraph 
 shall be submitted in unclassified form, but may 
 include a classified annex.

SEC. 6306. LAW ENFORCEMENT ATTACHE DEPLOYMENT.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of the Interior, acting through the 
Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, and in 
consultation with the Secretary of State, shall require the Chief of 
Law Enforcement of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service to hire, 
train, and deploy not fewer than 50 new United States Fish and Wildlife 
Service law enforcement attaches, and appropriate additional support 
staff, at 1 or more United States embassies, consulates, commands, or 
other facilities--
 (1) in 1 or more countries designated as a focus country or 
 a country of concern in the most recent report submitted under 
 section 201 of the Eliminate, Neutralize, and Disrupt Wildlife 
 Trafficking Act of 2016 (16 U.S.C. 7621); and
 (2) in such additional countries or regions, as determined 
 by the Secretary of the Interior, that are known or suspected 
 to be a source of illegal trade of species listed--
 (A) as a threatened species or an endangered 
 species under the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 
 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.); or
 (B) under appendix I of the Convention on 
 International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna 
 and Flora, done at Washington March 3, 1973 (27 UST 
 1087; TIAS 8249).
 (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to carry out this section $150,000,000 for each of fiscal 
years 2023 through 2032.

SEC. 6307. RESERVATION OF RIGHTS.

 Nothing in this title shall restrict or otherwise prohibit--
 (1) legal and regulated hunting, fishing, or trapping 
 activities for subsistence, sport, or recreation; or
 (2) the lawful domestic and international transport of 
 legally harvested fish or wildlife trophies.

TITLE LXIV--PROHIBITION OF ARMS SALES TO COUNTRIES COMMITTING GENOCIDE 
 OR WAR CRIMES AND RELATED MATTERS

SEC. 6401. PROHIBITION OF ARMS SALES TO COUNTRIES COMMITTING GENOCIDE 
 OR WAR CRIMES.

 (a) In General.--No sale, export, or transfer of defense articles 
or defense services may occur to any country if the Secretary of State 
has credible information that the government of such country has 
committed or is committing genocide or violations of international 
humanitarian law after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Exception.--The restriction under subsection (a) shall not 
apply if the Secretary of State certifies to the appropriate 
congressional committees that--
 (1) the government has adequately punished the persons 
 directly or indirectly responsible for such acts through a 
 credible, transparent, and effective judicial process;
 (2) appropriate measures have been instituted to ensure 
 that such acts will not recur; and
 (3) other appropriate compensation or appropriate 
 compensatory measures have been or are being provided to the 
 persons harmed by such acts.

SEC. 6402. CONSIDERATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS AND DEMOCRATIZATION IN ARMS 
 EXPORTS.

 (a) In General.--In considering the sale, export, or transfer of 
defense articles and defense services to foreign countries, the 
Secretary of State shall--
 (1) also consider the extent to which the government of the 
 foreign country protects human rights and supports democratic 
 institutions, including an independent judiciary; and
 (2) ensure that the views and expertise of the Bureau of 
 Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor of the Department of State 
 in connection with any sale, export, or transfer are fully 
 taken into account.
 (b) Inspector General Oversight.--Not later than one year after the 
date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter for four 
years, the Inspector General of the Department of State shall submit to 
the appropriate congressional committees a report on the implementation 
of the requirement under subsection (a) during the preceding year.

SEC. 6403. ENHANCEMENT OF CONGRESSIONAL OVERSIGHT OF HUMAN RIGHTS IN 
 ARMS EXPORTS.

 (a) In General.--It is the sense of Congress that any letter of 
offer to sell, or any application for a license to export or transfer, 
defense articles or defense services controlled for export, regardless 
of monetary value, should take into account as part of its evaluation 
whether the Secretary of State has credible information, with respect 
to a country to which the defense articles or defense services are 
proposed to be sold, exported, or transferred, that--
 (1) the government of such country on or after the date of 
 enactment of this Act has been deposed by a coup d'etat or 
 decree in which the military played a decisive role, and a 
 democratically elected government has not taken office 
 subsequent to the coup or decree; or
 (2) a unit of the security forces of the government of such 
 country--
 (A) has violated international humanitarian law and 
 has not been credibly investigated and subjected to a 
 credible and transparent judicial process addressing 
 such allegation; or
 (B) has committed a gross violation of human 
 rights, and has not been credibly investigated and 
 subjected to a credible and transparent judicial 
 process addressing such allegation, including, inter 
 alia--
 (i) torture;
 (ii) rape or sexual assault;
 (iii) ethnic cleansing of civilians;
 (iv) recruitment or use of child soldiers;
 (v) unjust or wrongful detention;
 (vi) the operation of, or effective control 
 or direction over, secret detention facilities; 
 or
 (vii) extrajudicial killings or enforced 
 disappearances, whether by military, police, or 
 other security forces.
 (b) Inclusion of Information in Human Rights Report.--The Secretary 
of State shall also provide to the appropriate congressional committees 
the report described in section 502B(c) of the Foreign Assistance Act 
(22 U.S.C. 2304(c)) biannually for the period of time specified in 
subsection (c) of this section regarding any country covered under 
subsection (a).
 (c) Modification of Prior Notification of Shipment of Arms.--
Section 36(i) of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2776(i)) is 
amended by striking ``subject to the requirements of subsection (b) at 
the joint request of the Chairman and Ranking Member'' and inserting 
``subject to the requirements of this section at the request of the 
Chairman or Ranking Member''.

SEC. 6404. END USE MONITORING OF MISUSE OF ARMS IN HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES.

 (a) End Use Monitoring.--Section 40A(a)(2)(B) of the Arms Export 
Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2785) is amended--
 (1) in clause (i), by striking ``; and'' and inserting a 
 semicolon;
 (2) in clause (ii), by striking the period at the end and 
 inserting ``and;''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 ``(iii) such articles and services are not 
 being used to violate international 
 humanitarian law or internationally recognized 
 human rights.''.
 (b) Report.--The Secretary shall report to the appropriate 
congressional committees on the measures that will be taken, including 
any additional resources needed, to conduct an effective end-use 
monitoring program to fulfill the requirement of clause (iii) of 
section 40A(a)(2)(B) of the Arms Export Control Act, as added by 
subsection (a)(3).

SEC. 6405. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the 
 Committee on Appropriations of the Senate; and
 (B) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the 
 Committee on Appropriations of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (2) The terms ``defense article'' and ``defense service'' 
 have the same meanings given the terms in section 47 of the 
 Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2794).

 TITLE LXV--BURMA ACT OF 2022

SEC. 6501. SHORT TITLE.

 This title may be cited as the ``Burma Unified through Rigorous 
Military Accountability Act of 2022'' or the ``BURMA Act of 2022''.

SEC. 6502. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Burmese military.--The term ``Burmese military''--
 (A) means the Armed Forces of Burma, including the 
 army, navy, and air force; and
 (B) includes security services under the control of 
 the Armed Forces of Burma such as the police and border 
 guards.
 (2) Crimes against humanity.--The term ``crimes against 
 humanity'' includes the following, when committed as part of a 
 widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian 
 population, with knowledge of the attack:
 (A) Murder.
 (B) Forced transfer of population.
 (C) Torture.
 (D) Extermination.
 (E) Enslavement.
 (F) Rape, sexual slavery, or any other form of 
 sexual violence of comparable severity.
 (G) Enforced disappearance of persons.
 (H) Persecution against any identifiable group or 
 collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, 
 cultural, religious, gender, or other grounds that are 
 universally recognized as impermissible under 
 international law.
 (I) Imprisonment or other severe deprivation of 
 physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of 
 international law.
 (3) Executive order 14014.--The term ``Executive Order 
 14014'' means Executive Order 14014 (86 Fed. Reg. 9429; 
 relating to blocking property with respect to the situation in 
 Burma).
 (4) Genocide.--The term ``genocide'' means any offense 
 described in section 1091(a) of title 18, United States Code.
 (5) Transitional justice.--The term ``transitional 
 justice'' means the range of judicial, nonjudicial, formal, 
 informal, retributive, and restorative measures employed by 
 countries transitioning out of armed conflict or repressive 
 regimes, or employed by the international community through 
 international justice mechanisms, to redress past or ongoing 
 atrocities and to promote long-term, sustainable peace.
 (6) War crime.--The term ``war crime'' has the meaning 
 given the term in section 2441(c) of title 18, United States 
 Code.

 Subtitle A--Matters Relating to the Conflict in Burma

SEC. 6511. FINDINGS.

 Congress makes the following findings:
 (1) Since 1988, the United States policy of principled 
 engagement has fostered positive democratic reforms in Burma, 
 with elections in 2010, 2015, and 2020, helping to bring about 
 the partial transition to civilian rule and with the latter 2 
 elections resulting in resounding electoral victories for the 
 National League for Democracy.
 (2) That democratic transition remained incomplete, with 
 the military retaining significant power and independence from 
 civilian control following the 2015 elections, including 
 through control of 25 percent of parliamentary seats, a de 
 facto veto over constitutional reform, authority over multiple 
 government ministries, and the ability to operate with impunity 
 and no civilian oversight.
 (3) Despite some improvements with respect for human rights 
 and fundamental freedoms beginning in 2010, and the 
 establishment of a quasi-civilian government following credible 
 elections in 2015, Burma's military leaders have, since 2016, 
 overseen an increase in restrictions to freedom of expression 
 (including for members of the press), freedom of peaceful 
 assembly, freedom of association, and freedom of religion or 
 belief.
 (4) On August 25, 2017, Burmese military and security 
 forces launched a genocidal military campaign against Rohingya, 
 resulting in a mass exodus of some 750,000 Rohingya from 
 Burma's Rakhine State into Bangladesh, where they remain. The 
 military has since taken no steps to improve conditions for 
 Rohingya still in Rakhine State, who remain at high risk of 
 genocide and other atrocities, or to create conditions 
 conducive to the voluntary return of Rohingya refugees and 
 other internally displaced persons (IDPs).
 (5) The Burmese military has also engaged in renewed 
 violence with other ethnic minority groups across the country. 
 The military has continued to commit atrocities in Chin, 
 Kachin, Kayah, and Shan. Fighting in northern Burma has forced 
 more than 100,000 people from their homes and into camps for 
 internally displaced persons. The Burmese military continues to 
 heavily proscribe humanitarian and media access to conflict-
 affected populations across the country.
 (6) With more nearly $470,000,000 in humanitarian 
 assistance in response to the crisis in fiscal year 2021, the 
 United States is the largest humanitarian donor to populations 
 in need as a result of conflicts in Burma. In May 2021, the 
 United States announced nearly $155,000,000 in additional 
 humanitarian assistance to meet the urgent needs of Rohingya 
 refugees and host communities in Bangladesh and people affected 
 by ongoing violence in Burma's Rakhine, Kachin, Shan, and Chin 
 states. In September 2021, the United States provided nearly 
 $180,000,000 in additional critical humanitarian assistance to 
 the people of Burma, bringing the total fiscal year 2021 to 
 more than $434,000,000.
 (7) Both government- and military-initiated investigations 
 into human rights abuses in Burma involving violence between 
 ethnic minorities and Burmese security forces have failed to 
 yield credible results or hold perpetrators accountable.
 (8) In its report dated September 17, 2018, the United 
 Nations Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on 
 Myanmar concluded, on reasonable grounds, that the factors 
 allowing inference of ``genocidal intent'' are present with 
 respect to the attacks against Rohingya in Rakhine State, and 
 acts by Burmese security forces against Rohingya in Rakhine 
 State and other ethnic minorities in Kachin and Shan States 
 amount to ``crimes against humanity'' and ``war crimes''. The 
 Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar 
 established by the United Nations Human Rights Council 
 recommended that the United Nations Security Council ``should 
 ensure accountability for crimes under international law 
 committed in Myanmar, preferably by referring the situation to 
 the International Criminal Court or alternatively by creating 
 an ad hoc international criminal tribunal''. The Mission also 
 recommended the imposition of targeted economic sanctions, 
 including an arms embargo on Burma.
 (9) On December 13, 2018, the United States House of 
 Representatives passed House Resolution 1091 (115th Congress), 
 which expressed the sense of the House that ``the atrocities 
 committed against the Rohingya by the Burmese military and 
 security forces since August 2017 constitute crimes against 
 humanity and genocide'' and called upon the Secretary of State 
 to review the available evidence and make a similar 
 determination.
 (10) In a subsequent report dated August 5, 2019, the 
 United Nations Independent International Fact-Finding Mission 
 on Myanmar found that the Burmese military's economic interests 
 ``enable its conduct'' and that it benefits from and supports 
 extractive industry businesses operating in conflict-affected 
 areas in northern Burma, including natural resources, 
 particularly oil and gas, minerals and gems and argued that 
 ``through controlling its own business empire, the Tatmadaw can 
 evade the accountability and oversight that normally arise from 
 civilian oversight of military budgets''. The report called for 
 the United Nations and individual governments to place targeted 
 sanctions on all senior officials in the Burmese military as 
 well as their economic interests, especially Myanma Economic 
 Holdings Limited and Myanmar Economic Corporation.
 (11) Burma's November 2020 election resulted in a landslide 
 victory for the National League of Democracy, with the National 
 League for Democracy winning a large majority of seats in 
 Burma's national parliament. The elections were judged to be 
 credible, and marked an important step in the country's 
 democratic transition.
 (12) On February 1, 2021, the Burmese military conducted a 
 coup d'etat, declaring a year-long state of emergency and 
 detaining State Counsellor Aung San Suu Kyi, President Win 
 Myint, and dozens of other government officials and elected 
 members of parliament, thus derailing Burma's transition to 
 democracy and disregarding the will of the people of Burma as 
 expressed in the November 2020 general elections, which were 
 determined to be credible by international and national 
 observers.
 (13) Following the coup, some ousted members of parliament 
 established the Committee Representing the Pyidaungsu Hluttaw 
 (CRPH), which subsequently established the National Unity 
 Consultative Council in March of 2021. The National Unity 
 Consultative Council includes representatives from a broad 
 spectrum of stakeholders in Burma opposed to the military and 
 the coup: elected representatives from the CRPH, 
 representatives from the ethnic armed organizations, members of 
 Burma's civil disobedience movement, and other anti-coup 
 forces.
 (14) The CRPH subsequently released the Federal Democracy 
 Charter in March 2021 and established the National Unity 
 Government in April 2021. The National Unity Government 
 includes representatives from ethnic minority groups, civil 
 society organizations, women's groups, leaders of the civil 
 disobedience movement, and others.
 (15) Since the coup on February 1, 2021, the Burmese 
 military has--
 (A) used lethal force on peaceful protestors on 
 multiple occasions, killing more than 2,000 people, 
 including more than 142 children;
 (B) detained more than 10,000 peaceful protestors, 
 participants in the Civil Disobedience Movement, labor 
 leaders, government officials and elected members of 
 parliament, members of the media, and others, according 
 to the Assistance Association for Political Prisoners;
 (C) issued laws and directives used to further 
 impede fundamental freedoms, including freedom of 
 expression (including for members of the press), 
 freedom of peaceful assembly, and freedom of 
 association; and
 (D) imposed restrictions on the internet and 
 telecommunications.
 (16) According to the UNHCR, more than 758,000 people have 
 been internally displaced since the coup, while an estimated 
 40,000 have sought refuge in neighboring countries. 
 Nevertheless, the Burmese military continues to block 
 humanitarian assistance to populations in need. According to 
 the World Health Organization, the military has carried out 
 more than 286 attacks on health care entities since the coup 
 and killed at least 30 health workers. Dozens more have been 
 arbitrarily detained, and hundreds have warrants out for their 
 arrest. The military continued such attacks even as they 
 inhibited efforts to combat a devastating third wave of COVID-
 19. The brutality of the Burmese military was on full display 
 on March 27, 2021, Armed Forces Day, when, after threatening on 
 state television to shoot protesters in the head, security 
 forces killed more than 150 people.
 (17) The coup represents a continuation of a long pattern 
 of violent and anti-democratic behavior by the military that 
 stretches back decades, with the military having previously 
 taken over Burma in coups d'etat in 1962 and 1988, and having 
 ignored the results of the 1990 elections, and a long history 
 of violently repressing protest movements, including killing 
 and imprisoning thousands of peaceful protestors during pro-
 democracy demonstrations in 1988 and 2007.
 (18) On February 11, 2021, President Biden issued Executive 
 Order 14014 in response to the coup d'etat, authorizing 
 sanctions against the Burmese military, its economic interests, 
 and other perpetrators of the coup.
 (19) Since the issuance of Executive Order 14014, President 
 Biden has taken several steps to impose costs on the Burmese 
 military and its leadership, including by designating or 
 otherwise imposing targeted sanctions with respect to--
 (A) multiple high-ranking individuals and their 
 family members, including the Commander-in-Chief of the 
 Burmese military, Min Aung Hlaing, Burma's Chief of 
 Police, Than Hlaing, and the Bureau of Special 
 Operations commander, Lieutenant General Aung Soe, and 
 over 35 other individuals;
 (B) state-owned and military controlled companies, 
 including Myanma Economic Holdings Public Company, 
 Ltd., Myanmar Economic Corporation, Ltd., Myanmar 
 Economic Holdings Ltd., Myanmar Ruby Enterprise, 
 Myanmar Imperial Jade Co., Ltd., and Myanma Gems 
 Enterprise; and
 (C) other corporate entities, Burmese military 
 units, and Burmese military entities, including the 
 military regime's State Administrative Council.
 (20) The United States has also implemented new 
 restrictions on exports and reexports to Burma pursuant to 
 Executive Order 14014; and
 (21) On April 24, 2021, the Association of Southeast Asian 
 Nations (ASEAN) agreed to a five-point consensus which called 
 for an ``immediate cessation of violence'', ``constructive 
 dialogue among all parties'', the appointment of an ASEAN 
 special envoy, the provision of humanitarian assistance through 
 ASEAN's AHA Centre, and a visit by the ASEAN special envoy to 
 Burma. Except for the appointment of the Special Envoy in 
 August 2021, the other elements of the ASEAN consensus remain 
 unimplemented due to obstruction by the Burmese military.
 (22) In June 2021, the National Unity Government included 
 ethnic minorities and women among its cabinet and released a 
 policy paper outlining pledges to Rohingya and calling for 
 ``justice and reparations'' for the community. The statement 
 affirms the Rohingya right to citizenship in Burma, a 
 significant break from past Burmese government policies.
 (23) On March 21, 2022, Secretary of State Antony Blinken 
 announced that the United States had concluded that ``members 
 of the Burmese military committed genocide and crimes against 
 humanity against Rohingya''.

SEC. 6512. STATEMENT OF POLICY.

 It is the policy of the United States--
 (1) to support genuine democracy, peace, and national 
 reconciliation in Burma;
 (2) to pursue a strategy of calibrated engagement, which is 
 essential to support the establishment of a peaceful, 
 prosperous, and democratic Burma that includes respect for the 
 human rights of all individuals regardless of ethnicity and 
 religion;
 (3) to seek the restoration to power of a civilian 
 government that reflects the will of the people of Burma;
 (4) to support constitutional reforms that ensure civilian 
 governance and oversight over the military;
 (5) to assist in the establishment of a fully democratic, 
 civilian-led, inclusive, and representative political system 
 that includes free, fair, credible, and democratic elections in 
 which all people of Burma, including all ethnic and religious 
 minorities, can participate in the political process at all 
 levels including the right to vote and to run for elected 
 office;
 (6) to support legal reforms that ensure protection for the 
 civil and political rights of all individuals in Burma, 
 including reforms to laws that criminalize the exercise of 
 human rights and fundamental freedoms, and strengthening 
 respect for and protection of human rights, including freedom 
 of religion or belief;
 (7) to seek the unconditional release of all prisoners of 
 conscience and political prisoners in Burma;
 (8) to strengthen Burma's civilian governmental 
 institutions, including support for greater transparency and 
 accountability once the military is no longer in power;
 (9) to empower and resource local communities, civil 
 society organizations, and independent media;
 (10) to promote national reconciliation and the conclusion 
 and credible implementation of a nationwide cease-fire 
 agreement, followed by a peace process that is inclusive of 
 ethnic Rohingya, Shan, Rakhine, Kachin, Chin, Karenni, and 
 Karen, and other ethnic groups and leads to the development of 
 a political system that effectively addresses natural resource 
 governance, revenue-sharing, land rights, and constitutional 
 change enabling inclusive peace;
 (11) to ensure the protection and non-refoulement of 
 refugees fleeing Burma to neighboring countries and prioritize 
 efforts to create a conducive environment and meaningfully 
 address long-standing structural challenges that undermine the 
 safety and rights of Rohingya in Rakhine State as well as 
 members of other ethnic and religious minorities in Burma, 
 including by promoting the creation of conditions for the 
 dignified, safe, sustainable, and voluntary return of refugees 
 in Bangladesh, Thailand, and in the surrounding region when 
 conditions allow;
 (12) to support an immediate end to restrictions that 
 hinder the freedom of movement of members of ethnic minorities 
 throughout the country, including Rohingya, and an end to any 
 and all policies and practices designed to forcibly segregate 
 Rohingya, and providing humanitarian support for all internally 
 displaced persons in Burma;
 (13) to support unfettered access for humanitarian actors, 
 media, and human rights mechanisms, including those established 
 by the United Nations Human Rights Council and the United 
 Nations General Assembly, to all relevant areas of Burma, 
 including Rakhine, Chin, Kachin, Shan, and Kayin States, as 
 well as Sagaing and Magway regions;
 (14) to call for accountability through independent, 
 credible investigations and prosecutions for any potential 
 genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity, including 
 those involving sexual and gender-based violence and violence 
 against children, perpetrated against ethnic or religious 
 minorities, including Rohingya, by members of the military and 
 security forces of Burma, and other armed groups;
 (15) to encourage reforms toward the military, security, 
 and police forces operating under civilian control and being 
 held accountable in civilian courts for human rights abuses, 
 corruption, and other abuses of power;
 (16) to promote broad-based, inclusive economic development 
 and fostering healthy and resilient communities;
 (17) to combat corruption and illegal economic activity, 
 including that which involves the military and its close 
 allies; and
 (18) to promote responsible international and regional 
 engagement;
 (19) to support and advance the strategy of calibrated 
 engagement, impose targeted sanctions with respect to the 
 Burmese military's economic interests and major sources of 
 income for the Burmese military, including with respect to--
 (A) officials in Burma, including the Commander in 
 Chief of the Armed Forces of Burma, Min Aung Hlaing, 
 and all individuals described in paragraphs (1), (2), 
 and (3) of section 202(a), under the authorities 
 provided by title II, Executive Order 14014, and the 
 Global Magnitsky Human Rights Accountability Act 
 (subtitle F of title XII of Public Law 114-328; 22 
 U.S.C. 2656 note);
 (B) enterprises owned or controlled by the Burmese 
 military, including the Myanmar Economic Corporation, 
 Union of Myanmar Economic Holding, Ltd., and all other 
 entities described in section 202(a)(4), under the 
 authorities provided by title II, the Burmese Freedom 
 and Democracy Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-61; 50 U.S.C. 
 1701 note), the Tom Lantos Block Burmese JADE (Junta's 
 Anti-Democratic Efforts) Act of 2008 (Public Law 110-
 286; 50 U.S.C. 1701 note), other relevant statutory 
 authorities, and Executive Order 14014; and
 (C) state-owned economic enterprises if--
 (i) there is a substantial risk of the 
 Burmese military accessing the accounts of such 
 an enterprise; and
 (ii) the imposition of sanctions would not 
 cause disproportionate harm to the people of 
 Burma, the restoration of a civilian government 
 in Burma, or the national interest of the 
 United States; and
 (20) to ensure that any sanctions imposed with respect to 
 entities or individuals are carefully targeted to maximize 
 impact on the military and security forces of Burma and its 
 economic interests while minimizing impact on the people of 
 Burma, recognizing the calls from the people of Burma for the 
 United States to take action against the sources of income for 
 the military and security forces of Burma.

 Subtitle B--Sanctions and Policy Coordination With Respect to Burma

SEC. 6521. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Admitted; alien.--The terms ``admitted'' and ``alien'' 
 have the meanings given those terms in section 101 of the 
 Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101).
 (2) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term 
 ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (A) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the 
 Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the 
 Senate; and
 (B) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the 
 Committee on Financial Services of the House of 
 Representatives.
 (3) Correspondent account; payable-through account.--The 
 terms ``correspondent account'' and ``payable-through account'' 
 have the meanings given those terms in section 5318A of title 
 31, United States Code.
 (4) Foreign financial institution.--The term ``foreign 
 financial institution'' has the meaning of that term as 
 determined by the Secretary of the Treasury by regulation.
 (5) Foreign person.--The term ``foreign person'' means a 
 person that is not a United States person.
 (6) Knowingly.--The term ``knowingly'', with respect to 
 conduct, a circumstance, or a result, means that a person has 
 actual knowledge, or should have known, of the conduct, the 
 circumstance, or the result.
 (7) Person.--The term ``person'' means an individual or 
 entity.
 (8) Support.--The term ``support'', with respect to the 
 Burmese military, means to knowingly have materially assisted, 
 sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological 
 support for, or goods or services to or in support of the 
 Burmese military.
 (9) United states person.--The term ``United States 
 person'' means--
 (A) a United States citizen or an alien lawfully 
 admitted to the United States for permanent residence;
 (B) an entity organized under the laws of the 
 United States or any jurisdiction within the United 
 States, including a foreign branch of such an entity; 
 or
 (C) any person in the United States.

SEC. 6522. IMPOSITION OF SANCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES 
 AND PERPETRATION OF A COUP IN BURMA.

 (a) Mandatory Sanctions.--Not later than 60 days after the 
enactment of this Act, the President shall impose the sanctions 
described in subsection (d) with respect to any foreign person that the 
President determines--
 (1) knowingly operates as a senior official or in a 
 significant capacity in the defense sector of the Burmese 
 economy;
 (2) leading up to, during, and since the February 2021 coup 
 is responsible for or has directly and knowingly engaged in--
 (A) actions or policies that undermine democratic 
 processes or institutions in Burma;
 (B) actions or policies that threaten the peace, 
 security, or stability of Burma;
 (C) actions or policies that prohibit, limit, or 
 penalize the exercise of freedom of expression or 
 assembly by people in Burma, or that limit access to 
 print, online, or broadcast media in Burma; or
 (D) the arbitrary detention or torture of any 
 person in Burma or other serious human rights abuse in 
 Burma;
 (3) is a senior leader of--
 (A) the Burmese military or security forces of 
 Burma, or any successor entity to any of such forces;
 (B) the State Administration Council, the military-
 appointed cabinet at the level of Deputy Minister or 
 higher, or a military-appointed minister of a Burmese 
 state or region; or
 (C) an entity that has engaged in any activity 
 described in paragraph (2) leading up to, during, and 
 after the February 2021 coup;
 (4) knowingly operates--
 (A) any entity that is a state-owned economic 
 enterprise under Burmese law (other than the entity 
 specified in subsection (c)) that benefits the Burmese 
 military, including the Myanma Gems Enterprise; or
 (B) any entity controlled in whole or in part by an 
 entity described in subparagraph (A), or a successor to 
 such an entity, that benefits the Burmese military;
 (5) knowingly and materially violates, attempts to violate, 
 conspires to violate, or has caused or attempted to cause a 
 violation of any license, order, regulation, or prohibition 
 contained in or issued pursuant to Executive Order 14014 or 
 this Act;
 (6) to be a spouse or adult child of any person described 
 in any of paragraphs (1) through (5); or
 (7) to be owned or controlled by, and to act for or on 
 behalf of, directly or indirectly, a person that has engaged in 
 the activity described, as the case may be, in any of 
 paragraphs (1) through (6).
 (b) Additional Measure Relating to Facilitation of Transactions.--
The Secretary of the Treasury shall, in consultation with the Secretary 
of State, prohibit or impose strict conditions on the opening or 
maintaining in the United States of a correspondent account or payable-
through account by a foreign financial institution that the President 
determines has, on or after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
knowingly conducted or facilitated a significant transaction or 
transactions on behalf of a foreign person sanctioned based on 
subsection (a).
 (c) Additional Sanctions.--Beginning on the date that is 180 days 
after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall impose 
the sanctions described in subsection (d) with respect to the Myanma 
Oil and Gas Enterprise.
 (d) Sanctions Described.--The sanctions that may be imposed with 
respect to a foreign person described in subsection (a) are the 
following:
 (1) Property blocking.--Notwithstanding the requirements of 
 section 202 of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act 
 (50 U.S.C. 1701), the President may exercise of all powers 
 granted to the President by that Act to the extent necessary to 
 block and prohibit all transactions in all property and 
 interests in property of the foreign person if such property 
 and interests in property are in the United States, come within 
 the United States, or are or come within the possession or 
 control of a United States person.
 (2) Foreign exchange.--The President may, pursuant to such 
 regulations as the President may prescribe, prohibit any 
 transactions in foreign exchange that are subject to the 
 jurisdiction of the United States and in which the foreign 
 person has any interest.
 (3) Visas, admission, or parole.--
 (A) In general.--An alien who the Secretary of 
 State or the Secretary of Homeland Security (or a 
 designee of one of such Secretaries) knows, or has 
 reason to believe, is described in subsection (a) is--
 (i) inadmissible to the United States;
 (ii) ineligible for a visa or other 
 documentation to enter the United States; and
 (iii) otherwise ineligible to be admitted 
 or paroled into the United States or to receive 
 any other benefit under the Immigration and 
 Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101 et seq.).
 (B) Current visas revoked.--
 (i) In general.--The issuing consular 
 officer, the Secretary of State, or the 
 Secretary of Homeland Security (or a designee 
 of one of such Secretaries) shall, in 
 accordance with section 221(i) of the 
 Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 
 1201(i)), revoke any visa or other entry 
 documentation issued to an alien described in 
 clause (i) regardless of when the visa or other 
 entry documentation is issued.
 (ii) Effect of revocation.--A revocation 
 under subclause (i)--
 (I) shall take effect immediately; 
 and
 (II) shall automatically cancel any 
 other valid visa or entry documentation 
 that is in the alien's possession.
 (e) Exceptions.--
 (1) Exception for intelligence, law enforcement, and 
 national security activities.--Sanctions under this section 
 shall not apply to any authorized intelligence, law 
 enforcement, or national security activities of the United 
 States.
 (2) Exception to comply with international obligations.--
 Sanctions under subsection (d)(3) shall not apply with respect 
 to the admission of an alien if admitting or paroling the alien 
 into the United States is necessary to permit the United States 
 to comply with the Agreement regarding the Headquarters of the 
 United Nations, signed at Lake Success June 26, 1947, and 
 entered into force November 21, 1947, between the United 
 Nations and the United States, or other applicable 
 international obligations.
 (3) Exception relating to the provision of humanitarian 
 assistance.--Sanctions under this section may not be imposed 
 with respect to transactions or the facilitation of 
 transactions for--
 (A) the sale of agricultural commodities, food, 
 medicine, or medical devices to Burma;
 (B) the provision of humanitarian assistance to the 
 people of Burma;
 (C) financial transactions relating to humanitarian 
 assistance or for humanitarian purposes in Burma; or
 (D) transporting goods or services that are 
 necessary to carry out operations relating to 
 humanitarian assistance or humanitarian purposes in 
 Burma.
 (f) Waiver.--The President may, on a case-by-case basis and for 
periods not to exceed 180 days each, waive the application of sanctions 
or restrictions imposed with respect to a foreign person under this 
section if the President certifies to the appropriate congressional 
committees not later than 15 days before such waiver is to take effect 
that the waiver is vital to the national security interests of the 
United States.
 (g) Implementation; Penalties.--
 (1) Implementation.--The President may exercise all 
 authorities provided to the President under sections 203 and 
 205 of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 
 U.S.C. 1702 and 1704) to carry out this section.
 (2) Penalties.--The penalties provided for in subsections 
 (b) and (c) of section 206 of the International Emergency 
 Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1705) shall apply to a person 
 that violates, attempts to violate, conspires to violate, or 
 causes a violation of regulations promulgated under section 
 403(b) to carry out paragraph (1)(A) to the same extent that 
 such penalties apply to a person that commits an unlawful act 
 described in section 206(a) of that Act.
 (h) Report.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment 
of this Act and annually thereafter for 8 years, the Secretary of the 
Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State and the heads of 
other United States Government agencies, as appropriate, shall submit 
to the appropriate congressional committees a report that--
 (1) sets forth the plan of the Department of the Treasury 
 for ensuring that property blocked pursuant to subsection (a) 
 or Executive Order 14014 remains blocked;
 (2) describes the primary sources of income to which the 
 Burmese military has access and that the United States has been 
 unable to reach using sanctions authorities;
 (3) makes recommendations for how the sources of income 
 described in paragraph (2) can be reduced or blocked;
 (4) evaluates the implications of imposing sanctions on the 
 Burmese-government owned Myanmar Oil and Gas Enterprise, 
 including a determination with respect to the extent to which 
 sanctions on Myanmar Oil and Gas Enterprise would advance the 
 interests of the United States in Burma; and
 (5) assesses the impact of the sanctions imposed pursuant 
 to the authorities under this Act on the Burmese people and the 
 Burmese military.

SEC. 6523. CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENT FOR REMOVAL OF CERTAIN PERSONS 
 FROM THE LIST OF SPECIALLY DESIGNATED NATIONALS AND 
 BLOCKED PERSONS.

 (a) In General.--On or after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
the President may not remove a person described in subsection (b) from 
the list of specially designated nationals and blocked persons 
maintained by the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the Department of 
the Treasury (commonly referred to as the ``SDN list'') until the 
President submits to the appropriate congressional committees a 
certification described in subsection (c) with respect to the person.
 (b) Persons Described.--A person described in this subsection is a 
foreign person included in the SDN list for violations of part 525 of 
title 31, Code of Federal Regulations, or any other regulations 
imposing sanctions on or related to Burma.
 (c) Certification Described.--A certification described in this 
subsection, with respect to a person described in subsection (b), is a 
certification that the person has not knowingly assisted in, sponsored, 
or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or 
financial or other services to or in support of--
 (1) terrorism or a terrorist organization;
 (2) a significant foreign narcotics trafficker (as defined 
 in section 808 of the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act 
 (21 U.S.C. 1907));
 (3) a significant transnational criminal organization under 
 Executive Order 13581 (50 U.S.C. note; relating to blocking 
 property of transnational criminal organizations); or
 (4) any other person on the SDN list.
 (d) Form.--A certification described in subsection (c) shall be 
submitted in unclassified form but may include a classified annex.

SEC. 6524. SANCTIONS AND POLICY COORDINATION FOR BURMA.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of State may designate an official 
of the Department of State to serve as the United States Special 
Coordinator for Burmese Democracy (in this section referred to as the 
``Special Coordinator'').
 (b) Central Objective.--The Special Coordinator should develop a 
comprehensive strategy for the implementation of the full range of 
United States diplomatic capabilities, including the provisions of this 
Act, to promote human rights and the restoration of civilian government 
in Burma.
 (c) Duties and Responsibilities.--The Special Coordinator should, 
as appropriate, assist in--
 (1) coordinating the sanctions policies of the United 
 States under section 6522 with relevant bureaus and offices 
 within the Department of State and other relevant United States 
 Government agencies;
 (2) conducting relevant research and vetting of entities 
 and individuals that may be subject to sanctions under section 
 6522 and coordinate with other United States Government 
 agencies and international financial intelligence units to 
 assist in efforts to enforce anti-money laundering and anti-
 corruption laws and regulations;
 (3) promoting a comprehensive international effort to 
 impose and enforce multilateral sanctions with respect to 
 Burma;
 (4) coordinating with and supporting interagency United 
 States Government efforts, including efforts of the United 
 States Ambassador to Burma, the United States Ambassador to 
 ASEAN, and the United States Permanent Representative to the 
 United Nations, relating to--
 (A) identifying opportunities to coordinate with 
 and exert pressure on the governments of the People's 
 Republic of China and the Russian Federation to support 
 multilateral action against the Burmese military;
 (B) working with like-minded partners to impose a 
 coordinated arms embargo on the Burmese military and 
 targeted sanctions on the economic interests of the 
 Burmese military, including through the introduction 
 and adoption of a United Nations Security Council 
 resolution;
 (C) engaging in direct dialogue with Burmese civil 
 society, democracy advocates, ethnic minority 
 representative groups, and organizations or groups 
 representing the protest movement and the officials 
 elected in 2020, such as the Committee Representing the 
 Pyidaungsu Hluttaw, the National Unity Government, the 
 National Unity Consultative Council, and their 
 designated representatives;
 (D) encouraging the National Unity Government to 
 incorporate accountability mechanisms in relation to 
 the atrocities against Rohingya and other ethnic 
 groups, to take further steps to make its leadership 
 and membership ethnically diverse, and to incorporate 
 measures to enhance ethnic reconciliation and national 
 unity into its policy agenda;
 (E) assisting efforts by the relevant United 
 Nations Special Envoys and Special Rapporteurs to 
 secure the release of all political prisoners in Burma, 
 promote respect for human rights, and encourage 
 dialogue; and
 (F) supporting nongovernmental organizations 
 operating in Burma and neighboring countries working to 
 restore civilian democratic rule to Burma and to 
 address the urgent humanitarian needs of the people of 
 Burma; and
 (5) providing timely input for reporting on the impacts of 
 the implementation of section 6522 on the Burmese military and 
 the people of Burma.
 (d) Deadline.--If the Secretary of State has not designated the 
Special Coordinator by the date that is 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on 
Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives and the Committee on 
Foreign Relations of the Senate a report detailing the reasons for not 
doing so.

SEC. 6525. SUPPORT FOR GREATER UNITED NATIONS ACTION WITH RESPECT TO 
 BURMA.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the United Nations Security Council has not taken 
 adequate steps to condemn the February 1, 2021, coup in Burma, 
 pressure the Burmese military to cease its violence against 
 civilians, or secure the release of those unjustly detained;
 (2) countries, such as the People's Republic of China and 
 the Russian Federation, that are directly or indirectly 
 shielding the Burmese military from international scrutiny and 
 action, should be obliged to endure the reputational damage of 
 doing so by taking public votes on resolutions related to Burma 
 that apply greater pressure on the Burmese military to restore 
 Burma to its democratic path; and
 (3) The United Nations Secretariat and the United Nations 
 Security Council should take concrete steps to address the coup 
 and ongoing crisis in Burma consistent with the UN General 
 Assembly resolution 75/287, ``The situation in Myanmar,'' which 
 was adopted on June 18, 2021.
 (b) Support for Greater Action.--The President shall direct the 
United States Permanent Representative to the United Nations to use the 
voice, vote, and influence of the United States to spur greater action 
by the United Nations and the United Nations Security Council with 
respect to Burma by--
 (1) pushing the United Nations Security Council to consider 
 a resolution condemning the February 1, 2021, coup and calling 
 on the Burmese military to cease its violence against the 
 people of Burma and release without preconditions the 
 journalists, pro-democracy activists, and political officials 
 that it has unjustly detained;
 (2) pushing the United Nations Security Council to consider 
 a resolution that immediately imposes a global arms embargo 
 against Burma to ensure that the Burmese military is not able 
 to obtain weapons and munitions from other nations to further 
 harm, murder, and oppress the people of Burma;
 (3) pushing the United Nations and other United Nations 
 authorities to cut off assistance to the Government of Burma 
 while providing humanitarian assistance directly to the people 
 of Burma through UN bodies and civil society organizations, 
 particularly such organizations working with ethnic minorities 
 that have been adversely affected by the coup and the Burmese 
 military's violent crackdown;
 (4) objecting to the appointment of representatives to the 
 United Nations and United Nations bodies such as the Human 
 Rights Council that are sanctioned by the Burmese military;
 (5) working to ensure the Burmese military is not 
 recognized as the legitimate government of Burma in any United 
 Nations body; and
 (6) spurring the United Nations Security Council to 
 consider multilateral sanctions against the Burmese military 
 for its atrocities against Rohingya and individuals of other 
 ethnic and religious minorities, its coup, and the crimes 
 against humanity it has and continues to commit in the coup's 
 aftermath.

SEC. 6526. SUNSET.

 (a) In General.--The authority to impose sanctions and the 
sanctions imposed under this title shall terminate on the date that is 
8 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Certification for Early Sunset of Sanctions.--Sanctions imposed 
under this title may be removed before the date specified in subsection 
(a), if the President submits to the appropriate congressional 
committees a certification that--
 (1) the Burmese military has released all political 
 prisoners taken into custody on or after February 1, 2021, or 
 is providing legal recourse to those that remain in custody;
 (2) the elected government has been reinstated or new free 
 and fair elections have been held;
 (3) all legal charges against those winning election in 
 November 2020 are dropped; and
 (4) the 2008 constitution of Burma has been amended or 
 replaced to place the Burmese military under civilian oversight 
 and ensure that the Burmese military no longer automatically 
 receives 25 percent of seats in Burma's state, regional, and 
 national Hluttaws.

 Subtitle C--Humanitarian Assistance and Civil Society Support With 
 Respect to Burma

SEC. 6531. SUPPORT TO CIVIL SOCIETY AND INDEPENDENT MEDIA.

 (a) Authorization to Provide Support.--The Secretary of State and 
the Administrator of the United States Agency for International 
Development are authorized to provide support to civil society in 
Burma, Bangladesh, Thailand, and the surrounding region, including by--
 (1) ensuring the safety of democracy activists, civil 
 society leaders, independent media, participants in the Civil 
 Disobedience Movement, and government defectors exercising 
 their fundamental rights by--
 (A) supporting safe houses for those under threat 
 of arbitrary arrest or detention;
 (B) providing access to secure channels for 
 communication;
 (C) assisting individuals forced to flee from Burma 
 and take shelter in neighboring countries, including in 
 ensuring protection assistance and non-refoulement; and
 (D) providing funding to organizations that equip 
 activists, civil society organizations, and independent 
 media with consistent, long-term technical support on 
 physical and digital security in local languages;
 (2) supporting democracy activists in their efforts to 
 promote freedom, democracy, and human rights in Burma, by--
 (A) providing aid and training to democracy 
 activists in Burma;
 (B) providing aid to individuals and groups 
 conducting democracy programming outside of Burma 
 targeted at a peaceful transition to constitutional 
 democracy inside Burma;
 (C) providing aid and assistance to independent 
 media outlets and journalists and groups working to 
 protect internet freedom and maintain independent 
 media;
 (D) expanding radio and television broadcasting 
 into Burma; and
 (E) providing financial support to civil society 
 organizations and nongovernmental organizations led by 
 members of ethnic and religious minority groups within 
 Burma and its cross-border regions;
 (3) assisting ethnic minority groups and civil society in 
 Burma to further prospects for justice, reconciliation, and 
 sustainable peace; and
 (4) promoting ethnic minority inclusion and participation 
 in political processes in Burma.
 (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated $50,000,000 to carry out the provisions of this section 
for each of fiscal years 2023 through 2027.

SEC. 6532. HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE AND RECONCILIATION.

 (a) Authorization to Provide Humanitarian Assistance.--The 
Secretary of State and the Administrator of the United States Agency 
for International Development are authorized to provide humanitarian 
assistance and reconciliation activities for ethnic groups and civil 
society organizations in Burma, Bangladesh, Thailand, and the 
surrounding region, including--
 (1) assistance for victims of violence by the Burmese 
 military, including Rohingya and individuals from other ethnic 
 minorities displaced or otherwise affected by conflict, in 
 Burma, Bangladesh, Thailand, and the surrounding region;
 (2) support for voluntary resettlement or repatriation of 
 displaced individuals in Burma, upon the conclusion of genuine 
 agreements developed and negotiated with the involvement and 
 consultation of the displaced individuals and if resettlement 
 or repatriation is safe, voluntary, and dignified;
 (3) support for the promotion of ethnic and religious 
 tolerance, improving social cohesion, combating gender-based 
 violence, increasing the engagement of women in peacebuilding, 
 and mitigating human rights violations and abuses against 
 children;
 (4) support for--
 (A) primary, secondary, and tertiary education for 
 displaced children living in areas of Burma affected by 
 conflict; and
 (B) refugee camps in the surrounding region and 
 opportunities to access to higher education in 
 Bangladesh and Thailand;
 (5) capacity-building support--
 (A) to ensure that displaced individuals are 
 consulted and participate in decision-making processes 
 affecting the displaced individuals; and
 (B) for the creation of mechanisms to facilitate 
 the participation of displaced individuals in such 
 processes; and
 (6) increased humanitarian aid to Burma to address the dire 
 humanitarian situation that has uprooted 170,000 people 
 through--
 (A) international aid partners;
 (B) the International Committee of the Red Cross; 
 and
 (C) cross-border aid.
 (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated $220,500,000 to carry out the provisions of this section 
for fiscal year 2023.

SEC. 6533. AUTHORIZATION OF ASSISTANCE FOR BURMA POLITICAL PRISONERS.

 (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
 (1) the freedom of expression, including for members of the 
 press, is an inalienable right and should be upheld and 
 protected in Burma and everywhere;
 (2) the Burmese military must immediately cease the 
 arbitrary arrest, detention, imprisonment, and physical attacks 
 of journalists, which have created a climate of fear and self-
 censorship among local journalists;
 (3) the Government of Burma should repeal or amend all laws 
 that violate the right to freedom of expression, peaceful 
 assembly, or association, and ensure that laws such as the 
 Telecommunications Law of 2013 and the Unlawful Associations 
 Act of 1908, and laws relating to the right to peaceful 
 assembly all comply with Burma's human rights obligations;
 (4) all prisoners of conscience and political prisoners in 
 Burma should be unconditionally and immediately released;
 (5) the Burmese military should immediately and 
 unconditionally release Danny Fenster and other journalists 
 unjustly detained for their work;
 (6) the Government of Burma must immediately drop 
 defamation charges against all individuals unjustly detained, 
 including the three Kachin activists, Lum Zawng, Nang Pu, and 
 Zau Jet, who led a peaceful rally in Mytkyina, the capital of 
 Kachin State in April 2018, and that the prosecution of Lum 
 Zawng, Nang Pu, and Zau Jet is an attempt by Burmese 
 authorities to intimidate, harass, and silence community 
 leaders and human rights defenders who speak out about military 
 abuses and their impact on civilian populations; and
 (7) the United States Government should use all diplomatic 
 tools to seek the unconditional and immediate release of all 
 prisoners of conscience and political prisoners in Burma.
 (b) Political Prisoners Assistance.--The Secretary of State is 
authorized to continue to provide assistance to civil society 
organizations in Burma that work to secure the release of and support 
prisoners of conscience and political prisoners in Burma, including--
 (1) support for the documentation of human rights 
 violations with respect to prisoners of conscience and 
 political prisoners;
 (2) support for advocacy in Burma to raise awareness of 
 issues relating to prisoners of conscience and political 
 prisoners;
 (3) support for efforts to repeal or amend laws that are 
 used to imprison individuals as prisoners of conscience or 
 political prisoners;
 (4) support for health, including mental health, and post-
 incarceration assistance in gaining access to education and 
 employment opportunities or other forms of reparation to enable 
 former prisoners of conscience and political prisoners to 
 resume normal lives; and
 (5) the creation, in consultation with former political 
 prisoners and prisoners of conscience, their families, and 
 their representatives, of an independent prisoner review 
 mechanism in Burma--
 (A) to review the cases of individuals who may have 
 been charged or deprived of their liberty for 
 peacefully exercising their human rights;
 (B) to review all laws used to arrest, prosecute, 
 and punish individuals as political prisoners and 
 prisoners of conscience; and
 (C) to provide recommendations to the Government of 
 Burma for the repeal or amendment of all such laws.
 (c) Termination.--The authority to provide assistance under this 
section shall terminate on the date that is 8 years after the date of 
the enactment of this Act.

 Subtitle D--Accountability for Human Rights Abuses

SEC. 6541. REPORT ON ACCOUNTABILITY FOR WAR CRIMES, CRIMES AGAINST 
 HUMANITY, AND GENOCIDE IN BURMA.

 (a) Statement of Policy.--It is the policy of the United States--
 (1) to continue the support of ongoing mechanisms and 
 special procedures of the United Nations Human Rights Council, 
 including the United Nations Independent Investigative 
 Mechanism for Myanmar and the Special Rapporteur on the 
 situation of human rights in Myanmar; and
 (2) to refute the credibility and impartiality of efforts 
 sponsored by the Government of Burma, such as the Independent 
 Commission of Enquiry, unless the United States Ambassador at 
 Large for Global Criminal Justice determines the efforts to be 
 credible and impartial and notifies the appropriate 
 congressional committees in writing and in unclassified form 
 regarding that determination.
 (b) Report Required.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State, after consultation with 
the heads of other United States Government agencies and 
representatives of human rights organizations, as appropriate, shall 
submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report that--
 (1) evaluates the persecution of Rohingya in Burma by the 
 Burmese military;
 (2) after consulting with the Atrocity Early Warning Task 
 Force, or any successor entity or office, provides a detailed 
 description of any proposed atrocity prevention response 
 recommended by the Task Force as it relates to Burma;
 (3) summarizes any atrocity crimes committed against 
 Rohingya or members of other ethnic minority groups in Burma 
 between 2012 and the date of the submission of the report;
 (4) describes any potential transitional justice mechanisms 
 for Burma;
 (5) provides an analysis of whether the reports summarized 
 under paragraph (3) amount to war crimes, crimes against 
 humanity, or genocide;
 (6) includes an assessment on which events that took place 
 in the state of Rakhine in Burma, starting on August 25, 2017, 
 constitute war crimes, crimes against humanity, or genocide; 
 and
 (7) includes a determination with respect to whether events 
 that took place during or after the coup of February 1, 2021, 
 in any state in Burma constitute war crimes or crimes against 
 humanity.
 (c) Elements.--The report required by subsection (b) shall include 
the following:
 (1) A description of--
 (A) credible evidence of events that may constitute 
 war crimes, crimes against humanity, or genocide 
 committed by the Burmese military against Rohingya and 
 members of other ethnic minority groups, including the 
 identities of any other actors involved in the events;
 (B) the role of the civilian government in the 
 commission of any events described in subparagraph (A);
 (C) credible evidence of events of war crimes, 
 crimes against humanity, or genocide committed by other 
 armed groups in Burma;
 (D) attacks on health workers, health facilities, 
 health transport, or patients and, to the extent 
 possible, the identities of any individuals who engaged 
 in or organized such attacks in Burma; and
 (E) to the extent possible, the conventional and 
 unconventional weapons used for any events or attacks 
 described in this paragraph and the sources of such 
 weapons.
 (2) In consultation with the Administrator of the United 
 States Agency for International Development, the Attorney 
 General, and heads of any other appropriate United States 
 Government agencies, as appropriate, a description and 
 assessment of the effectiveness of any efforts undertaken by 
 the United States to promote accountability for war crimes, 
 crimes against humanity, and genocide perpetrated against 
 Rohingya by the Burmese military, the government of the Rakhine 
 State, pro-government militias, or other armed groups operating 
 in the Rakhine State, including efforts--
 (A) to train civilian investigators, within and 
 outside of Burma and Bangladesh, to document, 
 investigate, develop findings of, identify, and locate 
 alleged perpetrators of war crimes, crimes against 
 humanity, or genocide in Burma;
 (B) to promote and prepare for a transitional 
 justice mechanism for the perpetrators of war crimes, 
 crimes against humanity, and genocide occurring in the 
 Rakhine State in 2017; and
 (C) to document, collect, preserve, and protect 
 evidence of war crimes, crimes against humanity, and 
 genocide in Burma, including by--
 (i) providing support for ethnic Rohingya, 
 Shan, Rakhine, Kachin, Chin, and Kayin and 
 other ethnic minorities;
 (ii) Burmese, Bangladeshi, foreign, and 
 international nongovernmental organizations;
 (iii) the Independent Investigative 
 Mechanism for Myanmar; and
 (iv) other entities engaged in 
 investigative activities with respect to war 
 crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide 
 in Burma.
 (3) A detailed study of the feasibility and desirability of 
 a transitional justice mechanism for Burma, such as an 
 international tribunal, a hybrid tribunal, or other options, 
 that includes--
 (A) a discussion of the use of universal 
 jurisdiction or of legal cases brought against Burma by 
 other countries at the International Court of Justice 
 regarding any atrocity crimes perpetrated in Burma;
 (B) recommendations for any transitional justice 
 mechanism the United States should support, the reason 
 the mechanism should be supported, and the type of 
 support that should be offered; and
 (C) consultation regarding transitional justice 
 mechanisms with representatives of Rohingya and 
 individuals from other ethnic minority groups who have 
 suffered human rights violations and abuses.
 (d) Protection of Witnesses and Evidence.--The Secretary of State 
shall seek to ensure that the identification of witnesses and physical 
evidence used for the report required by this section are not publicly 
disclosed in a manner that might place witnesses at risk of harm or 
encourage the destruction of evidence by the military or government of 
Burma.
 (e) Form of Report; Public Availability.--
 (1) Form.--The report required by subsection (b) shall be 
 submitted in unclassified form but may include a classified 
 annex.
 (2) Public availability.--The unclassified portion of the 
 report required by subsection (b) shall be posted on a publicly 
 available internet website.
 (f) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on 
 Armed Services of the Senate; and
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on 
 Armed Services of the House of Representatives.

SEC. 6542. AUTHORIZATION TO PROVIDE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FOR EFFORTS 
 AGAINST HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of State is authorized to provide 
assistance to support appropriate civilian or international entities 
that--
 (1) identify suspected perpetrators of war crimes, crimes 
 against humanity, and genocide;
 (2) collect, document, and protect evidence of crimes and 
 preserving the chain of custody for such evidence;
 (3) conduct criminal investigations of such crimes; and
 (4) support investigations conducted by other countries, 
 and by entities mandated by the United Nations, such as the 
 Independent Investigative Mechanism for Myanmar.
 (b) Authorization for Transitional Justice Mechanisms.--The 
Secretary of State, taking into account any relevant findings in the 
report submitted under section 6542, is authorized to provide support 
for the establishment and operation of transitional justice mechanisms, 
including a hybrid tribunal, to prosecute individuals suspected of 
committing war crimes, crimes against humanity, or genocide in Burma.

 Subtitle E--Sanctions Exception Relating to Importation of Goods

SEC. 6551. SANCTIONS EXCEPTION RELATING TO IMPORTATION OF GOODS.

 (a) In General.--The authorities and requirements to impose 
sanctions under this title shall not include the authority or 
requirement to impose sanctions on the importation of goods.
 (b) Good Defined.--In this section, the term ``good'' means any 
article, natural or man-made substance, material, supply, or 
manufactured product, including inspection and test equipment, and 
excluding technical data.

 TITLE LXVI--PROMOTING AND ADVANCING COMMUNITIES OF COLOR THROUGH 
 INCLUSIVE LENDING ACT

SEC. 6601. SHORT TITLE.

 This title may be cited as the ``Promoting and Advancing 
Communities of Color Through Inclusive Lending Act''.

 Subtitle A--Promoting and Advancing Communities of Color Through 
 Inclusive Lending

SEC. 6611. STRENGTHENING DIVERSE AND MISSION-DRIVEN COMMUNITY FINANCIAL 
 INSTITUTIONS.

 (a) Minority Lending Institution Set-aside in Providing 
Assistance.--
 (1) In general.--Section 108 of the Riegle Community 
 Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994 (12 U.S.C. 
 4707) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(i) Supporting Minority Institutions.--Notwithstanding any other 
provision of law, in providing any assistance to community development 
financial institutions, the Fund shall reserve 40 percent of such 
assistance for minority lending institutions.''.
 (2) Definitions.--Section 103 of the Riegle Community 
 Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994 (12 U.S.C. 
 4702) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(22) Minority lending institution.--The term `minority 
 lending institution' has the meaning given that term under 
 section 523(c) of division N of the Consolidated Appropriations 
 Act, 2021.''.
 (b) Office of Minority Lending Institutions.--Section 104 of the 
Riegle Community Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994 (12 
U.S.C. 4703) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(l) CDFI Office of Minority Lending Institutions.--There is 
established within the Fund an Office of Minority Lending Institutions, 
which shall oversee assistance provided by the Fund to minority lending 
institutions.''.
 (c) Reporting on Minority Lending Institutions.--Section 117 of the 
Riegle Community Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994 (12 
U.S.C. 4716) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(g) Reporting on Minority Lending Institutions.--Each report 
required under subsection (a) shall include a description of the extent 
to which assistance from the Fund are provided to minority lending 
institutions.''.
 (d) Submission of Demographic Data Relating to Diversity by 
Community Development Financial Institutions.--Section 104 of the 
Riegle Community Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994 (12 
U.S.C. 4703), as amended by subsection (b), is further amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(m) Submission of Demographic Data Relating to Diversity.--
 ``(1) Definitions.--In this subsection--
 ``(A) the term `executive officer' has the meaning 
 given the term in section 230.501(f) of title 17, Code 
 of Federal Regulations, as in effect on the date of 
 enactment of this subsection;
 ``(B) the term `gender identity' means the gender-
 related identity, appearance, mannerisms, or other 
 gender-related characteristics of an individual, 
 regardless of the individual's designated sex at birth;
 ``(C) the term `sexual orientation' means 
 homosexuality, heterosexuality, or bisexuality; and
 ``(D) the term `veteran' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 101 of title 38, United States Code.
 ``(2) Submission of disclosure.--Each Fund applicant and 
 recipient shall provide data regarding such factors as may be 
 determined by the Fund, which may include the following:
 ``(A) Demographic data, based on voluntary self-
 identification, on the racial, ethnic, gender identity, 
 and sexual orientation composition of--
 ``(i) the board of directors of the 
 institution; and
 ``(ii) the executive officers of the 
 institution.
 ``(B) The status of any member of the board of 
 directors of the institution, any nominee for the board 
 of directors of the institution, or any executive 
 officer of the institution, based on voluntary self-
 identification, as a veteran.
 ``(C) Whether the board of directors of the 
 institution, or any committee of that board of 
 directors, has, as of the date on which the institution 
 makes a disclosure under this paragraph, adopted any 
 policy, plan, or strategy to promote racial, ethnic, 
 and gender diversity among--
 ``(i) the board of directors of the 
 institution;
 ``(ii) nominees for the board of directors 
 of the institution; or
 ``(iii) the executive officers of the 
 institution.
 ``(3) Report to congress.--Not later than 24 months after 
 the date of enactment of this subsection, and every other year 
 thereafter, the Fund shall submit to the Committee on Banking, 
 Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on 
 Financial Services of the House of Representatives, and make 
 publicly available on the website of the Fund, a report--
 ``(A) on the demographic data and trends of the 
 diversity information made available pursuant to 
 paragraph (2), including breakdowns by each State 
 (including the District of Columbia and each territory 
 of the United States) and Tribal government entity; and
 ``(B) containing any administrative or legislative 
 recommendations of the Fund to enhance the 
 implementation of this title or to promote diversity 
 and inclusion within community development financial 
 institutions.''.
 (e) Office of Diverse and Mission-Driven Community Financial 
Institutions.--
 (1) Establishment.--There is established within the 
 Department of the Treasury the Office of Diverse and Mission-
 Driven Community Financial Institutions.
 (2) Leadership.--The Office of Diverse and Mission-Driven 
 Community Financial Institutions shall be led by a Deputy 
 Assistant Secretary for Diverse and Mission-Driven Community 
 Financial Institutions, who shall be appointed by the Secretary 
 of the Treasury, in consultation with the Department of the 
 Treasury's Director of Office of Minority and Women Inclusion.
 (3) Functions.--The Office of Diverse and Mission-Driven 
 Community Financial Institutions, pursuant to the direction of 
 the Secretary, shall seek to provide support for diverse and 
 mission-driven community financial institutions and have the 
 authority--
 (A) to monitor and issue reports regarding--
 (i) community development financial 
 institutions, minority depository institutions, 
 and minority lending institutions; and
 (ii) the role such institutions play in the 
 financial system of the United States, 
 including the impact they have on providing 
 financial access to low- and moderate-income 
 communities, communities of color, and other 
 underserved communities;
 (B) to serve as a resource and Federal liaison for 
 current and prospective community development financial 
 institutions, minority depository institutions, and 
 minority lending institutions seeking to engage with 
 the Department of the Treasury, the Community 
 Development Financial Institutions Fund (``CDFI 
 Fund''), other Federal government agencies, including 
 by providing contact information for other offices of 
 the Department of the Treasury or other Federal 
 Government agencies, resources, technical assistance, 
 or other support for entities wishing--
 (i) to become certified as a community 
 development financial institution, and maintain 
 the certification;
 (ii) to obtain a banking charter, deposit 
 insurance, or otherwise carry on banking 
 activities in a safe, sound, and responsible 
 manner;
 (iii) to obtain financial support through 
 private sector deposits, investments, 
 partnerships, and other means;
 (iv) to expand their operations through 
 internal growth and acquisitions;
 (v) to develop and upgrade their 
 technology, cybersecurity resilience, 
 compliance systems, data reporting systems, and 
 their capacity to support their communities, 
 including through partnerships with third-party 
 companies;
 (vi) to obtain grants, awards, investments 
 and other financial support made available 
 through the CDFI Fund, the Board of Governors 
 of the Federal Reserve System, the Central 
 Liquidity Facility, the Federal Home Loan 
 Banks, and other Federal programs;
 (vii) to participate as a financial 
 intermediary with respect to various Federal 
 and State programs and agencies, including the 
 State Small Business Credit Initiative and 
 programs of the Small Business Administration; 
 and
 (viii) to participate in Financial Agent 
 Mentor-Protege Program of the Department of the 
 Treasury and other Federal programs designed to 
 support private sector partnerships;
 (C) to provide resources to the public wishing to 
 learn more about minority depository institutions, 
 community development financial institutions, and 
 minority lending institutions, including helping the 
 Secretary implement the requirements under section 334, 
 publishing reports issued by the Office on the website 
 of the Department of the Treasury and providing 
 hyperlinks to other relevant reports and materials from 
 other Federal agencies;
 (D) to provide policy recommendations to other 
 relevant Federal agencies and Congress on ways to 
 further strengthen Federal support for community 
 development financial institutions, minority depository 
 institutions, and minority lending institutions;
 (E) to assist the Secretary in carrying out the 
 Secretary's responsibilities under section 308 of the 
 Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and 
 Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 U.S.C. 1463 note) to 
 preserve and promote minority depository institutions 
 in consultation with the Chairman of the Board of 
 Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the 
 Comptroller of the Currency, the Chairman of the 
 National Credit Union Administration, and the 
 Chairperson of the Board of Directors of the Federal 
 Deposit Insurance Corporation;
 (F) to carry out other duties of the Secretary of 
 the Treasury required by this subtitle and the 
 amendments made by this subtitle, and to perform such 
 other duties and authorities as may be assigned by the 
 Secretary.
 (f) Strengthening Federal Efforts and Interagency Coordination to 
Promote Diverse and Mission-driven Community Financial Institutions.--
 (1) Senior officials designated.--The Chairman of the Board 
 of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Comptroller of 
 the Currency, the Chairman of the National Credit Union 
 Administration, the Chairperson of the Board of Directors of 
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Director of 
 the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection shall each, in 
 consultation with their respective Director of Office of 
 Minority and Women Inclusion, designate a senior official to be 
 their respective agency's officer responsible for promoting 
 minority depository institutions, community development 
 financial institutions, and minority lending institutions, 
 including to fulfill obligations under section 308 of the 
 Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 
 1989 (12 U.S.C. 1463 note) to preserve and promote minority 
 depository institutions.
 (2) Interagency working group.--The Department of the 
 Treasury shall regularly convene meetings, no less than once a 
 quarter, of an interagency working group to be known as the 
 ``Interagency Working Group to Promote Diverse and Mission-
 Driven Community Financial Institutions'', which shall consist 
 of the senior officials designated by their respective agencies 
 under paragraph (1), along with the Deputy Assistant Secretary 
 for Diverse and Mission-Driven Community Financial 
 Institutions, the Director of the Community Development 
 Financial Institutions Fund, and such other government 
 officials as the Secretary of the Treasury may choose to 
 invite, to examine and discuss the state of minority depository 
 institutions, community development financial institutions, and 
 minority lending institutions, and actions the relevant 
 agencies can take to preserve, promote, and strengthen these 
 institutions.
 (3) Promoting fair housing and collective ownership 
 opportunities.--
 (A) Initial report.--Not later than 18 months after 
 the date of the enactment of this subsection, the 
 Secretary of Treasury, jointly with the Secretary of 
 Housing and Urban Development, shall issue a report to 
 the covered agencies and the Congress examining 
 different ways financial institutions, including 
 community development financial institutions, can 
 affirmatively further fair housing and be encouraged 
 and incentivized to carry out activities that expand 
 long-term wealth-building opportunities within low-
 income and minority communities that support collective 
 ownership opportunities, including through investments 
 in worker cooperatives, consumer cooperatives, 
 community land trusts, not-for-profit-led shared equity 
 homeownership, and limited-equity cooperatives, and to 
 provide recommendations to the covered agencies and the 
 Congress in the furtherance of these objectives.
 (B) Progress updates.--Beginning not later than 
 three years after the date of the enactment of this 
 subsection, and every five years thereafter, the 
 Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of Housing 
 and Urban Development shall, after receiving the 
 necessary updates from the covered agencies, issue a 
 report examining the progress made on implementing 
 relevant recommendations, and providing any additional 
 recommendations to the covered agencies and the 
 Congress in furtherance of the objectives under 
 subparagraph (A).
 (C) Covered agencies.--For purposes of this 
 subsection, the term ``covered agencies'' means the 
 Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, the 
 Department of Housing and Urban Development. the Board 
 of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal 
 Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the 
 Comptroller of the Currency, the National Credit Union 
 Administration, and the Federal Housing Finance Agency.
 (4) Annual report to congress.--Not later than 1 year after 
 the date of the enactment of this subsection, and annually 
 thereafter, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Chairman of the 
 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the 
 Comptroller of the Currency, the Chairman of the National 
 Credit Union Administration, the Chairperson of the Board of 
 Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the 
 Director of the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection shall 
 submit a joint report to the Committee on Financial Services of 
 the House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, 
 Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate regarding the work 
 that has been done the prior year to preserve, promote, and 
 strengthen community development financial institutions, 
 minority depository institutions, and minority lending 
 institutions, along with any policy recommendations on actions 
 various government agencies and Congress should take to 
 preserve, promote, and strengthen community development 
 financial institutions, minority depository institutions, and 
 minority lending institutions.

SEC. 6612. CAPITAL INVESTMENTS, GRANTS, AND TECHNOLOGY SUPPORT FOR MDIS 
 AND CDFIS.

 (a) Authorization of Appropriation.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to the Emergency Capital Investment Fund $4,000,000,000. 
Such funds may be used for administrative expenses of the Department of 
the Treasury.
 (b) Conforming Amendments to Allow for Additional Purchases of 
Capital.--Section 104A of the Riegle Community Development and 
Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994 (12 U.S.C. 4703a) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (c), by striking paragraph (2); and
 (2) in subsection (e), by striking paragraph (2).
 (c) Use of Funds for CDFI Financial and Technical Assistance.--
Section 104A of the Riegle Community Development and Regulatory 
Improvement Act of 1994 (12 U.S.C. 4703a) is amended by adding at the 
end the following:
 ``(p) Use of Funds for CDFI Financial and Technical Assistance.--
The Secretary shall transfer no less than $1,000,000,000 in the 
Emergency Capital Investment Fund to the Fund for the purpose of 
providing financial and technical assistance grants to community 
development financial institutions certified by the Secretary. The Fund 
shall provide such grants using a formula that takes into account 
criteria such as certification status, financial and compliance 
performance, portfolio and balance sheet strength, diversity of CDFI 
business model types, and program capacity.''.
 (d) Technology Grants for MDIs and CDFIs.--
 (1) Study and report on certain technology challenges.--
 (A) Study.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall 
 carry out a study on the technology challenges 
 impacting minority depository institutions and 
 community development financial institutions with 
 respect to--
 (i) internal technology capabilities and 
 capacity of the institutions to process loan 
 applications and otherwise serve current and 
 potential customers through the internet, 
 mobile phone applications, and other tools;
 (ii) technology capabilities and capacity 
 of the institutions, provided in partnership 
 with third party companies, to process loan 
 applications and otherwise serve current and 
 potential customers through the internet, 
 mobile phone applications, and other tools;
 (iii) cybersecurity; and
 (iv) challenges and solutions related to 
 algorithmic bias in the deployment of 
 technology.
 (B) Report.--Not later than 18 months after the 
 date of the enactment of this subsection, the Secretary 
 shall submit a report to the Committee on Financial 
 Services of the House of Representatives and the 
 Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the 
 Senate that includes the results of the study required 
 under subparagraph (A).
 (2) Technology grant program.--
 (A) Program authorized.--The Secretary shall carry 
 out a technology grant program to make grants to 
 minority depository institutions and community 
 development financial institutions to address 
 technology challenges impacting such institutions.
 (B) Application.--To be eligible to be awarded a 
 grant under this paragraph, a minority depository 
 institution or community development financial 
 institution shall submit an application to the 
 Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing 
 such information as the Secretary may require.
 (C) Use of funds.--A minority depository 
 institution or community development financial 
 institution that is awarded a grant under this 
 paragraph may use the grant funds to--
 (i) enhance or adopt technologies that--
 (I) shorten loan approval 
 processes;
 (II) improve customer experience;
 (III) provide additional services 
 to customers;
 (IV) facilitate compliance with 
 applicable laws, regulations, and 
 program requirements, including testing 
 to ensure that the use of technology 
 does not result in discrimination, and 
 helping to satisfy data reporting 
 requirements;
 (V) help ensure privacy of customer 
 records and cybersecurity resilience; 
 and
 (VI) reduce the unbanked and 
 underbanked population; or
 (ii) carry out such other activities as the 
 Secretary determines appropriate.
 (3) Funding.--The Secretary may use amounts in the 
 Emergency Capital Investment Fund to implement and make grants 
 under paragraph (2), but not to exceed $250,000,000 in the 
 aggregate.
 (4) Definitions.--In this subsection, the terms ``community 
 development financial institution'' and ``minority depository 
 institution'' have the meaning given those terms, respectively, 
 under section 103 of the Riegle Community Development and 
 Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994 (12 U.S.C. 4702).
 (e) Pilot Program for Establishing De Novo CDFIs and MDIs.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury, in 
 consultation with the Fund and the appropriate Federal banking 
 agencies, shall establish a pilot program to provide 
 competitive grants to a person for the purpose of providing 
 capital for such person to establish a minority depository 
 institution or a community development financial institution.
 (2) Application.--A person desiring a grant under this 
 subsection shall submit to the Secretary an application in such 
 form and containing such information as the Secretary 
 determines appropriate.
 (3) Disbursement.--Before disbursing grant amounts to a 
 person selected to receive a grant under this subsection, the 
 Secretary shall ensure that such person has received approval 
 from the appropriate Federal banking agency (or such other 
 Federal or State agency from whom approval is required) to 
 establish a minority depository institution or a community 
 development financial institution, as applicable.
 (4) Funding.--The Secretary may use amounts in the 
 Emergency Capital Investment Fund to implement and make grants 
 under paragraph (2), but not to exceed $100,000,000 in the 
 aggregate.
 (5) Definitions.--In this subsection, the terms 
 ``appropriate Federal banking agency'', ``community development 
 financial institution'', ``Fund'', and ``minority depository 
 institution'' have the meaning given those terms, respectively, 
 under section 103 of the Riegle Community Development and 
 Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994 (12 U.S.C. 4702).
 (f) Guidance for Subchapter S and Mutual Banks.--Not later than 30 
days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Board of Governors of 
the Federal Reserve System and the Secretary shall issue guidance 
regarding how Emergency Capital Investment Program investments (whether 
made before or after the date of enactment of this Act) are considered 
for purposes of various prudential requirements, including debt to 
equity, leverage ratio, and double leverage ratio requirements with 
respect to subchapter S and mutual bank recipients of such investments.
 (g) Collection of Data.--Section 111 of the Riegle Community 
Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994 (12 U.S.C. 4710) is 
amended--
 (1) by striking ``The Fund'' and inserting the following:
 ``(a) In General.--The Fund''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(b) Collection of Certain Data by CDFIs.--Notwithstanding the 
Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691 et seq.)--
 ``(1) a community development financial institution may 
 collect data described in section 701(a)(1) of that Act (15 
 U.S.C. 1691(a)(1)) from borrowers and applicants for credit for 
 the sole purpose and exclusive use to ensure that targeted 
 populations and low-income residents of investment areas are 
 adequately served and to report the level of service provided 
 to such populations and areas to the Fund; and
 ``(2) a community development financial institution that 
 collects the data described in paragraph (1) shall not be 
 subject to adverse action related to that collection by the 
 Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection or any other Federal 
 agency.''.

SEC. 6613. SUPPORTING YOUNG ENTREPRENEURS PROGRAM.

 Section 108 of the Riegle Community Development and Regulatory 
Improvement Act of 1994 (12 U.S.C. 4707), as amended by section 
331(a)(1), is further amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(j) Supporting Young Entrepreneurs Program.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Fund shall establish a Supporting 
 Young Entrepreneurs Program under which the Fund may provide 
 financial awards to the community development financial 
 institutions that the Fund determines have the best programs to 
 help young entrepreneurs get the start up capital needed to 
 start a small business, with a focus on supporting young women 
 entrepreneurs, entrepreneurs who are Black, Hispanic, Asian or 
 Pacific Islander, and Native American or Native Alaskan and 
 other historically underrepresented groups or first time 
 business owners.
 ``(2) No matching requirement.--The matching requirement 
 under subsection (e) shall not apply to awards made under this 
 subsection.
 ``(3) Funding.--In carrying out this subsection, the Fund 
 may use--
 ``(A) amounts in the Emergency Capital Investment 
 Fund, but not to exceed $100,000,000 in the aggregate; 
 and
 ``(B) such other funds as may be appropriated by 
 Congress to the Fund to carry out the Supporting Young 
 Entrepreneurs Program.''.

SEC. 6614. MAP OF MINORITY DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS AND COMMUNITY 
 DEVELOPMENT FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation 
with the CDFI Fund and the Federal banking agencies, shall establish an 
interactive, searchable map showing the geographic locations of the 
headquarters and branch locations of minority depository institutions, 
which shall be provided by the Federal banking agencies, and community 
development financial institutions that have been certified by the 
Secretary, including breakdowns by each State (including the District 
of Columbia and each territory of the United States), Tribal government 
entity, and congressional district. Such map shall also provide a link 
to the website of each such minority depository institution and 
community development financial institution.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) CDFI fund.--The term ``CDFI Fund'' means the Community 
 Development Financial Institutions Fund established under 
 section 104(a) of the Riegle Community Development and 
 Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994.
 (2) Community development financial institution.--The term 
 ``community development financial institution'' has the meaning 
 given in section 103 of the Riegle Community Development and 
 Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994.
 (3) Federal banking agency.--The term ``Federal banking 
 agency''--
 (A) has the meaning given in section 3 of the 
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act; and
 (B) means the National Credit Union Administration.
 (4) Minority depository institution.--The term ``minority 
 depository institution'' has the meaning given in section 
 308(b) of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and 
 Enforcement Act of 1989.

SEC. 6615. REPORT ON CERTIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT FINANCIAL 
 INSTITUTIONS.

 Section 117(a) of the Riegle Community Development and Regulatory 
Improvement Act of 1994 (12 U.S.C. 4716(a)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``The Fund'' and inserting the following:
 ``(1) In general.--The Fund'';
 (2) by striking ``and the Congress'' and inserting ``, the 
 Congress, and the public''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) Report on certified community development financial 
 institutions.--The annual report required under paragraph (1) 
 shall include a report on community development financial 
 institutions (`CDFIs') that have been certified by the 
 Secretary of the Treasury, including a summary with aggregate 
 data and analysis, to the fullest extent practicable, 
 regarding--
 ``(A) a list of the types of organizations that are 
 certified as CDFIs, and the number of each type of 
 organization;
 ``(B) the geographic location and capacity of 
 different types of certified CDFIs, including overall 
 impact breakdowns by each State (including the District 
 of Columbia and each territory of the United States) 
 and Tribal government entity;
 ``(C) the lines of business for different types of 
 certified CDFIs;
 ``(D) human resources and staffing information for 
 different types of certified CDFIs, including--
 ``(E) the types of development services provided by 
 different types of certified CDFIs;
 ``(F) the target markets of different types of 
 certified CDFIs and the amount of products and services 
 offered by CDFIs to those target markets, including--
 ``(i) the number and amount of loans and 
 loan guarantees made in those target markets;
 ``(ii) the number and amount of other 
 investments made in those target markets; and
 ``(iii) the number and amount of 
 development services offered in those target 
 markets; and
 ``(G) such other information as the Director of the 
 Fund may determine necessary to promote transparency of 
 the impact of different types of CDFIs, while carrying 
 out this report in a manner that seeks to minimize data 
 reporting requirements from certified CDFIs when 
 feasible, including utilizing information gathered from 
 other regulators under section 104(l).''.

SEC. 6616. CONSULTATION AND MINIMIZATION OF DATA REQUESTS.

 Section 104 of the Riegle Community Development and Regulatory 
Improvement Act of 1994 (12 U.S.C. 4703) is amended by adding at the 
end the following:
 ``(l) Consultation and Minimization of Data Requests.--
 ``(1) In general.--In carrying out its duties, the Fund 
 shall--
 ``(A) periodically, and no less frequent than once 
 a year, consult with the applicable Federal regulator 
 of certified CDFIs and applicants to be a certified 
 CDFI (`applicants)';
 ``(B) seek to gather any information necessary 
 related to Fund certification and award decisions on 
 certified CDFIs and applicants from the applicable 
 Federal regulator, and such regulators shall use 
 reasonable efforts to provide such information to the 
 Fund, to minimize duplicative data collection requests 
 made by the Fund of certified CDFIs and applicants and 
 to expedite certification, award, or other relevant 
 processes administered by the Fund.
 ``(2) Applicable federal regulator defined.--In this 
 subsection, the term `applicable Federal regulator' means--
 ``(A) with respect to a certified CDFI or an 
 applicant that is regulated by both an appropriate 
 Federal banking agency and the Bureau of Consumer 
 Financial Protection, the Bureau of Consumer Financial 
 Protection;
 ``(B) with respect to a certified CDFI or an 
 applicant that is not regulated by the Bureau of 
 Consumer Financial Protection, the appropriate Federal 
 banking agency for such applicant; or
 ``(C) the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, 
 with respect to a certified CDFI or an applicant--
 ``(i) that is not regulated by an 
 appropriate Federal banking agency; and
 ``(ii) that offers or provides consumer 
 financial products or services (as defined in 
 section 1002 of the Consumer Financial 
 Protection Act of 2010 (12 U.S.C. 5481).''.

SEC. 6617. ACCESS TO THE DISCOUNT WINDOW OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM 
 FOR MDIS AND CDFIS.

 Within 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System shall establish a process under 
which minority depository institutions and community development 
financial institutions may have access to the discount window, at the 
seasonal credit interest rate most recently published on the Federal 
Reserve Statistical Release on selected interest rates (daily or 
weekly).

SEC. 6618. STUDY ON SECURITIZATION BY CDFIS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation 
with the Community Development Financial Institutions Fund and such 
other Federal agencies as the Secretary determines appropriate, shall 
carry out a study on--
 (1) the use of securitization by CDFIs;
 (2) any barriers to the use of securitization as a source 
 of liquidity by CDFIs; and
 (3) any authorities available to the Government to support 
 the use of securitization by CDFIs to the extent it helps serve 
 underserved communities.
 (b) Report.--Not later than the end of the 1-year period beginning 
on the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall issue a 
report to the Committee on Financial Services of the House of 
Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban 
Affairs of the Senate containing--
 (1) all findings and determinations made in carrying out 
 the study required under subsection (a); and
 (2) any legislative or administrative recommendations of 
 the Secretary that would promote the responsible use of 
 securitization to help CDFIs in reaching more underserved 
 communities.
 (c) CDFI Defined.--The term ``CDFI'' has the meaning given the term 
``community development financial institution'' under section 103 of 
the Riegle Community Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 
1994.

 Subtitle B--Promoting New and Diverse Depository Institutions

SEC. 6621. STUDY AND STRATEGIC PLAN.

 (a) In General.--The Federal banking regulators shall jointly--
 (1) conduct a study about the challenges faced by proposed 
 depository institutions, including proposed minority depository 
 institutions, seeking de novo depository institution charters; 
 and
 (2) submit to the Committee on Financial Services of the 
 House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, 
 and Urban Affairs of the Senate and publish publically, not 
 later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this 
 section--
 (A) an analysis based on the study conducted 
 pursuant to paragraph (1);
 (B) any findings from the study conducted pursuant 
 to paragraph (1); and
 (C) any legislative recommendations that the 
 Federal banking regulators developed based on the study 
 conducted pursuant to paragraph (1).
 (b) Strategic Plan.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 18 months after the date of 
 the enactment of this section, the Federal banking regulators 
 shall jointly submit to the Committee on Financial Services of 
 the House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, 
 Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate and publish publically 
 a strategic plan based on the study conducted pursuant to 
 subsection (a) and designed to help proposed depository 
 institutions (including proposed minority depository 
 institutions) successfully apply for de novo depository 
 institution charters in a manner that promotes increased 
 availability of banking and financial services, safety and 
 soundness, consumer protection, community reinvestment, 
 financial stability, and a level playing field.
 (2) Contents of strategic plan.--The strategic plan 
 described in paragraph (1) shall--
 (A) promote the chartering of de novo depository 
 institutions, including--
 (i) proposed minority depository 
 institutions; and
 (ii) proposed depository institutions that 
 could be certified as community development 
 financial institutions; and
 (B) describe actions the Federal banking regulators 
 may take that would increase the number of depository 
 institutions located in geographic areas where 
 consumers lack access to a branch of a depository 
 institution.
 (c) Public Involvement.--When conducting the study and developing 
the strategic plan required by this section, the Federal banking 
regulators shall invite comments and other feedback from the public to 
inform the study and strategic plan.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Depository institution.--The term ``depository 
 institution'' has the meaning given in section 3 of the Federal 
 Deposit Insurance Act, and includes a ``Federal credit union'' 
 and a ``State credit union'' as such terms are defined, 
 respectively, under section 101 of the Federal Credit Union 
 Act.
 (2) Community development financial institution.--The term 
 ``community development financial institution'' has the meaning 
 given in section 103 of the Riegle Community Development and 
 Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994.
 (3) Federal banking regulators.--The term ``Federal banking 
 regulators'' means the Board of Governors of the Federal 
 Reserve System, the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal 
 Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Credit Union 
 Administration, and the Director of the Bureau of Consumer 
 Financial Protection.
 (4) Minority depository institution.--The term ``minority 
 depository institution'' has the meaning given in section 
 308(b) of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and 
 Enforcement Act of 1989.

 Subtitle C--Ensuring Diversity in Community Banking

SEC. 6631. SHORT TITLE.

 This subtitle may be cited as the ``Ensuring Diversity in Community 
Banking Act''.

SEC. 6632. SENSE OF CONGRESS ON FUNDING THE LOAN-LOSS RESERVE FUND FOR 
 SMALL DOLLAR LOANS.

 The sense of Congress is the following:
 (1) The Community Development Financial Institutions Fund 
 (the ``CDFI Fund'') is an agency of the Department of the 
 Treasury, and was established by the Riegle Community 
 Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994. The mission 
 of the CDFI Fund is ``to expand economic opportunity for 
 underserved people and communities by supporting the growth and 
 capacity of a national network of community development 
 lenders, investors, and financial service providers''. A 
 community development financial institution (a ``CDFI'') is a 
 specialized financial institution serving low-income 
 communities and a Community Development Entity (a ``CDE'') is a 
 domestic corporation or partnership that is an intermediary 
 vehicle for the provision of loans, investments, or financial 
 counseling in low-income communities. The CDFI Fund certifies 
 CDFIs and CDEs. Becoming a certified CDFI or CDE allows 
 organizations to participate in various CDFI Fund programs as 
 follows:
 (A) The Bank Enterprise Award Program, which 
 provides FDIC-insured depository institutions awards 
 for a demonstrated increase in lending and investments 
 in distressed communities and CDFIs.
 (B) The CDFI Program, which provides Financial and 
 Technical Assistance awards to CDFIs to reinvest in the 
 CDFI, and to build the capacity of the CDFI, including 
 financing product development and loan loss reserves.
 (C) The Native American CDFI Assistance Program, 
 which provides CDFIs and sponsoring entities Financial 
 and Technical Assistance awards to increase lending and 
 grow the number of CDFIs owned by Native Americans to 
 help build capacity of such CDFIs.
 (D) The New Market Tax Credit Program, which 
 provides tax credits for making equity investments in 
 CDEs that stimulate capital investments in low-income 
 communities.
 (E) The Capital Magnet Fund, which provides awards 
 to CDFIs and nonprofit affordable housing organizations 
 to finance affordable housing solutions and related 
 economic development activities.
 (F) The Bond Guarantee Program, a source of long-
 term, patient capital for CDFIs to expand lending and 
 investment capacity for community and economic 
 development purposes.
 (2) The Department of the Treasury is authorized to create 
 multi-year grant programs designed to encourage low-to-moderate 
 income individuals to establish accounts at federally insured 
 banks, and to improve low-to-moderate income individuals' 
 access to such accounts on reasonable terms.
 (3) Under this authority, grants to participants in CDFI 
 Fund programs may be used for loan-loss reserves and to 
 establish small-dollar loan programs by subsidizing related 
 losses. These grants also allow for the providing recipients 
 with the financial counseling and education necessary to 
 conduct transactions and manage their accounts. These loans 
 provide low-cost alternatives to payday loans and other 
 nontraditional forms of financing that often impose excessive 
 interest rates and fees on borrowers, and lead millions of 
 Americans to fall into debt traps. Small-dollar loans can only 
 be made pursuant to terms, conditions, and practices that are 
 reasonable for the individual consumer obtaining the loan.
 (4) Program participation is restricted to eligible 
 institutions, which are limited to organizations listed in 
 section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and exempt from 
 tax under 501(a) of such Code, federally insured depository 
 institutions, community development financial institutions and 
 State, local, or Tribal government entities.
 (5) According to the CDFI Fund, some programs attract as 
 much as $10 in private capital for every $1 invested by the 
 CDFI Fund. The Administration and the Congress should 
 prioritize appropriation of funds for the loan loss reserve 
 fund and technical assistance programs administered by the 
 Community Development Financial Institution Fund.

SEC. 6633. DEFINITIONS.

 In this subtitle:
 (1) Community development financial institution.--The term 
 ``community development financial institution'' has the meaning 
 given under section 103 of the Riegle Community Development and 
 Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994 (12 U.S.C. 4702).
 (2) Minority depository institution.--The term ``minority 
 depository institution'' has the meaning given under section 
 308 of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and 
 Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 U.S.C. 1463 note), as amended by 
 this Act.

SEC. 6634. INCLUSION OF WOMEN'S BANKS IN THE DEFINITION OF MINORITY 
 DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION.

 Section 308(b)(1) of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, 
and Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 U.S.C. 1463 note) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) as 
 clauses (i), (ii), and (iii), respectively;
 (2) by striking ``means any'' and inserting the following: 
 ``means--
 ``(A) any''; and
 (3) in clause (iii) (as so redesignated), by striking the 
 period at the end and inserting ``; or''; and
 (4) by inserting at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(B) any bank described in clause (i), (ii), or 
 (iii) of section 19(b)(1)(A) of the Federal Reserve 
 Act--
 ``(i) more than 50 percent of the 
 outstanding shares of which are held by 1 or 
 more women; and
 ``(ii) the majority of the directors on the 
 board of directors of which are women.''.

SEC. 6635. ESTABLISHMENT OF IMPACT BANK DESIGNATION.

 (a) In General.--Each Federal banking agency shall establish a 
program under which a depository institution with total consolidated 
assets of less than $10,000,000,000 may elect to be designated as an 
impact bank if the total dollar value of the loans extended by such 
depository institution to low-income borrowers is greater than or equal 
to 50 percent of the assets of such bank.
 (b) Notification of Eligibility.--Based on data obtained through 
examinations of depository institutions, the appropriate Federal 
banking agency shall notify a depository institution if the institution 
is eligible to be designated as an impact bank.
 (c) Application.--Regardless of whether or not it has received a 
notice of eligibility under subsection (b), a depository institution 
may submit an application to the appropriate Federal banking agency--
 (1) requesting to be designated as an impact bank; and
 (2) demonstrating that the depository institution meets the 
 applicable qualifications.
 (d) Limitation on Additional Data Requirements.--The Federal 
banking agencies may only impose additional data collection 
requirements on a depository institution under this section if such 
data is--
 (1) necessary to process an application submitted by the 
 depository institution to be designated an impact bank; or
 (2) with respect to a depository institution that is 
 designated as an impact bank, necessary to ensure the 
 depository institution's ongoing qualifications to maintain 
 such designation.
 (e) Removal of Designation.--If the appropriate Federal banking 
agency determines that a depository institution designated as an impact 
bank no longer meets the criteria for such designation, the appropriate 
Federal banking agency shall rescind the designation and notify the 
depository institution of such rescission.
 (f) Reconsideration of Designation; Appeals.--Under such procedures 
as the Federal banking agencies may establish, a depository institution 
may--
 (1) submit to the appropriate Federal banking agency a 
 request to reconsider a determination that such depository 
 institution no longer meets the criteria for the designation; 
 or
 (2) file an appeal of such determination.
 (g) Rulemaking.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Federal banking agencies shall jointly issue 
rules to carry out the requirements of this section, including by 
providing a definition of a low-income borrower.
 (h) Reports.--Each Federal banking agency shall submit an annual 
report to the Congress containing a description of actions taken to 
carry out this section.
 (i) Federal Deposit Insurance Act Definitions.--In this section, 
the terms ``depository institution'', ``appropriate Federal banking 
agency'', and ``Federal banking agency'' have the meanings given such 
terms, respectively, in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act 
(12 U.S.C. 1813).

SEC. 6636. MINORITY DEPOSITORIES ADVISORY COMMITTEES.

 (a) Establishment.--Each covered regulator shall establish an 
advisory committee to be called the ``Minority Depositories Advisory 
Committee''.
 (b) Duties.--Each Minority Depositories Advisory Committee shall 
provide advice to the respective covered regulator on meeting the goals 
established by section 308 of the Financial Institutions Reform, 
Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 U.S.C. 1463 note) to preserve 
the present number of covered minority institutions, preserve the 
minority character of minority-owned institutions in cases involving 
mergers or acquisitions, provide technical assistance, and encourage 
the creation of new covered minority institutions. The scope of the 
work of each such Minority Depositories Advisory Committee shall 
include an assessment of the current condition of covered minority 
institutions, what regulatory changes or other steps the respective 
agencies may be able to take to fulfill the requirements of such 
section 308, and other issues of concern to covered minority 
institutions.
 (c) Membership.--
 (1) In general.--Each Minority Depositories Advisory 
 Committee shall consist of no more than 10 members, who--
 (A) shall serve for one two-year term;
 (B) shall serve as a representative of a depository 
 institution or an insured credit union with respect to 
 which the respective covered regulator is the covered 
 regulator of such depository institution or insured 
 credit union; and
 (C) shall not receive pay by reason of their 
 service on the advisory committee, but may receive 
 travel or transportation expenses in accordance with 
 section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
 (2) Diversity.--To the extent practicable, each covered 
 regulator shall ensure that the members of the Minority 
 Depositories Advisory Committee of such agency reflect the 
 diversity of covered minority institutions.
 (d) Meetings.--
 (1) In general.--Each Minority Depositories Advisory 
 Committee shall meet not less frequently than twice each year.
 (2) Notice and invitations.--Each Minority Depositories 
 Advisory Committee shall--
 (A) notify the Committee on Financial Services of 
 the House of Representatives and the Committee on 
 Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate in 
 advance of each meeting of the Minority Depositories 
 Advisory Committee; and
 (B) invite the attendance at each meeting of the 
 Minority Depositories Advisory Committee of--
 (i) one member of the majority party and 
 one member of the minority party of the 
 Committee on Financial Services of the House of 
 Representatives and the Committee on Banking, 
 Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate; and
 (ii) one member of the majority party and 
 one member of the minority party of any 
 relevant subcommittees of such committees.
 (e) No Termination of Advisory Committees.--The termination 
requirements under section 14 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 
U.S.C. app.) shall not apply to a Minority Depositories Advisory 
Committee established pursuant to this section.
 (f) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Covered regulator.--The term ``covered regulator'' 
 means the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors 
 of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Corporation, and the National Credit Union Administration.
 (2) Covered minority institution.--The term ``covered 
 minority institution'' means a minority depository institution 
 (as defined in section 308(b) of the Financial Institutions 
 Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 U.S.C. 1463 
 note)).
 (3) Depository institution.--The term ``depository 
 institution'' has the meaning given under section 3 of the 
 Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813).
 (4) Insured credit union.--The term ``insured credit 
 union'' has the meaning given in section 101 of the Federal 
 Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1752).
 (g) Technical Amendment.--Section 308(b) of the Financial 
Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 U.S.C. 
1463 note) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(3) Depository institution.--The term `depository 
 institution' means an `insured depository institution' (as 
 defined in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 
 U.S.C. 1813)) and an insured credit union (as defined in 
 section 101 of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 
 1752)).''.

SEC. 6637. FEDERAL DEPOSITS IN MINORITY DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 308 of the Financial Institutions Reform, 
Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 U.S.C. 1463 note) is 
amended--
 (1) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(d) Federal Deposits.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall ensure 
that deposits made by Federal agencies in minority depository 
institutions and impact banks are collateralized or insured, as 
determined by the Secretary. Such deposits shall include reciprocal 
deposits as defined in section 337.6(e)(2)(v) of title 12, Code of 
Federal Regulations (as in effect on March 6, 2019).''; and
 (2) in subsection (b), as amended by section 6(g), by 
 adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Impact bank.--The term `impact bank' means a 
 depository institution designated by the appropriate Federal 
 banking agency pursuant to section 6635 of the Ensuring 
 Diversity in Community Banking Act.''.
 (b) Technical Amendments.--Section 308 of the Financial 
Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 U.S.C. 
1463 note) is amended--
 (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking 
 ``section--'' and inserting ``section:''; and
 (2) in the paragraph heading for paragraph (1), by striking 
 ``financial'' and inserting ``depository''.

SEC. 6638. MINORITY BANK DEPOSIT PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--Section 1204 of the Financial Institutions Reform, 
Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 U.S.C. 1811 note) is amended 
to read as follows:

``SEC. 1204. EXPANSION OF USE OF MINORITY DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS.

 ``(a) Minority Bank Deposit Program.--
 ``(1) Establishment.--There is established a program to be 
 known as the `Minority Bank Deposit Program' to expand the use 
 of minority depository institutions.
 ``(2) Administration.--The Secretary of the Treasury, 
 acting through the Fiscal Service, shall--
 ``(A) on application by a depository institution or 
 credit union, certify whether such depository 
 institution or credit union is a minority depository 
 institution;
 ``(B) maintain and publish a list of all depository 
 institutions and credit unions that have been certified 
 pursuant to subparagraph (A); and
 ``(C) periodically distribute the list described in 
 subparagraph (B) to--
 ``(i) all Federal departments and agencies;
 ``(ii) interested State and local 
 governments; and
 ``(iii) interested private sector 
 companies.
 ``(3) Inclusion of certain entities on list.--A depository 
 institution or credit union that, on the date of the enactment 
 of this section, has a current certification from the Secretary 
 of the Treasury stating that such depository institution or 
 credit union is a minority depository institution shall be 
 included on the list described under paragraph (2)(B).
 ``(b) Expanded Use Among Federal Departments and Agencies.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 establishment of the program described in subsection (a), the 
 head of each Federal department or agency shall develop and 
 implement standards and procedures to prioritize, to the 
 maximum extent possible as permitted by law and consistent with 
 principles of sound financial management, the use of minority 
 depository institutions to hold the deposits of each such 
 department or agency.
 ``(2) Report to congress.--Not later than 2 years after the 
 establishment of the program described in subsection (a), and 
 annually thereafter, the head of each Federal department or 
 agency shall submit to Congress a report on the actions taken 
 to increase the use of minority depository institutions to hold 
 the deposits of each such department or agency.
 ``(c) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
 ``(1) Credit union.--The term `credit union' has the 
 meaning given the term `insured credit union' in section 101 of 
 the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1752).
 ``(2) Depository institution.--The term `depository 
 institution' has the meaning given in section 3 of the Federal 
 Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813).
 ``(3) Minority depository institution.--The term `minority 
 depository institution' has the meaning given that term under 
 section 308 of this Act.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--The following provisions are amended by 
striking ``1204(c)(3)'' and inserting ``1204(c)'':
 (1) Section 808(b)(3) of the Community Reinvestment Act of 
 1977 (12 U.S.C. 2907(b)(3)).
 (2) Section 40(g)(1)(B) of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1831q(g)(1)(B)).
 (3) Section 704B(h)(4) of the Equal Credit Opportunity Act 
 (15 U.S.C. 1691c-2(h)(4)).

SEC. 6639. DIVERSITY REPORT AND BEST PRACTICES.

 (a) Annual Report.--Each covered regulator shall submit to Congress 
an annual report on diversity including the following:
 (1) Data, based on voluntary self-identification, on the 
 racial, ethnic, and gender composition of the examiners of each 
 covered regulator, disaggregated by length of time served as an 
 examiner.
 (2) The status of any examiners of covered regulators, 
 based on voluntary self-identification, as a veteran.
 (3) Whether any covered regulator, as of the date on which 
 the report required under this section is submitted, has 
 adopted a policy, plan, or strategy to promote racial, ethnic, 
 and gender diversity among examiners of the covered regulator.
 (4) Whether any special training is developed and provided 
 for examiners related specifically to working with depository 
 institutions and credit unions that serve communities that are 
 predominantly minorities, low income, or rural, and the key 
 focus of such training.
 (b) Best Practices.--Each Office of Minority and Women Inclusion of 
a covered regulator shall develop, provide to the head of the covered 
regulator, and make publicly available best practices--
 (1) for increasing the diversity of candidates applying for 
 examiner positions, including through outreach efforts to 
 recruit diverse candidate to apply for entry-level examiner 
 positions; and
 (2) for retaining and providing fair consideration for 
 promotions within the examiner staff for purposes of achieving 
 diversity among examiners.
 (c) Covered Regulator Defined.--In this section, the term ``covered 
regulator'' means the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation, and the National Credit Union Administration.

SEC. 6640. INVESTMENTS IN MINORITY DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS AND IMPACT 
 BANKS.

 (a) Control for Certain Institutions.--Section 7(j)(8)(B) of the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1817(j)(8)(B)) is amended to 
read as follows:
 ``(B) `control' means the power, directly or indirectly--
 ``(i) to direct the management or policies of an 
 insured depository institution; or
 ``(ii)(I) with respect to an insured depository 
 institution, of a person to vote 25 per centum or more 
 of any class of voting securities of such institution; 
 or
 ``(II) with respect to an insured depository 
 institution that is an impact bank (as designated 
 pursuant to section 6635 of the Ensuring Diversity in 
 Community Banking Act) or a minority depository 
 institution (as defined in section 308(b) of the 
 Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and 
 Enforcement Act of 1989), of an individual to vote 30 
 percent or more of any class of voting securities of 
 such an impact bank or a minority depository 
 institution.''.
 (b) Rulemaking.--The Federal banking agencies (as defined in 
section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1813)) shall 
jointly issue rules for de novo minority depository institutions and de 
novo impact banks (as designated pursuant to section 6635) to allow 3 
years to meet the capital requirements otherwise applicable to minority 
depository institutions and impact banks.
 (c) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Federal banking agencies shall jointly submit to 
Congress a report on--
 (1) the principal causes for the low number of de novo 
 minority depository institutions during the 10-year period 
 preceding the date of the report;
 (2) the main challenges to the creation of de novo minority 
 depository institutions and de novo impact banks; and
 (3) regulatory and legislative considerations to promote 
 the establishment of de novo minority depository institutions 
 and de novo impact banks.

SEC. 6641. REPORT ON COVERED MENTOR-PROTEGE PROGRAMS.

 (a) Report.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the 
enactment of this Act and annually thereafter, the Secretary of the 
Treasury shall submit to Congress a report on participants in a covered 
mentor-protege program, including--
 (1) an analysis of outcomes of such program;
 (2) the number of minority depository institutions that are 
 eligible to participate in such program but do not have large 
 financial institution mentors; and
 (3) recommendations for how to match such minority 
 depository institutions with large financial institution 
 mentors.
 (b) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Covered mentor-protege program.--The term ``covered 
 mentor-protege program'' means a mentor-protege program 
 established by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to 
 section 45 of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 657r).
 (2) Large financial institution.--The term ``large 
 financial institution'' means any entity--
 (A) regulated by the Comptroller of the Currency, 
 the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, or the 
 National Credit Union Administration; and
 (B) that has total consolidated assets greater than 
 or equal to $50,000,000,000.

SEC. 6642. CUSTODIAL DEPOSIT PROGRAM FOR COVERED MINORITY DEPOSITORY 
 INSTITUTIONS AND IMPACT BANKS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury shall issue rules 
establishing a custodial deposit program under which a covered bank may 
receive deposits from a qualifying account.
 (b) Requirements.--In issuing rules under subsection (a), the 
Secretary of the Treasury shall--
 (1) consult with the Federal banking agencies;
 (2) ensure each covered bank participating in the program 
 established under this section--
 (A) has appropriate policies relating to management 
 of assets, including measures to ensure the safety and 
 soundness of each such covered bank; and
 (B) is compliant with applicable law; and
 (3) ensure, to the extent practicable that the rules do not 
 conflict with goals described in section 308(a) of the 
 Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 
 1989 (12 U.S.C. 1463 note).
 (c) Limitations.--
 (1) Deposits.--With respect to the funds of an individual 
 qualifying account, an entity may not deposit an amount greater 
 than the insured amount in a single covered bank.
 (2) Total deposits.--The total amount of funds deposited in 
 a covered bank under the custodial deposit program described 
 under this section may not exceed the lesser of--
 (A) 10 percent of the average amount of deposits 
 held by such covered bank in the previous quarter; or
 (B) $100,000,000 (as adjusted for inflation).
 (d) Report.--Each quarter, the Secretary of the Treasury shall 
submit to Congress a report on the implementation of the program 
established under this section including information identifying 
participating covered banks and the total amount of deposits received 
by covered banks under the program, including breakdowns by each State 
(including the District of Columbia and each territory of the United 
States) and Tribal government entity.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Covered bank.--The term ``covered bank'' means--
 (A) a minority depository institution that is well 
 capitalized, as defined by the appropriate Federal 
 banking agency; or
 (B) a depository institution designated pursuant to 
 section 4935 that is well capitalized, as defined by 
 the appropriate Federal banking agency.
 (2) Insured amount.--The term ``insured amount'' means the 
 amount that is the greater of--
 (A) the standard maximum deposit insurance amount 
 (as defined in section 11(a)(1)(E) of the Federal 
 Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1821(a)(1)(E))); or
 (B) such higher amount negotiated between the 
 Secretary of the Treasury and the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Corporation under which the Corporation will 
 insure all deposits of such higher amount.
 (3) Federal banking agencies.--The terms ``appropriate 
 Federal banking agency'' and ``Federal banking agencies'' have 
 the meaning given those terms, respectively, under section 3 of 
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
 (4) Qualifying account.--The term ``qualifying account'' 
 means any account established in the Department of the Treasury 
 that--
 (A) is controlled by the Secretary; and
 (B) is expected to maintain a balance greater than 
 $200,000,000 for the following 24-month period.

SEC. 6643. STREAMLINED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT FINANCIAL INSTITUTION 
 APPLICATIONS AND REPORTING.

 (a) Application Processes.--Not later than 12 months after the date 
of the enactment of this Act and with respect to any person having 
assets under $3,000,000,000 that submits an application for deposit 
insurance with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation that could 
also become a community development financial institution, the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation, in consultation with the Administrator 
of the Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, shall--
 (1) develop systems and procedures to record necessary 
 information to allow the Administrator to conduct preliminary 
 analysis for such person to also become a community development 
 financial institution; and
 (2) develop procedures to streamline the application and 
 annual certification processes and to reduce costs for such 
 person to become, and maintain certification as, a community 
 development financial institution.
 (b) Implementation Report.--Not later than 18 months after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
shall submit to Congress a report describing the systems and procedures 
required under subsection (a).
 (c) Annual Report.--
 (1) In general.--Section 17(a)(1) of the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1827(a)(1)) is amended--
 (A) in subparagraph (E), by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (B) by redesignating subparagraph (F) as 
 subparagraph (G);
 (C) by inserting after subparagraph (E) the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(F) applicants for deposit insurance that could 
 also become a community development financial 
 institution (as defined in section 103 of the Riegle 
 Community Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 
 1994), a minority depository institution (as defined in 
 section 308 of the Financial Institutions Reform, 
 Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989), or an impact 
 bank (as designated pursuant to section 6635 of the 
 Ensuring Diversity in Community Banking Act); and''.
 (2) Application.--The amendment made by this subsection 
 shall apply with respect to the first report to be submitted 
 after the date that is 2 years after the date of the enactment 
 of this Act.

SEC. 6644. TASK FORCE ON LENDING TO SMALL BUSINESS CONCERNS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Small Business 
Administration shall establish a task force to examine methods for 
improving relationships between the Small Business Administration and 
community development financial institutions, minority depository 
institutions, and impact banks (as designated pursuant to section 6635) 
to increase the volume of loans provided by such institutions to small 
business concerns (as defined under section 3 of the Small Business Act 
(15 U.S.C. 632)).
 (b) Report to Congress.--Not later than 18 months after the 
establishment of the task force described in subsection (a), the 
Administrator of the Small Business Administration shall submit to 
Congress a report on the findings of such task force.

SEC. 6645. DISCRETIONARY SURPLUS FUND.

 (a) In General.--Subparagraph (A) of section 7(a)(3) of the Federal 
Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 289(a)(3)(A)) is amended by reducing the dollar 
figure described in such subparagraph by $1,920,000,000.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
take effect on September 30, 2022.

 Subtitle D--Expanding Opportunity for Minority Depository Institutions

SEC. 6651. ESTABLISHMENT OF FINANCIAL AGENT MENTOR-PROTEGE PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--Section 308 of the Financial Institutions Reform, 
Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 U.S.C. 1463 note) is amended 
by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(d) Financial Agent Mentor-Protege Program.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall 
 establish a program to be known as the `Financial Agent Mentor-
 Protege Program' (in this subsection referred to as the 
 `Program') under which a financial agent designated by the 
 Secretary or a large financial institution may serve as a 
 mentor, under guidance or regulations prescribed by the 
 Secretary, to a small financial institution to allow such small 
 financial institution--
 ``(A) to be prepared to perform as a financial 
 agent; or
 ``(B) to improve capacity to provide services to 
 the customers of the small financial institution.
 ``(2) Outreach.--The Secretary shall hold outreach events 
 to promote the participation of financial agents, large 
 financial institutions, and small financial institutions in the 
 Program at least once a year.
 ``(3) Exclusion.--The Secretary shall issue guidance or 
 regulations to establish a process under which a financial 
 agent, large financial institution, or small financial 
 institution may be excluded from participation in the Program.
 ``(4) Report.--The Office of Minority and Women Inclusion 
 of the Department of the Treasury shall include in the report 
 submitted to Congress under section 342(e) of the Dodd-Frank 
 Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act information 
 pertaining to the Program, including--
 ``(A) the number of financial agents, large 
 financial institutions, and small financial 
 institutions participating in such Program, including 
 breakdowns by each State (including the District of 
 Columbia and each territory of the United States), 
 Tribal government entity, and congressional district; 
 and
 ``(B) the number of outreach events described in 
 paragraph (2) held during the year covered by such 
 report.
 ``(5) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Financial agent.--The term `financial agent' 
 means any national banking association designated by 
 the Secretary of the Treasury to be employed as a 
 financial agent of the Government.
 ``(B) Large financial institution.--The term `large 
 financial institution' means any entity regulated by 
 the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors 
 of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Corporation, or the National Credit Union 
 Administration that has total consolidated assets 
 greater than or equal to $50,000,000,000.
 ``(C) Small financial institution.--The term `small 
 financial institution' means--
 ``(i) any entity regulated by the 
 Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of 
 Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the 
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, or the 
 National Credit Union Administration that has 
 total consolidated assets lesser than or equal 
 to $2,000,000,000; or
 ``(ii) a minority depository 
 institution.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--This section and the amendments made by this 
section shall take effect 90 days after the date of the enactment of 
this Act.

 Subtitle E--CDFI Bond Guarantee Program Improvement

SEC. 6661. SENSE OF CONGRESS.

 It is the sense of Congress that the authority to guarantee bonds 
under section 114A of the Community Development Banking and Financial 
Institutions Act of 1994 (12 U.S.C. 4713a) (commonly referred to as the 
``CDFI Bond Guarantee Program'') provides community development 
financial institutions with a sustainable source of long-term capital 
and furthers the mission of the Community Development Financial 
Institutions Fund (established under section 104(a) of such Act (12 
U.S.C. 4703(a)) to increase economic opportunity and promote community 
development investments for underserved populations and distressed 
communities in the United States.

SEC. 6662. GUARANTEES FOR BONDS AND NOTES ISSUED FOR COMMUNITY OR 
 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PURPOSES.

 Section 114A of the Community Development Banking and Financial 
Institutions Act of 1994 (12 U.S.C. 4713a) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (c)(2), by striking ``, multiplied by an 
 amount equal to the outstanding principal balance of issued 
 notes or bonds'';
 (2) in subsection (e)(2)(B), by striking ``$100,000,000'' 
 and inserting ``$25,000,000''; and
 (3) in subsection (k), by striking ``September 30, 2014'' 
 and inserting ``the date that is 4 years after the date of 
 enactment of the Promoting and Advancing Communities of Color 
 Through Inclusive Lending Act''.

SEC. 6663. REPORT ON THE CDFI BOND GUARANTEE PROGRAM.

 Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, and 
not later than 3 years after such date of enactment, the Secretary of 
the Treasury shall issue a report to the Committee on Financial 
Services of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, 
Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate on the effectiveness of the 
CDFI bond guarantee program established under section 114A of the 
Community Development Banking and Financial Institutions Act of 1994 
(12 U.S.C. 4713a).

 TITLE LXVII--HOMELAND SECURITY PROVISIONS

 Subtitle A--Strengthening Security of Our Communities

SEC. 6701. NONPROFIT SECURITY GRANT PROGRAM IMPROVEMENT.

 (a) In General.--Section 2009 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 
(6 U.S.C. 609a) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by inserting ``and threats'' before 
 the period at the end;
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by 
 striking ``this subsection (a)'' and inserting ``this 
 subsection''; and
 (B) by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows:
 ``(2) determined by the Secretary to be at risk of 
 terrorist attacks and threats.'';
 (3) in subsection (c)--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) 
 as subparagraphs (A), (B), and (E), respectively, and 
 moving such subparagraphs, as so redesignated, two ems 
 to the right;
 (B) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), as so 
 redesignated, by striking ``The recipient'' and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(1) In general.--The recipient'';
 (C) in subparagraph (A), as so redesignated, by 
 striking ``equipment and inspection and screening 
 systems'' and inserting ``equipment, inspection and 
 screening systems, and alteration or remodeling of 
 existing buildings or physical facilities'';
 (D) by inserting after subparagraph (B), as so 
 redesignated, the following new subparagraphs:
 ``(C) Facility security personnel costs, including 
 costs associated with contracted security.
 ``(D) Expenses directly related to the 
 administration of the grant, except that such expenses 
 may not exceed five percent of the amount of the 
 grant.''; and
 (E) by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(2) Retention.--Each State through which a recipient 
 receives a grant under this section may retain up to five 
 percent of each grant for expenses directly related to the 
 administration of the grant.'';
 (4) in subsection (e)--
 (A) by striking ``2020 through 2024'' and inserting 
 ``2022 through 2028''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 sentence: ``Each such report shall also include 
 information on the number of applications submitted by 
 eligible nonprofit organizations to each State, the 
 number of applications submitted by each State to the 
 Administrator, and the operations of the Nonprofit 
 Security Grant Program Office, including staffing 
 resources and efforts with respect to subparagraphs (A) 
 through (E) of subsection (c)(1).'';
 (5) by redesignating subsection (f) as subsection (j);
 (6) by inserting after subsection (e) the following new 
 subsections:
 ``(f) Administration.--Not later than 120 days after the date of 
the enactment of this subsection, the Administrator shall establish 
within the Federal Emergency Management Agency a program office for the 
Program (in this section referred to as the `program office'). The 
program office shall be headed by a senior official of the Agency. The 
Administrator shall administer the Program (including, where 
appropriate, in coordination with States), including relating to the 
following:
 ``(1) Outreach, engagement, education, and technical 
 assistance and support to eligible nonprofit organizations 
 described in subsection (b), with particular attention to such 
 organizations in underserved communities, prior to, during, and 
 after the awarding of grants, including web-based training 
 videos for eligible nonprofit organizations that provide 
 guidance on preparing an application and the environmental 
 planning and historic preservation process.
 ``(2) Establishment of mechanisms to ensure program office 
 processes are conducted in accordance with constitutional, 
 statutory, regulatory, and other legal and agency policy 
 requirements that protect civil rights and civil liberties and, 
 to the maximum extent practicable, advance equity for members 
 of underserved communities.
 ``(3) Establishment of mechanisms for the Administrator to 
 provide feedback to eligible nonprofit organizations that do 
 not receive grants.
 ``(4) Establishment of mechanisms to collect data to 
 measure the effectiveness of grants under the Program.
 ``(5) Establishment and enforcement of standardized 
 baseline operational requirements for States, including 
 requirements for States to eliminate or prevent any 
 administrative or operational obstacles that may impact 
 eligible nonprofit organizations described in subsection (b) 
 from receiving grants under the Program.
 ``(6) Carrying out efforts to prevent waste, fraud, and 
 abuse, including through audits of grantees.
 ``(g) Grant Guidelines.--For each fiscal year, prior to awarding 
grants under this section, the Administrator--
 ``(1) shall publish guidelines, including a notice of 
 funding opportunity or similar announcement, as the 
 Administrator determines appropriate; and
 ``(2) may prohibit States from closing application 
 processes prior to the publication of such guidelines.
 ``(h) Allocation Requirements.--
 ``(1) In general.--In awarding grants under this section, 
 the Administrator shall ensure that--
 ``(A) 50 percent of amounts appropriated pursuant 
 to the authorization of appropriations under subsection 
 (k) is provided to eligible recipients located in high-
 risk urban areas that receive funding under section 
 2003 in the current fiscal year or received such 
 funding in any of the preceding ten fiscal years, 
 inclusive of any amounts States may retain pursuant to 
 paragraph (2) of subsection (c); and
 ``(B) 50 percent of amounts appropriated pursuant 
 to the authorizations of appropriations under 
 subsection (k) is provided to eligible recipients 
 located in jurisdictions not receiving funding under 
 section 2003 in the current fiscal year or have not 
 received such funding in any of the preceding ten 
 fiscal years, inclusive of any amounts States may 
 retain pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection (c).
 ``(2) Exception.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the 
 Administrator may allocate a different percentage if the 
 Administrator does not receive a sufficient number of 
 applications from eligible recipients to meet the allocation 
 percentages described in either subparagraph (A) or (B) of such 
 paragraph. If the Administrator exercises the authorization 
 under this paragraph, the Administrator shall, not later than 
 30 days after such exercise, report to the Committee on 
 Homeland Security of the House of Representatives and the 
 Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the 
 Senate regarding such exercise.
 ``(i) Paperwork Reduction Act.--Chapter 35 of title 44, United 
States Code (commonly known as the `Paperwork Reduction Act'), shall 
not apply to any changes to the application materials, Program forms, 
or other core Program documentation intended to enhance participation 
by eligible nonprofit organizations in the Program.'';
 (7) in subsection (j), as so redesignated--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``$75 million for 
 each of fiscal years 2020 through 2024'' and inserting 
 ``$75,000,000 for fiscal year 2023 and $500,000,000 for 
 each of fiscal years 2024 through 2028''; and
 (B) by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows:
 ``(2) Operations and maintenance.--Of the amounts 
 authorized to be appropriated pursuant to paragraph (1), not 
 more than five percent is authorized--
 ``(A) to operate the program office; and
 ``(B) for other costs associated with the 
 management, administration, and evaluation of the 
 Program.''; and
 (8) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(k) Treatment.--Nonprofit organizations determined by the 
Secretary to be at risk of extremist attacks other than terrorist 
attacks and threats under subsection (a) are deemed to satisfy the 
conditions specified in subsection (b) if protecting such organizations 
against such other extremist attacks would help protect such 
organizations against such terrorist attacks and threats.''.
 (b) Plan.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management 
Agency shall submit to the Committee on Homeland Security of the House 
of Representatives and the Committee on Homeland Security and 
Governmental Affairs of the Senate a plan for the administration of the 
program office for the Nonprofit Security Grant Program established 
under subsection (f) of section 2009 of the Homeland Security Act 2002 
(6 U.S.C. 609a), as amended by subsection (a), including a staffing 
plan for such program office.
 (c) Conforming Amendment.--Section 2008 of the Homeland Security 
Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 609) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (c) by striking ``sections 2003 and 
 2004'' and inserting ``sections 2003, 2004, and 2009''; and
 (2) in subsection (e), by striking ``section 2003 or 2004'' 
 and inserting ``sections 2003, 2004, or 2009''.

SEC. 6702. NATIONAL COMPUTER FORENSICS INSTITUTE REAUTHORIZATION.

 (a) In General.--Section 822 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 
(6 U.S.C. 383) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in the subsection heading, by striking ``In 
 General'' and inserting ``In General; Mission'';
 (B) by striking ``2022'' and inserting ``2032''; 
 and
 (C) by striking the second sentence and inserting 
 ``The Institute's mission shall be to educate, train, 
 and equip State, local, territorial, and Tribal law 
 enforcement officers, prosecutors, judges, participants 
 in the United States Secret Service's network of cyber 
 fraud task forces, and other appropriate individuals 
 regarding the investigation and prevention of 
 cybersecurity incidents, electronic crimes, and related 
 cybersecurity threats, including through the 
 dissemination of homeland security information, in 
 accordance with relevant Department guidance regarding 
 privacy, civil rights, and civil liberties 
 protections.'';
 (2) by redesignating subsections (c) through (f) as 
 subsections (d) through (g), respectively;
 (3) by striking subsection (b) and inserting the following 
 new subsections:
 ``(b) Curriculum.--In furtherance of subsection (a), all education 
and training of the Institute shall be conducted in accordance with 
relevant Federal law and policy regarding privacy, civil rights, and 
civil liberties protections, including best practices for safeguarding 
data privacy and fair information practice principles. Education and 
training provided pursuant to subsection (a) shall relate to the 
following:
 ``(1) Investigating and preventing cybersecurity incidents, 
 electronic crimes, and related cybersecurity threats, including 
 relating to instances involving illicit use of digital assets 
 and emerging trends in cybersecurity and electronic crime.
 ``(2) Conducting forensic examinations of computers, mobile 
 devices, and other information systems.
 ``(3) Prosecutorial and judicial considerations related to 
 cybersecurity incidents, electronic crimes, related 
 cybersecurity threats, and forensic examinations of computers, 
 mobile devices, and other information systems.
 ``(4) Methods to obtain, process, store, and admit digital 
 evidence in court.
 ``(c) Research and Development.--In furtherance of subsection (a), 
the Institute shall research, develop, and share information relating 
to investigating cybersecurity incidents, electronic crimes, and 
related cybersecurity threats that prioritize best practices for 
forensic examinations of computers, mobile devices, and other 
information systems. Such information may include training on methods 
to investigate ransomware and other threats involving the use of 
digital assets.'';
 (4) in subsection (d), as so redesignated--
 (A) by striking ``cyber and electronic crime and 
 related threats is shared with State, local, tribal, 
 and territorial law enforcement officers and 
 prosecutors'' and inserting ``cybersecurity incidents, 
 electronic crimes, and related cybersecurity threats is 
 shared with recipients of education and training 
 provided pursuant to subsection (a)''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following new 
 sentence: ``The Institute shall prioritize providing 
 education and training to individuals from 
 geographically-diverse jurisdictions throughout the 
 United States.'';
 (5) in subsection (e), as so redesignated--
 (A) by striking ``State, local, tribal, and 
 territorial law enforcement officers'' and inserting 
 ``recipients of education and training provided 
 pursuant to subsection (a)''; and
 (B) by striking ``necessary to conduct cyber and 
 electronic crime and related threat investigations and 
 computer and mobile device forensic examinations'' and 
 inserting ``for investigating and preventing 
 cybersecurity incidents, electronic crimes, related 
 cybersecurity threats, and for forensic examinations of 
 computers, mobile devices, and other information 
 systems'';
 (6) in subsection (f), as so redesignated--
 (A) by amending the heading to read as follows: 
 ``Cyber Fraud Task Forces'';
 (B) by striking ``Electronic Crime'' and inserting 
 ``Cyber Fraud'';
 (C) by striking ``State, local, tribal, and 
 territorial law enforcement officers'' and inserting 
 ``recipients of education and training provided 
 pursuant to subsection (a)''; and
 (D) by striking ``at'' and inserting ``by'';
 (7) by redesignating subsection (g), as redesignated 
 pursuant to paragraph (2), as subsection (j); and
 (8) by inserting after subsection (f), as so redesignated, 
 the following new subsections:
 ``(g) Expenses.--The Director of the United States Secret Service 
may pay for all or a part of the education, training, or equipment 
provided by the Institute, including relating to the travel, 
transportation, and subsistence expenses of recipients of education and 
training provided pursuant to subsection (a).
 ``(h) Annual Reports to Congress.--The Secretary shall include in 
the annual report required pursuant to section 1116 of title 31, United 
States Code, information regarding the activities of the Institute, 
including relating to the following:
 ``(1) Activities of the Institute, including, where 
 possible, an identification of jurisdictions with recipients of 
 education and training provided pursuant to subsection (a) of 
 this section during such year and information relating to the 
 costs associated with such education and training.
 ``(2) Any information regarding projected future demand for 
 such education and training.
 ``(3) Impacts of the Institute's activities on 
 jurisdictions' capability to investigate and prevent 
 cybersecurity incidents, electronic crimes, and related 
 cybersecurity threats.
 ``(4) A description of the nomination process for State, 
 local, territorial, and Tribal law enforcement officers, 
 prosecutors, judges, participants in the United States Secret 
 Service's network of cyber fraud task forces, and other 
 appropriate individuals to receive the education and training 
 provided pursuant to subsection (a).
 ``(5) Any other issues determined relevant by the 
 Secretary.
 ``(i) Definitions.--In this section--
 ``(1) Cybersecurity threat.--The term `cybersecurity 
 threat' has the meaning given such term in section 102 of the 
 Cybersecurity Act of 2015 (enacted as division N of the 
 Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2016 (Public Law 114-113; 6 
 U.S.C. 1501)).
 ``(2) Incident.--The term `incident' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 2209(a).
 ``(3) Information system.--The term `information system' 
 has the meaning given such term in section 102 of the 
 Cybersecurity Act of 2015 (enacted as division N of the 
 Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2016 (Public Law 114-113; 6 
 U.S.C. 1501(9))).''.
 (b) Guidance From the Privacy Officer and Civil Rights and Civil 
Liberties Officer.--The Privacy Officer and the Officer for Civil 
Rights and Civil Liberties of the Department of Homeland Security shall 
provide guidance, upon the request of the Director of the United States 
Secret Service, regarding the functions specified in subsection (b) of 
section 822 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 383), as 
amended by subsection (a).
 (c) Template for Information Collection From Participating 
Jurisdictions.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Director of the United States Secret Service shall 
develop and disseminate to jurisdictions that are recipients of 
education and training provided by the National Computer Forensics 
Institute pursuant to subsection (a) of section 822 of the Homeland 
Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 383), as amended by subsection (a), a 
template to permit each such jurisdiction to submit to the Director 
reports on the impacts on such jurisdiction of such education and 
training, including information on the number of digital forensics 
exams conducted annually. The Director shall, as appropriate, revise 
such template and disseminate to jurisdictions described in this 
subsection any such revised templates.
 (d) Requirements Analysis.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than one year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Director of the United States 
 Secret Service shall carry out a requirements analysis of 
 approaches to expand capacity of the National Computer 
 Forensics Institute to carry out the Institute's mission as set 
 forth in subsection (a) of section 822 of the Homeland Security 
 Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 383), as amended by subsection (a).
 (2) Submission.--Not later than 90 days after completing 
 the requirements analysis under paragraph (1), the Director of 
 the United States Secret Service shall submit to Congress such 
 analysis, together with a plan to expand the capacity of the 
 National Computer Forensics Institute to provide education and 
 training described in such subsection. Such analysis and plan 
 shall consider the following:
 (A) Expanding the physical operations of the 
 Institute.
 (B) Expanding the availability of virtual education 
 and training to all or a subset of potential recipients 
 of education and training from the Institute.
 (C) Some combination of the considerations set 
 forth in subparagraphs (A) and (B).
 (e) Research and Development.--The Director of the United States 
Secret Service may coordinate with the Under Secretary for Science and 
Technology of the Department of Homeland Security to carry out research 
and development of systems and procedures to enhance the National 
Computer Forensics Institute's capabilities and capacity to carry out 
the Institute's mission as set forth in subsection (a) of section 822 
of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 383), as amended by 
subsection (a).

SEC. 6703. HOMELAND SECURITY CAPABILITIES PRESERVATION.

 (a) Plan.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than one year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security, 
 acting through the Administrator of the Federal Emergency 
 Management Agency, shall submit to the Committee on Homeland 
 Security of the House of Representatives and the Committee on 
 Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate a 
 plan, informed by the survey information collected pursuant to 
 subsection (b), to make Federal assistance available for at 
 least three consecutive fiscal years to certain urban areas 
 that in the current fiscal year did not receive grant funding 
 under the Urban Area Security Initiative under section 2003 of 
 the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 604) and require 
 continued Federal assistance for the purpose of preserving a 
 homeland security capability related to preventing, preparing 
 for, protecting against, and responding to acts of terrorism 
 that had been developed or otherwise supported through prior 
 grant funding under such Initiative and allow for such urban 
 areas to transition to such urban areas costs of preserving 
 such homeland security capabilities.
 (2) Additional requirement.--The plan required under 
 paragraph (1) shall also contain a prohibition on an urban area 
 that in a fiscal year is eligible to receive Federal assistance 
 described in such paragraph from also receiving grant funding 
 under the Urban Area Security Initiative under section 2003 of 
 the Homeland Security Act of 2002. In such a case, such plan 
 shall require such an urban area to promptly notify the 
 Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency 
 regarding the preference of such urban area to retain either--
 (A) such eligibility for such Federal assistance; 
 or
 (B) such receipt of such grant funding.
 (b) Survey.--In developing the plan required under subsection (a), 
the Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, shall, to 
ascertain the scope of Federal assistance required, survey urban areas 
that--
 (1) did not receive grant funding under the Urban Area 
 Security Initiative under section 2003 of the Homeland Security 
 Act of 2002 in the current fiscal year concerning homeland 
 security capabilities related to preventing, preparing for, 
 protecting against, and responding to acts of terrorism that 
 had been developed or otherwise supported through funding under 
 such Initiative that are at risk of being reduced or eliminated 
 without such Federal assistance;
 (2) received such funding in the current fiscal year, but 
 did not receive such funding in at least one fiscal year in the 
 six fiscal years immediately preceding the current fiscal year; 
 and
 (3) any other urban areas the Secretary determines 
 appropriate.
 (c) Exemption.--The Secretary of Homeland Security may exempt the 
Federal Emergency Management Agency from the requirements of subchapter 
I of chapter 35 of title 44, United States Code (commonly referred to 
as the ``Paperwork Reduction Act''), for purposes of carrying out 
subsection (b) if the Secretary determines that complying with such 
requirements would delay the development of the plan required under 
subsection (a).
 (d) Contents.--The plan required under subsection (a) shall--
 (1) establish eligibility criteria for urban areas to 
 receive Federal assistance pursuant to such plan to provide 
 assistance for the purpose described in such subsection;
 (2) identify annual funding levels for such Federal 
 assistance in accordance with the survey required under 
 subsection (b); and
 (3) consider a range of approaches to make such Federal 
 assistance available to such urban areas, including--
 (A) modifications to the Urban Area Security 
 Initiative under section 2003 of the Homeland Security 
 Act of 2002 in a manner that would not affect the 
 availability of funding to urban areas under such 
 Initiative;
 (B) the establishment of a competitive grant 
 program;
 (C) the establishment of a formula grant program; 
 and
 (D) a timeline for the implementation of any such 
 approach and, if necessary, a legislative proposal to 
 authorize any such approach.

SEC. 6704. SCHOOL AND DAYCARE PROTECTION.

 (a) In General.--Title VII of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 
U.S.C. 341 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
section:

``SEC. 714. SCHOOL SECURITY COORDINATING COUNCIL.

 ``(a) Establishment.--There is established in the Department a 
coordinating council to ensure that, to the maximum extent practicable, 
activities, plans, and policies to enhance the security of early 
childhood education programs, elementary schools, high schools, and 
secondary schools against acts of terrorism and other homeland security 
threats are coordinated.
 ``(b) Composition.--The members of the council established pursuant 
to subsection (a) shall include the following:
 ``(1) The Under Secretary for Strategy, Policy, and Plans.
 ``(2) The Director of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure 
 Security.
 ``(3) The Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management 
 Agency.
 ``(4) The Director of the Secret Service.
 ``(5) The Executive Director of the Office of Academic 
 Engagement.
 ``(6) The Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs.
 ``(7) Any other official of the Department the Secretary 
 determines appropriate.
 ``(c) Leadership.--The Secretary shall designate a member of the 
council to serve as chair of the council.
 ``(d) Resources.--The Secretary shall participate in Federal 
efforts to maintain and publicize a clearinghouse of resources 
available to early childhood education programs, elementary schools, 
high schools, and secondary schools to enhance security against acts of 
terrorism and other homeland security threats.
 ``(e) Reports.--Not later than January 30, 2023, and annually 
thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Homeland 
Security of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Homeland 
Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate a report regarding the 
following:
 ``(1) The Department's activities, plans, and policies 
 aimed at enhancing the security of early childhood education 
 programs, elementary schools, high schools, and secondary 
 schools against acts of terrorism and other homeland security 
 threats.
 ``(2) With respect to the immediately preceding year, 
 information on the following:
 ``(A) The council's activities during such year.
 ``(B) The Department's contributions to Federal 
 efforts to maintain and publicize the clearinghouse of 
 resources referred to in subsection (d) during such 
 year.
 ``(3) Any metrics regarding the efficacy of such activities 
 and contributions, and any engagement with stakeholders outside 
 of the Federal Government.
 ``(f) Definitions.--In this section, the terms `early childhood 
education program', `elementary school', `high school', and `secondary 
school' have the meanings given such terms in section 8101 of the 
Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7801).''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of 
the Homeland Security Act of 2002 is amended by inserting after the 
item relating to section 713 the following new item:

``Sec. 714. School security coordinating council.''.

SEC. 6705. REPORTING EFFICIENTLY TO PROPER OFFICIALS IN RESPONSE TO 
 TERRORISM.

 (a) In General.--Whenever an act of terrorism occurs in the United 
States, the Secretary of Homeland Security, the Attorney General, the 
Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and, as appropriate, 
the head of the National Counterterrorism Center, shall submit to the 
appropriate congressional committees, by not later than one year after 
the completion of the investigation concerning such act by the primary 
Government agency conducting such investigation, an unclassified report 
(which may be accompanied by a classified annex) concerning such act.
 (b) Content of Reports.--A report under this section shall--
 (1) include a statement of the facts of the act of 
 terrorism referred to in subsection (a), as known at the time 
 of the report;
 (2) identify any gaps in homeland or national security that 
 could be addressed to prevent future acts of terrorism; and
 (3) include any recommendations for additional measures 
 that could be taken to improve homeland or national security, 
 including recommendations relating to potential changes in law 
 enforcement practices or changes in law, with particular 
 attention to changes that could help prevent future acts of 
 terrorism.
 (c) Exception.--
 (1) In general.--If the Secretary of Homeland Security, the 
 Attorney General, the Director of the Federal Bureau of 
 Investigation, or, as appropriate, the head of the National 
 Counterterrorism Center determines any information described in 
 subsection (b) required to be reported in accordance with 
 subsection (a) could jeopardize an ongoing investigation or 
 prosecution, the Secretary, Attorney General, Director, or 
 head, as the case may be--
 (A) may withhold from reporting such information; 
 and
 (B) shall notify the appropriate congressional 
 committees of such determination.
 (2) Saving provision.--Withholding of information pursuant 
 to a determination under paragraph (1) shall not affect in any 
 manner the responsibility to submit a report required under 
 subsection (a) containing other information described in 
 subsection (b) not subject to such determination.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Act of terrorism.--The term ``act of terrorism'' has 
 the meaning given such term in section 3077 of title 18, United 
 States Code.
 (2) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term 
 ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (A) in the House of Representatives--
 (i) the Committee on Homeland Security;
 (ii) the Committee on the Judiciary; and
 (iii) the Permanent Select Committee on 
 Intelligence; and
 (B) in the Senate--
 (i) the Committee on Homeland Security and 
 Governmental Affairs;
 (ii) the Committee on the Judiciary; and
 (iii) the Select Committee on Intelligence.

SEC. 6706. CYBERSECURITY GRANTS FOR SCHOOLS.

 (a) In General.--Section 2220 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 
(6 U.S.C. 665f) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
subsection:
 ``(e) Grants and Cooperative Agreements.--The Director may award 
financial assistance in the form of grants or cooperative agreements to 
States, local governments, institutions of higher education (as such 
term is defined in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
U.S.C. 1001)), nonprofit organizations, and other non-Federal entities 
as determined appropriate by the Director for the purpose of funding 
cybersecurity and infrastructure security education and training 
programs and initiatives to--
 ``(1) carry out the purposes of CETAP; and
 ``(2) enhance CETAP to address the national shortfall of 
 cybersecurity professionals.''.
 (b) Briefings.--Paragraph (2) of subsection (c) of section 2220 of 
the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 665f) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (C) and (D) as 
 subparagraphs (D) and (E) respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after subparagraph (B) the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(C) information on any grants or cooperative 
 agreements made pursuant to subsection (e), including 
 how any such grants or cooperative agreements are being 
 used to enhance cybersecurity education for underserved 
 populations or communities;''.

 Subtitle B--Enhancing DHS Acquisitions and Supply Chain

SEC. 6721. HOMELAND PROCUREMENT REFORM.

 (a) In General.--Subtitle D of title VIII of the Homeland Security 
Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 391 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new section:

``SEC. 836. REQUIREMENTS TO BUY CERTAIN ITEMS RELATED TO NATIONAL 
 SECURITY INTERESTS.

 ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Covered item.--The term `covered item' means any of 
 the following:
 ``(A) Footwear provided as part of a uniform.
 ``(B) Uniforms.
 ``(C) Holsters and tactical pouches.
 ``(D) Patches, insignia, and embellishments.
 ``(E) Chemical, biological, radiological, and 
 nuclear protective gear.
 ``(F) Body armor components intended to provide 
 ballistic protection for an individual, consisting of 1 
 or more of the following:
 ``(i) Soft ballistic panels.
 ``(ii) Hard ballistic plates.
 ``(iii) Concealed armor carriers worn under 
 a uniform.
 ``(iv) External armor carriers worn over a 
 uniform.
 ``(G) Any other item of clothing or protective 
 equipment as determined appropriate by the Secretary.
 ``(2) Frontline operational component.-- The term 
 `frontline operational component' means any of the following 
 organizations of the Department:
 ``(A) U.S. Customs and Border Protection.
 ``(B) U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement.
 ``(C) The United States Secret Service.
 ``(D) The Transportation Security Administration.
 ``(E) The Coast Guard.
 ``(F) The Federal Protective Service.
 ``(G) The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
 ``(H) The Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers.
 ``(I) The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security 
 Agency.
 ``(b) Requirements.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall ensure that any 
 procurement of a covered item for a frontline operational 
 component meets the following criteria:
 ``(A)(i) To the maximum extent possible, not less 
 than one-third of funds obligated in a specific fiscal 
 year for the procurement of such covered items shall be 
 covered items that are manufactured or supplied in the 
 United States by entities that qualify as small 
 business concerns, as such term is described under 
 section 3 of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 632).
 ``(ii) Covered items may only be supplied pursuant 
 to subparagraph (A) to the extent that United States 
 entities that qualify as small business concerns--
 ``(I) are unable to manufacture covered 
 items in the United States; and
 ``(II) meet the criteria identified in 
 subparagraph (B).
 ``(B) Each contractor with respect to the 
 procurement of such a covered item, including the end-
 item manufacturer of such a covered item--
 ``(i) is an entity registered with the 
 System for Award Management (or successor 
 system) administered by the General Services 
 Administration; and
 ``(ii) is in compliance with ISO 9001:2015 
 of the International Organization for 
 Standardization (or successor standard) or a 
 standard determined appropriate by the 
 Secretary to ensure the quality of products and 
 adherence to applicable statutory and 
 regulatory requirements.
 ``(C) Each supplier of such a covered item with an 
 insignia (such as any patch, badge, or emblem) and each 
 supplier of such an insignia, if such covered item with 
 such insignia or such insignia, as the case may be, is 
 not produced, applied, or assembled in the United 
 States, shall--
 ``(i) store such covered item with such 
 insignia or such insignia in a locked area;
 ``(ii) report any pilferage or theft of 
 such covered item with such insignia or such 
 insignia occurring at any stage before delivery 
 of such covered item with such insignia or such 
 insignia; and
 ``(iii) destroy any such defective or 
 unusable covered item with insignia or insignia 
 in a manner established by the Secretary, and 
 maintain records, for three years after the 
 creation of such records, of such destruction 
 that include the date of such destruction, a 
 description of the covered item with insignia 
 or insignia destroyed, the quantity of the 
 covered item with insignia or insignia 
 destroyed, and the method of destruction.
 ``(2) Waiver.--
 ``(A) In general.--In the case of a national 
 emergency declared by the President under the National 
 Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) or a major 
 disaster declared by the President under section 401 of 
 the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency 
 Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5170), the Secretary may 
 waive a requirement in subparagraph (A), (B) or (C) of 
 paragraph (1) if the Secretary determines there is an 
 insufficient supply of a covered item that meets the 
 requirement.
 ``(B) Notice.--Not later than 60 days after the 
 date on which the Secretary determines a waiver under 
 subparagraph (A) is necessary, the Secretary shall 
 provide to the Committee on Homeland Security and 
 Governmental Affairs and the Committee on 
 Appropriations of the Senate and the Committee on 
 Homeland Security, the Committee on Oversight and 
 Reform, and the Committee on Appropriations of the 
 House of Representatives notice of such determination, 
 which shall include--
 ``(i) identification of the national 
 emergency or major disaster declared by the 
 President;
 ``(ii) identification of the covered item 
 for which the Secretary intends to issue the 
 waiver; and
 ``(iii) a description of the demand for the 
 covered item and corresponding lack of supply 
 from contractors able to meet the criteria 
 described in subparagraph (B) or (C) of 
 paragraph (1).
 ``(c) Pricing.--The Secretary shall ensure that covered items are 
purchased at a fair and reasonable price, consistent with the 
procedures and guidelines specified in the Federal Acquisition 
Regulation.
 ``(d) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of 
this section and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall provide to 
the Committee on Homeland Security, the Committee on Oversight and 
Reform, and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of 
Representatives, and the Committee on Homeland Security and 
Governmental Affairs and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate 
a briefing on instances in which vendors have failed to meet deadlines 
for delivery of covered items and corrective actions taken by the 
Department in response to such instances.
 ``(e) Effective Date.--This section applies with respect to a 
contract entered into by the Department or any frontline operational 
component on or after the date that is 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this section.''.
 (b) Study.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 18 months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall 
 submit to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental 
 Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on Homeland Security of 
 the House of Representatives a study of the adequacy of uniform 
 allowances provided to employees of frontline operational 
 components (as defined in section 836 of the Homeland Security 
 Act of 2002, as added by subsection (a)).
 (2) Requirements.--The study conducted under paragraph (1) 
 shall--
 (A) be informed by a Department-wide survey of 
 employees from across the Department of Homeland 
 Security who receive uniform allowances that seeks to 
 ascertain what, if any, improvements could be made to 
 the current uniform allowances and what, if any, 
 impacts current allowances have had on employee morale 
 and retention;
 (B) assess the adequacy of the most recent increase 
 made to the uniform allowance for first year employees; 
 and
 (C) consider increasing by 50 percent, at minimum, 
 the annual allowance for all other employees.
 (c) Additional Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall 
 provide a report with recommendations on how the Department of 
 Homeland Security could procure additional items from domestic 
 sources and bolster the domestic supply chain for items related 
 to national security to--
 (A) the Committee on Homeland Security and 
 Governmental Affairs and the Committee on 
 Appropriations of the Senate; and
 (B) the Committee on Homeland Security, the 
 Committee on Oversight and Reform, and the Committee on 
 Appropriations of the House of Representatives.
 (2) Contents.--The report required under paragraph (1) 
 shall include the following:
 (A) A review of the compliance of the Department of 
 Homeland Security with the requirements under section 
 604 of title VI of division A of the American Recovery 
 and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (6 U.S.C. 453b) to buy 
 certain items related to national security interests 
 from sources in the United States.
 (B) An assessment of the capacity of the Department 
 of Homeland Security to procure the following items 
 from domestic sources:
 (i) Personal protective equipment and other 
 items necessary to respond to a pandemic such 
 as that caused by COVID-19.
 (ii) Helmets that provide ballistic 
 protection and other head protection and 
 components.
 (iii) Rain gear, cold weather gear, and 
 other environmental and flame resistant 
 clothing.
 (d) Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of 
the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-296; 116 Stat. 2135) 
is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 835 the 
following:

``Sec. 836. Requirements to buy certain items related to national 
 security interests.''.

SEC. 6722. DHS SOFTWARE SUPPLY CHAIN RISK MANAGEMENT.

 (a) Guidance.--The Secretary of Homeland Security, acting through 
the Under Secretary, shall issue guidance with respect to new and 
existing covered contracts.
 (b) New Covered Contracts.--In developing guidance under subsection 
(a), with respect to each new covered contract, as a condition on the 
award of such a contract, each contractor responding to a solicitation 
for such a contract shall submit to the covered officer--
 (1) a planned bill of materials when submitting a bid 
 proposal; and
 (2) the certification and notifications described in 
 subsection (e).
 (c) Existing Covered Contracts.--In developing guidance under 
subsection (a), with respect to each existing covered contract, each 
contractor with an existing covered contract shall submit to the 
covered officer--
 (1) the bill of materials used for such contract, upon the 
 request of such officer; and
 (2) the certification and notifications described in 
 subsection (e).
 (d) Updating Bill of Materials.--With respect to a covered 
contract, in the case of a change to the information included in a bill 
of materials submitted pursuant to subsections (b)(1) and (c)(1), each 
contractor shall submit to the covered officer the update to such bill 
of materials, in a timely manner.
 (e) Certification and Notifications.--The certification and 
notifications referred to in subsections (b)(2) and (c)(2), with 
respect to a covered contract, are the following:
 (1) A certification that each item listed on the submitted 
 bill of materials is free from all known vulnerabilities or 
 defects affecting the security of the end product or service 
 identified in--
 (A) the National Institute of Standards and 
 Technology National Vulnerability Database; and
 (B) any database designated by the Under Secretary, 
 in coordination with the Director of the Cybersecurity 
 and Infrastructure Security Agency, that tracks 
 security vulnerabilities and defects in open source or 
 third-party developed software.
 (2) A notification of each vulnerability or defect 
 affecting the security of the end product or service, if 
 identified, through--
 (A) the certification of such submitted bill of 
 materials required under paragraph (1); or
 (B) any other manner of identification.
 (3) A notification relating to the plan to mitigate, 
 repair, or resolve each security vulnerability or defect listed 
 in the notification required under paragraph (2).
 (f) Enforcement.--In developing guidance under subsection (a), the 
Secretary shall instruct covered officers with respect to--
 (1) the processes available to such officers enforcing 
 subsections (b) and (c); and
 (2) when such processes should be used.
 (g) Effective Date.--The guidance required under subsection (a) 
shall take effect on the date that is 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this section.
 (h) GAO Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States 
shall submit to the Secretary, the Committee on Homeland Security of 
the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Homeland Security 
and Governmental Affairs of the Senate a report that includes--
 (1) a review of the implementation of this section;
 (2) information relating to the engagement of the 
 Department of Homeland Security with industry;
 (3) an assessment of how the guidance issued pursuant to 
 subsection (a) complies with Executive Order 14208 (86 Fed. 
 Reg. 26633; relating to improving the nation's cybersecurity); 
 and
 (4) any recommendations relating to improving the supply 
 chain with respect to covered contracts.
 (i) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Bill of materials.--The term ``bill of materials'' 
 means a list of the parts and components (whether new or 
 reused) of an end product or service, including, with respect 
 to each part and component, information relating to the origin, 
 composition, integrity, and any other information as determined 
 appropriate by the Under Secretary.
 (2) Covered contract.--The term ``covered contract'' means 
 a contract relating to the procurement of covered information 
 and communications technology or services for the Department of 
 Homeland Security.
 (3) Covered information and communications technology or 
 services.--The term ``covered information and communications 
 technology or services'' means the terms--
 (A) ``information technology'' (as such term is 
 defined in section 11101(6) of title 40, United States 
 Code);
 (B) ``information system'' (as such term is defined 
 in section 3502(8) of title 44, United States Code);
 (C) ``telecommunications equipment'' (as such term 
 is defined in section 3(52) of the Communications Act 
 of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 153(52))); and
 (D) ``telecommunications service'' (as such term is 
 defined in section 3(53) of the Communications Act of 
 1934 (47 U.S.C. 153(53))).
 (4) Covered officer.--The term ``covered officer'' means--
 (A) a contracting officer of the Department; and
 (B) any other official of the Department as 
 determined appropriate by the Under Secretary.
 (5) Software.--The term ``software'' means computer 
 programs and associated data that may be dynamically written or 
 modified during execution.
 (6) Under secretary.--The term ``Under Secretary'' means 
 the Under Secretary for Management of the Department of 
 Homeland Security.

SEC. 6723. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY MENTOR-PROTEGE PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--Subtitle H of title VIII of the Homeland Security 
Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 451 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new section:

``SEC. 890C. MENTOR-PROTEGE PROGRAM.

 ``(a) Establishment.--There is established in the Department a 
mentor-protege program (in this section referred to as the `Program') 
under which a mentor firm enters into an agreement with a protege firm 
for the purpose of assisting the protege firm to compete for prime 
contracts and subcontracts of the Department.
 ``(b) Eligibility.--The Secretary shall establish criteria for 
mentor firms and protege firms to be eligible to participate in the 
Program, including a requirement that a firm is not included on any 
list maintained by the Federal Government of contractors that have been 
suspended or debarred.
 ``(c) Program Application and Approval.--
 ``(1) Application.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization of the 
 Department, shall establish a process for submission of an 
 application jointly by a mentor firm and the protege firm 
 selected by the mentor firm. The application shall include each 
 of the following:
 ``(A) A description of the assistance to be 
 provided by the mentor firm, including, to the extent 
 available, the number and a brief description of each 
 anticipated subcontract to be awarded to the protege 
 firm.
 ``(B) A schedule with milestones for achieving the 
 assistance to be provided over the period of 
 participation in the Program.
 ``(C) An estimate of the costs to be incurred by 
 the mentor firm for providing assistance under the 
 Program.
 ``(D) Attestations that Program participants will 
 submit to the Secretary reports at times specified by 
 the Secretary to assist the Secretary in evaluating the 
 protege firm's developmental progress.
 ``(E) Attestations that Program participants will 
 inform the Secretary in the event of a change in 
 eligibility or voluntary withdrawal from the Program.
 ``(2) Approval.--Not later than 60 days after receipt of an 
 application pursuant to paragraph (1), the head of the Office 
 of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization shall notify 
 applicants of approval or, in the case of disapproval, the 
 process for resubmitting an application for reconsideration.
 ``(3) Rescission.--The head of the Office of Small and 
 Disadvantaged Business Utilization may rescind the approval of 
 an application under this subsection if it determines that such 
 action is in the best interest of the Department.
 ``(d) Program Duration.--A mentor firm and protege firm approved 
under subsection (c) shall enter into an agreement to participate in 
the Program for a period of not less than 36 months.
 ``(e) Program Benefits.--A mentor firm and protege firm that enter 
into an agreement under subsection (d) may receive the following 
Program benefits:
 ``(1) With respect to an award of a contract that requires 
 a subcontracting plan, a mentor firm may receive evaluation 
 credit for participating in the Program.
 ``(2) With respect to an award of a contract that requires 
 a subcontracting plan, a mentor firm may receive credit for a 
 protege firm performing as a first tier subcontractor or a 
 subcontractor at any tier in an amount equal to the total 
 dollar value of any subcontracts awarded to such protege firm.
 ``(3) A protege firm may receive technical, managerial, 
 financial, or any other mutually agreed upon benefit from a 
 mentor firm, including a subcontract award.
 ``(f) Reporting.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the head of the Office 
of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization shall submit to the 
Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs and the 
Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship of the Senate and the 
Committee on Homeland Security and the Committee on Small Business of 
the House of Representatives a report that--
 ``(1) identifies each agreement between a mentor firm and a 
 protege firm entered into under this section, including the 
 number of protege firm participants that are--
 ``(A) small business concerns;
 ``(B) small business concerns owned and controlled 
 by veterans;
 ``(C) small business concerns owned and controlled 
 by service-disabled veterans;
 ``(D) qualified HUBZone small business concerns;
 ``(E) small business concerns owned and controlled 
 by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals;
 ``(F) small business concerns owned and controlled 
 by women;
 ``(G) historically Black colleges and universities; 
 and
 ``(H) minority-serving institutions;
 ``(2) describes the type of assistance provided by mentor 
 firms to protege firms;
 ``(3) identifies contracts within the Department in which a 
 mentor firm serving as the prime contractor provided 
 subcontracts to a protege firm under the Program; and
 ``(4) assesses the degree to which there has been--
 ``(A) an increase in the technical capabilities of 
 protege firms; and
 ``(B) an increase in the quantity and estimated 
 value of prime contract and subcontract awards to 
 protege firms for the period covered by the report.
 ``(g) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section may be 
construed to limit, diminish, impair, or otherwise affect the authority 
of the Department to participate in any program carried out by or 
requiring approval of the Small Business Administration or adopt or 
follow any regulation or policy that the Administrator of the Small 
Business Administration may promulgate, except that, to the extent that 
any provision of this section (including subsection (h)) conflicts with 
any other provision of law, regulation, or policy, this section shall 
control.
 ``(h) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Historically black college or university.--The term 
 `historically Black college or university' has the meaning 
 given the term `part B institution' in section 322 of the 
 Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1061).
 ``(2) Mentor firm.--The term `mentor firm' means a for-
 profit business concern that is not a small business concern 
 that--
 ``(A) has the ability to assist and commits to 
 assisting a protege to compete for Federal prime 
 contracts and subcontracts; and
 ``(B) satisfies any other requirements imposed by 
 the Secretary.
 ``(3) Minority-serving institution.--The term `minority-
 serving institution' means an institution of higher education 
 described in section 317 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
 (20 U.S.C. 1067q(a)).
 ``(4) Protege firm.--The term `protege firm' means a small 
 business concern, a historically Black college or university, 
 or a minority-serving institution that--
 ``(A) is eligible to enter into a prime contract or 
 subcontract with the Department; and
 ``(B) satisfies any other requirements imposed by 
 the Secretary.
 ``(5) Small business act definitions.--The terms `small 
 business concern', `small business concern owned and controlled 
 by veterans', `small business concern owned and controlled by 
 service-disabled veterans', `qualified HUBZone small business 
 concern', `and small business concern owned and controlled by 
 women' have the meanings given such terms, respectively, under 
 section 3 of the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 632). The term 
 `small business concern owned and controlled by socially and 
 economically disadvantaged individuals' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 8(d)(3)(C) of the Small Business Act (15 
 U.S.C. 637(d)(3)(C)).''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of 
the Homeland Security Act of 2002 is amended by inserting after the 
item relating to section 890B the following new item:

``Sec. 890C. Mentor-protege program.''.

SEC. 6724. DHS TRADE AND ECONOMIC SECURITY COUNCIL.

 (a) DHS Trade and Economic Security Council.--
 (1) In general.--Subtitle H of title VIII of the Homeland 
 Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 451 et seq.) is further amended 
 by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 890D. DHS TRADE AND ECONOMIC SECURITY COUNCIL.

 ``(a) Establishment.--There is established in the Department the 
DHS Trade and Economic Security Council (referred to in this section as 
the `Council').
 ``(b) Duties of the Council.--The Council shall provide to the 
Secretary advice and recommendations on matters of trade and economic 
security, including--
 ``(1) identifying concentrated risks for trade and economic 
 security;
 ``(2) setting priorities for securing the Nation's trade 
 and economic security;
 ``(3) coordinating Department-wide activity on trade and 
 economic security matters;
 ``(4) with respect to the President's continuity of the 
 economy plan under section 9603 of the William M. (Mac) 
 Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act of Fiscal Year 
 2021;
 ``(5) proposing statutory and regulatory changes impacting 
 trade and economic security; and
 ``(6) any other matters the Secretary considers 
 appropriate.
 ``(c) Membership.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Council shall be composed of the 
 following members:
 ``(A) The Assistant Secretary for Trade and 
 Economic Security of the Office of Strategy, Policy, 
 and Plans of the Department.
 ``(B) An officer or an employee, selected by the 
 Secretary, from each of the following components and 
 offices of the Department:
 ``(i) The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure 
 Security Agency.
 ``(ii) The Federal Emergency Management 
 Agency.
 ``(iii) The Office of Intelligence and 
 Analysis.
 ``(iv) The Science and Technology 
 Directorate.
 ``(v) United States Citizenship and 
 Immigration Services.
 ``(vi) The Coast Guard.
 ``(vii) U.S. Customs and Border Protection.
 ``(viii) U.S. Immigration and Customs 
 Enforcement.
 ``(ix) The Transportation Security 
 Administration.
 ``(2) Chair and vice chair.--The Assistant Secretary for 
 Trade and Economic Security shall serve as Chair of the 
 Council. The Assistant Secretary for Trade and Economic 
 Security may designate a Council member as a Vice Chair.
 ``(d) Meetings.--The Council shall meet not less frequently than 
quarterly, as well as--
 ``(1) at the call of the Chair; or
 ``(2) at the direction of the Secretary.
 ``(e) Briefings.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this section and every six months thereafter for four 
years, the Council shall brief the Committee on Homeland Security of 
the House of Representatives and the Committee on Homeland Security and 
Governmental Affairs of the Senate on the actions and activities of the 
Council.
 ``(f) Definition.--In this section, the term `economic security' 
means the condition of having secure and resilient domestic production 
capacity combined with reliable access to the global resources 
necessary to maintain an acceptable standard of living and protect core 
national values.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of contents in section 
 1(b) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 is amended by 
 inserting after the item relating to section 890C the following 
 new item:

``Sec. 890D. DHS Trade and Economic Security Council.''.
 (b) Assistant Secretary for Trade and Economic Security.--Section 
709 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 349) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (g) as subsection (h); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (f) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(g) Assistant Secretary for Trade and Economic Security.--
 ``(1) In general.--There is within the Office of Strategy, 
 Policy, and Plans an Assistant Secretary for Trade and Economic 
 Security.
 ``(2) Duties.--The Assistant Secretary for Trade and 
 Economic Security shall be responsible for policy formulation 
 regarding matters relating to economic security and trade, as 
 such matters relate to the mission and the operations of the 
 Department.
 ``(3) Additional responsibilities.--In addition to the 
 duties specified in paragraph (2), the Assistant Secretary for 
 Trade and Economic Security shall--
 ``(A) oversee--
 ``(i) the activities and enhancements of 
 requirements for supply chain mapping not 
 otherwise assigned by law or by the Secretary 
 to another officer; and
 ``(ii) assessments and reports to Congress 
 related to critical economic security domains;
 ``(B) serve as the executive for the Department on 
 the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United 
 States (CFIUS), the Committee for the Assessment of 
 Foreign Participation in the United States 
 Telecommunications Services Sector, and the Federal 
 Acquisition Security Council (in addition to any 
 position on such Council occupied by a representative 
 of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency 
 of the Department);
 ``(C) coordinate with stakeholders in other Federal 
 departments and agencies and non-governmental entities 
 with trade and economic security interests, 
 authorities, and responsibilities; and
 ``(D) perform such additional duties as the 
 Secretary or the Under Secretary of Strategy, Policy, 
 and Plans may prescribe.
 ``(4) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 ``(A) Critical economic security domain.--The term 
 `critical economic security domain' means any 
 infrastructure, industry, technology, or intellectual 
 property (or combination thereof) that is essential for 
 the economic security of the United States.
 ``(B) Economic security.--The term `economic 
 security' has the meaning given such term in section 
 890B.''.
 (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to the Secretary of Homeland Security $3,000,000 for each 
of fiscal years 2023 through 2027 to carry out section 890B and 
subsection (g) of section 709 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002, as 
added and inserted, respectively, by subsections (a) and (b) of this 
Act.

SEC. 6725. DHS ACQUISITION REFORM.

 (a) Acquisition Authorities for the Under Secretary of Management 
of the Department of Homeland Security.--Section 701 of the Homeland 
Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 341) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``and 
 acquisition management'' after ``Procurement''; and
 (B) in paragraph (6), by inserting ``(including 
 firearms and other sensitive assets)'' after 
 ``equipment'';
 (2) by redesignating subsections (d), the first subsection 
 (e) (relating to the system for award management consultation), 
 and the second subsection (e) (relating to the definition of 
 interoperable communications) as subsections (e), (f), and (g), 
 respectively; and
 (3) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(d) Acquisition and Related Responsibilities.--
 ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding section 1702(a) of title 
 41, United States Code, the Under Secretary for Management is 
 the Chief Acquisition Officer of the Department. As Chief 
 Acquisition Officer, the Under Secretary shall have the 
 authorities and perform the functions specified in section 
 1702(b) of such title, and perform all other functions and 
 responsibilities delegated by the Secretary or described in 
 this subsection.
 ``(2) Functions and responsibilities.--In addition to the 
 authorities and functions specified in section 1702(b) of title 
 41, United States Code, the functions and responsibilities of 
 the Under Secretary for Management related to acquisition (as 
 such term is defined in section 131 of such title) include the 
 following:
 ``(A) Advising the Secretary regarding acquisition 
 management activities, considering risks of failure to 
 achieve cost, schedule, or performance parameters, to 
 ensure that the Department achieves its mission through 
 the adoption of widely accepted program management best 
 practices (as such term is defined in section 837) and 
 standards and, where appropriate, acquisition 
 innovation best practices.
 ``(B) Leading the Department's acquisition 
 oversight body, the Acquisition Review Board.
 ``(C) Synchronizing interagency coordination 
 relating to acquisition programs and acquisition 
 management efforts of the Department.
 ``(D) Exercising the acquisition decision authority 
 (as such term is defined in section 837) to approve, 
 pause, modify (including the rescission of approvals of 
 program milestones), or cancel major acquisition 
 programs (as such term is defined in section 837), 
 unless the Under Secretary delegates such authority to 
 a Component Acquisition Executive (as such term is 
 defined in section 837) pursuant to paragraph (3).
 ``(E) Providing additional scrutiny and oversight 
 for an acquisition that is not a major acquisition if--
 ``(i) the acquisition is for a program that 
 is important to the strategic and performance 
 plans of the Department;
 ``(ii) the acquisition is for a program 
 with significant program or policy 
 implications; and
 ``(iii) the Secretary determines that such 
 scrutiny and oversight for the acquisition is 
 proper and necessary.
 ``(F) Establishing policies for managing 
 acquisitions across the Department that promote best 
 practices (as such term is defined in section 837).
 ``(G) Establishing policies for acquisition that 
 implement an approach that considers risks of failure 
 to achieve cost, schedule, or performance parameters 
 that all components of the Department shall comply 
 with, including outlining relevant authorities for 
 program managers to effectively manage acquisition 
 programs (as such term is defined in section 837).
 ``(H) Ensuring that each major acquisition program 
 has a Department-approved acquisition program baseline 
 (as such term is defined in section 837), pursuant to 
 the Department's acquisition management policy that is 
 traceable to the life-cycle cost estimate of the 
 program, integrated master schedule, and operational 
 requirements.
 ``(I) Assisting the heads of components and 
 Component Acquisition Executives in efforts to comply 
 with Federal law, the Federal Acquisition Regulation, 
 and Department acquisition management directives.
 ``(J) Ensuring that grants and financial assistance 
 are provided only to individuals and organizations that 
 are not suspended or debarred.
 ``(K) Distributing guidance throughout the 
 Department to ensure that contractors involved in 
 acquisitions, particularly contractors that access the 
 Department's information systems and technologies, 
 adhere to relevant Department policies related to 
 physical and information security as identified by the 
 Under Secretary.
 ``(L) Overseeing the Component Acquisition 
 Executive organizational structure to ensure Component 
 Acquisition Executives have sufficient capabilities and 
 comply with Department acquisition policies.
 ``(M) Developing and managing a professional 
 acquisition workforce to ensure the goods and services 
 acquired by the Department meet the needs of the 
 mission and are at the best value for the expenditure 
 of public resources.
 ``(3) Delegation of certain acquisition decision 
 authority.--The Under Secretary for Management may delegate 
 acquisition decision authority, in writing, to the relevant 
 Component Acquisition Executive for a major capital asset, 
 service, or hybrid acquisition program that has a life-cycle 
 cost estimate of at least $300,000,000 but not more than 
 $1,000,000,000, based on fiscal year 2022 constant dollars, 
 if--
 ``(A) the component concerned possesses working 
 policies, processes, and procedures that are consistent 
 with Department acquisition policy;
 ``(B) the Component Acquisition Executive concerned 
 has adequate, experienced, and dedicated professional 
 employees with program management training; and
 ``(C) each major acquisition program has a 
 Department-approved acquisition program baseline, and 
 it is meeting agreed-upon cost, schedule, and 
 performance thresholds.''.
 (b) Office of Test and Evaluation of the Department of Homeland 
Security.--
 (1) In general.--Title III of the Homeland Security Act of 
 2002 (6 U.S.C. 181 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new section:

``SEC. 323. OFFICE OF TEST AND EVALUATION.

 ``(a) Establishment of Office.--There is established in the 
Directorate of Science and Technology of the Department an Office of 
Test and Evaluation (in this section referred to as the `Office'). The 
Office shall--
 ``(1) serve as the principal advisory office for test and 
 evaluation support across the Department; and
 ``(2) serve as the test and evaluation liaison with--
 ``(A) Federal agencies and foreign, State, local, 
 Tribal, and territorial governments;
 ``(B) the private sector;
 ``(C) institutions of higher education; and
 ``(D) other relevant entities.
 ``(b) Director.--The Office shall be led by a Director. The 
Director shall oversee the duties specified in subsection (a) and carry 
out the following responsibilities:
 ``(1) Serve as a member of the Department's Acquisition 
 Review Board.
 ``(2) Establish and update, as necessary, test and 
 evaluation policies, procedures, and guidance for the 
 Department.
 ``(3) Ensure, in coordination with the Chief Acquisition 
 Officer, the Joint Requirements Council, the Under Secretary 
 for Science and Technology, and relevant component heads, that 
 acquisition programs (as such term is defined in section 837)--
 ``(A) complete reviews of operational requirements 
 to ensure such requirements--
 ``(i) are informed by threats, including 
 physical and cybersecurity threats;
 ``(ii) are operationally relevant; and
 ``(iii) are measurable, testable, and 
 achievable within the constraints of cost and 
 schedule;
 ``(B) complete independent testing and evaluation 
 of a system or service throughout development of such 
 system or service;
 ``(C) complete operational testing and evaluation 
 that includes all system components and incorporates 
 operators into such testing and evaluation to ensure 
 that a system or service satisfies the mission 
 requirements in the operational environment of such 
 system or service as intended in the acquisition 
 program baseline;
 ``(D) use independent verification and validation 
 of test and evaluation implementation and results, as 
 appropriate; and
 ``(E) document whether such programs meet all 
 operational requirements.
 ``(4) Provide oversight of test and evaluation activities 
 for major acquisition programs throughout the acquisition life 
 cycle by--
 ``(A) approving program test and evaluation master 
 plans, plans for individual test and evaluation events, 
 and other related documentation, determined appropriate 
 by the Director;
 ``(B) approving which independent test and 
 evaluation agent or third-party tester is selected for 
 each program; and
 ``(C) providing an independent assessment to the 
 acquisition decision authority (as such term is defined 
 in section 837) that assesses a program's progress in 
 meeting operational requirements and operational 
 effectiveness, suitability, and resilience to inform 
 production and deployment decisions.
 ``(5) Determine if testing of a system or service conducted 
 by other Federal agencies, entities, or institutions of higher 
 education are relevant and sufficient in determining whether 
 such system or service performs as intended.
 ``(c) Annual Report.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than one year after the date 
 of the enactment of this section and annually thereafter, the 
 Director of the Office shall submit to the Secretary, the Under 
 Secretary for Management, component heads, and the Committee on 
 Homeland Security of the House of Representatives and the 
 Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs a 
 report relating to the test and evaluation activities of the 
 major acquisition programs of the Department for the previous 
 fiscal year.
 ``(2) Elements.--Each report required under paragraph (1) 
 shall include the following:
 ``(A) An assessment of--
 ``(i) test and evaluation activities 
 conducted for each major acquisition program 
 with respect to demonstrating operational 
 requirements and operational effectiveness, 
 suitability, and resilience for each such 
 program;
 ``(ii) any waivers of, or deviations from, 
 approved program test and evaluation master 
 plans referred to in subsection (b)(3)(A);
 ``(iii) any concerns raised by the 
 independent test and evaluation agent or third-
 party tester selected and approved under 
 subsection (b)(3)(B) relating to such waivers 
 or deviations; and
 ``(iv) any actions that have been taken or 
 are planned to be taken to address such 
 concerns.
 ``(B) Recommendations with respect to resources, 
 facilities, and levels of funding made available for 
 test and evaluation activities referred to in 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(3) Form.--Each report required under paragraph (1) shall 
 be submitted in unclassified form but may include a classified 
 annex.
 ``(d) Relationship to Under Secretary for Science and Technology.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Under Secretary for Management and 
 the Under Secretary for Science and Technology shall coordinate 
 in matters related to Department-wide acquisitions so that 
 investments of the Directorate of Science and Technology are 
 able to support current and future requirements of the 
 components of the Department.
 ``(2) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this subsection may 
 be construed as affecting or diminishing the authority of the 
 Under Secretary for Science and Technology.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of contents in section 
 1(b) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 is amended by 
 inserting after the item relating to section 322 the following 
 new item:

``Sec. 323. Office of Test and Evaluation.''.
 (c) Acquisition Authorities for Chief Financial Officer of the 
Department of Homeland Security.--Paragraph (2) of section 702(b) of 
the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 342(b)) is amended by--
 (1) redesignating subparagraph (I) as subparagraph (J); and
 (2) inserting after subparagraph (H) the following new 
 subparagraph:
 ``(I) Oversee the costs of acquisition programs (as 
 such term is defined in section 837) and related 
 activities to ensure that actual and planned costs are 
 in accordance with budget estimates and are affordable, 
 or can be adequately funded, over the life cycle of 
 such programs and activities.''.
 (d) Acquisition Authorities for Chief Information Officer of the 
Department of Homeland Security.--Section 703 of the Homeland Security 
Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 343) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsection (b) as subsection (c); and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (a) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(b) Acquisition Responsibilities.--In addition to the 
responsibilities specified in section 11315 of title 40, United States 
Code, the acquisition responsibilities of the Chief Information 
Officer, in consultation with the Under Secretary for Management, shall 
include the following:
 ``(1) Overseeing the management of the Homeland Security 
 Enterprise Architecture and ensuring that, before each 
 acquisition decision event (as such term is defined in section 
 837), approved information technology acquisitions comply with 
 any departmental information technology management 
 requirements, security protocols, and the Homeland Security 
 Enterprise Architecture, and in any case in which information 
 technology acquisitions do not so comply, making 
 recommendations to the Department's Acquisition Review Board 
 regarding such noncompliance.
 ``(2) Providing recommendations to the Acquisition Review 
 Board regarding information technology programs and developing 
 information technology acquisition strategic guidance.''.
 (e) Acquisition Authorities for Under Secretary of Strategy, 
Policy, and Plans of the Department of Homeland Security.--Subsection 
(c) of section 709 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 349) 
is amended by--
 (1) redesignating paragraphs (4) through (7) as (5) through 
 (8), respectively; and
 (2) inserting after paragraph (3) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(4) ensure acquisition programs (as such term is defined 
 in section 837) support the DHS Quadrennial Homeland Security 
 Review Report, the DHS Strategic Plan, the DHS Strategic 
 Priorities, and other appropriate successor documents;''.
 (f) Acquisition Authorities for Program Accountability and Risk 
Management (PARM) of the Department of Homeland Security.--
 (1) In general.--Title VII of the Homeland Security Act of 
 2002 (6 U.S.C. 341 et seq.), as amended by this Act, is further 
 amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 715. PROGRAM ACCOUNTABILITY AND RISK MANAGEMENT OFFICE.

 ``(a) Establishment of Office.--There is established in the 
Management Directorate of the Department a Program Accountability and 
Risk Management office. Such office shall--
 ``(1) provide consistent accountability, standardization, 
 and transparency of major acquisition programs of the 
 Department;
 ``(2) serve as the central oversight function for all 
 Department major acquisition programs; and
 ``(3) provide review and analysis of Department acquisition 
 programs, as appropriate.
 ``(b) Executive Director.--The Program Accountability and Risk 
Management office shall be led by an Executive Director. The Executive 
Director shall oversee the duties specified in subsection (a), report 
directly to the Under Secretary for Management, and carry out the 
following responsibilities:
 ``(1) Regularly monitor the performance of Department major 
 acquisition programs between acquisition decision events to 
 identify problems with cost, performance, or schedule that 
 components may need to address to prevent cost overruns, 
 performance issues, or schedule delays.
 ``(2) Assist the Under Secretary for Management in managing 
 the Department's acquisition programs, acquisition workforce, 
 and related activities of the Department.
 ``(3) Conduct oversight of individual acquisition programs 
 to implement Department acquisition program policy, procedures, 
 and guidance, with a priority on ensuring the data the office 
 collects and maintains from Department components is accurate 
 and reliable.
 ``(4) Serve as the focal point and coordinator for the 
 acquisition life-cycle review process and as the executive 
 secretariat for the Department's Acquisition Review Board.
 ``(5) Advise the persons having acquisition decision 
 authority to--
 ``(A) make acquisition decisions consistent with 
 all applicable laws; and
 ``(B) establish clear lines of authority, 
 accountability, and responsibility for acquisition 
 decision-making within the Department.
 ``(6) Develop standardized certification standards, in 
 consultation with the Component Acquisition Executives, for all 
 acquisition program managers.
 ``(7) Assess the results of major acquisition programs' 
 post-implementation reviews, and identify opportunities to 
 improve performance throughout the acquisition process.
 ``(8) Provide technical support and assistance to 
 Department acquisition programs and acquisition personnel, and 
 coordinate with the Chief Procurement Officer regarding 
 workforce training and development activities.
 ``(9) Assist, as appropriate, with the preparation of the 
 Future Years Homeland Security Program, and make such 
 information available to the congressional homeland security 
 committees.
 ``(10) In coordination with the Component Acquisition 
 Executives, maintain the Master Acquisition Oversight List, 
 updated quarterly, that shall serve as an inventory of all 
 major acquisition programs and non-major acquisition programs 
 within the Department, including for each such program--
 ``(A) the component sponsoring the acquisition;
 ``(B) the name of the acquisition;
 ``(C) the acquisition level as determined by the 
 anticipated life-cycle cost of the program and other 
 criteria pursuant to the Department-level acquisition 
 policy;
 ``(D) the acquisition decision authority for the 
 acquisition; and
 ``(E) the current acquisition phase.
 ``(c) Responsibilities of Components.--Each head of a component 
shall comply with Federal law, the Federal Acquisition Regulation, and 
Department acquisition management directives established by the Under 
Secretary for Management. For each major acquisition program, each head 
of a component shall--
 ``(1) establish an organizational structure for conducting 
 acquisitions within the component, to be managed by a Component 
 Acquisition Executive;
 ``(2) obtain the resources necessary to operate such an 
 organizational structure that are aligned with the number, 
 type, size, and complexity of the acquisition programs of the 
 component; and
 ``(3) oversee sustainment of capabilities deployed by major 
 acquisition programs and non-major acquisition programs after 
 all planned deployments are completed until such capabilities 
 are retired or replaced.
 ``(d) Responsibilities of Component Acquisition Executives.--Each 
Component Acquisition Executive shall--
 ``(1) establish and implement policies and guidance for 
 managing and conducting oversight for major acquisition 
 programs and non-major acquisition programs within the 
 component at issue that comply with Federal law, the Federal 
 Acquisition Regulation, and Department acquisition management 
 directives established by the Under Secretary for Management;
 ``(2) for each major acquisition program--
 ``(A) define baseline requirements and document 
 changes to such requirements, as appropriate;
 ``(B) establish a complete life cycle cost estimate 
 with supporting documentation that is consistent with 
 cost estimating best practices as identified by the 
 Comptroller General of the United States;
 ``(C) verify each life cycle cost estimate against 
 independent cost estimates or assessments, as 
 appropriate, and reconcile any differences;
 ``(D) complete a cost-benefit analysis with 
 supporting documentation; and
 ``(E) develop and maintain a schedule that is 
 consistent with scheduling best practices as identified 
 by the Comptroller General of the United States, 
 including, in appropriate cases, an integrated master 
 schedule;
 ``(3) ensure that all acquisition program documentation 
 provided by the component demonstrates the knowledge required 
 for successful program execution prior to final approval and is 
 complete, accurate, timely, and valid;
 ``(4) in such cases where it is appropriate, exercise the 
 acquisition decision authority to approve, pause, modify 
 (including the rescission of approvals of program milestones), 
 or cancel major acquisition programs or non-major acquisition 
 programs when delegated by the Under Secretary for Management 
 pursuant to section 701(d)(3); and
 ``(5) review, oversee, and direct activities between 
 acquisition decision events for major acquisition programs 
 within the component for which the Under Secretary for 
 Management is the acquisition decision authority.
 ``(e) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Acquisition.--The term `acquisition' has the meaning 
 given such term in section 131 of title 41, United States Code.
 ``(2) Acquisition decision authority.--The term 
 `acquisition decision authority' means the authority, in 
 addition to the authorities and functions specified in 
 subsection (b) of section 1702 of title 41, United States Code, 
 held by the Secretary acting through the Under Secretary for 
 Management to--
 ``(A) ensure compliance with Federal law, the 
 Federal Acquisition Regulation, and Department 
 acquisition management directives;
 ``(B) review (including approving, pausing, 
 modifying, or canceling) an acquisition program 
 throughout the life cycle of such program;
 ``(C) ensure that acquisition program managers have 
 the resources necessary to successfully execute an 
 approved acquisition program;
 ``(D) ensure appropriate acquisition program 
 management of cost, schedule, risk, and system or 
 service performance of the acquisition program at 
 issue, including assessing acquisition program baseline 
 breaches and directing any corrective action for such 
 breaches;
 ``(E) ensure that acquisition program managers, on 
 an ongoing basis, monitor cost, schedule, and 
 performance against established baselines and use tools 
 to assess risks to an acquisition program at all phases 
 of the life-cycle of such program; and
 ``(F) establish policies and procedures for major 
 acquisition programs of the Department.
 ``(3) Acquisition decision event.--The term `acquisition 
 decision event', with respect to an acquisition program, means 
 a predetermined point within the acquisition life-cycle at 
 which the acquisition decision authority determines whether 
 such acquisition program shall proceed to the next acquisition 
 phase.
 ``(4) Acquisition program.--The term `acquisition program' 
 means the conceptualization, initiation, design, development, 
 test, contracting, production, deployment, logistics support, 
 modification, or disposal of systems, supplies, or services 
 (including construction) to satisfy the Department's needs.
 ``(5) Acquisition program baseline.--The term `acquisition 
 program baseline', with respect to an acquisition program, 
 means the cost, schedule, and performance parameters, expressed 
 in standard, measurable, quantitative terms, which must be met 
 to accomplish the goals of such program.
 ``(6) Best practices.--The term `best practices', with 
 respect to acquisition, means a knowledge-based approach to 
 capability development, procurement, and support that includes 
 the following:
 ``(A) Identifying and validating needs.
 ``(B) Assessing alternatives to select the most 
 appropriate solution.
 ``(C) Establishing well-defined requirements.
 ``(D) Developing realistic cost assessments and 
 schedules that account for the entire life-cycle of an 
 acquisition.
 ``(E) Demonstrating technology, design, and 
 manufacturing maturity before initiating production.
 ``(F) Using milestones and exit criteria or 
 specific accomplishments that demonstrate the 
 attainment of knowledge to support progress throughout 
 the acquisition phases.
 ``(G) Regularly assessing and managing risks to 
 achieve requirements and cost and schedule goals.
 ``(H) To the maximum extent possible, adopting and 
 executing standardized processes.
 ``(I) Establishing a workforce that is qualified to 
 perform necessary acquisition roles.
 ``(J) Integrating into the Department's mission and 
 business operations the capabilities described in 
 subparagraphs (A) through (I).
 ``(7) Breach.--The term `breach', with respect to a major 
 acquisition program, means a failure to meet any cost, 
 schedule, or performance threshold specified in the most 
 recently approved acquisition program baseline.
 ``(8) Congressional homeland security committees.--The term 
 `congressional homeland security committees' means--
 ``(A) the Committee on Homeland Security of the 
 House of Representatives and the Committee on Homeland 
 Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate; and
 ``(B) the Committee on Appropriations of the House 
 of Representatives and the Committee on Appropriations 
 of the Senate.
 ``(9) Component acquisition executive.--The term `Component 
 Acquisition Executive' means the senior acquisition official 
 within a component who is designated in writing by the Under 
 Secretary for Management, in consultation with the component 
 head, with authority and responsibility for leading a process 
 and staff to provide acquisition and program management 
 oversight, policy, and guidance to ensure that statutory, 
 regulatory, and higher level policy requirements are fulfilled, 
 including compliance with Federal law, the Federal Acquisition 
 Regulation, and Department acquisition management directives 
 established by the Under Secretary.
 ``(10) Life-cycle cost.--The term `life-cycle cost' means 
 the total cost to the Government of acquiring, operating, 
 supporting, and (if applicable) disposing of the items being 
 acquired.
 ``(11) Major acquisition program.--The term `major 
 acquisition program' means a Department capital asset, 
 services, or hybrid acquisition program that is estimated by 
 the Secretary to require an eventual total expenditure of at 
 least $300,000,000 (based on fiscal year 2022 constant dollars) 
 over its life cycle or a program identified by the Chief 
 Acquisition Officer as a program of special interest.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of contents in section 
 1(b) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 is amended by 
 inserting after the item relating to section 714 the following 
 new item:

``Sec. 715. Program Accountability and Risk Management office.''.
 (g) Acquisition Documentation.--
 (1) In general.--Subtitle D of title VIII of the Homeland 
 Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 391 et seq.), as amended by this 
 Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new 
 section:

``SEC. 837. ACQUISITION DOCUMENTATION.

 ``For each major acquisition program (as such term is defined in 
section 714), the Secretary, acting through the Under Secretary for 
Management, shall require the head of each relevant component or office 
of the Department to--
 ``(1) maintain acquisition documentation that is complete, 
 accurate, timely, and valid, and that includes--
 ``(A) operational requirements that are validated 
 consistent with departmental policy;
 ``(B) a complete life-cycle cost estimate with 
 supporting documentation;
 ``(C) verification of such life-cycle cost estimate 
 against independent cost estimates, and reconciliation 
 of any differences;
 ``(D) a cost-benefit analysis with supporting 
 documentation;
 ``(E) an integrated master schedule with supporting 
 documentation;
 ``(F) plans for conducting systems engineering 
 reviews and test and evaluation activities throughout 
 development to support production and deployment 
 decisions;
 ``(G) an acquisition plan that outlines the 
 procurement approach, including planned contracting 
 vehicles;
 ``(H) a logistics and support plan for operating 
 and maintaining deployed capabilities until such 
 capabilities are disposed of or retired; and
 ``(I) an acquisition program baseline that is 
 traceable to the operational requirements of the 
 program required under subparagraphs (A), (B), and (E);
 ``(2) prepare cost estimates and schedules for major 
 acquisition programs pursuant to subparagraphs (B) and (E) of 
 paragraph (1) in a manner consistent with best practices as 
 identified by the Comptroller General of the United States; and
 ``(3) ensure any revisions to the acquisition documentation 
 maintained pursuant to paragraph (1) are reviewed and approved 
 in accordance with departmental policy.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of contents in section 
 1(b) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 is amended by adding 
 after the item relating to section 836 the following new item:

``Sec. 837. Acquisition documentation.''.

SEC. 6726. DHS ACQUISITION REVIEW BOARD.

 (a) In General.--Subtitle D of title VIII of the Homeland Security 
Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 391 et seq.) is further amended by adding at the 
end the following new section:

``SEC. 838. ACQUISITION REVIEW BOARD.

 ``(a) In General.--There is established in the Department an 
Acquisition Review Board (in this section referred to as the `Board') 
to support the Under Secretary for Management in managing the 
Department's acquisitions.
 ``(b) Composition.--
 ``(1) Chair.--The Under Secretary for Management shall 
 serve as chair of the Board.
 ``(2) Oversight.--The Under Secretary for Management may 
 designate an employee of the Department to oversee the 
 operations of the Board.
 ``(3) Participation.-- The Under Secretary for Management 
 shall ensure participation by other relevant Department 
 officials with responsibilities related to acquisitions as 
 permanent members of the Board, including the following:
 ``(A) The Chair of the Joint Requirements Council.
 ``(B) The Chief Financial Officer.
 ``(C) The Chief Human Capital Officer.
 ``(D) The Chief Information Officer.
 ``(E) The Chief Procurement Officer.
 ``(F) The Chief Readiness Support Officer.
 ``(G) The Chief Security Officer.
 ``(H) The Director of the Office of Test and 
 Evaluation.
 ``(I) Other relevant senior Department officials, 
 as designated by the Under Secretary for Management.
 ``(c) Meetings.--The Board shall meet regularly for purposes of 
evaluating the progress and status of an acquisition program. The Board 
shall convene at the Under Secretary for Management's discretion, and 
at such time as--
 ``(1) a new acquisition program is initiated;
 ``(2) a major acquisition program--
 ``(A) requires authorization to proceed from one 
 acquisition decision event to another throughout the 
 acquisition life-cycle;
 ``(B) is in breach of its approved acquisition 
 program baseline; or
 ``(C) requires additional review, as determined by 
 the Under Secretary for Management; or
 ``(3) a non-major acquisition program requires review, as 
 determined by the Under Secretary for Management.
 ``(d) Responsibilities.--The responsibilities of the Board are as 
follows:
 ``(1) Determine the appropriate acquisition level and 
 acquisition decision authority for new acquisition programs 
 based on the estimated eventual total expenditure of each such 
 program to satisfy the mission need of the Department over the 
 life-cycle of such acquisition regardless of funding source.
 ``(2) Determine whether a proposed acquisition has met the 
 requirements of key phases of the acquisition life-cycle 
 framework and is able to proceed to the next phase and eventual 
 full production and deployment.
 ``(3) Oversee whether a proposed acquisition's business 
 strategy, resources, management, and accountability is 
 executable and is aligned with the mission and strategic goals 
 of the Department.
 ``(4) Support the person with acquisition decision 
 authority for an acquisition in determining the appropriate 
 direction for such acquisition at key acquisition decision 
 events.
 ``(5) Conduct systematic reviews of acquisitions to ensure 
 that such acquisitions are progressing in accordance with best 
 practices and in compliance with the most recently approved 
 documents for such acquisitions' current acquisition phases.
 ``(6) Review the acquisition documents of each major 
 acquisition program, including the acquisition program baseline 
 and documentation reflecting consideration of tradeoffs among 
 cost, schedule, and performance objectives, to ensure the 
 reliability of underlying data.
 ``(7) Ensure that practices are adopted and implemented to 
 require consideration of trade-offs among cost, schedule, and 
 performance objectives as part of the process for developing 
 requirements for major acquisition programs prior to the 
 initiation of the second acquisition decision event, including, 
 at a minimum, the following practices:
 ``(A) Department officials responsible for 
 acquisition, budget, and cost estimating functions are 
 provided with the appropriate opportunity to develop 
 estimates and raise cost and schedule concerns before 
 performance objectives are established for capabilities 
 when feasible.
 ``(B) Full consideration is given to possible 
 trade-offs among cost, schedule, and performance 
 objectives for each alternative.
 ``(e) Documentation.--
 ``(1) In general.--The chair of the Board shall ensure that 
 all actions and decisions made pursuant to the responsibilities 
 of the Board under subsection (d) are documented in an 
 acquisition decision memorandum that includes--
 ``(A) a summary of the action at issue or purpose 
 for convening a meeting under subsection (c);
 ``(B) the decision with respect to actions 
 discussed during such meeting;
 ``(C) the rationale for such a decision, including 
 justifications for any such decision made to allow 
 acquisition programs to deviate from the acquisition 
 management policy of the Department;
 ``(D) any assigned items for further action; and
 ``(E) the signature of the chair verifying the 
 contents of such memorandum.
 ``(2) Submission of memorandum.--Not later than seven days 
 after the date on which the acquisition decision memorandum is 
 signed by the chair pursuant to paragraph (1)(E), the chair 
 shall submit to the Secretary, the Committee on Homeland 
 Security of the House of Representatives, and the Committee on 
 Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate a copy 
 of such memorandum.
 ``(f) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Acquisition.--The term `acquisition' has the meaning 
 given such term in section 131 of title 41, United States Code.
 ``(2) Acquisition decision authority.--The term 
 `acquisition decision authority' means the authority, held by 
 the Secretary to--
 ``(A) ensure acquisition programs are in compliance 
 with Federal law, the Federal Acquisition Regulation, 
 and Department acquisition management directives;
 ``(B) review (including approving, pausing, 
 modifying, or cancelling) an acquisition program 
 through the life-cycle of such program;
 ``(C) ensure that acquisition program managers have 
 the resources necessary to successfully execute an 
 approved acquisition program;
 ``(D) ensure appropriate acquisition program 
 management of cost, schedule, risk, and system 
 performance of the acquisition program at issue, 
 including assessing acquisition program baseline 
 breaches and directing any corrective action for such 
 breaches; and
 ``(E) ensure that acquisition program managers, on 
 an ongoing basis, monitor cost, schedule, and 
 performance against established baselines and use tools 
 to assess risks to an acquisition program at all phases 
 of the life-cycle of such program to avoid and mitigate 
 acquisition program baseline breaches.
 ``(3) Acquisition decision event.--The term `acquisition 
 decision event', with respect to an acquisition program, means 
 a predetermined point within each of the acquisition phases at 
 which the acquisition decision authority determines whether 
 such acquisition program shall proceed to the next acquisition 
 phase.
 ``(4) Acquisition decision memorandum.--The term 
 `acquisition decision memorandum' means the official documented 
 record of decisions, including the rationale for such decisions 
 and any assigned actions, for the acquisition at issue, as 
 determined by the person exercising acquisition decision 
 authority for such acquisition.
 ``(5) Acquisition program baseline.--The term `acquisition 
 program baseline', with respect to an acquisition program, 
 means a summary of the cost, schedule, and performance 
 parameters, expressed in standard, measurable, quantitative 
 terms, which must be satisfied to accomplish the goals of such 
 program.
 ``(6) Best practices.--The term `best practices', with 
 respect to acquisition, means a knowledge-based approach to 
 capability development that includes--
 ``(A) identifying and validating needs;
 ``(B) assessing alternatives to select the most 
 appropriate solution;
 ``(C) clearly establishing well-defined 
 requirements;
 ``(D) developing realistic cost estimates and 
 schedules that account for the entire life-cycle of 
 such an acquisition;
 ``(E) securing stable funding that matches 
 resources to requirements before initiating such 
 development;
 ``(F) demonstrating technology, design, and 
 manufacturing maturity before initiating production of 
 the item that is the subject of such acquisition;
 ``(G) using milestones and exit criteria or 
 specific accomplishments that demonstrate the 
 attainment of knowledge to support progress;
 ``(H) regularly assessing and managing risks to 
 achieving requirements and cost and schedule goals;
 ``(I) adopting and executing standardized processes 
 with known success across programs;
 ``(J) establishing an adequate workforce that is 
 qualified and sufficient to perform necessary 
 functions; and
 ``(K) integrating the capabilities described in 
 subparagraphs (A) through (J).
 ``(7) Major acquisition program.--The term `major 
 acquisition program' means--
 ``(A) a Department capital asset, service, or 
 hybrid acquisition program that is estimated by the 
 Secretary to require an eventual total expenditure of 
 at least $300 million (based on fiscal year 2022 
 constant dollars) over its life-cycle cost; or
 ``(B) a program identified by the Under Secretary 
 for Management as a program of special interest.
 ``(8) Non-major acquisition program.--The term `non-major 
 acquisition program' means a Department capital asset, service, 
 or hybrid acquisition program that is estimated by the 
 Secretary to require an eventual total expenditure of less than 
 $300,000,000 (based on fiscal year 2022 constant dollars) over 
 its life-cycle.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of 
the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 101 et seq.) is amended by 
inserting after the item relating to section 837 the following new 
item:

``Sec. 838. Acquisition Review Board.''.

SEC. 6727. DHS CONTRACT REPORTING.

 (a) Daily Public Report of Covered Contract Awards.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall post, maintain, and 
 update in accordance with paragraph (2), on a publicly 
 available website of the Department, a daily report of all 
 covered contract awards. Each reported covered contract award 
 shall include information relating to--
 (A) the contract number, modification number, or 
 delivery order number;
 (B) the contract type;
 (C) the amount obligated for such award;
 (D) the total contract value for such award, 
 including all options;
 (E) the description of the purpose for such award;
 (F) the number of proposals or bids received;
 (G) the name and address of the vendor, and whether 
 such vendor is considered a small business;
 (H) the period and each place of performance for 
 such award;
 (I) whether such award is multiyear;
 (J) whether such award requires a small business 
 subcontracting plan; and
 (K) the contracting office and the point of contact 
 for such office.
 (2) Update.--Updates referred to in paragraph (1) shall 
 occur not later than two business days after the date on which 
 the covered contract is authorized or modified.
 (3) Subscribing to alerts.--The website referred to in 
 paragraph (1) shall provide the option to subscribe to an 
 automatic notification of the publication of each report 
 required under such paragraph.
 (4) Effective date.--Paragraph (1) shall take effect on the 
 date that is 180 days after the date of the enactment of this 
 section.
 (b) Undefinitized Contract Action or Definitized Amount.--If a 
covered contract award reported pursuant to subsection (a) includes an 
undefinitized contract action, the Secretary shall--
 (1) report the estimated total contract value for such 
 award and the amount obligated upon award; and
 (2) once such award is definitized, update the total 
 contract value and amount obligated.
 (c) Exemption.--Each report required under subsection (a) shall not 
include covered contract awards relating to classified products, 
programs, or services.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Covered contract award.--The term ``covered contract 
 award''--
 (A) means a contract action of the Department with 
 the total authorized dollar amount of $4,000,000 or 
 greater, including unexercised options; and
 (B) includes--
 (i) contract awards governed by the Federal 
 Acquisition Regulation;
 (ii) modifications to a contract award that 
 increase the total value, expand the scope of 
 work, or extend the period of performance;
 (iii) orders placed on a multiple award or 
 multiple-agency contract that includes delivery 
 or quantity terms that are indefinite;
 (iv) other transaction authority 
 agreements; and
 (v) contract awards made with other than 
 full and open competition.
 (2) Definitized amount.--The term ``definitized amount'' 
 means the final amount of a covered contract award after 
 agreement between the Department and the contractor at issue.
 (3) Department.--The term ``Department'' means the 
 Department of Homeland Security.
 (4) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Homeland Security.
 (5) Small business.--The term ``small business'' means an 
 entity that qualifies as a small business concern, as such term 
 is described under section 3 of the Small Business Act (15 
 U.S.C. 632).
 (6) Total contract value.--The term ``total contract 
 value'' means the total amount of funds expected to be provided 
 to the contractor at issue under the terms of the contract 
 through the full period of performance.
 (7) Undefinitized contract action.--The term 
 ``undefinitized contract action'' means any contract action for 
 which the contract terms, specifications, or price is not 
 established prior to the start of the performance of a covered 
 contract award.

SEC. 6728. UNMANNED AERIAL SECURITY.

 (a) Prohibition on Agency Operation or Procurement.--Except as 
provided in subsection (b) and subsection (c)(3), the Secretary of 
Homeland Security may not operate, provide financial assistance for, or 
enter into or renew a contract for the procurement of--
 (1) an unmanned aircraft system (UAS) that--
 (A) is manufactured in a covered foreign country or 
 by a corporation domiciled in a covered foreign 
 country;
 (B) uses flight controllers, radios, data 
 transmission devices, cameras, or gimbals manufactured 
 in a covered foreign country or by a corporation 
 domiciled in a covered foreign country;
 (C) uses a ground control system or operating 
 software developed in a covered foreign country or by a 
 corporation domiciled in a covered foreign country; or
 (D) uses network connectivity or data storage 
 located in a covered foreign country or administered by 
 a corporation domiciled in a covered foreign country;
 (2) a software operating system associated with a UAS that 
 uses network connectivity or data storage located in a covered 
 foreign country or administered by a corporation domiciled in a 
 covered foreign country; or
 (3) a system for the detection or identification of a UAS, 
 which system is manufactured in a covered foreign country or by 
 a corporation domiciled in a covered foreign country.
 (b) Waiver.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Homeland Security is 
 authorized to waive the prohibition under subsection (a) if the 
 Secretary certifies in writing to the Committee on Homeland 
 Security of the House of Representatives and the Committee on 
 Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate that a 
 UAS, a software operating system associated with a UAS, or a 
 system for the detection or identification of a UAS referred to 
 in any of subparagraphs (A) through (C) of such subsection that 
 is the subject of such a waiver is required--
 (A) in the national interest of the United States;
 (B) for counter-UAS surrogate research, testing, 
 development, evaluation, or training; or
 (C) for intelligence, electronic warfare, or 
 information warfare operations, testing, analysis, and 
 or training.
 (2) Notice.--The certification described in paragraph (1) 
 shall be submitted to the Committees specified in such 
 paragraph by not later than the date that is 14 days after the 
 date on which a waiver is issued under such paragraph.
 (c) Effective Dates.--
 (1) In general.--This Act shall take effect on the date 
 that is 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) Waiver process.--Not later than 60 days after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland 
 Security shall establish a process by which the head of an 
 office or component of the Department of Homeland Security may 
 request a waiver under subsection (b).
 (3) Exception.--Notwithstanding the prohibition under 
 subsection (a), the head of an office or component of the 
 Department of Homeland Security may continue to operate a UAS, 
 a software operating system associated with a UAS, or a system 
 for the detection or identification of a UAS described in any 
 of subparagraphs (1) through (3) of such subsection that was in 
 the inventory of such office or component on the day before the 
 effective date of this Act until--
 (A) such time as the Secretary of Homeland Security 
 has--
 (i) granted a waiver relating thereto under 
 subsection (b); or
 (ii) declined to grant such a waiver; or
 (B) one year after the date of the enactment of 
 this Act,
 whichever is later.
 (d) Drone Origin Security Report to Congress.--Not later than 180 
days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of 
Homeland Security shall submit to the Committee on Homeland Security of 
the House of Representatives and the Committee on Homeland Security and 
Governmental Affairs of the Senate a terrorism threat assessment and 
report that contains information relating to the following:
 (1) The extent to which the Department of Homeland Security 
 has previously analyzed the threat that a UAS, a software 
 operating system associated with a UAS, or a system for the 
 detection or identification of a UAS from a covered foreign 
 country operating in the United States poses, and the results 
 of such analysis.
 (2) The number of UAS, software operating systems 
 associated with a UAS, or systems for the detection or 
 identification of a UAS from a covered foreign country in 
 operation by the Department, including an identification of the 
 component or office of the Department at issue, as of such 
 date.
 (3) The extent to which information gathered by such a UAS, 
 a software operating system associated with a UAS, or a system 
 for the detection or identification of a UAS from a covered 
 foreign country could be employed to harm the national or 
 economic security of the United States.
 (e) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Covered foreign country.--The term ``covered foreign 
 country'' means a country that--
 (A) the intelligence community has identified as a 
 foreign adversary in its most recent Annual Threat 
 Assessment; or
 (B) the Secretary of Homeland Security, in 
 coordination with the Director of National 
 Intelligence, has identified as a foreign adversary 
 that is not included in such Annual Threat Assessment.
 (2) Intelligence community.--The term ``intelligence 
 community'' has the meaning given such term in section 3(4) of 
 the National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3003(4)).
 (3) Unmanned aircraft system; uas.--The terms ``unmanned 
 aircraft system'' and ``UAS'' have the meaning given the term 
 ``unmanned aircraft system'' in section 44801 of title 49, 
 United States Code.

 Subtitle C--Enhancing DHS Operations

SEC. 6731. QUADRENNIAL HOMELAND SECURITY REVIEW TECHNICAL CORRECTIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 707 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 
(6 U.S.C. 347) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(3)--
 (A) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``and'' after 
 the semicolon at the end;
 (B) by redesignating subparagraph (C) as 
 subparagraph (D); and
 (C) by inserting after subparagraph (B) the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(C) representatives from appropriate advisory 
 committees established pursuant to section 871, 
 including the Homeland Security Advisory Council and 
 the Homeland Security Science and Technology Advisory 
 Committee, or otherwise established, including the 
 Aviation Security Advisory Committee established 
 pursuant to section 44946 of title 49, United States 
 Code; and'';
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (2), by inserting before the 
 semicolon at the end the following: ``based on the risk 
 assessment required pursuant to subsection (c)(2)(B)'';
 (B) in paragraph (3)--
 (i) by inserting ``, to the extent 
 practicable,'' after ``describe''; and
 (ii) by striking ``budget plan'' and 
 inserting ``resources required'';
 (C) in paragraph (4)--
 (i) by inserting ``, to the extent 
 practicable,'' after ``identify'';
 (ii) by striking ``budget plan required to 
 provide sufficient resources to successfully'' 
 and inserting ``resources required to''; and
 (iii) by striking the semicolon at the end 
 and inserting the following: ``, including any 
 resources identified from redundant, wasteful, 
 or unnecessary capabilities or capacities that 
 may be redirected to better support other 
 existing capabilities or capacities, as the 
 case may be; and'';
 (D) in paragraph (5), by striking ``; and'' and 
 inserting a period; and
 (E) by striking paragraph (6);
 (3) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``December 31 of 
 the year'' and inserting ``60 days after the date of 
 the submission of the President's budget for the fiscal 
 year after the fiscal year'';
 (B) in paragraph (2)--
 (i) in subparagraph (B), by striking 
 ``description of the threats to'' and inserting 
 ``risk assessment of'';
 (ii) in subparagraph (C), by inserting ``, 
 as required under subsection (b)(2)'' before 
 the semicolon at the end;
 (iii) in subparagraph (D)--
 (I) by inserting ``to the extent 
 practicable,'' before ``a 
 description''; and
 (II) by striking ``budget plan'' 
 and inserting ``resources required'';
 (iv) in subparagraph (F)--
 (I) by inserting ``to the extent 
 practicable,'' before ``a discussion''; 
 and
 (II) by striking ``the status of'';
 (v) in subparagraph (G)--
 (I) by inserting ``to the extent 
 practicable,'' before ``a discussion'';
 (II) by striking ``the status of'';
 (III) by inserting ``and risks'' 
 before ``to national homeland''; and
 (IV) by inserting ``and'' after the 
 semicolon at the end;
 (vi) by striking subparagraph (H); and
 (vii) by redesignating subparagraph (I) as 
 subparagraph (H);
 (C) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph 
 (4); and
 (D) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following 
 new paragraph:
 ``(3) Documentation.--The Secretary shall retain and, upon 
 request, provide to Congress the following documentation 
 regarding each quadrennial homeland security review:
 ``(A) Records regarding the consultation carried 
 out pursuant to subsection (a)(3), including the 
 following:
 ``(i) All written communications, including 
 communications sent out by the Secretary and 
 feedback submitted to the Secretary through 
 technology, online communications tools, in-
 person discussions, and the interagency 
 process.
 ``(ii) Information on how feedback received 
 by the Secretary informed each such quadrennial 
 homeland security review.
 ``(B) Information regarding the risk assessment 
 required pursuant to subsection (c)(2)(B), including 
 the following:
 ``(i) The risk model utilized to generate 
 such risk assessment.
 ``(ii) Information, including data used in 
 the risk model, utilized to generate such risk 
 assessment.
 ``(iii) Sources of information, including 
 other risk assessments, utilized to generate 
 such risk assessment.
 ``(iv) Information on assumptions, weighing 
 factors, and subjective judgments utilized to 
 generate such risk assessment, together with 
 information on the rationale or basis 
 thereof.'';
 (4) by redesignating subsection (d) as subsection (e); and
 (5) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(d) Review.--Not later than 90 days after the submission of each 
report required under subsection (c)(1), the Secretary shall provide to 
the Committee on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives and 
the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the 
Senate information on the degree to which the findings and 
recommendations developed in the quadrennial homeland security review 
that is the subject of such report were integrated into the acquisition 
strategy and expenditure plans for the Department.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this Act shall apply 
with respect to a quadrennial homeland security review conducted after 
December 31, 2021.

SEC. 6732. BOMBING PREVENTION.

 (a) Office for Bombing Prevention.--
 (1) In general.--Title XXII of the Homeland Security Act of 
 2002 (6 U.S.C. 651 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new subtitle:

 ``Subtitle E--Bombing Prevention

``SEC. 2251. OFFICE FOR BOMBING PREVENTION.

 ``(a) Establishment.--There is established within the Department an 
Office for Bombing Prevention (in this section referred to as the 
`Office').
 ``(b) Activities.--The Office shall have the primary responsibility 
within the Department for enhancing the ability and coordinating the 
efforts of the United States to deter, detect, prevent, protect 
against, mitigate, and respond to terrorist explosive threats and 
attacks in the United States, including by carrying out the following:
 ``(1) Advising the Secretary on matters related to 
 terrorist explosive threats and attacks in the United States.
 ``(2) Coordinating the efforts of the Department to counter 
 terrorist explosive threats and attacks in the United States, 
 including by carrying out the following:
 ``(A) Developing, in coordination with the Under 
 Secretary for Strategy, Policy, and Plans, the 
 Department's strategy against terrorist explosives 
 threats and attacks, including efforts to support the 
 security and preparedness of critical infrastructure 
 and the public sector and private sector.
 ``(B) Leading the prioritization of the 
 Department's efforts against terrorist explosive 
 threats and attacks, including preparedness and 
 operational requirements.
 ``(C) Ensuring, in coordination with the Under 
 Secretary for Science and Technology and the 
 Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management 
 Agency, the identification, evaluation, and 
 availability of effective technology applications 
 through field pilot testing and acquisition of such 
 technology applications by the public sector to deter, 
 detect, prevent, protect against, mitigate, and respond 
 to terrorist explosive threats and attacks in the 
 United States.
 ``(D) Providing advice and recommendations to the 
 Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management 
 Agency regarding the effective use of grants authorized 
 under section 2002.
 ``(E) In coordination with the Assistant Secretary 
 for Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction, aligning 
 Department efforts related to terrorist explosive 
 threats and attacks in the United States and weapons of 
 mass destruction.
 ``(3) Engaging other Federal departments and agencies, 
 including Sector Risk Management Agencies, regarding terrorist 
 explosive threats and attacks in the United States.
 ``(4) Facilitating information sharing and decision support 
 of the public and private sector involved in deterrence, 
 detection, prevention, protection against, mitigation of, and 
 response to terrorist explosive threats and attacks in the 
 United States. Such sharing and support may include the 
 following:
 ``(A) Operating and maintaining a secure 
 information sharing system that allows the sharing of 
 critical information and data relating to terrorist 
 explosive attack tactics, techniques, procedures, and 
 security capabilities, including information and data 
 described in paragraph (6) and section 2242.
 ``(B) Working with international partners, in 
 coordination with the Office for International Affairs 
 of the Department, to develop and share effective 
 practices to deter, prevent, detect, protect against, 
 mitigate, and respond to terrorist explosive threats 
 and attacks in the United States.
 ``(5) Promoting security awareness among the public and 
 private sector and the general public regarding the risks posed 
 by the misuse of explosive precursor chemicals and other bomb-
 making materials.
 ``(6) Providing training, guidance, assessments, and 
 planning assistance to the public and private sector, as 
 appropriate, to help counter the risk of terrorist explosive 
 threats and attacks in the United States.
 ``(7) Conducting analysis and planning for the capabilities 
 and requirements necessary for the public and private sector, 
 as appropriate, to deter, detect, prevent, protect against, 
 mitigate, and respond to terrorist explosive threats and 
 attacks in the United States by carrying out the following:
 ``(A) Maintaining a database on capabilities and 
 requirements, including capabilities and requirements 
 of public safety bomb squads, explosive detection 
 canine teams, special tactics teams, public safety dive 
 teams, and recipients of services described in section 
 2242.
 ``(B) Applying the analysis derived from the 
 database described in subparagraph (A) with respect to 
 the following:
 ``(i) Evaluating progress toward closing 
 identified gaps relating to national strategic 
 goals and standards related to deterring, 
 detecting, preventing, protecting against, 
 mitigating, and responding to terrorist 
 explosive threats and attacks in the United 
 States.
 ``(ii) Informing decisions relating to 
 homeland security policy, assistance, training, 
 research, development efforts, testing and 
 evaluation, and related requirements regarding 
 deterring, detecting, preventing, protecting 
 against, mitigating, and responding to 
 terrorist explosive threats and attacks in the 
 United States.
 ``(8) Promoting secure information sharing of sensitive 
 material and promoting security awareness, including by 
 carrying out the following:
 ``(A) Operating and maintaining a secure 
 information sharing system that allows the sharing 
 among and between the public and private sector of 
 critical information relating to explosive attack 
 tactics, techniques, and procedures.
 ``(B) Educating the public and private sectors 
 about explosive precursor chemicals.
 ``(C) Working with international partners, in 
 coordination with the Office for International Affairs 
 of the Department, to develop and share effective 
 practices to deter, detect, prevent, protect against, 
 mitigate, and respond to terrorist explosive threats 
 and attacks in the United States.
 ``(D) Executing national public awareness and 
 vigilance campaigns relating to terrorist explosive 
 threats and attacks in the United States, preventing 
 explosive attacks, and activities and measures underway 
 to safeguard the United States.
 ``(E) Working with relevant stakeholder 
 organizations.
 ``(9) Providing any other assistance the Secretary 
 determines necessary.

``SEC. 2252. COUNTERING EXPLOSIVE DEVICES TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.

 ``(a) Establishment.--Upon request, the Secretary shall, to the 
extent practicable, provide to the public and private sector technical 
assistance services to support the security and preparedness of such 
sectors, as appropriate, to counter terrorist explosive threats and 
attacks that pose a risk in certain jurisdictions, including vulnerable 
and disadvantaged communities, to critical infrastructure facilities, 
or to special events, as appropriate.
 ``(b) Elements.--Technical assistance services provided pursuant to 
subsection (a) shall--
 ``(1) support the planning and implementation of effective 
 measures to deter, detect, prevent, protect against, mitigate, 
 and respond to terrorist explosive threats and attacks in the 
 United States, including effective strategic risk management 
 and emergency operations plans;
 ``(2) support the security of explosive precursor chemicals 
 and other bomb-making materials outside of regulatory control;
 ``(3) support efforts to prepare for and respond to bomb 
 threats or other acts involving the malicious conveyance of 
 false information concerning terrorist explosive threats and 
 attacks in the United States;
 ``(4) make available resources to enhance deterrence, 
 prevention, detection, protection, mitigation, and response 
 capabilities for terrorist explosive threats and attacks in the 
 United States, including coordination and communication, to 
 better integrate State, local, Tribal, and territorial and 
 private sector capabilities and assets, as appropriate, with 
 Federal operations;
 ``(5) make available augmenting resources, as appropriate, 
 to enable State, local, Tribal, and territorial governments to 
 sustain and refresh their capabilities;
 ``(6) track performance in meeting the goals and associated 
 plans of the provision of such technical assistance; and
 ``(7) include any other assistance the Secretary determines 
 necessary.

``SEC. 2253. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER DEPARTMENT COMPONENTS AND FEDERAL 
 AGENCIES.

 ``(a) In General.--The authority of the Secretary under this 
subtitle shall not affect or diminish the authority or the 
responsibility of any officer of any other Federal agency with respect 
to the command, control, or direction of the functions, personnel, 
funds, assets, or liabilities of any other such Federal agency.
 ``(b) Department Components.--Nothing in this subtitle or any other 
provision of law may be construed to affect or reduce the 
responsibilities of--
 ``(1) the Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office or 
 the Assistant Secretary of the Office, including with respect 
 to any asset, function, or mission of the Office or the 
 Assistant Secretary, as the case may be;
 ``(2) the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the 
 Administrator of the Agency, including the diversion of any 
 asset, function, or mission of the Agency or the Administrator 
 as the case may be; or
 ``(3) the Transportation Security Administration or the 
 Administrator of the Administration, including the diversion of 
 any asset, function, or mission of the Administration or the 
 Administrator, as the case may be.''.
 (2) Strategy and reports.--
 (A) Strategy.--Not later than one year after the 
 date of the enactment of this section, the head of the 
 Office for Bombing Prevention of the Department of 
 Homeland Security (established pursuant to section 2241 
 of the Homeland Security Act of 2002, as added by 
 paragraph (1)), in consultation with the heads of other 
 components of the Department and the heads of other 
 Federal agencies, as appropriate, shall develop a 
 strategy to align the Office's activities with the 
 threat environment and stakeholder needs, and make the 
 public and private sector aware of the Office's 
 capabilities. Such strategy shall include the following 
 elements:
 (i) Information on terrorist explosive 
 threats, tactics, and attacks in the United 
 States.
 (ii) Information, by region of the United 
 States, regarding public and private sector 
 entities likely to be targeted by terrorist 
 explosive threats and attacks in the United 
 States, including historically black colleges 
 and universities and minority serving 
 institutions, places of worship, health care 
 facilities, transportation systems, commercial 
 facilities, and government facilities.
 (iii) Guidance on how outreach to owners 
 and operators of critical infrastructure (as 
 such term is defined in section 1016(e) of 
 Public Law 107-56 (42 U.S.C. 5195c(e))) in a 
 region should be prioritized.
 (iv) A catalogue of the services and 
 training currently offered by the Office, and a 
 description of how such services and trainings 
 assist the public and private sector to deter, 
 detect, prevent, protect against, mitigate, and 
 respond to terrorist explosive threats and 
 attacks in the United States.
 (v) Long-term objectives of the Office, 
 including future service and training 
 offerings.
 (vi) Metrics for measuring the 
 effectiveness of services and trainings offered 
 by the Office.
 (vii) An assessment of resource 
 requirements necessary to implement such 
 strategy.
 (viii) A description of how the Office 
 partners with other components of the 
 Department and other Federal agencies to carry 
 out its mission.
 (B) Reports.--Not later than one year after the 
 date of the enactment of this section and annually 
 thereafter, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall 
 submit to the Committee on Homeland Security of the 
 House of Representatives and the Committee on Homeland 
 Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate a 
 report describing the activities of the Office for 
 Bombing Prevention of the Department of Homeland 
 Security (established pursuant to section 2241 of the 
 Homeland Security Act of 2002, as added by paragraph 
 (1)). Each such report shall include information on the 
 following:
 (i) Changes to terrorist explosive threats, 
 tactics, and attacks in the United States.
 (ii) Changes to the types of public and 
 private sector entities likely to be targeted 
 by terrorist explosive threats and attacks in 
 the United States.
 (iii) The number of trainings, assessments, 
 and other engagements carried out by the Office 
 within each region of the United States, 
 including a description of the critical 
 infrastructure sector or stakeholder served.
 (iv) The number of trainings, assessments, 
 or other engagements the Office was asked to 
 conduct but did not, and an explanation 
 relating thereto.
 (v) The effectiveness of the trainings, 
 assessments, or other engagements provided by 
 the Office based on the metrics described in 
 subparagraph (A)(vi).
 (vi) Any changes or anticipated changes in 
 the trainings, assessments, and other 
 engagements, or any other services, offered by 
 the Office, and an explanation relating 
 thereto.
 (3) Clerical amendment.--The table of contents in section 
 1(b) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 is amended by 
 inserting after the item relating to section 2246 the following 
 new items:

 ``Subtitle E--Bombing Prevention

``Sec. 2251. Office for Bombing Prevention.
``Sec. 2252. Countering explosive devices technical assistance.
``Sec. 2253. Relationship to other Department components and Federal 
 agencies.''.
 (b) Explosives Technology Development.--
 (1) In general.--Title III of the Homeland Security Act of 
 2002 (6 U.S.C. 181 et seq.) is further amended by adding at the 
 end the following new section:

``SEC. 324. EXPLOSIVES RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Under 
Secretary for Science and Technology, and in coordination with the head 
of the Office for Bombing Prevention and the Assistant Secretary for 
the Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office, and in consultation 
with the Attorney General, the Secretary of Defense, and the head of 
any other relevant Federal department or agency, including Sector Risk 
Management Agencies, shall ensure coordination and information sharing 
regarding nonmilitary research, development, testing, and evaluation 
activities of the Federal Government relating to the deterrence, 
detection, prevention, protection against, mitigation of, and response 
to terrorist explosive threats and attacks in the United States.
 ``(b) Leveraging Military Research.--The Secretary, acting through 
the Under Secretary for Science and Technology, and in coordination 
with the head of the Office for Bombing Prevention and the Assistant 
Secretary for the Countering of Weapons of Mass Destruction Office, 
shall consult with the Secretary of Defense and the head of any other 
relevant Federal department or agency, including Sector Risk Management 
Agencies, to ensure that, to the maximum extent possible, military 
policies and procedures, and research, development, testing, and 
evaluation activities relating to the deterrence, detection, 
prevention, protection against, mitigation of, and response to 
terrorist explosive threats and attacks in the United States are 
adapted to nonmilitary uses.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of contents in section 
 1(b) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 is amended by 
 inserting after the item relating to section 323 the following 
 new item:

``Sec. 324. Explosives research and development.''.

SEC. 6733. DHS BASIC TRAINING ACCREDITATION IMPROVEMENT.

 (a) Reporting on Basic Training Programs of the Department of 
Homeland Security.--
 (1) Annual reporting.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act and annually 
 thereafter, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall 
 report to the relevant congressional committees on the 
 accreditation status for each basic training program 
 within the Department of Homeland Security, including 
 information relating to the following:
 (i) The date on which each such program 
 achieved initial accreditation, or in the case 
 of a program that is not currently accredited, 
 the reasons for not obtaining or maintaining 
 accreditation, the activities, if any, taken to 
 achieve accreditation, and an anticipated 
 timeline for accreditation of such program.
 (ii) The date each such program most 
 recently received accreditation or 
 reaccreditation, if applicable.
 (iii) Each such program's anticipated 
 accreditation or next reaccreditation date.
 (iv) The name of the accreditation manager 
 for each such program.
 (B) Termination of reporting requirement.--Annual 
 reports under subparagraph (A) shall terminate when all 
 basic training programs of the Department of Homeland 
 Security are accredited.
 (2) Lapse in accreditation.--
 (A) In general.--If a basic training program of the 
 Department of Homeland Security loses accreditation, 
 the head of the relevant component of the Department 
 shall notify the Secretary of Homeland Security not 
 later than 30 days after such loss.
 (B) Notice to congress.--Not later than 30 days 
 after receiving a notification pursuant to subparagraph 
 (A), the Secretary of Homeland Security shall notify 
 the relevant congressional committees of the lapse in 
 accreditation at issue, the reason for such lapse, and 
 the activities underway and planned to regain 
 accreditation.
 (3) Definitions.--In this section:
 (A) Accreditation.--The term ``accreditation'' 
 means the recognition by a board that a basic training 
 program is administered, developed, and delivered 
 according to an applicable set of standards.
 (B) Accreditation manager.--The term 
 ``accreditation manager'' means the individual assigned 
 by the component of the Department of Homeland Security 
 to manage accreditation activities for a basic training 
 program.
 (C) Basic training program.--The term ``basic 
 training program'' means an entry level program of the 
 Department of Homeland Security that is transitional to 
 law enforcement service, provides training on critical 
 competencies and responsibilities, and is typically a 
 requirement for appointment to a law enforcement 
 service job or job series.
 (D) Reaccreditation.--The term ``reaccreditation'' 
 means the assessment of a basic training program after 
 initial accreditation to ensure the continued 
 compliance with an applicable set of standards.
 (E) Relevant congressional committees.--The term 
 ``relevant congressional committees'' means the 
 Committee on Homeland Security and the Committee on the 
 Judiciary of the House of Representatives and the 
 Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs 
 and the Committee of the Judiciary of the Senate.
 (b) Research and Development.--The Under Secretary for Science and 
Technology of the Department of Homeland Security shall carry out 
research and development of systems and technologies to enhance access 
to training offered by the Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers to 
State, local, Tribal, and territorial law enforcement, with particular 
attention to law enforcement in rural and remote communities, for the 
purpose of enhancing domestic preparedness for and collective response 
to terrorism and other homeland security threats.

SEC. 6734. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY INSPECTOR GENERAL 
 TRANSPARENCY.

 (a) In General.--Subtitle B of title VIII of the Homeland Security 
Act of 2002 is amended by inserting before section 812 the following 
new section:

``SEC. 811. OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL.

 ``(a) Publication of Reports.--
 ``(1) In general.--Beginning not later than 30 days after 
 the date of the enactment of this section, the Inspector 
 General of the Department shall submit to the appropriate 
 congressional committees any report finalized on and after such 
 date that substantiates--
 ``(A) a violation of paragraph (8) or (9) of 
 section 2302(b) of title 5, United States Code, section 
 1034 of title 10, United States Code, or Presidential 
 Personnel Directive-19; or
 ``(B) an allegation of misconduct, waste, fraud, 
 abuse, or violation of policy within the Department 
 involving a member of the Senior Executive Service or 
 politically appointed official of the Department.
 ``(2) Public availability.--
 ``(A) In general.--Concurrent with the submission 
 to the appropriate congressional committees of reports 
 pursuant to paragraph (1), the Inspector General shall, 
 consistent with privacy, civil rights, and civil 
 liberties protections, publish on a publicly available 
 website of the Inspector General each such report.
 ``(B) Exception.--The requirement pursuant to 
 subparagraph (A) to publish reports does not apply if 
 section (5)(e)(1) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 
 applies to any such report.
 ``(3) Requirement.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Inspector General of the 
 Department may not redact any portion of a report 
 submitted pursuant to paragraph (1).
 ``(B) Exception.--The requirement under 
 subparagraph (A) shall not apply with respect to the 
 name or any other identifying information, including 
 any contextual details not relevant to the audit, 
 inspection, or evaluation at issue that may be used by 
 other employees or officers of the Department to 
 determine the identity of a whistleblower complainant, 
 of a whistleblower complainant who does not consent to 
 the inclusion of such in a report of the Inspector 
 General.
 ``(b) Semiannual Reporting.--Beginning with the first semiannual 
report transmitted to the appropriate committees or subcommittees of 
the Congress pursuant to section 5(b) of the Inspector General Act of 
1978 that is transmitted after the date of the enactment of this 
section, each such report shall be accompanied by a list of ongoing 
audits, inspections, and evaluations of the Department, together with a 
narrative description relating to each such audit, inspection, or 
evaluation that identifies the scope of such audit, inspection, or 
evaluation, as the case may be, as well as the subject office, 
component, or directorate of the Department. For each such ongoing 
audit, inspection, or evaluation such narrative description shall 
include the following:
 ``(1) Information relating to the source of each such 
 audit, inspection, or evaluation.
 ``(2) Information regarding whether each such audit, 
 inspection, or evaluation is being conducted independently, 
 jointly, concurrently, or in some other manner.
 ``(3) In the event each such audit, inspection, or 
 evaluation was initiated due to a referral, the date on which 
 the Inspector General notified the originator of a referral of 
 the Inspector General's intention to carry out such audit, 
 inspection, or evaluation.
 ``(4) Information relating to the dates on which--
 ``(A) each such audit, inspection, or evaluation 
 was initiated;
 ``(B) a draft report relating to each such audit, 
 inspection, or evaluation is scheduled to be submitted 
 to the Secretary for review; and
 ``(C) a final report relating to each such audit, 
 inspection, or evaluation is scheduled to be submitted 
 to the appropriate congressional committees and 
 published on the website of the Inspector General in 
 accordance with paragraphs (1) and (2), respectively, 
 of subsection (a).
 ``(5) An explanation for--
 ``(A) any significant changes to the narrative 
 description of each such audit, inspection, or 
 evaluation, including the identification of the subject 
 office, component, or directorate of the Department; or
 ``(B) a delay of more than 30 days in the scheduled 
 date for submitting to the Secretary a draft report for 
 review or publishing on the website of the Inspector 
 General of the Department the final report relating to 
 each such audit, inspection, or evaluation.
 ``(6) Data regarding tips and complaints made to the 
 Inspector General Hotline of the Department or otherwise 
 referred to the Department, including--
 ``(A) the number and type of tips and complaints 
 regarding fraud, waste, abuse, corruption, financial 
 crimes, civil rights and civil liberty abuse, or other 
 complaints regarding criminal or non-criminal activity 
 associated with fraud, waste, or abuse;
 ``(B) actions taken by the Department to address or 
 resolve each substantiated tip or complaint;
 ``(C) the total amount of time it took the 
 Department to so address or resolve each such 
 substantiated tip or complaint;
 ``(D) the total number of tips and complaints that 
 are substantiated compared with the number of tips and 
 complaints that are unsubstantiated; and
 ``(E) the percentage of audits, inspections, and 
 evaluations that are initiated as a result of tips and 
 complaints made to the Inspector General Hotline.
 ``(c) Notification to Congress.--The Inspector General of the 
Department shall notify the Committee on Homeland Security of the House 
of Representatives and the Committee on Homeland Security and 
Governmental Affairs of the Senate if the head of an office or 
component of the Department does not provide in a timely manner to the 
Inspector General information or assistance that is requested by the 
Inspector General to conduct an audit, inspection, or evaluation.
 ``(d) Definition.--In this section, the term `appropriate 
congressional committees' means the Committee on Homeland Security of 
the House of Representatives, the Committee on Homeland Security and 
Governmental Affairs of the Senate, and any committee of the House of 
Representatives or the Senate, respectively, having legislative or 
oversight jurisdiction under the Rules of the House of Representatives 
or the Senate, respectively, over the matter concerned.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of 
the Homeland Security Act of 2002 is amended by amending the item 
relating to section 811 to read as follows:

``Sec. 811. Office of Inspector General.''.
 (c) Reports.--
 (1) Inspector general of dhs.--Not later than one year 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Inspector 
 General of the Department of Homeland Security shall submit to 
 the Committee on Homeland Security of the House of 
 Representatives, the Committee on Homeland Security and 
 Governmental Affairs of the Senate, and the Comptroller General 
 of the United States a report on the policies, procedures, and 
 internal controls established that ensure compliance with the 
 Quality Standards for Federal Offices of Inspector General from 
 the Council of Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency.
 (2) Comptroller general.--Not later than one year after 
 receipt of the report required under paragraph (1), the 
 Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to the 
 Committee on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives 
 and the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs 
 of the Senate an evaluation of such report.

SEC. 6735. PRESIDENT'S CUP CYBERSECURITY COMPETITION.

 (a) In General.--The Director of the Cybersecurity and 
Infrastructure Security Agency (in this section referred to as the 
``Director'') of the Department of Homeland Security is authorized to 
hold an annual cybersecurity competition to be known as the 
``Department of Homeland Security Cybersecurity and Infrastructure 
Security Agency's President's Cup Cybersecurity Competition'' (in this 
section referred to as the ``competition'') for the purpose of 
identifying, challenging, and competitively awarding prizes, including 
cash prizes, to the United States Government's best cybersecurity 
practitioners and teams across offensive and defensive cybersecurity 
disciplines.
 (b) Competition Design.--
 (1) In general.--Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, 
 United States Code, the Director, in carrying out the 
 competition, may consult with, and consider advice from, any 
 person who has experience or expertise in the development, 
 design, or execution of cybersecurity competitions.
 (2) Limitation.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 
 U.S.C. App.) shall not apply to consultations pursuant to this 
 section.
 (3) Prohibition.--A person with whom the Director consults 
 under paragraph (1) may not--
 (A) receive pay by reason of being so consulted; or
 (B) be considered an employee of the Federal 
 Government by reason of so consulting.
 (c) Eligibility.--To be eligible to participate in the competition, 
an individual shall be a Federal civilian employee or member of the 
uniformed services (as such term is defined in section 2101(3) of title 
5, United States Code) and shall comply with any rules promulgated by 
the Director regarding the competition.
 (d) Competition Administration.--The Director may enter into a 
grant, contract, cooperative agreement, or other agreement with a 
private sector for-profit or nonprofit entity or State or local 
government agency to administer the competition.
 (e) Competition Parameters.--Each competition shall incorporate the 
following elements:
 (1) Cybersecurity skills outlined in the National 
 Initiative for Cybersecurity Education Framework, or any 
 successor framework.
 (2) Individual and team events.
 (3) Categories demonstrating offensive and defensive cyber 
 operations, such as software reverse engineering and 
 exploitation, network operations, forensics, big data analysis, 
 cyber analysis, cyber defense, cyber exploitation, secure 
 programming, obfuscated coding, or cyber-physical systems.
 (4) Any other elements related to paragraphs (1), (2), or 
 (3) as determined necessary by the Director.
 (f) Use of Funds.--
 (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 law, the Director may use amounts made available to the 
 Director for the competition for the following:
 (A) Advertising, marketing, and promoting the 
 competition.
 (B) Meals for participants and organizers of the 
 competition if attendance at the meal during the 
 competition is necessary to maintain the integrity of 
 the competition.
 (C) Promotional items, including merchandise and 
 apparel.
 (D) Monetary and nonmonetary awards for competition 
 participants, including members of the uniformed 
 services.
 (E) Necessary expenses for the honorary recognition 
 of competition participants, including members of the 
 uniformed services.
 (F) Any other appropriate activity necessary to 
 carry out the competition, as determined by the 
 Director.
 (2) Application.--This subsection shall apply to amounts 
 appropriated on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (g) Prize Limitation.--The Director may make one or more awards per 
competition, except that the amount or value of each shall not exceed 
$10,000. The Secretary of Homeland Security may make one or more awards 
per competition, except the amount or the value of each shall not to 
exceed $25,000. A monetary award under this section shall be in 
addition to the regular pay of the recipient.
 (h) Reporting Requirements.--The Director shall annually provide to 
the Committee on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives and 
the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the 
Senate a report that includes the following:
 (1) A description of available funds under subsection (f) 
 for each competition conducted in the preceding year.
 (2) A description of expenditures authorized in subsection 
 (g) for each competition.
 (3) Information relating to the participation of each 
 competition.
 (4) Information relating to lessons learned from each 
 competition and how such lessons may be applied to improve 
 cybersecurity operations and recruitment of the Cybersecurity 
 and Infrastructure Security Agency of the Department of 
 Homeland Security.

SEC. 6736. INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS CYBERSECURITY TRAINING.

 (a) In General.--Subtitle A of title XXII of the Homeland Security 
Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 651 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new section:

``SEC. 2220E. INDUSTRIAL CONTROL SYSTEMS CYBERSECURITY TRAINING 
 INITIATIVE.

 ``(a) Establishment.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Industrial Control Systems 
 Cybersecurity Training Initiative (in this section referred to 
 as the `Initiative') is established within the Agency.
 ``(2) Purpose.--The purpose of the Initiative is to develop 
 and strengthen the skills of the cybersecurity workforce 
 related to securing industrial control systems.
 ``(b) Requirements.--In carrying out the Initiative, the Director 
shall--
 ``(1) ensure the Initiative includes--
 ``(A) virtual and in-person trainings and courses 
 provided at no cost to participants;
 ``(B) trainings and courses available at different 
 skill levels, including introductory level courses;
 ``(C) trainings and courses that cover cyber 
 defense strategies for industrial control systems, 
 including an understanding of the unique cyber threats 
 facing industrial control systems and the mitigation of 
 security vulnerabilities in industrial control systems 
 technology; and
 ``(D) appropriate consideration regarding the 
 availability of trainings and courses in different 
 regions of the United States; and
 ``(2) engage in--
 ``(A) collaboration with the National Laboratories 
 of the Department of Energy in accordance with section 
 309;
 ``(B) consultation with Sector Risk Management 
 Agencies; and
 ``(C) as appropriate, consultation with private 
 sector entities with relevant expertise, such as 
 vendors of industrial control systems technologies.
 ``(c) Reports.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than one year after the date 
 of the enactment of this section and annually thereafter, the 
 Director shall submit to the Committee on Homeland Security of 
 the House of Representatives and the Committee on Homeland 
 Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate a report on the 
 Initiative.
 ``(2) Contents.--Each report under paragraph (1) shall 
 include the following:
 ``(A) A description of the courses provided under 
 the Initiative.
 ``(B) A description of outreach efforts to raise 
 awareness of the availability of such courses.
 ``(C) Information on the number and demographics of 
 participants in such courses, including by gender, 
 race, and place of residence.
 ``(D) Information on the participation in such 
 courses of workers from each critical infrastructure 
 sector.
 ``(E) Plans for expanding access to industrial 
 control systems education and training, including 
 expanding access to women and underrepresented 
 populations, and expanding access to different regions 
 of the United States.
 ``(F) Recommendations on how to strengthen the 
 state of industrial control systems cybersecurity 
 education and training.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of 
the Homeland Security Act of 2002 is amended by inserting after the 
item relating to section 2220D the following new item:

``Sec. 2220E. Industrial Control Systems Cybersecurity Training 
 Initiative.''.

SEC. 6737. TSA REACHING ACROSS NATIONALITIES, SOCIETIES, AND LANGUAGES 
 TO ADVANCE TRAVELER EDUCATION.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Transportation Security 
Administration (TSA) shall submit to the Committee on Homeland Security 
of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, 
and Transportation of the Senate a plan to ensure that TSA material 
disseminated in major airports can be better understood by more people 
accessing such airports.
 (b) Contents.--The plan required under subsection (a) shall include 
the following:
 (1) An identification of the most common languages other 
 than English that are the primary languages of individuals that 
 travel through or work in each major airport.
 (2) A plan to improve--
 (A) TSA materials to communicate information in 
 languages identified pursuant to paragraph (1); and
 (B) the communication of TSA material to 
 individuals with vision or hearing impairments or other 
 possible barriers to understanding such material.
 (c) Considerations.--In developing the plan required under 
subsection (a), the Administrator of the TSA, acting through the Office 
of Civil Rights and Liberties, Ombudsman, and Traveler Engagement of 
the TSA, shall take into consideration data regarding the following:
 (1) International enplanements.
 (2) Local populations surrounding major airports.
 (3) Languages spoken by members of Indian Tribes within 
 each service area population in which a major airport is 
 located.
 (d) Implementation.--Not later than 180 days after the submission 
of the plan required under subsection (a), the Administrator of the 
TSA, in consultation with the owner or operator of each major airport, 
shall implement such plan.
 (e) GAO Review.--Not later than one year after the implementation 
pursuant to subsection (d) of the plan required under subsection (a), 
the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to the 
Committee on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives and the 
Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate a 
review of such implementation.
 (f) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Airport.--The term ``airport'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 40102 of title 49, United States Code.
 (2) Indian tribe.--The term ``Indian Tribe'' means an 
 Indian Tribe, as such term is defined in section 102 of the 
 Federally Recognized Indian Tribe List Act of 1994 (25 U.S.C. 
 5130), individually identified (including parenthetically) in 
 the list published most recently as of the date of the 
 enactment of this Act pursuant to section 104 of that Act (25 
 U.S.C. 5131).
 (3) Major airports.--The term ``major airports'' means 
 Category X and Category I airports.
 (4) Non-traveling individual.--The term ``non-traveling 
 individual'' has the meaning given such term in section 1560.3 
 of title 49, Code of Federal Regulations.
 (5) TSA material.--The term ``TSA material'' means signs, 
 videos, audio messages, websites, press releases, social media 
 postings, and other communications published and disseminated 
 by the Administrator of the TSA in Category X and Category I 
 airports for use by both traveling and non-traveling 
 individuals.

SEC. 6738. BEST PRACTICES RELATED TO CERTAIN INFORMATION COLLECTED BY 
 RENTAL COMPANIES AND DEALERS (DARREN DRAKE).

 (a) Development and Dissemination.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than one year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security 
 shall develop and disseminate best practices for rental 
 companies and dealers to report suspicious behavior to law 
 enforcement agencies at the point of sale of a covered rental 
 vehicle.
 (2) Consultation; updates.--The Secretary shall develop 
 and, as necessary, update the best practices described in 
 paragraph (1) after consultation with Federal, State, local, 
 and Tribal law enforcement agencies and relevant transportation 
 security stakeholders.
 (3) Guidance on suspicious behavior.--The Secretary shall 
 include, in the best practices developed under paragraph (1), 
 guidance on defining and identifying suspicious behavior in a 
 manner that protects civil rights and civil liberties.
 (b) Report to Congress.--Not later than one year after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall 
submit to Congress a report on the implementation of this section, 
including an assessment of--
 (1) the impact of the best practices described in 
 subsection (a) on efforts to protect the United States against 
 terrorist attacks; and
 (2) ways to improve and expand cooperation and engagement 
 between--
 (A) the Department of Homeland Security;
 (B) Federal, State, local, and Tribal law 
 enforcement agencies; and
 (C) rental companies, dealers, and other relevant 
 rental industry stakeholders.
 (c) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The terms ``dealer'' and ``rental company'' have the 
 meanings given those terms in section 30102 of title 49, United 
 States Code.
 (2) The term ``covered rental vehicle'' means a motor 
 vehicle that--
 (A) is rented without a driver for an initial term 
 of less than 4 months; and
 (B) is part of a motor vehicle fleet of 35 or more 
 motor vehicles that are used for rental purposes by a 
 rental company.

SEC. 6739. ONE-STOP PILOT PROGRAM.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the 
 Administrator of the Transportation Security Administration.
 (2) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term 
 ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (A) the Committee on Homeland Security of the House 
 of Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Homeland Security and 
 Governmental Affairs and the Committee on Commerce, 
 Science, and Transportation of the Senate.
 (3) TSA.--The term ``TSA'' means the Transportation 
 Security Administration of the Department of Homeland Security.
 (b) Establishment.--Notwithstanding 44901(a) of title 49, United 
States Code, the Administrator, in coordination with the Commissioner 
of U.S. Customs and Border Protection, may establish a pilot program at 
not more than six foreign last point of departure airports to permit 
passengers and their accessible property arriving on direct flights or 
flight segments originating at such participating foreign airports to 
continue on additional flights or flight segments originating in the 
United States without additional security re-screening if--
 (1) the initial screening was conducted in accordance with 
 an aviation security screening agreement described in 
 subsection (e);
 (2) passengers arriving from participating foreign airports 
 are unable to access their checked baggage until the arrival at 
 their final destination; and
 (3) upon arrival in the United States, passengers arriving 
 from participating foreign airports do not come into contact 
 with other arriving international passengers, those passengers' 
 property, or other persons who have not been screened or 
 subjected to other appropriate security controls required for 
 entry into the airport's sterile area.
 (c) Requirements for Pilot Program.--In carrying out this section, 
the Administrator shall ensure that there is no reduction in the level 
of security or specific TSA aviation security standards or requirements 
for screening passengers and their property prior to boarding an 
international flight bound for the United States, including specific 
aviation security standards and requirements regarding--
 (1) high risk passengers and their property;
 (2) weapons, explosives, and incendiaries;
 (3) screening passengers and property transferring at a 
 foreign last point of departure airport from another airport 
 and bound for the United States, and addressing any commingling 
 of such passengers and property with passengers and property 
 screened under the pilot program described in subsection (b); 
 and
 (4) insider risk at foreign last point of departure 
 airports.
 (d) Re-screening of Checked Baggage.--Subject to subsection (f), 
the Administrator may determine whether checked baggage arriving from 
participating foreign airports referenced in subsection (b) that screen 
using an explosives detection system must be re-screened in the United 
States by an explosives detection system before such baggage continues 
on any additional flight or flight segment.
 (e) Aviation Security Screening Agreement.--An aviation security 
screening agreement described in this subsection is a treaty, executive 
agreement, or other international arrangement that--
 (1)(A) in the case of a treaty or executive agreement, is 
 signed by the President; and
 (B) in the case of an international agreement, is signed by 
 only the President, Secretary of Homeland Security, or 
 Administrator, without delegating such authority; and
 (2) is entered into with a foreign country that delineates 
 and implements security standards and protocols utilized at a 
 foreign last point of departure airport that are determined by 
 the Administrator--
 (A) to be comparable to those of the United States; 
 and
 (B) sufficiently effective to enable passengers and 
 their accessible property to deplane into sterile areas 
 of airports in the United States without the need for 
 re-screening.
 (f) Re-screening Requirement.--
 (1) In general.--If the Administrator determines that a 
 foreign country participating in the aviation security 
 screening agreement has not maintained and implemented security 
 standards and protocols comparable to those of the United 
 States at foreign last point of departure airports at which a 
 pilot program has been established in accordance with this 
 section, the Administrator shall ensure that passengers and 
 their property arriving from such airports are re-screened in 
 the United States, including by using explosives detection 
 systems in accordance with section 44901(d)(1) of title 49, 
 United States Code, and implementing regulations and 
 directives, before such passengers and their property are 
 permitted into sterile areas of airports in the United States.
 (2) Consultation.--If the Administrator has reasonable 
 grounds to believe that the other party to an aviation security 
 screening agreement has not complied with such agreement, the 
 Administrator shall request immediate consultation with such 
 party.
 (3) Suspension or termination of agreement.--If a 
 satisfactory resolution between TSA and a foreign country is 
 not reached within 45 days after a consultation request under 
 paragraph (2) or in the case of the foreign country's continued 
 or egregious failure to maintain the security standards and 
 protocols described in paragraph (1), the President, Secretary 
 of Homeland Security, or Administrator, as appropriate, shall 
 suspend or terminate the aviation security screening agreement 
 with such country, as determined appropriate by the President, 
 Secretary of Homeland Security, or Administrator. The 
 Administrator shall notify the appropriate congressional 
 committees of such consultation and suspension or termination, 
 as the case may be, not later than seven days after such 
 consultation and suspension or termination.
 (g) Briefings to Congress.--Not later than 45 days before an 
aviation security screening agreement described in subsection (e) 
enters into force, the Administrator shall submit to the appropriate 
congressional committees--
 (1) an aviation security threat assessment for the country 
 in which such foreign last point of departure airport is 
 located;
 (2) information regarding any corresponding mitigation 
 efforts to address any security issues identified in such 
 threat assessment, including any plans for joint covert 
 testing;
 (3) information on potential security vulnerabilities 
 associated with commencing a pilot program at such foreign last 
 point of departure airport pursuant to subsection (b) and 
 mitigation plans to address such potential security 
 vulnerabilities;
 (4) an assessment of the impacts such pilot program will 
 have on aviation security;
 (5) an assessment of the screening performed at such 
 foreign last point of departure airport, including the 
 feasibility of TSA personnel monitoring screening, security 
 protocols, and standards;
 (6) information regarding identifying the entity or 
 entities responsible for screening passengers and property at 
 such foreign last point of departure airport;
 (7) the name of the entity or local authority and any 
 contractor or subcontractor;
 (8) information regarding the screening requirements 
 relating to such aviation security screening agreement;
 (9) details regarding information sharing mechanisms 
 between the TSA and such foreign last point of departure 
 airport, screening authority, or entity responsible for 
 screening provided for under such aviation security screening 
 agreement; and
 (10) a copy of the aviation security screening agreement, 
 which shall identify the foreign last point of departure 
 airport or airports at which a pilot program under this section 
 is to be established.
 (h) Certifications Relating to the Pilot Program for One-stop 
Security.--For each aviation security screening agreement described in 
subsection (e), the Administrator shall submit to the appropriate 
congressional committees--
 (1)(A) a certification that such agreement satisfies all of 
 the requirements specified in subsection (c); or
 (B) in the event that one or more of such requirements are 
 not so satisfied, a description of the unsatisfied requirement 
 and information on what actions the Administrator will take to 
 ensure that such remaining requirements are satisfied before 
 such agreement enters into force;
 (2) a certification that TSA and U.S. Customs and Border 
 Protection have ensured that any necessary physical 
 modifications or appropriate mitigations exist in the domestic 
 one-stop security pilot program airport prior to receiving 
 international passengers from a last point of departure airport 
 under the aviation security screening agreement;
 (3) a certification that a foreign last point of departure 
 airport covered by an aviation security screening agreement has 
 an operation to screen all checked bags as required by law, 
 regulation, or international agreement, including the full 
 utilization of explosives detection systems to the extent 
 applicable; and
 (4) a certification that the Administrator consulted with 
 stakeholders, including air carriers, aviation nonprofit labor 
 organizations, airport operators, relevant interagency 
 partners, and other stakeholders that the Administrator 
 determines appropriate.
 (i) Report to Congress.--Not later than five years after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security, in 
coordination with the Administrator, shall submit a report to the 
appropriate congressional committees regarding the implementation of 
the pilot program authorized under this section, including information 
relating to--
 (1) the impact of such program on homeland security and 
 international aviation security, including any benefits and 
 challenges of such program;
 (2) the impact of such program on passengers, airports, and 
 air carriers, including any benefits and challenges of such 
 program; and
 (3) the impact and feasibility of continuing such program 
 or expanding it into a more permanent program, including any 
 benefits and challenges of such continuation or expansion.
 (j) Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section may be construed 
as limiting the authority of U.S. Customs and Border Protection to 
inspect persons and baggage arriving in the United States in accordance 
with applicable law.
 (k) Sunset.--The pilot program authorized under this section shall 
terminate on the date that is six years after the date of the enactment 
of this Act.

SEC. 6740. DHS ILLICIT CROSS-BORDER TUNNEL DEFENSE.

 (a) Counter Illicit Cross-border Tunnel Operations Strategic 
Plan.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Commissioner of U.S. Customs and 
 Border Protection, in coordination with the Under Secretary for 
 Science and Technology, and, as appropriate, other officials of 
 the Department of Homeland Security, shall develop a counter 
 illicit cross-border tunnel operations strategic plan (in this 
 section referred to as the ``strategic plan'') to address the 
 following:
 (A) Risk-based criteria to be used to prioritize 
 the identification, breach, assessment, and remediation 
 of illicit cross-border tunnels.
 (B) Promote the use of innovative technologies to 
 identify, breach, assess, and remediate illicit cross-
 border tunnels in a manner that, among other 
 considerations, reduces the impact of such activities 
 on surrounding communities.
 (C) Processes to share relevant illicit cross-
 border tunnel location, operations, and technical 
 information.
 (D) Indicators of specific types of illicit cross-
 border tunnels found in each U.S. Border Patrol sector 
 identified through operations to be periodically 
 disseminated to U.S. Border Patrol sector chiefs to 
 educate field personnel.
 (E) A counter illicit cross-border tunnel 
 operations resource needs assessment that includes 
 consideration of the following:
 (i) Technology needs.
 (ii) Staffing needs, including the 
 following:
 (I) A position description for 
 counter illicit cross-border tunnel 
 operations personnel.
 (II) Any specialized skills 
 required of such personnel.
 (III) The number of such full time 
 personnel, disaggregated by U.S. Border 
 Patrol sector.
 (2) Report to congress on strategic plan.--Not later than 
 one year after the development of the strategic plan, the 
 Commissioner of U.S. Customs and Border Protection shall submit 
 to the Committee on Homeland Security of the House of 
 Representatives and the Committee on Homeland Security and 
 Governmental Affairs of the Senate a report on the 
 implementation of the strategic plan.
 (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to the Commissioner of U.S. Customs and Border Protection 
$1,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2023 and 2024 to carry out--
 (1) the development of the strategic plan; and
 (2) remediation operations of illicit cross-border tunnels 
 in accordance with the strategic plan to the maximum extent 
 practicable.

SEC. 6741. PREVENT EXPOSURE TO NARCOTICS AND TOXICS.

 (a) Training for U.S. Customs and Border Protection Personnel on 
the Use of Containment Devices to Prevent Secondary Exposure to 
Fentanyl and Other Potentially Lethal Substances.--Paragraph (1) of 
section 416(b) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 216(b)) 
is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(C) How to use containment devices to prevent 
 secondary exposure to fentanyl and other potentially 
 lethal substances.''.
 (b) Availability of Containment Devices.--Section 416(c) of the 
Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 U.S.C. 216(c)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``and'' after ``equipment'' and inserting a 
 comma; and
 (2) by inserting ``and containment devices'' after 
 ``naloxone,''.

 Subtitle D--Technical, Conforming, and Clerical Amendments

SEC. 6751. TECHNICAL, CONFORMING, AND CLERICAL AMENDMENTS.

 The table of contents in section 1(b) of the Homeland Security Act 
of 2002 is amended by--
 (1) amending the items relating to sections 435 and 436 to 
 read as follows:

``Sec. 435. Maritime operations coordination plan.
``Sec. 436. Maritime security capabilities assessments.'';
 (2) amending the item relating to section 1617 to read as 
 follows:

``Sec. 1617. Diversified security technology industry marketplace.'';
 (3) amending the item relating to section 1621 to read as 
 follows:

``Sec. 1621. Maintenance validation and oversight.''; and
 (4) amending the item relating to section 2103 to read as 
 follows:

``Sec. 2103. Protection and sharing of information.''.

 TITLE LXVIII--FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ADVANCEMENT OF EQUITY

SEC. 6801. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the 
 Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
 (2) Agency.--The term ``Agency'' means the Federal 
 Emergency Management Agency.
 (3) Emergency.--The term ``emergency'' means an emergency 
 declared by the President under section 501 of the Robert T. 
 Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 
 U.S.C. 5191).
 (4) Equity.--The term ``equity'' means the guarantee of 
 fair treatment, advancement, equal opportunity, and access for 
 underserved communities and others, the elimination of barriers 
 that have prevented full participation for underserved 
 communities, and the reduction of disparate outcomes.
 (5) Equitable.--The term ``equitable'' means having or 
 exhibiting equity.
 (6) Federal assistance.--The term ``Federal assistance'' 
 means assistance provided pursuant to--
 (A) a declaration of a major disaster or emergency 
 under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and 
 Emergency Assistance Act;
 (B) sections 203 and 205 of the Robert T. Stafford 
 Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act; and
 (C) section 1366 of the National Flood Insurance 
 Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 4104c).
 (7) Major disaster.--The term ``major disaster'' means a 
 major disaster declared by the President under section 401 of 
 the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance 
 Act (42 U.S.C. 5170).
 (8) Underserved community.--The term ``underserved 
 community'' means--
 (A) the Native-American and Alaskan-Native 
 community;
 (B) the African-American community;
 (C) the Asian community;
 (D) the Hispanic community (including individuals 
 of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, and Central or South 
 American origin);
 (E) the Pacific Islander community;
 (F) the Middle Eastern and North African community;
 (G) a rural community;
 (H) a low-income community;
 (I) individuals with disabilities;
 (J) a limited English proficiency community;
 (K) other individuals or communities otherwise 
 adversely affected by persistent poverty or inequality; 
 and
 (L) any other disadvantaged community, as 
 determined by the Administrator.

 Subtitle A--Ensuring Equity in Federal Disaster Management

SEC. 6811. DATA COLLECTION, ANALYSIS, AND CRITERIA.

 (a) In General.--Not later than one year after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall, in consultation with 
the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and the Administrator of 
the Small Business Administration, develop and implement a process to 
ensure equity in the provision of Federal assistance and throughout all 
programs and policies of the Agency.
 (b) Specific Areas for Consultation.--In carrying out subsection 
(a), the Administrator shall identify requirements for ensuring the 
quality, consistency, accessibility, and availability of information 
needed to identify programs and policies of the Agency that may not 
support the provision of equitable Federal assistance, including--
 (1) information requirements;
 (2) data sources and collection methods; and
 (3) strategies for overcoming data or other information 
 challenges.
 (c) Modification of Data Collection Systems.--The Administrator 
shall modify the data collection systems of the Agency based on the 
process developed under subsection (a) to ensure the quality, 
consistency, accessibility, and availability of information needed to 
identify any programs and policies of the Agency that may not support 
the provision of equitable Federal assistance.

SEC. 6812. CRITERIA FOR ENSURING EQUITY IN POLICIES AND PROGRAMS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than one year after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall develop, disseminate, 
and update, as appropriate, criteria to apply to policies and programs 
of the Agency to ensure equity in the provision of Federal assistance 
and throughout all programs and policies of the Agency.
 (b) Consultation.--In developing and disseminating the criteria 
required under subsection (a), the Administrator shall consult with--
 (1) the Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties of the 
 Department of Homeland Security;
 (2) the United States Department of Housing and Urban 
 Development; and
 (3) the Small Business Administration.
 (c) Integration of Criteria.--
 (1) In general.--The Administrator shall, to the maximum 
 extent possible, integrate the criteria developed under 
 subsection (a) into existing and future processes related to 
 the provision of Federal assistance.
 (2) Priority.--The Administrator shall prioritize 
 integrating the criteria under paragraph (1) into processes 
 related to the provision of--
 (A) assistance under sections 402, 403, 406, 407, 
 428, and 502 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief 
 and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5170a et seq.);
 (B) Federal assistance to individuals and 
 households under section 408 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 5174);
 (C) hazard mitigation assistance under section 404 
 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 5170c); and
 (D) predisaster hazard mitigation assistance under 
 section 203 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 5133).

SEC. 6813. METRICS; REPORT.

 (a) Metrics.--In carrying out this subtitle, the Administrator 
shall--
 (1) establish metrics to measure the efficacy of the 
 process developed under section 6811 and the criteria developed 
 under section 6812; and
 (2) seek input from relevant representatives of State, 
 regional, local, territorial, and Tribal governments, 
 representatives of community-based organizations, subject 
 matter experts, and individuals from underserved communities 
 impacted by disasters.
 (b) Report.--Not later than one year after the dissemination of the 
criteria under section 6812(a), and annually thereafter, the 
Administrator shall submit to Congress a report describing how the 
criteria and processes developed under this subtitle have impacted 
efforts to ensure equity in the provision of Federal assistance and 
throughout all programs and policies of the Agency, including--
 (1) any obstacles identified or areas for improvement with 
 respect to implementation of such criteria and processes, 
 including any recommended legislative changes;
 (2) the effectiveness of such criteria and processes, as 
 measured by the metrics established under subsection (a); and
 (3) any impacts of such criteria and processes on the 
 provision of Federal assistance, with specific attention to 
 impacts related to efforts within the Agency to address 
 barriers to access and reducing disparate outcomes.

 Subtitle B--Operational Enhancement to Improve Equity in Federal 
 Disaster Management

SEC. 6821. EQUITY ADVISOR.

 (a) In General.--The Administrator shall designate a senior 
official within the Agency as an equity advisor to the Administrator to 
be responsible for advising the Administrator on Agency efforts to 
ensure equity in the provision of Federal assistance and throughout all 
programs and policies of the Agency.
 (b) Qualifications.--In designating an equity advisor under 
subsection (a), the Administrator shall select an individual who is a 
qualified expert with significant experience with respect to equity 
policy, civil rights policy, or programmatic reforms.
 (c) Duties.--In addition to advising the Administrator, the equity 
advisor designated under subsection (a) shall--
 (1) participate in the implementation of sections 6811 and 
 6812;
 (2) monitor equity the implementation of equity efforts 
 within the Agency and within Federal Emergency Management 
 Agency Regions to ensure consistency in the implementation of 
 policy or programmatic changes intended to ensure equity in the 
 provision of Federal assistance and throughout all programs and 
 policies of the Agency;
 (3) identify ways to improve the policies and programs of 
 the Agency to ensure that such policies and programs are 
 equitable, including enhancing opportunities to support 
 underserved populations in preparedness, mitigation, 
 protection, response, and recovery; and
 (4) any other activities the Administrator considers 
 appropriate.
 (d) Consultation.--In carrying out the duties under this section, 
the equity advisor shall, on an ongoing basis, consult with 
representatives of underserved communities, including communities 
directly impacted by disasters, to evaluate opportunities and develop 
approaches to advancing equity within the Agency, including by 
increasing coordination, communication, and engagement with--
 (1) community-based organizations;
 (2) civil rights organizations;
 (3) institutions of higher education;
 (4) research institutions;
 (5) academic organizations specializing in diversity, 
 equity, and inclusion issues; and
 (6) religious and faith-based organizations.

SEC. 6822. EQUITY ENTERPRISE STEERING GROUP.

 (a) Establishment.--There is established in the Agency a steering 
group to advise the Administrator on how to ensure equity in the 
provision of Federal assistance and throughout all programs and 
policies of the Agency.
 (b) Responsibilities.--In carrying out subsection (a), the steering 
group established under this section shall--
 (1) review and, as appropriate, recommend changes to 
 Agency-wide policies, procedures, plans, and guidance;
 (2) support the development and implementation of the 
 processes and criteria developed under subtitle A; and
 (3) monitor the integration and establishment of metrics 
 developed under section 6813.
 (c) Composition.--The Administrator shall appoint the following 
individuals as members of the steering group established under 
subsection (a):
 (1) Representatives from each of the following offices of 
 the Agency:
 (A) The Office of Equal Rights.
 (B) The Office of Response and Recovery.
 (C) FEMA Resilience.
 (D) The Office of Disability Integration and 
 Coordination.
 (E) The United States Fire Administration.
 (F) The mission support office of the Agency.
 (G) The Office of Chief Counsel.
 (H) The Office of the Chief Financial Officer.
 (I) The Office of Policy and Program Analysis.
 (J) The Office of External Affairs.
 (2) The administrator of each Regional Office, or his or 
 her designee.
 (3) The equity advisor, as designated by the Administrator 
 under section 6821.
 (4) A representative from the Office for Civil Rights and 
 Civil Liberties of the Department of Homeland Security.
 (5) The Superintendent of the Emergency Management 
 Institute.
 (6) The National Tribal Affairs Advisor of the Federal 
 Emergency Management Agency.
 (7) Any other official of the Agency the Administrator 
 determines appropriate.
 (d) Leadership.--The Administrator shall designate one or more 
members of the steering group established under subsection (a) to serve 
as chair of the steering group.

SEC. 6823. GAO REVIEW OF EQUITY REFORMS.

 Not later than three years after the date of enactment of this Act, 
the Comptroller General of the United States shall issue a report to 
evaluate the implementation of this subtitle and subtitle A.

 Subtitle C--GAO Review of Factors to Determine Assistance

SEC. 6831. GAO REVIEW OF FACTORS TO DETERMINE ASSISTANCE.

 (a) In General.--Not later than one year after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States 
shall issue a report describing the factors the Agency considers when 
evaluating a request from a Governor to declare that a major disaster 
or emergency exists and to authorize assistance under sections 402, 
403, 406, 407, 408, 428, and 502 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster 
Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5170a et seq.).
 (b) Contents.--The report issued under subsection (a) shall 
include--
 (1) an assessment of--
 (A) the degree to which the factors the Agency 
 considers when evaluating a request for a major 
 disaster or emergency declaration--
 (i) affect equity for underserved 
 communities, particularly with respect to major 
 disaster and emergency declaration requests, 
 approvals of such requests, and the 
 authorization of assistance described in 
 subsection (a); and
 (ii) are designed to deliver equitable 
 outcomes;
 (B) how the Agency utilizes such factors or 
 monitors whether such factors result in equitable 
 outcomes;
 (C) the extent to which major disaster and 
 emergency declaration requests, approvals of such 
 requests, and the authorization of assistance described 
 in subsection (a), are more highly correlated with 
 high-income counties compared to lower-income counties;
 (D) whether the process and administrative steps 
 for conducting preliminary damage assessments are 
 equitable; and
 (E) to the extent practicable, whether such factors 
 may deter a Governor from seeking a major disaster or 
 emergency declaration for potentially eligible 
 counties; and
 (2) a consideration of the extent to which such factors 
 affect underserved communities--
 (A) of varying size;
 (B) with varying population density and demographic 
 characteristics;
 (C) with limited emergency management staff and 
 resources; and
 (D) located in urban or rural areas.
 (c) Recommendations.--The Comptroller General shall include in the 
report issued under subsection (a) any recommendations for changes to 
the factors the Agency considers when evaluating a request for a major 
disaster or emergency declaration to account for underserved 
communities.

 TITLE LXIX--GLOBAL HEALTH SECURITY ACT OF 2022

SEC. 6901. SHORT TITLE.

 This title may be cited as the ``Global Health Security Act of 
2022''.

SEC. 6902. FINDINGS.

 Congress finds the following:
 (1) In December 2009, President Obama released the National 
 Strategy for Countering Biological Threats, which listed as one 
 of seven objectives ``Promote global health security: Increase 
 the availability of and access to knowledge and products of the 
 life sciences that can help reduce the impact from outbreaks of 
 infectious disease whether of natural, accidental, or 
 deliberate origin''.
 (2) In February 2014, the United States and nearly 30 other 
 nations launched the Global Health Security Agenda (GHSA) to 
 address several high-priority, global infectious disease 
 threats. The GHSA is a multi-faceted, multi-country initiative 
 intended to accelerate partner countries' measurable 
 capabilities to achieve specific targets to prevent, detect, 
 and respond to infectious disease threats, whether naturally 
 occurring, deliberate, or accidental.
 (3) In 2015, the United Nations adopted the Sustainable 
 Development Goals (SDGs), which include specific reference to 
 the importance of global health security as part of SDG 3 
 ``ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all 
 ages'' as follows: ``strengthen the capacity of all countries, 
 in particular developing countries, for early warning, risk 
 reduction and management of national and global health risks''.
 (4) On November 4, 2016, President Obama signed Executive 
 Order No. 13747, ``Advancing the Global Health Security Agenda 
 to Achieve a World Safe and Secure from Infectious Disease 
 Threats''.
 (5) In October 2017 at the GHSA Ministerial Meeting in 
 Uganda, the United States and more than 40 GHSA member 
 countries supported the ``Kampala Declaration'' to extend the 
 GHSA for an additional 5 years to 2024.
 (6) In December 2017, President Trump released the National 
 Security Strategy, which includes the priority action: ``Detect 
 and contain biothreats at their source: We will work with other 
 countries to detect and mitigate outbreaks early to prevent the 
 spread of disease. We will encourage other countries to invest 
 in basic health care systems and to strengthen global health 
 security across the intersection of human and animal health to 
 prevent infectious disease outbreaks''.
 (7) In September 2018, President Trump released the 
 National Biodefense Strategy, which includes objectives to 
 ``strengthen global health security capacities to prevent local 
 bioincidents from becoming epidemics'', and ``strengthen 
 international preparedness to support international response 
 and recovery capabilities''.
 (8) In January 2021, President Biden issued Executive Order 
 13987 (86 Fed. Reg. 7019; relating to Organizing and Mobilizing 
 the United States Government to Provide a Unified and Effective 
 Response to Combat COVID-19 and to Provide United States 
 Leadership on Global Health and Security), as well as National 
 Security Memorandum on United States Global Leadership to 
 Strengthen the International COVID-19 Response and to Advance 
 Global Health Security and Biological Preparedness, which 
 include objectives to strengthen and reform the World Health 
 Organization, increase United States leadership in the global 
 response to COVID-19, and to finance and advance global health 
 security and pandemic preparedness.

SEC. 6903. STATEMENT OF POLICY.

 It is the policy of the United States to--
 (1) promote and invest in global health security and 
 pandemic preparedness as a core national security interest;
 (2) advance the aims of the Global Health Security Agenda;
 (3) collaborate with other countries to detect and mitigate 
 outbreaks early to prevent the spread of disease;
 (4) encourage and support other countries to advance 
 pandemic preparedness by investing in basic resilient and 
 sustainable health care systems; and
 (5) strengthen global health security across the 
 intersection of human and animal health to prepare for and 
 prevent infectious disease outbreaks and combat the growing 
 threat of antimicrobial resistance.

SEC. 6904. GLOBAL HEALTH SECURITY AGENDA INTERAGENCY REVIEW COUNCIL.

 (a) Establishment.--The President shall establish a Global Health 
Security Agenda Interagency Review Council (in this section referred to 
as the ``Council'') to perform the general responsibilities described 
in subsection (c) and the specific roles and responsibilities described 
in subsection (e).
 (b) Meetings.--The Council shall meet not less than four times per 
year to advance its mission and fulfill its responsibilities.
 (c) General Responsibilities.--The Council shall be responsible for 
the following activities:
 (1) Provide policy-level recommendations to participating 
 agencies on Global Health Security Agenda (GHSA) goals, 
 objectives, and implementation, and other international efforts 
 to strengthen pandemic preparedness and response.
 (2) Facilitate interagency, multi-sectoral engagement to 
 carry out GHSA implementation.
 (3) Provide a forum for raising and working to resolve 
 interagency disagreements concerning the GHSA, and other 
 international efforts to strengthen pandemic preparedness and 
 response.
 (4)(A) Review the progress toward and work to resolve 
 challenges in achieving United States commitments under the 
 GHSA, including commitments to assist other countries in 
 achieving the GHSA targets.
 (B) The Council shall consider, among other issues, the 
 following:
 (i) The status of United States financial 
 commitments to the GHSA in the context of commitments 
 by other donors, and the contributions of partner 
 countries to achieve the GHSA targets.
 (ii) The progress toward the milestones outlined in 
 GHSA national plans for those countries where the 
 United States Government has committed to assist in 
 implementing the GHSA and in annual work-plans 
 outlining agency priorities for implementing the GHSA.
 (iii) The external evaluations of United States and 
 partner country capabilities to address infectious 
 disease threats, including the ability to achieve the 
 targets outlined within the WHO Joint External 
 Evaluation tool, as well as gaps identified by such 
 external evaluations.
 (d) Participation.--The Council shall be headed by the Assistant to 
the President for National Security Affairs, in coordination with the 
heads of relevant Federal agencies. The Council shall consist of 
representatives from the following agencies:
 (1) The Department of State.
 (2) The Department of Defense.
 (3) The Department of Justice.
 (4) The Department of Agriculture.
 (5) The Department of Health and Human Services.
 (6) The Department of the Treasury.
 (7) The Department of Labor.
 (8) The Department of Homeland Security.
 (9) The Office of Management and Budget.
 (10) The Office of the Director of National Intelligence.
 (11) The United States Agency for International 
 Development.
 (12) The Environmental Protection Agency.
 (13) The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
 (14) The Office of Science and Technology Policy.
 (15) The National Institutes of Health.
 (16) The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
 Diseases.
 (17) Such other agencies as the Council determines to be 
 appropriate.
 (e) Specific Roles and Responsibilities.--
 (1) In general.--The heads of agencies described in 
 subsection (d) shall--
 (A) make the GHSA and its implementation and global 
 pandemic preparedness a high priority within their 
 respective agencies, and include GHSA- and global 
 pandemic preparedness-related activities within their 
 respective agencies' strategic planning and budget 
 processes;
 (B) designate a senior-level official to be 
 responsible for the implementation of this title;
 (C) designate, in accordance with subsection (d), 
 an appropriate representative at the Assistant 
 Secretary level or higher to participate on the 
 Council;
 (D) keep the Council apprised of GHSA-related 
 activities undertaken within their respective agencies;
 (E) maintain responsibility for agency-related 
 programmatic functions in coordination with host 
 governments, country teams, and GHSA in-country teams, 
 and in conjunction with other relevant agencies;
 (F) coordinate with other agencies that are 
 identified in this section to satisfy programmatic 
 goals, and further facilitate coordination of country 
 teams, implementers, and donors in host countries; and
 (G) coordinate across national health security 
 action plans and with GHSA and other partners, as 
 appropriate, to which the United States is providing 
 assistance.
 (2) Additional roles and responsibilities.--In addition to 
 the roles and responsibilities described in paragraph (1), the 
 heads of agencies described in subsection (d) shall carry out 
 their respective roles and responsibilities described in 
 subsections (b) through (i) of section 3 of Executive Order 
 13747 (81 Fed. Reg. 78701; relating to Advancing the Global 
 Health Security Agenda to Achieve a World Safe and Secure from 
 Infectious Disease Threats), as in effect on the day before the 
 date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 6905. UNITED STATES COORDINATOR FOR GLOBAL HEALTH SECURITY.

 (a) In General.--The President shall appoint an individual to the 
position of United States Coordinator for Global Health Security, who 
shall be responsible for the coordination of the interagency process 
for responding to global health security emergencies. As appropriate, 
the designee shall coordinate with the President's Special Coordinator 
for International Disaster Assistance.
 (b) Congressional Briefing.--Not less frequently than twice each 
year, the employee designated under this section shall provide to the 
appropriate congressional committees a briefing on the responsibilities 
and activities of the individual under this section.

SEC. 6906. SENSE OF CONGRESS.

 It is the sense of the Congress that, given the complex and 
multisectoral nature of global health threats to the United States, the 
President--
 (1) should consider appointing an individual with 
 significant background and expertise in public health or 
 emergency response management to the position of United States 
 Coordinator for Global Health Security, as required by section 
 6905(a), who is an employee of the National Security Council at 
 the level of Deputy Assistant to the President or higher; and
 (2) in providing assistance to implement the strategy 
 required under section 6907(a), should--
 (A) coordinate, through a whole-of-government 
 approach, the efforts of relevant Federal departments 
 and agencies to implement the strategy;
 (B) seek to fully utilize the unique capabilities 
 of each relevant Federal department and agency while 
 collaborating with and leveraging the contributions of 
 other key stakeholders; and
 (C) utilize open and streamlined solicitations to 
 allow for the participation of a wide range of 
 implementing partners through the most appropriate 
 procurement mechanisms, which may include grants, 
 contracts, cooperative agreements, and other 
 instruments as necessary and appropriate.

SEC. 6907. STRATEGY AND REPORTS.

 (a) Strategy.--The President shall coordinate the development and 
implementation of a strategy to implement the policy aims described in 
section 6903, which shall--
 (1) seek to strengthen United States diplomatic leadership 
 and improve the effectiveness of United States foreign 
 assistance for global health security to prevent, detect, and 
 respond to infectious disease threats, including through 
 advancement of the Global Health Security Agenda (GHSA), the 
 International Health Regulations (2005), and other relevant 
 frameworks that contribute to global health security and 
 pandemic preparedness;
 (2) establish specific and measurable goals, benchmarks, 
 timetables, performance metrics, and monitoring and evaluation 
 plans for United States foreign assistance for global health 
 security that promote learning and reflect international best 
 practices relating to global health security, transparency, and 
 accountability;
 (3) establish mechanisms to improve coordination and avoid 
 duplication of effort between the United States Government and 
 partner countries, donor countries, the private sector, 
 multilateral organizations, and other key stakeholders;
 (4) prioritize working with partner countries with 
 demonstrated--
 (A) need, as identified through the Joint External 
 Evaluation process, the Global Health Security Index 
 classification of health systems, national action plans 
 for health security, GHSA Action Packages, and other 
 complementary or successor indicators of global health 
 security and pandemic preparedness; and
 (B) commitment to transparency, including budget 
 and global health data transparency, complying with the 
 International Health Regulations (2005), investing in 
 domestic health systems, and achieving measurable 
 results;
 (5) reduce long-term reliance upon United States foreign 
 assistance for global health security by promoting partner 
 country ownership, improved domestic resource mobilization, co-
 financing, and appropriate national budget allocations for 
 global health security and pandemic preparedness and response;
 (6) assist partner countries in building the technical 
 capacity of relevant ministries, systems, and networks to 
 prepare, execute, monitor, and evaluate effective national 
 action plans for health security, including mechanisms to 
 enhance budget and global health data transparency, as 
 necessary and appropriate;
 (7) support and be aligned with country-owned global health 
 security policy and investment plans developed with input from 
 key stakeholders, as appropriate;
 (8) facilitate communication and collaboration, as 
 appropriate, among local stakeholders in support of a multi-
 sectoral approach to global health security;
 (9) support the long-term success of programs by building 
 the capacity of local organizations and institutions in target 
 countries and communities;
 (10) develop community resilience to infectious disease 
 threats and emergencies;
 (11) support global health budget and workforce planning in 
 partner countries, including training in financial management 
 and budget and global health data transparency;
 (12) align United States foreign assistance for global 
 health security with national action plans for health security 
 in partner countries, developed with input from key 
 stakeholders, including the private sector, to the greatest 
 extent practicable and appropriate;
 (13) strengthen linkages between complementary bilateral 
 and multilateral foreign assistance programs, including efforts 
 of the World Bank, the World Health Organization, the Global 
 Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria, and Gavi, the 
 Vaccine Alliance, that contribute to the development of more 
 resilient health systems and supply chains in partner countries 
 with the capacity, resources, and personnel required to 
 prevent, detect, and respond to infectious disease threats;
 (14) support innovation and public-private partnerships to 
 improve pandemic preparedness and response, including for the 
 development and deployment of effective, accessible, and 
 affordable infectious disease tracking tools, diagnostics, 
 therapeutics, and vaccines;
 (15) support collaboration with and among relevant public 
 and private research entities engaged in global health 
 security; and
 (16) support collaboration between United States 
 universities and public and private institutions in partner 
 countries that promote global health security and innovation.
 (b) Strategy Submission.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the President, in consultation with 
 the head of each relevant Federal department and agency, shall 
 submit to the appropriate congressional committees the strategy 
 required under subsection (a) that provides a detailed 
 description of how the United States intends to advance the 
 policy set forth in section 6903 and the agency-specific plans 
 described in paragraph (2).
 (2) Agency-specific plans.--The strategy required under 
 subsection (a) shall include specific implementation plans from 
 each relevant Federal department and agency that describe--
 (A) the anticipated contributions of the department 
 or agency, including technical, financial, and in-kind 
 contributions, to implement the strategy; and
 (B) the efforts of the department or agency to 
 ensure that the activities and programs carried out 
 pursuant to the strategy are designed to achieve 
 maximum impact and long-term sustainability.
 (c) Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date on 
 which the strategy required under subsection (a) is submitted 
 to the appropriate congressional committees under subsection 
 (b), and not later than October 1 of each year thereafter, the 
 President shall submit to the appropriate congressional 
 committees a report that describes the status of the 
 implementation of the strategy.
 (2) Contents.--The report required under paragraph (1) 
 shall--
 (A) identify any substantial changes made in the 
 strategy during the preceding calendar year;
 (B) describe the progress made in implementing the 
 strategy;
 (C) identify the indicators used to establish 
 benchmarks and measure results over time, as well as 
 the mechanisms for reporting such results in an open 
 and transparent manner;
 (D) contain a transparent, open, and detailed 
 accounting of expenditures by relevant Federal 
 departments and agencies to implement the strategy, 
 including, to the extent practicable, for each Federal 
 department and agency, the statutory source of 
 expenditures, amounts expended, partners, targeted 
 populations, and types of activities supported;
 (E) describe how the strategy leverages other 
 United States global health and development assistance 
 programs and bilateral and multilateral institutions;
 (F) assess efforts to coordinate United States 
 global health security programs, activities, and 
 initiatives with key stakeholders;
 (G) incorporate a plan for regularly reviewing and 
 updating strategies, partnerships, and programs and 
 sharing lessons learned with a wide range of 
 stakeholders, including key stakeholders, in an open, 
 transparent manner; and
 (H) describe the progress achieved and challenges 
 concerning the United States Government's ability to 
 advance GHSA and pandemic preparedness, including data 
 disaggregated by priority country using indicators that 
 are consistent on a year-to-year basis and 
 recommendations to resolve, mitigate, or otherwise 
 address the challenges identified therein.
 (d) Form.--The strategy required under subsection (a) and the 
report required under subsection (c) shall be submitted in unclassified 
form but may contain a classified annex.

SEC. 6908. ESTABLISHMENT OF FUND FOR GLOBAL HEALTH SECURITY AND 
 PANDEMIC PREPAREDNESS.

 (a) Negotiations for Establishment of a Fund for Global Health 
Security and Pandemic Preparedness.--The Secretary of State, in 
coordination with the Secretary of the Treasury, the Administrator of 
the United States Agency for International Development, the Secretary 
of Health and Human Services, and the heads of other relevant Federal 
departments and agencies as necessary and appropriate, should seek to 
enter into negotiations with donors, relevant United Nations agencies, 
including the World Health Organization, and other key multilateral 
stakeholders, for the establishment of--
 (1) a multilateral, catalytic financing mechanism for 
 global health security and pandemic preparedness, which may be 
 known as the Fund for Global Health Security and Pandemic 
 Preparedness (in this title referred to as ``the Fund''), in 
 accordance with the provisions of this section; and
 (2) an Advisory Board to the Fund in accordance with 
 section 6909.
 (b) Purpose.--The purpose of the Fund should be to close critical 
gaps in global health security and pandemic preparedness and build 
capacity in eligible partner countries in the areas of global health 
security, infectious disease control, and pandemic preparedness, such 
that it--
 (1) prioritizes capacity building and financing 
 availability in eligible partner countries;
 (2) incentivizes countries to prioritize the use of 
 domestic resources for global health security and pandemic 
 preparedness;
 (3) leverages government, nongovernment, and private sector 
 investments;
 (4) regularly responds to and evaluates progress based on 
 clear metrics and benchmarks, such as the Joint External 
 Evaluation and Global Health Security Index;
 (5) aligns with and complements ongoing bilateral and 
 multilateral efforts and financing, including through the World 
 Bank, the World Health Organization, the Global Fund to Fight 
 AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria, and Gavi, the Vaccine 
 Alliance; and
 (6) accelerates country compliance with the International 
 Health Regulations (2005) and fulfillment of the Global Health 
 Security Agenda 2024 Framework, in coordination with the 
 ongoing Joint External Evaluation national action planning 
 process.
 (c) Executive Board.--
 (1) In general.--The Fund should be governed by an 
 Executive Board, which should be composed of not more than 20 
 representatives of donor governments, foundations, academic 
 institutions, civil society, and the private sector that meet a 
 minimum threshold in annual contributions and agree to uphold 
 transparency measures.
 (2) Duties.--The Executive Board should be charged with 
 approving strategies, operations, and grant-making authorities, 
 such that it is able to conduct effective fiduciary, 
 monitoring, and evaluation efforts, and other oversight 
 functions. In addition, the Executive Board should--
 (A) be comprised only of contributors to the Fund 
 at not less than the minimum threshold to be 
 established pursuant to paragraph (1);
 (B) determine operational procedures such that the 
 Fund is able to effectively fulfill its mission; and
 (C) provide oversight and accountability for the 
 Fund in collaboration with the Inspector General to be 
 established pursuant to section 6910(e)(1)(A).
 (3) Composition.--The Executive Board should include--
 (A) representatives of the governments of founding 
 permanent member countries who, in addition to the 
 requirements in paragraph (1), qualify based upon 
 meeting an established initial contribution threshold, 
 which should be not less than 10 percent of total 
 initial contributions, and a demonstrated commitment to 
 supporting the International Health Regulations (2005);
 (B) term members, who are from academic 
 institutions, civil society, and the private sector and 
 are selected by the permanent members on the basis of 
 their experience and commitment to innovation, best 
 practices, and the advancement of global health 
 security objectives; and
 (C) representatives of the World Health 
 Organization, and the chair of the Global Health 
 Security Steering Group.
 (4) Qualifications.--Individuals appointed to the Executive 
 Board should have demonstrated knowledge and experience across 
 a variety of sectors, including human and animal health, 
 agriculture, development, defense, finance, research, and 
 academia.
 (5) Conflicts of interest.--
 (A) Technical experts.--The Executive Board may 
 include independent technical experts, provided they 
 are not affiliated with or employed by a recipient 
 country or organization.
 (B) Multilateral bodies and institutions.--
 Executive Board members appointed under paragraph 
 (3)(C) should recuse themselves from matters presenting 
 conflicts of interest, including financing decisions 
 relating to such bodies and institutions.
 (6) United states representation.--
 (A) In general.--
 (i) Founding permanent member.--The 
 Secretary of State shall seek to establish the 
 United States as a founding permanent member of 
 the Fund.
 (ii) United states representation.--The 
 United States shall be represented on the 
 Executive Board by an officer or employee of 
 the United States appointed by the President.
 (B) Effective and termination dates.--
 (i) Effective date.--This paragraph shall 
 take effect upon the date the Secretary of 
 State certifies and transmits to Congress an 
 agreement establishing the Fund.
 (ii) Termination date.--The membership 
 established pursuant to subparagraph (A) shall 
 terminate upon the date of termination of the 
 Fund.
 (7) Removal procedures.--The Fund should establish 
 procedures for the removal of members of the Executive Board 
 who engage in a consistent pattern of human rights abuses, fail 
 to uphold global health data transparency requirements, or 
 otherwise violate the established standards of the Fund, 
 including in relation to corruption.
 (8) Enforceability.--Any agreement concluded under the 
 authorities provided by this section shall be legally effective 
 and binding upon the United States, as may be provided in the 
 agreement, upon--
 (A) the enactment of appropriate implementing 
 legislation which provides for the approval of the 
 specific agreement or agreements, including 
 attachments, annexes, and supporting documentation, as 
 appropriate; or
 (B) if concluded and submitted as a treaty, 
 receiving the necessary consent of the Senate.
 (9) Eligible partner country defined.--In this section, the 
 term ``eligible partner country'' means a country with 
 demonstrated--
 (A) need, as identified through the Joint External 
 Evaluation process, the Global Health Security Index 
 classification of health systems, national action plans 
 for health security, and other complementary or 
 successor indicators of global health security and 
 pandemic preparedness; and
 (B) commitment to transparency, including budget 
 and global health data transparency, complying with the 
 International Health Regulations (2005), investing in 
 domestic health systems, and achieving measurable 
 results, and in which the Fund for Global Health 
 Security and Pandemic Preparedness established under 
 this section may finance global health security and 
 pandemic preparedness assistance programs under this 
 title.

SEC. 6909. FUND AUTHORITIES.

 (a) Program Objectives.--
 (1) In general.--In carrying out the purpose set forth in 
 section 6908, the Fund, acting through the Executive Board, 
 should provide grants, including challenge grants, technical 
 assistance, concessional lending, catalytic investment funds, 
 and other innovative funding mechanisms, as appropriate, to--
 (A) help eligible partner countries close critical 
 gaps in health security, as identified through the 
 Joint External Evaluation process, the Global Health 
 Security Index classification of health systems, and 
 national action plans for health security and other 
 complementary or successor indicators of global health 
 security and pandemic preparedness; and
 (B) support measures that enable such countries, at 
 both national and sub-national levels, and in 
 partnership with civil society and the private sector, 
 to strengthen and sustain resilient health systems and 
 supply chains with the resources, capacity, and 
 personnel required to prevent, detect, mitigate, and 
 respond to infectious disease threats before they 
 become pandemics.
 (2) Activities supported.--The activities to be supported 
 by the Fund should include efforts to--
 (A) enable eligible partner countries to formulate 
 and implement national health security and pandemic 
 preparedness action plans, advance action packages 
 under the Global Health Security Agenda, and adopt and 
 uphold commitments under the International Health 
 Regulations (2005) and other related international 
 health agreements, as appropriate;
 (B) support global health security budget planning 
 in eligible partner countries, including training in 
 financial management and budget and global health data 
 transparency;
 (C) strengthen the health security workforce, 
 including hiring, training, and deploying experts to 
 improve frontline preparedness for emerging epidemic 
 and pandemic threats;
 (D) improve infection control and the protection of 
 healthcare workers within healthcare settings;
 (E) combat the threat of antimicrobial resistance;
 (F) strengthen laboratory capacity and promote 
 biosafety and biosecurity through the provision of 
 material and technical assistance;
 (G) reduce the risk of bioterrorism, zoonotic 
 disease spillover, and accidental biological release;
 (H) build technical capacity to manage global 
 health security related supply chains, including for 
 personal protective equipment, oxygen, testing 
 reagents, and other lifesaving supplies, through 
 effective forecasting, procurement, warehousing, and 
 delivery from central warehouses to points of service 
 in both the public and private sectors;
 (I) enable bilateral, regional, and international 
 partnerships and cooperation, including through 
 pandemic early warning systems and emergency operations 
 centers, to identify and address transnational 
 infectious disease threats exacerbated by natural and 
 man-made disasters, human displacement, and zoonotic 
 infection;
 (J) establish partnerships for the sharing of best 
 practices and enabling eligible countries to meet 
 targets and indicators under the Joint External 
 Evaluation process, the Global Health Security Index 
 classification of health systems, and national action 
 plans for health security relating to the detection, 
 treatment, and prevention of neglected tropical 
 diseases;
 (K) build the technical capacity of eligible 
 partner countries to prepare for and respond to second 
 order development impacts of infectious disease 
 outbreaks, while accounting for the differentiated 
 needs and vulnerabilities of marginalized populations;
 (L) develop and utilize metrics to monitor and 
 evaluate programmatic performance and identify best 
 practices, including in accordance with Joint External 
 Evaluation benchmarks, Global Health Security Agenda 
 targets, and Global Health Security Index indicators;
 (M) develop and deploy mechanisms to enhance the 
 transparency and accountability of global health 
 security and pandemic preparedness programs and data, 
 in compliance with the International Health Regulations 
 (2005), including through the sharing of trends, risks, 
 and lessons learned; and
 (N) develop and implement simulation exercises, 
 produce and release after action reports, and address 
 related gaps.
 (3) Implementation of program objectives.--In carrying out 
 the objectives of paragraph (1), the Fund should work to 
 eliminate duplication and waste by upholding strict 
 transparency and accountability standards and coordinating its 
 programs and activities with key partners working to advance 
 global health security and pandemic preparedness, including--
 (A) governments, civil society, faith-based, and 
 nongovernmental organizations, research and academic 
 institutions, and private sector entities in eligible 
 partner countries;
 (B) the pandemic early warning systems and 
 emergency operations centers to be established under 
 section 6909;
 (C) the World Health Organization;
 (D) the Global Health Security Agenda;
 (E) the Global Health Security Initiative;
 (F) the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, 
 and Malaria;
 (G) the United Nations Office for the Coordination 
 of Humanitarian Affairs, UNICEF, and other relevant 
 funds, programs, and specialized agencies of the United 
 Nations;
 (H) Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance;
 (I) the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness 
 Innovations (CEPI);
 (J) the Global Polio Eradication Initiative; and
 (K) the United States Coordinator for Global Health 
 Security and Diplomacy established under section 5.
 (b) Priority.--In providing assistance under this section, the Fund 
should give priority to low-and lower-middle income countries with--
 (1) low scores on the Global Health Security Index 
 classification of health systems;
 (2) measurable gaps in global health security and pandemic 
 preparedness identified under Joint External Evaluations and 
 national action plans for health security;
 (3) demonstrated political and financial commitment to 
 pandemic preparedness; and
 (4) demonstrated commitment to upholding global health 
 budget and data transparency and accountability standards, 
 complying with the International Health Regulations (2005), 
 investing in domestic health systems, and achieving measurable 
 results.
 (c) Eligible Grant Recipients.--Governments and nongovernmental 
organizations should be eligible to receive grants as described in this 
section.

SEC. 6910. FUND ADMINISTRATION.

 (a) Appointment of an Administrator.--The Executive Board of the 
Fund should appoint an Administrator who should be responsible for 
managing the day-to-day operations of the Fund.
 (b) Authority to Solicit and Accept Contributions.--The Fund should 
be authorized to solicit and accept contributions from governments, the 
private sector, foundations, individuals, and nongovernmental entities 
of all kinds.
 (c) Accountability of Funds and Criteria for Programs.--As part of 
the negotiations described in section 6908(a), the Secretary of the 
State, shall, consistent with subsection (d)--
 (1) take such actions as are necessary to ensure that the 
 Fund will have in effect adequate procedures and standards to 
 account for and monitor the use of funds contributed to the 
 Fund, including the cost of administering the Fund; and
 (2) seek agreement on the criteria that should be used to 
 determine the programs and activities that should be assisted 
 by the Fund.
 (d) Selection of Partner Countries, Projects, and Recipients.--The 
Executive Board should establish--
 (1) eligible partner country selection criteria, to include 
 transparent metrics to measure and assess global health 
 security and pandemic preparedness strengths and 
 vulnerabilities in countries seeking assistance;
 (2) minimum standards for ensuring eligible partner country 
 ownership and commitment to long-term results, including 
 requirements for domestic budgeting, resource mobilization, and 
 co-investment;
 (3) criteria for the selection of projects to receive 
 support from the Fund;
 (4) standards and criteria regarding qualifications of 
 recipients of such support;
 (5) such rules and procedures as may be necessary for cost-
 effective management of the Fund; and
 (6) such rules and procedures as may be necessary to ensure 
 transparency and accountability in the grant-making process.
 (e) Additional Transparency and Accountability Requirements.--
 (1) Inspector general.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary of State shall seek 
 to ensure that the Fund maintains an independent Office 
 of the Inspector General and ensure that the office has 
 the requisite resources and capacity to regularly 
 conduct and publish, on a publicly accessible website, 
 rigorous financial, programmatic, and reporting audits 
 and investigations of the Fund and its grantees.
 (B) Sense of congress on corruption.--It is the 
 sense of Congress that--
 (i) corruption within global health 
 programs contribute directly to the loss of 
 human life and cannot be tolerated; and
 (ii) in making financial recoveries 
 relating to a corrupt act or criminal conduct 
 under a grant, as determined by the Inspector 
 General, the responsible grant recipient should 
 be assessed at a recovery rate of up to 150 
 percent of such loss.
 (2) Administrative expenses.--The Secretary of State shall 
 seek to ensure the Fund establishes, maintains, and makes 
 publicly available a system to track the administrative and 
 management costs of the Fund on a quarterly basis.
 (3) Financial tracking systems.--The Secretary of State 
 shall ensure that the Fund establishes, maintains, and makes 
 publicly available a system to track the amount of funds 
 disbursed to each grant recipient and sub-recipient during a 
 grant's fiscal cycle.

SEC. 6911. FUND ADVISORY BOARD.

 (a) In General.--There should be an Advisory Board to the Fund.
 (b) Appointments.--The members of the Advisory Board should be 
composed of--
 (1) individuals with experience and leadership in the 
 fields of development, global health, epidemiology, medicine, 
 biomedical research, and social sciences; and
 (2) representatives of relevant United Nations agencies, 
 including the World Health Organization, and nongovernmental 
 organizations with on-the-ground experience in implementing 
 global health programs in low and lower-middle income 
 countries.
 (c) Responsibilities.--The Advisory Board should provide advice and 
guidance to the Executive Board of the Fund on the development and 
implementation of programs and projects to be assisted by the Fund and 
on leveraging donations to the Fund.
 (d) Prohibition on Payment of Compensation.--
 (1) In general.--Except for travel expenses (including per 
 diem in lieu of subsistence), no member of the Advisory Board 
 should receive compensation for services performed as a member 
 of the Board.
 (2) United states representative.--Notwithstanding any 
 other provision of law (including an international agreement), 
 a representative of the United States on the Advisory Board may 
 not accept compensation for services performed as a member of 
 the Board, except that such representative may accept travel 
 expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, while away 
 from the representative's home or regular place of business in 
 the performance of services for the Board.
 (e) Conflicts of Interest.--Members of the Advisory Board should be 
required to disclose any potential conflicts of interest prior to 
serving on the Advisory Board.

SEC. 6912. REPORTS TO CONGRESS ON THE FUND.

 (a) Status Report.--Not later than 6 months after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State, in coordination with the 
Administrator of the United States Agency for International 
Development, and the heads of other relevant Federal departments and 
agencies, shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a 
report detailing the progress of international negotiations to 
establish the Fund.
 (b) Annual Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 the establishment of the Fund, and annually thereafter for the 
 duration of the Fund, the Secretary of State, shall submit to 
 the appropriate congressional committees a report on the Fund.
 (2) Report elements.--The report shall include a 
 description of--
 (A) the goals of the Fund;
 (B) the programs, projects, and activities 
 supported by the Fund;
 (C) private and governmental contributions to the 
 Fund; and
 (D) the criteria utilized to determine the programs 
 and activities that should be assisted by the Fund.
 (c) GAO Report on Effectiveness.--Not later than 2 years after the 
date that the Fund comes into effect, the Comptroller General of the 
United States shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees 
a report evaluating the effectiveness of the Fund, including--
 (1) the effectiveness of the programs, projects, and 
 activities supported by the Fund; and
 (2) an assessment of the merits of continued United States 
 participation in the Fund.

SEC. 6913. UNITED STATES CONTRIBUTIONS.

 (a) In General.--Subject to submission of the certification under 
this section, the President is authorized to make available for United 
States contributions to the Fund such funds as may be authorized to be 
made available for such purpose.
 (b) Notification.--The Secretary of State shall notify the 
appropriate congressional committees not later than 15 days in advance 
of making a contribution to the Fund, including--
 (1) the amount of the proposed contribution;
 (2) the total of funds contributed by other donors; and
 (3) the national interests served by United States 
 participation in the Fund.
 (c) Limitation.--At no point during the five years after enactment 
of this Act shall a United States contribution to the Fund cause the 
cumulative total of United States contributions to the Fund to exceed 
33 percent of the total contributions to the Fund from all sources.
 (d) Withholdings.--
 (1) Support for acts of international terrorism.--If at any 
 time the Secretary of State determines that the Fund has 
 provided assistance to a country, the government of which the 
 Secretary of State has determined, for purposes of section 620A 
 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2371) has 
 repeatedly provided support for acts of international 
 terrorism, the United States shall withhold from its 
 contribution to the Fund for the next fiscal year an amount 
 equal to the amount expended by the Fund to the government of 
 such country.
 (2) Excessive salaries.--If at any time during the five 
 years after enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State 
 determines that the salary of any individual employed by the 
 Fund exceeds the salary of the Vice President of the United 
 States for that fiscal year, then the United States should 
 withhold from its contribution for the next fiscal year an 
 amount equal to the aggregate amount by which the salary of 
 each such individual exceeds the salary of the Vice President 
 of the United States.
 (3) Accountability certification requirement.--The 
 Secretary of State may withhold not more than 20 percent of 
 planned United States contributions to the Fund until the 
 Secretary certifies to the appropriate congressional committees 
 that the Fund has established procedures to provide access by 
 the Office of Inspector General of the Department of State, as 
 cognizant Inspector General, the Inspector General of the 
 Department of Health and Human Services, the Inspector General 
 of the United States Agency for International Development, and 
 the Comptroller General of the United States to the Fund's 
 financial data and other information relevant to United States 
 contributions to the Fund (as determined by the Inspector 
 General of the Department of State, in consultation with the 
 Secretary of State).

SEC. 6914. COMPLIANCE WITH THE FOREIGN AID TRANSPARENCY AND 
 ACCOUNTABILITY ACT OF 2016.

 Section 2(3) of the Foreign Aid Transparency and Accountability Act 
of 2016 (Public Law 114-191; 22 U.S.C. 2394c note) is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (D), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in subparagraph (E), by striking the period at the end 
 and inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(F) the Global Health Security Act of 2022.''.

SEC. 6915. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term 
 ``appropriate congressional Committees'' means--
 (A) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the 
 Committee on Appropriations of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the 
 Committee on Appropriations of the Senate.
 (2) Global health security.--The term ``global health 
 security'' means activities supporting epidemic and pandemic 
 preparedness and capabilities at the country and global levels 
 in order to minimize vulnerability to acute public health 
 events that can endanger the health of populations across 
 geographical regions and international boundaries.

SEC. 6916. SUNSET.

 This title, and the amendments made by this title shall cease to be 
effective 5 fiscal years after the enactment of this Act.

 TITLE LXX--PROTECTION OF SAUDI DISSIDENTS

SEC. 7001. RESTRICTIONS ON TRANSFERS OF DEFENSE ARTICLES AND SERVICES, 
 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION SERVICES, AND MAJOR DEFENSE 
 EQUIPMENT TO SAUDI ARABIA.

 (a) Initial Period.--During the 120-day period beginning on the 
date of the enactment of this Act, the President may not sell, 
authorize a license for the export of, or otherwise transfer any 
defense articles or defense services, design and construction services, 
or major defense equipment under the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 
2751 et seq.) to an intelligence, internal security, or law enforcement 
agency or instrumentality of the Government of Saudi Arabia, or to any 
person acting as an agent of or on behalf of such agency or 
instrumentality.
 (b) Subsequent Periods.--
 (1) In general.--During the 120-day period beginning after 
 the end of the 120-day period described in subsection (a), and 
 each 120-day period thereafter, the President may not sell, 
 authorize a license for the export of, or otherwise transfer 
 any defense articles or services, design and construction 
 services, or major defense equipment under the Arms Export 
 Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2751 et seq.), regardless of the amount 
 of such articles, services, or equipment, to an intelligence, 
 internal security, or law enforcement agency or instrumentality 
 of the Government of Saudi Arabia, or to any person acting as 
 an agent of or on behalf of such agency or instrumentality, 
 unless the President has submitted to the chairman and ranking 
 member of the appropriate congressional committees a 
 certification described in paragraph (2).
 (2) Certification.--A certification described in this 
 paragraph is a certification that contains a determination of 
 the President that, during the 120-day period preceding the 
 date of submission of the certification, the United States 
 Government has not determined that the Government of Saudi 
 Arabia has conducted any of the following activities:
 (A) Forced repatriation, intimidation, or killing 
 of dissidents in other countries.
 (B) The unjust imprisonment in Saudi Arabia of 
 United States citizens or aliens lawfully admitted for 
 permanent residence or the prohibition on these 
 individuals and their family members from exiting Saudi 
 Arabia.
 (C) Torture of detainees in the custody of the 
 Government of Saudi Arabia.
 (c) Exception.--The restrictions in this section shall not apply 
with respect to the sale, authorization of a license for export, or 
transfer of any defense articles or services, design and construction 
services, or major defense equipment under the Arms Export Control Act 
(22 U.S.C. 2751 et seq.) for use in--
 (1) the defense of the territory of Saudi Arabia from 
 external threats; or
 (2) the defense of United States military or diplomatic 
 personnel or United States facilities located in Saudi Arabia.
 (d) Waiver.--
 (1) In general.--The President may waive the restrictions 
 in this section if the President submits to the appropriate 
 congressional committees a report not later than 15 days before 
 the granting of such waiver that contains--
 (A) a determination of the President that such a 
 waiver is in the vital national security interests of 
 the United States; and
 (B) a detailed justification for the use of such 
 waiver and the reasons why the restrictions in this 
 section cannot be met.
 (2) Form.--The report required by this subsection shall be 
 submitted in unclassified form but may contain a classified 
 annex.
 (e) Sunset.--This section shall terminate on the date that is 3 
years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (f) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Permanent Select 
 Committee on Intelligence, and the Committee on Armed Services 
 of the House of Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations, the Select 
 Committee on Intelligence, and the Committee on Armed Services 
 of the Senate.

SEC. 7002. REPORT ON CONSISTENT PATTERN OF ACTS OF INTIMIDATION OR 
 HARASSMENT DIRECTED AGAINST INDIVIDUALS IN THE UNITED 
 STATES.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) Section 6 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 
 2756) states the following: ``No letters of offer may be 
 issued, no credits or guarantees may be extended, and no export 
 licenses may be issued under this Act with respect to any 
 country determined by the President to be engaged in a 
 consistent pattern of acts of intimidation or harassment 
 directed against individuals in the United States''.
 (2) Section 6 of the Arms Export Control Act further 
 requires the President to report any such determination 
 promptly to the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the 
 Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives, 
 and to the chairman of the Committee on Foreign Relations of 
 the Senate.
 (b) Report on Acts of Intimidation or Harassment Against 
Individuals in the United States.--Not later than 60 days after the 
date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall submit to the 
appropriate congressional committees a report on--
 (1) whether any official of the Government of Saudi Arabia 
 engaged in a consistent pattern of acts of intimidation or 
 harassment directed against Jamal Khashoggi or any individual 
 in the United States; and
 (2) whether any United States-origin defense articles were 
 used in the activities described in paragraph (1).
 (c) Form.--The report required by subsection (b) shall be submitted 
in unclassified form but may contain a classified annex.
 (d) Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, 
the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means--
 (1) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Permanent 
 Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Select 
 Committee on Intelligence of the Senate.

SEC. 7003. REPORT AND CERTIFICATION WITH RESPECT TO SAUDI DIPLOMATS AND 
 DIPLOMATIC FACILITIES IN THE UNITED STATES.

 (a) Report on Saudi Diplomats and Diplomatic Facilities in United 
States.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of 
this Act, the President shall submit to the appropriate congressional 
committees a report covering the three-year period preceding such date 
of enactment regarding whether and to what extent covered persons used 
diplomatic credentials, visas, or covered facilities to facilitate 
monitoring, tracking, surveillance, or harassment of, or harm to, other 
nationals of Saudi Arabia living in the United States.
 (b) Certification.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 120 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, and each 120-day period thereafter, 
 the President shall, if the President determines that such is 
 the case, submit to the appropriate congressional committees a 
 certification that the United States Government has not 
 determined covered persons to be using diplomatic credentials, 
 visas, or covered facilities to facilitate serious harassment 
 of, or harm to, other nationals of Saudi Arabia living in the 
 United States during the time period covered by each such 
 certification.
 (2) Failure to submit certification.--If the President does 
 not submit a certification under paragraph (1), the President 
 shall--
 (A) close one or more covered facilities for such 
 period of time until the President does submit such a 
 certification; and
 (B) submit to the appropriate congressional 
 committee a report that contains--
 (i) a detailed explanation of why the 
 President is unable to make such a 
 certification;
 (ii) a list and summary of engagements of 
 the United States Government with the 
 Government of Saudi Arabia regarding the use of 
 diplomatic credentials, visas, or covered 
 facilities described in paragraph (1); and
 (iii) a description of actions the United 
 States Government has taken or intends to take 
 in response to the use of diplomatic 
 credentials, visas, or covered facilities 
 described in paragraph (1).
 (c) Form.--The report required by subsection (a) and the 
certification and report required by subsection (b) shall be submitted 
in unclassified form but may contain a classified annex.
 (d) Waiver.--
 (1) In general.--The President may waive the restrictions 
 in this section if the President submits to the appropriate 
 congressional committees a report not later than 15 days before 
 the granting of such waiver that contains--
 (A) a determination of the President that such a 
 waiver is in the vital national security interests of 
 the United States; and
 (B) a detailed justification for the use of such 
 waiver and the reasons why the restrictions in this 
 section cannot be met.
 (2) Form.--The report required by this subsection shall be 
 submitted in unclassified form but may contain a classified 
 annex.
 (e) Sunset.--This section shall terminate on the date that is 3 
years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (f) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the 
 Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House 
 of Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the 
 Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate.
 (2) The term ``covered facility'' means a diplomatic or 
 consular facility of Saudi Arabia in the United States.
 (3) The term ``covered person'' means a national of Saudi 
 Arabia credentialed to a covered facility.

SEC. 7004. REPORT ON THE DUTY TO WARN OBLIGATION OF THE GOVERNMENT OF 
 THE UNITED STATES.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds that Intelligence Community Directive 
191 provides that--
 (1) when an element of the intelligence community of the 
 United States collects or acquires credible and specific 
 information indicating an impending threat of intentional 
 killing, serious bodily injury, or kidnapping directed at a 
 person, the agency must ``warn the intended victim or those 
 responsible for protecting the intended victim, as 
 appropriate'' unless an applicable waiver of the duty is 
 granted by the appropriate official within the element; and
 (2) when issues arise with respect to whether the threat 
 information rises to the threshold of ``duty to warn'', the 
 directive calls for resolution in favor of warning the intended 
 victim.
 (b) Report on Duty to Warn.--Not later than 90 days after the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Director of National Intelligence, in 
coordination with the heads of other relevant United States 
intelligence agencies, shall submit to the appropriate congressional 
committees a report with respect to--
 (1) whether and how the intelligence community fulfilled 
 its duty to warn Jamal Khashoggi of threats to his life and 
 liberty pursuant to Intelligence Community Directive 191; and
 (2) in the case of the intelligence community not 
 fulfilling its duty to warn as described in paragraph (1), why 
 the intelligence community did not fulfill this duty.
 (c) Form.--The report required by subsection (b) shall be submitted 
in unclassified form but may contain a classified annex.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' 
 means--
 (A) the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the 
 Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House 
 of Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Foreign Relations and the 
 Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate.
 (2) The term ``duty to warn'' has the meaning given that 
 term in Intelligence Community Directive 191, as in effect on 
 July 21, 2015.
 (3) The term ``intelligence community'' has the meaning 
 given such term in section 3(4) of the National Security Act of 
 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3003(4)).
 (4) The term ``relevant United States intelligence agency'' 
 means any element of the intelligence community that may have 
 possessed intelligence reporting regarding threats to Jamal 
 Khashoggi.

 TITLE LXXI--COLORADO AND GRAND CANYON PUBLIC LANDS

SEC. 7101. DEFINITION OF STATE.

 In subtitles A through D, the term ``State'' means the State of 
Colorado.

 Subtitle A--Continental Divide

SEC. 7111. DEFINITIONS.

 In this subtitle:
 (1) Covered area.--The term ``covered area'' means any area 
 designated as wilderness by the amendments to section 2(a) of 
 the Colorado Wilderness Act of 1993 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; 
 Public Law 103-77) made by section 7112(a).
 (2) Historic landscape.--The term ``Historic Landscape'' 
 means the Camp Hale National Historic Landscape designated by 
 section 7118(a).
 (3) Recreation management area.--The term ``Recreation 
 Management Area'' means the Tenmile Recreation Management Area 
 designated by section 7114(a).
 (4) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Agriculture.
 (5) Wildlife conservation area.--The term ``Wildlife 
 Conservation Area'' means, as applicable--
 (A) the Porcupine Gulch Wildlife Conservation Area 
 designated by section 7115(a);
 (B) the Williams Fork Mountains Wildlife 
 Conservation Area designated by section 7116(a); and
 (C) the Spraddle Creek Wildlife Conservation Area 
 designated by section 7117(a).

SEC. 7112. COLORADO WILDERNESS ADDITIONS.

 (a) Designation.--Section 2(a) of the Colorado Wilderness Act of 
1993 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; Public Law 103-77) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (18), by striking ``1993,'' and inserting 
 ``1993, and certain Federal land within the White River 
 National Forest that comprises approximately 6,896 acres, as 
 generally depicted as `Proposed Ptarmigan Peak Wilderness 
 Additions' on the map entitled `Proposed Ptarmigan Peak 
 Wilderness Additions' and dated June 24, 2019,''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(23) Holy cross wilderness addition.--Certain Federal 
 land within the White River National Forest that comprises 
 approximately 3,866 acres, as generally depicted as `Proposed 
 Megan Dickie Wilderness Addition' on the map entitled `Holy 
 Cross Wilderness Addition Proposal' and dated June 24, 2019, 
 which shall be incorporated into, and managed as part of, the 
 Holy Cross Wilderness designated by section 102(a)(5) of Public 
 Law 96-560 (94 Stat. 3266).
 ``(24) Hoosier ridge wilderness.--Certain Federal land 
 within the White River National Forest that comprises 
 approximately 5,235 acres, as generally depicted as `Proposed 
 Hoosier Ridge Wilderness' on the map entitled `Tenmile 
 Proposal' and dated April 22, 2022, which shall be known as the 
 `Hoosier Ridge Wilderness'.
 ``(25) Tenmile wilderness.--Certain Federal land within the 
 White River National Forest that comprises approximately 7,624 
 acres, as generally depicted as `Proposed Tenmile Wilderness' 
 on the map entitled `Tenmile Proposal' and dated April 22, 
 2022, which shall be known as the `Tenmile Wilderness'.
 ``(26) Eagles nest wilderness additions.--Certain Federal 
 land within the White River National Forest that comprises 
 approximately 7,634 acres, as generally depicted as `Proposed 
 Freeman Creek Wilderness Addition' and `Proposed Spraddle Creek 
 Wilderness Addition' on the map entitled `Eagles Nest 
 Wilderness Additions Proposal' and dated April 26, 2022, which 
 shall be incorporated into, and managed as part of, the Eagles 
 Nest Wilderness designated by Public Law 94-352 (90 Stat. 
 870).''.
 (b) Applicable Law.--Any reference in the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 
1131 et seq.) to the effective date of that Act shall be considered to 
be a reference to the date of enactment of this Act for purposes of 
administering a covered area.
 (c) Fire, Insects, and Diseases.--In accordance with section 
4(d)(1) of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1133(d)(1)), the Secretary may 
carry out any activity in a covered area that the Secretary determines 
to be necessary for the control of fire, insects, and diseases, subject 
to such terms and conditions as the Secretary determines to be 
appropriate.
 (d) Grazing.--The grazing of livestock on a covered area, if 
established before the date of enactment of this Act, shall be 
permitted to continue subject to such reasonable regulations as are 
considered to be necessary by the Secretary, in accordance with--
 (1) section 4(d)(4) of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 
 1133(d)(4)); and
 (2) the guidelines set forth in the report of the Committee 
 on Interior and Insular Affairs of the House of Representatives 
 accompanying H.R. 5487 of the 96th Congress (H. Rept. 96-617).
 (e) Coordination.--For purposes of administering the Federal land 
designated as wilderness by paragraph (26) of section 2(a) of the 
Colorado Wilderness Act of 1993 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; Public Law 103-
77) (as added by subsection (a)(2)), the Secretary shall, as determined 
to be appropriate for the protection of watersheds, coordinate the 
activities of the Secretary in response to fires and flooding events 
with interested State and local agencies.

SEC. 7113. WILLIAMS FORK MOUNTAINS POTENTIAL WILDERNESS.

 (a) Designation.--In furtherance of the purposes of the Wilderness 
Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.), certain Federal land in the White River 
National Forest in the State, comprising approximately 8,036 acres, as 
generally depicted as ``Proposed Williams Fork Mountains Wilderness'' 
on the map entitled ``Williams Fork Mountains Proposal'' and dated June 
24, 2019, is designated as a potential wilderness area.
 (b) Management.--Subject to valid existing rights and except as 
provided in subsection (d), the potential wilderness area designated by 
subsection (a) shall be managed in accordance with--
 (1) the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.); and
 (2) this section.
 (c) Livestock Use of Vacant Allotments.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 3 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, in accordance with applicable laws 
 (including regulations), the Secretary shall publish a 
 determination regarding whether to authorize livestock grazing 
 or other use by livestock on the vacant allotments known as--
 (A) the ``Big Hole Allotment''; and
 (B) the ``Blue Ridge Allotment''.
 (2) Modification of allotments.--In publishing a 
 determination pursuant to paragraph (1), the Secretary may 
 modify or combine the vacant allotments referred to in that 
 paragraph.
 (3) Permit or other authorization.--Not later than 1 year 
 after the date on which a determination of the Secretary to 
 authorize livestock grazing or other use by livestock is 
 published under paragraph (1), if applicable, the Secretary 
 shall grant a permit or other authorization for that livestock 
 grazing or other use in accordance with applicable laws 
 (including regulations).
 (d) Range Improvements.--
 (1) In general.--If the Secretary permits livestock grazing 
 or other use by livestock on the potential wilderness area 
 under subsection (c), the Secretary, or a third party 
 authorized by the Secretary, may use motorized or mechanized 
 transport or equipment for purposes of constructing or 
 rehabilitating such range improvements as are necessary to 
 obtain appropriate livestock management objectives (including 
 habitat and watershed restoration).
 (2) Termination of authority.--The authority provided by 
 this subsection terminates on the date that is 2 years after 
 the date on which the Secretary publishes a positive 
 determination under subsection (c)(3).
 (e) Designation as Wilderness.--
 (1) Designation.--The potential wilderness area designated 
 by subsection (a) shall be designated as wilderness, to be 
 known as the ``Williams Fork Mountains Wilderness''--
 (A) effective not earlier than the date that is 180 
 days after the date of enactment this Act; and
 (B) on the earliest of--
 (i) the date on which the Secretary 
 publishes in the Federal Register a notice that 
 the construction or rehabilitation of range 
 improvements under subsection (d) is complete;
 (ii) the date described in subsection 
 (d)(2); and
 (iii) the effective date of a determination 
 of the Secretary not to authorize livestock 
 grazing or other use by livestock under 
 subsection (c)(1).
 (2) Administration.--Subject to valid existing rights, the 
 Secretary shall manage the Williams Fork Mountains Wilderness 
 in accordance with the Colorado Wilderness Act of 1993 (16 
 U.S.C. 1132 note; Public Law 103-77), except that any reference 
 in that Act to the effective date of that Act shall be 
 considered to be a reference to the date on which the Williams 
 Fork Mountains Wilderness is designated in accordance with 
 paragraph (1).

SEC. 7114. TENMILE RECREATION MANAGEMENT AREA.

 (a) Designation.--Subject to valid existing rights, the 
approximately 17,120 acres of Federal land in the White River National 
Forest in the State, as generally depicted as ``Proposed Tenmile 
Recreation Management Area'' on the map entitled ``Tenmile Proposal'' 
and dated April 22, 2022, are designated as the ``Tenmile Recreation 
Management Area''.
 (b) Purposes.--The purposes of the Recreation Management Area are 
to conserve, protect, and enhance for the benefit and enjoyment of 
present and future generations the recreational, scenic, watershed, 
habitat, and ecological resources of the Recreation Management Area.
 (c) Management.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall manage the Recreation 
 Management Area--
 (A) in a manner that conserves, protects, and 
 enhances--
 (i) the purposes of the Recreation 
 Management Area described in subsection (b); 
 and
 (ii) recreation opportunities, including 
 mountain biking, hiking, fishing, horseback 
 riding, snowshoeing, climbing, skiing, camping, 
 and hunting; and
 (B) in accordance with--
 (i) the Forest and Rangeland Renewable 
 Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1600 
 et seq.);
 (ii) any other applicable laws (including 
 regulations); and
 (iii) this section.
 (2) Uses.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary shall only allow 
 such uses of the Recreation Management Area as the 
 Secretary determines would further the purposes 
 described in subsection (b).
 (B) Vehicles.--
 (i) In general.--Except as provided in 
 clause (iii), the use of motorized vehicles in 
 the Recreation Management Area shall be limited 
 to the roads, vehicle classes, and periods 
 authorized for motorized vehicle use on the 
 date of enactment of this Act.
 (ii) New or temporary roads.--Except as 
 provided in clause (iii), no new or temporary 
 road shall be constructed in the Recreation 
 Management Area.
 (iii) Exceptions.--Nothing in clause (i) or 
 (ii) prevents the Secretary from--
 (I) rerouting or closing an 
 existing road or trail to protect 
 natural resources from degradation, as 
 the Secretary determines to be 
 appropriate;
 (II) authorizing the use of 
 motorized vehicles for administrative 
 purposes or roadside camping;
 (III) constructing temporary roads 
 or permitting the use of motorized 
 vehicles to carry out pre- or post-fire 
 watershed protection projects;
 (IV) authorizing the use of 
 motorized vehicles to carry out any 
 activity described in subsection (d), 
 (e)(1), or (f); or
 (V) responding to an emergency.
 (C) Commercial timber.--
 (i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), no 
 project shall be carried out in the Recreation 
 Management Area for the purpose of harvesting 
 commercial timber.
 (ii) Limitation.--Nothing in clause (i) 
 prevents the Secretary from harvesting or 
 selling a merchantable product that is a 
 byproduct of an activity authorized under this 
 section.
 (d) Fire, Insects, and Diseases.--The Secretary may carry out any 
activity, in accordance with applicable laws (including regulations), 
that the Secretary determines to be necessary to manage wildland fire 
and treat hazardous fuels, insects, and diseases in the Recreation 
Management Area, subject to such terms and conditions as the Secretary 
determines to be appropriate.
 (e) Water.--
 (1) Effect on water management infrastructure.--Nothing in 
 this section affects the construction, repair, reconstruction, 
 replacement, operation, maintenance, or renovation within the 
 Recreation Management Area of--
 (A) water management infrastructure in existence on 
 the date of enactment of this Act; or
 (B) any future infrastructure necessary for the 
 development or exercise of water rights decreed before 
 the date of enactment of this Act.
 (2) Applicable law.--Section 3(e) of the James Peak 
 Wilderness and Protection Area Act (Public Law 107-216; 116 
 Stat. 1058) shall apply to the Recreation Management Area.
 (f) Permits.--Nothing in this section affects--
 (1) any permit held by a ski area or other entity; or
 (2) the implementation of associated activities or 
 facilities authorized by law or permit outside the boundaries 
 of the Recreation Management Area.

SEC. 7115. PORCUPINE GULCH WILDLIFE CONSERVATION AREA.

 (a) Designation.--Subject to valid existing rights, the 
approximately 8,287 acres of Federal land located in the White River 
National Forest, as generally depicted as ``Proposed Porcupine Gulch 
Wildlife Conservation Area'' on the map entitled ``Porcupine Gulch 
Wildlife Conservation Area Proposal'' and dated June 24, 2019, are 
designated as the ``Porcupine Gulch Wildlife Conservation Area'' 
(referred to in this section as the ``Wildlife Conservation Area'').
 (b) Purposes.--The purposes of the Wildlife Conservation Area are--
 (1) to conserve and protect a wildlife migration corridor 
 over Interstate 70; and
 (2) to conserve, protect, and enhance for the benefit and 
 enjoyment of present and future generations the wildlife, 
 scenic, roadless, watershed, and ecological resources of the 
 Wildlife Conservation Area.
 (c) Management.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall manage the Wildlife 
 Conservation Area--
 (A) in a manner that conserves, protects, and 
 enhances the purposes described in subsection (b); and
 (B) in accordance with--
 (i) the Forest and Rangeland Renewable 
 Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1600 
 et seq.);
 (ii) any other applicable laws (including 
 regulations); and
 (iii) this section.
 (2) Uses.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary shall only allow 
 such uses of the Wildlife Conservation Area as the 
 Secretary determines would further the purposes 
 described in subsection (b).
 (B) Recreation.--The Secretary may permit such 
 recreational activities in the Wildlife Conservation 
 Area that the Secretary determines are consistent with 
 the purposes described in subsection (b).
 (C) Motorized vehicles and mechanized transport; 
 new or temporary roads.--
 (i) Motorized vehicles and mechanized 
 transport.--Except as provided in clause (iii), 
 the use of motorized vehicles and mechanized 
 transport in the Wildlife Conservation Area 
 shall be prohibited.
 (ii) New or temporary roads.--Except as 
 provided in clause (iii) and subsection (e), no 
 new or temporary road shall be constructed 
 within the Wildlife Conservation Area.
 (iii) Exceptions.--Nothing in clause (i) or 
 (ii) prevents the Secretary from--
 (I) authorizing the use of 
 motorized vehicles or mechanized 
 transport for administrative purposes;
 (II) constructing temporary roads 
 or permitting the use of motorized 
 vehicles or mechanized transport to 
 carry out pre- or post-fire watershed 
 protection projects;
 (III) authorizing the use of 
 motorized vehicles or mechanized 
 transport to carry out activities 
 described in subsection (d) or (e); or
 (IV) responding to an emergency.
 (D) Commercial timber.--
 (i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), no 
 project shall be carried out in the Wildlife 
 Conservation Area for the purpose of harvesting 
 commercial timber.
 (ii) Limitation.--Nothing in clause (i) 
 prevents the Secretary from harvesting or 
 selling a merchantable product that is a 
 byproduct of an activity authorized under this 
 section.
 (d) Fire, Insects, and Diseases.--The Secretary may carry out any 
activity, in accordance with applicable laws (including regulations), 
that the Secretary determines to be necessary to manage wildland fire 
and treat hazardous fuels, insects, and diseases in the Wildlife 
Conservation Area, subject to such terms and conditions as the 
Secretary determines to be appropriate.
 (e) Regional Transportation Projects.--Nothing in this section or 
section 7121(f) precludes the Secretary from authorizing, in accordance 
with applicable laws (including regulations) and subject to valid 
existing rights, the use of the subsurface of the Wildlife Conservation 
Area to construct, realign, operate, or maintain regional 
transportation projects, including Interstate 70 and the Eisenhower-
Johnson Tunnels.
 (f) Water.--Section 3(e) of the James Peak Wilderness and 
Protection Area Act (Public Law 107-216; 116 Stat. 1058) shall apply to 
the Wildlife Conservation Area.

SEC. 7116. WILLIAMS FORK MOUNTAINS WILDLIFE CONSERVATION AREA.

 (a) Designation.--Subject to valid existing rights, the 
approximately 3,528 acres of Federal land in the White River National 
Forest in the State, as generally depicted as ``Proposed Williams Fork 
Mountains Wildlife Conservation Area'' on the map entitled ``Williams 
Fork Mountains Proposal'' and dated June 24, 2019, are designated as 
the ``Williams Fork Mountains Wildlife Conservation Area'' (referred to 
in this section as the ``Wildlife Conservation Area'').
 (b) Purposes.--The purposes of the Wildlife Conservation Area are 
to conserve, protect, and enhance for the benefit and enjoyment of 
present and future generations the wildlife, scenic, roadless, 
watershed, recreational, and ecological resources of the Wildlife 
Conservation Area.
 (c) Management.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall manage the Wildlife 
 Conservation Area--
 (A) in a manner that conserves, protects, and 
 enhances the purposes described in subsection (b); and
 (B) in accordance with--
 (i) the Forest and Rangeland Renewable 
 Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1600 
 et seq.);
 (ii) any other applicable laws (including 
 regulations); and
 (iii) this section.
 (2) Uses.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary shall only allow 
 such uses of the Wildlife Conservation Area as the 
 Secretary determines would further the purposes 
 described in subsection (b).
 (B) Motorized vehicles.--
 (i) In general.--Except as provided in 
 clause (iii), the use of motorized vehicles in 
 the Wildlife Conservation Area shall be limited 
 to designated roads and trails.
 (ii) New or temporary roads.--Except as 
 provided in clause (iii), no new or temporary 
 road shall be constructed in the Wildlife 
 Conservation Area.
 (iii) Exceptions.--Nothing in clause (i) or 
 (ii) prevents the Secretary from--
 (I) authorizing the use of 
 motorized vehicles for administrative 
 purposes;
 (II) authorizing the use of 
 motorized vehicles to carry out 
 activities described in subsection (d); 
 or
 (III) responding to an emergency.
 (C) Bicycles.--The use of bicycles in the Wildlife 
 Conservation Area shall be limited to designated roads 
 and trails.
 (D) Commercial timber.--
 (i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), no 
 project shall be carried out in the Wildlife 
 Conservation Area for the purpose of harvesting 
 commercial timber.
 (ii) Limitation.--Nothing in clause (i) 
 prevents the Secretary from harvesting or 
 selling a merchantable product that is a 
 byproduct of an activity authorized under this 
 section.
 (E) Grazing.--The laws (including regulations) and 
 policies followed by the Secretary in issuing and 
 administering grazing permits or leases on land under 
 the jurisdiction of the Secretary shall continue to 
 apply with regard to the land in the Wildlife 
 Conservation Area, consistent with the purposes 
 described in subsection (b).
 (d) Fire, Insects, and Diseases.--The Secretary may carry out any 
activity, in accordance with applicable laws (including regulations), 
that the Secretary determines to be necessary to manage wildland fire 
and treat hazardous fuels, insects, and diseases in the Wildlife 
Conservation Area, subject to such terms and conditions as the 
Secretary determines to be appropriate.
 (e) Water.--Section 3(e) of the James Peak Wilderness and 
Protection Area Act (Public Law 107-216; 116 Stat. 1058) shall apply to 
the Wildlife Conservation Area.

SEC. 7117. SPRADDLE CREEK WILDLIFE CONSERVATION AREA.

 (a) Designation.--Subject to valid existing rights, the 
approximately 2,674 acres of Federal land in the White River National 
Forest in the State, as generally depicted as ``Proposed Spraddle Creek 
Wildlife Conservation Area'' on the map entitled ``Eagles Nest 
Wilderness Additions Proposal'' and dated April 26, 2022, are 
designated as the ``Spraddle Creek Wildlife Conservation Area'' 
(referred to in this section as the ``Wildlife Conservation Area'').
 (b) Purposes.--The purposes of the Wildlife Conservation Area are 
to conserve, protect, and enhance for the benefit and enjoyment of 
present and future generations the wildlife, scenic, roadless, 
watershed, recreational, and ecological resources of the Wildlife 
Conservation Area.
 (c) Management.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall manage the Wildlife 
 Conservation Area--
 (A) in a manner that conserves, protects, and 
 enhances the purposes described in subsection (b); and
 (B) in accordance with--
 (i) the Forest and Rangeland Renewable 
 Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1600 
 et seq.);
 (ii) any other applicable laws (including 
 regulations); and
 (iii) this subtitle.
 (2) Uses.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary shall only allow 
 such uses of the Wildlife Conservation Area as the 
 Secretary determines would further the purposes 
 described in subsection (b).
 (B) Motorized vehicles and mechanized transport.--
 Except as necessary for administrative purposes or to 
 respond to an emergency, the use of motorized vehicles 
 and mechanized transport in the Wildlife Conservation 
 Area shall be prohibited.
 (C) Roads.--
 (i) In general.--Except as provided in 
 clause (ii), no road shall be constructed in 
 the Wildlife Conservation Area.
 (ii) Exceptions.--Nothing in clause (i) 
 prevents the Secretary from--
 (I) constructing a temporary road 
 as the Secretary determines to be 
 necessary as a minimum requirement for 
 carrying out a vegetation management 
 project in the Wildlife Conservation 
 Area; or
 (II) responding to an emergency.
 (iii) Decommissioning of temporary roads.--
 Not later than 3 years after the date on which 
 the applicable vegetation management project is 
 completed, the Secretary shall decommission any 
 temporary road constructed under clause (ii)(I) 
 for the applicable vegetation management 
 project.
 (D) Commercial timber.--
 (i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), no 
 project shall be carried out in the Wildlife 
 Conservation Area for the purpose of harvesting 
 commercial timber.
 (ii) Limitation.--Nothing in clause (i) 
 prevents the Secretary from harvesting or 
 selling a merchantable product that is a 
 byproduct of an activity authorized in the 
 Wildlife Conservation Area under this section.
 (d) Fire, Insects, and Diseases.--The Secretary may carry out any 
activity, in accordance with applicable laws (including regulations), 
that the Secretary determines to be necessary to manage wildland fire 
and treat hazardous fuels, insects, and diseases in the Wildlife 
Conservation Area, subject to such terms and conditions as the 
Secretary determines to be appropriate.
 (e) Water.--Section 3(e) of the James Peak Wilderness and 
Protection Area Act (Public Law 107-216; 116 Stat. 1058) shall apply to 
the Wildlife Conservation Area.

SEC. 7118. CAMP HALE NATIONAL HISTORIC LANDSCAPE.

 (a) Designation.--Subject to valid existing rights, the 
approximately 28,197 acres of Federal land in the White River National 
Forest in the State, as generally depicted as ``Proposed Camp Hale 
National Historic Landscape'' on the map entitled ``Camp Hale National 
Historic Landscape Proposal'' and dated April 22, 2022, are designated 
the ``Camp Hale National Historic Landscape''.
 (b) Purposes.--The purposes of the Historic Landscape are--
 (1) to provide for--
 (A) the interpretation of historic events, 
 activities, structures, and artifacts of the Historic 
 Landscape, including with respect to the role of the 
 Historic Landscape in local, national, and world 
 history;
 (B) the preservation of the historic resources of 
 the Historic Landscape, consistent with the other 
 purposes of the Historic Landscape;
 (C) recreational opportunities, with an emphasis on 
 the activities related to the historic use of the 
 Historic Landscape, including skiing, snowshoeing, 
 snowmobiling, hiking, horseback riding, climbing, other 
 road- and trail-based activities, and other outdoor 
 activities; and
 (D) the continued environmental remediation and 
 removal of unexploded ordnance at the Camp Hale 
 Formerly Used Defense Site and the Camp Hale historic 
 cantonment area; and
 (2) to conserve, protect, restore, and enhance for the 
 benefit and enjoyment of present and future generations the 
 scenic, watershed, and ecological resources of the Historic 
 Landscape.
 (c) Management.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall manage the Historic 
 Landscape in accordance with--
 (A) the purposes of the Historic Landscape 
 described in subsection (b); and
 (B) any other applicable laws (including 
 regulations).
 (2) Management plan.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 5 years after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall 
 prepare a management plan for the Historic Landscape.
 (B) Contents.--The management plan prepared under 
 subparagraph (A) shall include plans for--
 (i) improving the interpretation of 
 historic events, activities, structures, and 
 artifacts of the Historic Landscape, including 
 with respect to the role of the Historic 
 Landscape in local, national, and world 
 history;
 (ii) conducting historic preservation and 
 veteran outreach and engagement activities;
 (iii) managing recreational opportunities, 
 including the use and stewardship of--
 (I) the road and trail systems; and
 (II) dispersed recreation 
 resources;
 (iv) the conservation, protection, 
 restoration, or enhancement of the scenic, 
 watershed, and ecological resources of the 
 Historic Landscape, including--
 (I) conducting the restoration and 
 enhancement project under subsection 
 (d);
 (II) forest fuels, wildfire, and 
 mitigation management; and
 (III) watershed health and 
 protection;
 (v) environmental remediation and, 
 consistent with subsection (e)(2), the removal 
 of unexploded ordnance; and
 (vi) managing the Historic Landscape in 
 accordance with subsection (g).
 (3) Explosive hazards.--The Secretary shall provide to the 
 Secretary of the Army a notification of any unexploded ordnance 
 (as defined in section 101(e) of title 10, United States Code) 
 that is discovered in the Historic Landscape.
 (d) Camp Hale Restoration and Enhancement Project.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall conduct a restoration 
 and enhancement project in the Historic Landscape--
 (A) to improve aquatic, riparian, and wetland 
 conditions in and along the Eagle River and tributaries 
 of the Eagle River;
 (B) to maintain or improve recreation and 
 interpretive opportunities and facilities; and
 (C) to conserve historic values in the Camp Hale 
 area.
 (2) Coordination.--In carrying out the project described in 
 paragraph (1), the Secretary shall coordinate with, and provide 
 the opportunity to collaborate on the project to--
 (A) the Corps of Engineers;
 (B) the Camp Hale-Eagle River Headwaters 
 Collaborative Group;
 (C) the National Forest Foundation;
 (D) the Colorado Department of Public Health and 
 Environment;
 (E) the Colorado State Historic Preservation 
 Office;
 (F) the Colorado Department of Natural Resources;
 (G) units of local government; and
 (H) other interested organizations and members of 
 the public.
 (e) Environmental Remediation.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Army shall continue 
 to carry out the projects and activities of the Department of 
 the Army in existence on the date of enactment of this Act 
 relating to cleanup of--
 (A) the Camp Hale Formerly Used Defense Site; or
 (B) the Camp Hale historic cantonment area.
 (2) Removal of unexploded ordnance.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary of the Army may 
 remove unexploded ordnance (as defined in section 
 101(e) of title 10, United States Code) from the 
 Historic Landscape, as the Secretary of the Army 
 determines to be appropriate in accordance with 
 applicable law (including regulations).
 (B) Action on receipt of notice.--On receipt from 
 the Secretary of a notification of unexploded ordnance 
 under subsection (c)(3), the Secretary of the Army may 
 remove the unexploded ordnance in accordance with--
 (i) the program for environmental 
 restoration of formerly used defense sites 
 under section 2701 of title 10, United States 
 Code;
 (ii) the Comprehensive Environmental 
 Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 
 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq.); and
 (iii) any other applicable provision of law 
 (including regulations).
 (3) Effect of subsection.--Nothing in this subsection 
 modifies any obligation in existence on the date of enactment 
 of this Act relating to environmental remediation or removal of 
 any unexploded ordnance located in or around the Camp Hale 
 historic cantonment area, the Camp Hale Formerly Used Defense 
 Site, or the Historic Landscape, including such an obligation 
 under--
 (A) the program for environmental restoration of 
 formerly used defense sites under section 2701 of title 
 10, United States Code;
 (B) the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
 Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601 
 et seq.); or
 (C) any other applicable provision of law 
 (including regulations).
 (f) Interagency Agreement.--As soon as practicable after the date 
of enactment of this Act, the Secretary and the Secretary of the Army 
shall enter into an agreement--
 (1) to specify--
 (A) the activities of the Secretary relating to the 
 management of the Historic Landscape; and
 (B) the activities of the Secretary of the Army 
 relating to environmental remediation and the removal 
 of unexploded ordnance in accordance with subsection 
 (e) and other applicable laws (including regulations); 
 and
 (2) to require the Secretary to provide to the Secretary of 
 the Army, by not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
 of this Act and periodically thereafter, as appropriate, a 
 management plan for the Historic Landscape for purposes of the 
 removal activities described in subsection (e).
 (g) Effect.--Nothing in this section--
 (1) affects the jurisdiction of the State over any water 
 law, water right, or adjudication or administration relating to 
 any water resource;
 (2) affects any water right in existence on the date of 
 enactment of this Act, or the exercise of such a water right, 
 including--
 (A) a water right subject to an interstate water 
 compact (including full development of any 
 apportionment made in accordance with such a compact);
 (B) a water right decreed within, above, below, or 
 through the Historic Landscape;
 (C) a change, exchange, plan for augmentation, or 
 other water decree with respect to a water right, 
 including a conditional water right, in existence on 
 the date of enactment of this Act--
 (i) that is consistent with the purposes 
 described in subsection (b); and
 (ii) that does not result in diversion of a 
 greater flow rate or volume of water for such a 
 water right in existence on the date of 
 enactment of this Act;
 (D) a water right held by the United States;
 (E) the management or operation of any reservoir, 
 including the storage, management, release, or 
 transportation of water; and
 (F) the construction or operation of such 
 infrastructure as is determined to be necessary by an 
 individual or entity holding water rights to develop 
 and place to beneficial use those rights, subject to 
 applicable Federal, State, and local law (including 
 regulations);
 (3) constitutes an express or implied reservation by the 
 United States of any reserved or appropriative water right;
 (4) affects--
 (A) any permit held by a ski area or other entity; 
 or
 (B) the implementation of associated activities or 
 facilities authorized by law or permit outside the 
 boundaries of the Historic Landscape;
 (5) prevents the Secretary from closing portions of the 
 Historic Landscape for public safety, environmental 
 remediation, or other use in accordance with applicable laws; 
 or
 (6) affects--
 (A) any special use permit in effect on the date of 
 enactment of this Act; or
 (B) the renewal of a permit described in 
 subparagraph (A).
 (h) Funding.--There is authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 
for activities relating to historic interpretation, preservation, and 
restoration carried out in and around the Historic Landscape.
 (i) Designation of Overlook.--The interpretive site located beside 
United States Route 24 in the State, at 39.431N 106.323W, is designated 
as the ``Sandy Treat Overlook''.

SEC. 7119. WHITE RIVER NATIONAL FOREST BOUNDARY MODIFICATION.

 (a) In General.--The boundary of the White River National Forest is 
modified to include the approximately 120 acres comprised of the SW\1/
4\, the SE\1/4\, and the NE\1/4\ of the SE\1/4\ of sec. 1, T. 2 S., R. 
80 W., 6th Principal Meridian, in Summit County in the State.
 (b) Land and Water Conservation Fund.--For purposes of section 
200306 of title 54, United States Code, the boundaries of the White 
River National Forest, as modified by subsection (a), shall be 
considered to be the boundaries of the White River National Forest as 
in existence on January 1, 1965.

SEC. 7120. ROCKY MOUNTAIN NATIONAL PARK POTENTIAL WILDERNESS BOUNDARY 
 ADJUSTMENT.

 (a) Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to provide for the 
ongoing maintenance and use of portions of the Trail River Ranch and 
the associated property located within Rocky Mountain National Park in 
Grand County in the State.
 (b) Boundary Adjustment.--Section 1952(b) of the Omnibus Public 
Land Management Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-11; 123 Stat. 1070) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Boundary adjustment.--The boundary of the Potential 
 Wilderness is modified to exclude the area comprising 
 approximately 15.5 acres of land identified as `Potential 
 Wilderness to Non-wilderness' on the map entitled `Rocky 
 Mountain National Park Proposed Wilderness Area Amendment' and 
 dated January 16, 2018.''.

SEC. 7121. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.

 (a) Fish and Wildlife.--Nothing in this subtitle affects the 
jurisdiction or responsibility of the State with respect to fish and 
wildlife in the State.
 (b) No Buffer Zones.--
 (1) In general.--Nothing in this subtitle or an amendment 
 made by this subtitle establishes a protective perimeter or 
 buffer zone around--
 (A) a covered area;
 (B) a wilderness area or potential wilderness area 
 designated by section 7113;
 (C) the Recreation Management Area;
 (D) a Wildlife Conservation Area; or
 (E) the Historic Landscape.
 (2) Outside activities.--The fact that a nonwilderness 
 activity or use on land outside of an area described in 
 paragraph (1) can be seen or heard from within the applicable 
 area described in paragraph (1) shall not preclude the activity 
 or use outside the boundary of the applicable area described in 
 paragraph (1).
 (c) Tribal Rights and Uses.--
 (1) Treaty rights.--Nothing in this subtitle affects the 
 treaty rights of an Indian Tribe.
 (2) Traditional tribal uses.--Subject to any terms and 
 conditions that the Secretary determines to be necessary and in 
 accordance with applicable law, the Secretary shall allow for 
 the continued use of the areas described in subsection (b)(1) 
 by members of Indian Tribes--
 (A) for traditional ceremonies; and
 (B) as a source of traditional plants and other 
 materials.
 (d) Maps and Legal Descriptions.--
 (1) In general.--As soon as practicable after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall prepare maps and 
 legal descriptions of each area described in subsection (b)(1) 
 with--
 (A) the Committee on Natural Resources of the House 
 of Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources 
 of the Senate.
 (2) Force of law.--Each map and legal description prepared 
 under paragraph (1) shall have the same force and effect as if 
 included in this subtitle, except that the Secretary may--
 (A) correct any typographical errors in the maps 
 and legal descriptions; and
 (B) in consultation with the State, make minor 
 adjustments to the boundaries of the Tenmile Recreation 
 Management Area designated by section 7114(a), the 
 Porcupine Gulch Wildlife Conservation Area designated 
 by section 7115(a), and the Williams Fork Mountains 
 Wildlife Conservation Area designated by section 
 7116(a) to account for potential highway or multimodal 
 transportation system construction, safety measures, 
 maintenance, realignment, or widening.
 (3) Public availability.--Each map and legal description 
 prepared under paragraph (1) shall be on file and available for 
 public inspection in the appropriate offices of the Forest 
 Service.
 (e) Acquisition of Land.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary may acquire any land or 
 interest in land within the boundaries of an area described in 
 subsection (b)(1) by donation, purchase from a willing seller, 
 or exchange.
 (2) Management.--Any land or interest in land acquired 
 under paragraph (1) shall be incorporated into, and 
 administered as a part of, the wilderness area, Recreation 
 Management Area, Wildlife Conservation Area, or Historic 
 Landscape, as applicable, in which the land or interest in land 
 is located.
 (f) Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, the areas 
described in subsection (b)(1) are withdrawn from--
 (1) entry, appropriation, and disposal under the public 
 land laws;
 (2) location, entry, and patent under mining laws; and
 (3) operation of the mineral leasing, mineral materials, 
 and geothermal leasing laws.
 (g) Military Overflights.--Nothing in this subtitle or an amendment 
made by this subtitle restricts or precludes--
 (1) any low-level overflight of military aircraft over any 
 area subject to this subtitle or an amendment made by this 
 subtitle, including military overflights that can be seen, 
 heard, or detected within such an area;
 (2) flight testing or evaluation over an area described in 
 paragraph (1); or
 (3) the use or establishment of--
 (A) any new unit of special use airspace over an 
 area described in paragraph (1); or
 (B) any military flight training or transportation 
 over such an area.
 (h) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that military 
aviation training on Federal public land in the State, including the 
training conducted at the High-Altitude Army National Guard Aviation 
Training Site, is critical to the national security of the United 
States and the readiness of the Armed Forces.

 Subtitle B--San Juan Mountains

SEC. 7131. DEFINITIONS.

 In this subtitle:
 (1) Covered land.--The term ``covered land'' means--
 (A) land designated as wilderness under paragraphs 
 (27) through (29) of section 2(a) of the Colorado 
 Wilderness Act of 1993 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; Public Law 
 103-77) (as added by section 7132); and
 (B) a Special Management Area.
 (2) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Agriculture.
 (3) Special management area.--The term ``Special Management 
 Area'' means each of--
 (A) the Sheep Mountain Special Management Area 
 designated by section 7133(a)(1); and
 (B) the Liberty Bell East Special Management Area 
 designated by section 7133(a)(2).

SEC. 7132. ADDITIONS TO NATIONAL WILDERNESS PRESERVATION SYSTEM.

 Section 2(a) of the Colorado Wilderness Act of 1993 (16 U.S.C. 1132 
note; Public Law 103-77) (as amended by section 7112(a)) is further 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(27) Lizard head wilderness addition.--Certain Federal 
 land in the Grand Mesa, Uncompahgre, and Gunnison National 
 Forests comprising approximately 3,141 acres, as generally 
 depicted on the map entitled `Proposed Wilson, Sunshine, Black 
 Face and San Bernardo Additions to the Lizard Head Wilderness' 
 and dated September 6, 2018, which is incorporated in, and 
 shall be administered as part of, the Lizard Head Wilderness.
 ``(28) Mount sneffels wilderness additions.--
 ``(A) Liberty bell and last dollar additions.--
 Certain Federal land in the Grand Mesa, Uncompahgre, 
 and Gunnison National Forests comprising approximately 
 7,235 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled 
 `Proposed Liberty Bell and Last Dollar Additions to the 
 Mt. Sneffels Wilderness, Liberty Bell East Special 
 Management Area' and dated September 6, 2018, which is 
 incorporated in, and shall be administered as part of, 
 the Mount Sneffels Wilderness.
 ``(B) Whitehouse additions.--Certain Federal land 
 in the Grand Mesa, Uncompahgre, and Gunnison National 
 Forests comprising approximately 12,465 acres, as 
 generally depicted on the map entitled `Proposed 
 Whitehouse Additions to the Mt. Sneffels Wilderness' 
 and dated September 6, 2018, which is incorporated in, 
 and shall be administered as part of, the Mount 
 Sneffels Wilderness.
 ``(29) Mckenna peak wilderness.--Certain Federal land in 
 the State of Colorado comprising approximately 8,884 acres of 
 Bureau of Land Management land, as generally depicted on the 
 map entitled `Proposed McKenna Peak Wilderness Area' and dated 
 September 18, 2018, to be known as the `McKenna Peak 
 Wilderness'.''.

SEC. 7133. SPECIAL MANAGEMENT AREAS.

 (a) Designation.--
 (1) Sheep mountain special management area.--The Federal 
 land in the Grand Mesa, Uncompahgre, and Gunnison and San Juan 
 National Forests in the State comprising approximately 21,663 
 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Proposed 
 Sheep Mountain Special Management Area'' and dated September 
 19, 2018, is designated as the ``Sheep Mountain Special 
 Management Area''.
 (2) Liberty bell east special management area.--The Federal 
 land in the Grand Mesa, Uncompahgre, and Gunnison National 
 Forests in the State comprising approximately 792 acres, as 
 generally depicted on the map entitled ``Proposed Liberty Bell 
 and Last Dollar Additions to the Mt. Sneffels Wilderness, 
 Liberty Bell East Special Management Area'' and dated September 
 6, 2018, is designated as the ``Liberty Bell East Special 
 Management Area''.
 (b) Purpose.--The purpose of the Special Management Areas is to 
conserve and protect for the benefit and enjoyment of present and 
future generations the geological, cultural, archaeological, 
paleontological, natural, scientific, recreational, wilderness, 
wildlife, riparian, historical, educational, and scenic resources of 
the Special Management Areas.
 (c) Management.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall manage the Special 
 Management Areas in a manner that--
 (A) conserves, protects, and enhances the resources 
 and values of the Special Management Areas described in 
 subsection (b);
 (B) subject to paragraph (3), maintains or improves 
 the wilderness character of the Special Management 
 Areas and the suitability of the Special Management 
 Areas for potential inclusion in the National 
 Wilderness Preservation System; and
 (C) is in accordance with--
 (i) the National Forest Management Act of 
 1976 (16 U.S.C. 1600 et seq.);
 (ii) this subtitle; and
 (iii) any other applicable laws.
 (2) Prohibitions.--The following shall be prohibited in the 
 Special Management Areas:
 (A) Permanent roads.
 (B) Except as necessary to meet the minimum 
 requirements for the administration of the Federal 
 land, to provide access for abandoned mine cleanup, and 
 to protect public health and safety--
 (i) the use of motor vehicles, motorized 
 equipment, or mechanical transport (other than 
 as provided in paragraph (3)); and
 (ii) the establishment of temporary roads.
 (3) Authorized activities.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary may allow any 
 activities (including helicopter access for recreation 
 and maintenance and the competitive running event 
 permitted since 1992) that have been authorized by 
 permit or license as of the date of enactment of this 
 Act to continue within the Special Management Areas, 
 subject to such terms and conditions as the Secretary 
 may require.
 (B) Permitting.--The designation of the Special 
 Management Areas by subsection (a) shall not affect the 
 issuance of permits relating to the activities covered 
 under subparagraph (A) after the date of enactment of 
 this Act.
 (C) Bicycles.--The Secretary may permit the use of 
 bicycles in--
 (i) the portion of the Sheep Mountain 
 Special Management Area identified as ``Ophir 
 Valley Area'' on the map entitled ``Proposed 
 Sheep Mountain Special Management Area'' and 
 dated September 19, 2018; and
 (ii) the portion of the Liberty Bell East 
 Special Management Area identified as ``Liberty 
 Bell Corridor'' on the map entitled ``Proposed 
 Liberty Bell and Last Dollar Additions to the 
 Mt. Sneffels Wilderness, Liberty Bell East 
 Special Management Area'' and dated September 
 6, 2018.
 (d) Applicable Law.--Water and water rights in the Special 
Management Areas shall be administered in accordance with section 8 of 
the Colorado Wilderness Act of 1993 (Public Law 103-77; 107 Stat. 762), 
except that, for purposes of this subtitle--
 (1) any reference contained in that section to ``the lands 
 designated as wilderness by this Act'', ``the Piedra, 
 Roubideau, and Tabeguache areas identified in section 9 of this 
 Act, or the Bowen Gulch Protection Area or the Fossil Ridge 
 Recreation Management Area identified in sections 5 and 6 of 
 this Act'', or ``the areas described in sections 2, 5, 6, and 9 
 of this Act'' shall be considered to be a reference to ``the 
 Special Management Areas''; and
 (2) any reference contained in that section to ``this Act'' 
 shall be considered to be a reference to ``the Colorado Outdoor 
 Recreation and Economy Act''.

SEC. 7134. RELEASE OF WILDERNESS STUDY AREAS.

 (a) Dominguez Canyon Wilderness Study Area.--Subtitle E of title II 
of Public Law 111-11 is amended--
 (1) by redesignating section 2408 (16 U.S.C. 460zzz-7) as 
 section 2409; and
 (2) by inserting after section 2407 (16 U.S.C. 460zzz-6) 
 the following:

``SEC. 2408. RELEASE.

 ``(a) In General.--Congress finds that, for the purposes of section 
603(c) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 
1782(c)), the portions of the Dominguez Canyon Wilderness Study Area 
not designated as wilderness by this subtitle have been adequately 
studied for wilderness designation.
 ``(b) Release.--Any public land referred to in subsection (a) that 
is not designated as wilderness by this subtitle--
 ``(1) is no longer subject to section 603(c) of the Federal 
 Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1782(c)); and
 ``(2) shall be managed in accordance with this subtitle and 
 any other applicable laws.''.
 (b) McKenna Peak Wilderness Study Area.--
 (1) In general.--Congress finds that, for the purposes of 
 section 603(c) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 
 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1782(c)), the portions of the McKenna Peak 
 Wilderness Study Area in San Miguel County in the State not 
 designated as wilderness by paragraph (29) of section 2(a) of 
 the Colorado Wilderness Act of 1993 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; 
 Public Law 103-77) (as added by section 7132) have been 
 adequately studied for wilderness designation.
 (2) Release.--Any public land referred to in paragraph (1) 
 that is not designated as wilderness by paragraph (29) of 
 section 2(a) of the Colorado Wilderness Act of 1993 (16 U.S.C. 
 1132 note; Public Law 103-77) (as added by section 7132)--
 (A) is no longer subject to section 603(c) of the 
 Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 
 U.S.C. 1782(c)); and
 (B) shall be managed in accordance with applicable 
 laws.

SEC. 7135. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.

 (a) Fish and Wildlife.--Nothing in this subtitle affects the 
jurisdiction or responsibility of the State with respect to fish and 
wildlife in the State.
 (b) No Buffer Zones.--
 (1) In general.--Nothing in this subtitle establishes a 
 protective perimeter or buffer zone around covered land.
 (2) Activities outside wilderness.--The fact that a 
 nonwilderness activity or use on land outside of the covered 
 land can be seen or heard from within covered land shall not 
 preclude the activity or use outside the boundary of the 
 covered land.
 (c) Tribal Rights and Uses.--
 (1) Treaty rights.--Nothing in this subtitle affects the 
 treaty rights of any Indian Tribe, including rights under the 
 Agreement of September 13, 1873, ratified by the Act of April 
 29, 1874 (18 Stat. 36, chapter 136).
 (2) Traditional tribal uses.--Subject to any terms and 
 conditions as the Secretary determines to be necessary and in 
 accordance with applicable law, the Secretary shall allow for 
 the continued use of the covered land by members of Indian 
 Tribes--
 (A) for traditional ceremonies; and
 (B) as a source of traditional plants and other 
 materials.
 (d) Maps and Legal Descriptions.--
 (1) In general.--As soon as practicable after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary or the Secretary of the 
 Interior, as appropriate, shall file a map and a legal 
 description of each wilderness area designated by paragraphs 
 (27) through (29) of section 2(a) of the Colorado Wilderness 
 Act of 1993 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; Public Law 103-77) (as added 
 by section 7132) and the Special Management Areas with--
 (A) the Committee on Natural Resources of the House 
 of Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources 
 of the Senate.
 (2) Force of law.--Each map and legal description filed 
 under paragraph (1) shall have the same force and effect as if 
 included in this subtitle, except that the Secretary or the 
 Secretary of the Interior, as appropriate, may correct any 
 typographical errors in the maps and legal descriptions.
 (3) Public availability.--Each map and legal description 
 filed under paragraph (1) shall be on file and available for 
 public inspection in the appropriate offices of the Bureau of 
 Land Management and the Forest Service.
 (e) Acquisition of Land.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary or the Secretary of the 
 Interior, as appropriate, may acquire any land or interest in 
 land within the boundaries of a Special Management Area or the 
 wilderness designated under paragraphs (27) through (29) of 
 section 2(a) of the Colorado Wilderness Act of 1993 (16 U.S.C. 
 1132 note; Public Law 103-77) (as added by section 7132) by 
 donation, purchase from a willing seller, or exchange.
 (2) Management.--Any land or interest in land acquired 
 under paragraph (1) shall be incorporated into, and 
 administered as a part of, the wilderness or Special Management 
 Area in which the land or interest in land is located.
 (f) Grazing.--The grazing of livestock on covered land, if 
established before the date of enactment of this Act, shall be 
permitted to continue subject to such reasonable regulations as are 
considered to be necessary by the Secretary with jurisdiction over the 
covered land, in accordance with--
 (1) section 4(d)(4) of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 
 1133(d)(4)); and
 (2) the applicable guidelines set forth in Appendix A of 
 the report of the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs of 
 the House of Representatives accompanying H.R. 2570 of the 
 101st Congress (H. Rept. 101-405) or H.R. 5487 of the 96th 
 Congress (H. Rept. 96-617).
 (g) Fire, Insects, and Diseases.--In accordance with section 
4(d)(1) of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1133(d)(1)), the Secretary 
with jurisdiction over a wilderness area designated by paragraphs (27) 
through (29) of section 2(a) of the Colorado Wilderness Act of 1993 (16 
U.S.C. 1132 note; Public Law 103-77) (as added by section 7132) may 
carry out any activity in the wilderness area that the Secretary 
determines to be necessary for the control of fire, insects, and 
diseases, subject to such terms and conditions as the Secretary 
determines to be appropriate.
 (h) Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, the covered land 
and the approximately 6,590 acres generally depicted on the map 
entitled ``Proposed Naturita Canyon Mineral Withdrawal Area'' and dated 
September 6, 2018, is withdrawn from--
 (1) entry, appropriation, and disposal under the public 
 land laws;
 (2) location, entry, and patent under mining laws; and
 (3) operation of the mineral leasing, mineral materials, 
 and geothermal leasing laws.

 Subtitle C--Thompson Divide

SEC. 7141. PURPOSES.

 The purposes of this subtitle are--
 (1) subject to valid existing rights, to withdraw certain 
 Federal land in the Thompson Divide area from mineral and other 
 disposal laws in order to protect the agricultural, ranching, 
 wildlife, air quality, recreation, ecological, and scenic 
 values of the area; and
 (2) to promote the capture of fugitive methane emissions 
 that would otherwise be emitted into the atmosphere.

SEC. 7142. DEFINITIONS.

 In this subtitle:
 (1) Fugitive methane emissions.--The term ``fugitive 
 methane emissions'' means methane gas from the Federal land or 
 interests in Federal land in Garfield, Gunnison, Delta, or 
 Pitkin County in the State, within the boundaries of the 
 ``Fugitive Coal Mine Methane Use Pilot Program Area'', as 
 generally depicted on the pilot program map, that would leak or 
 be vented into the atmosphere from--
 (A) an active or inactive coal mine subject to a 
 Federal coal lease; or
 (B) an abandoned underground coal mine or the site 
 of a former coal mine--
 (i) that is not subject to a Federal coal 
 lease; and
 (ii) with respect to which the Federal 
 interest in land includes mineral rights to the 
 methane gas.
 (2) Pilot program.--The term ``pilot program'' means the 
 Greater Thompson Divide Fugitive Coal Mine Methane Use Pilot 
 Program established by section 7145(a)(1).
 (3) Pilot program map.--The term ``pilot program map'' 
 means the map entitled ``Greater Thompson Divide Fugitive Coal 
 Mine Methane Use Pilot Program Area'' and dated April 29, 2022.
 (4) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of the Interior.
 (5) Thompson divide lease.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``Thompson Divide lease'' 
 means any oil or gas lease in effect on the date of 
 enactment of this Act within the Thompson Divide 
 Withdrawal and Protection Area.
 (B) Exclusions.--The term ``Thompson Divide lease'' 
 does not include any oil or gas lease that--
 (i) is associated with a Wolf Creek Storage 
 Field development right; or
 (ii) before the date of enactment of this 
 Act, has expired, been cancelled, or otherwise 
 terminated.
 (6) Thompson divide map.--The term ``Thompson Divide map'' 
 means the map entitled ``Greater Thompson Divide Area Map'' and 
 dated November 5, 2021.
 (7) Thompson divide withdrawal and protection area.--The 
 term ``Thompson Divide Withdrawal and Protection Area'' means 
 the Federal land and minerals within the area generally 
 depicted as the ``Thompson Divide Withdrawal and Protection 
 Area'' on the Thompson Divide map.
 (8) Wolf creek storage field development right.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``Wolf Creek Storage 
 Field development right'' means a development right for 
 any of the Federal mineral leases numbered COC 0007496, 
 COC 0007497, COC 0007498, COC 0007499, COC 0007500, COC 
 0007538, COC 0008128, COC 0015373, COC 0128018, COC 
 0051645, and COC 0051646, as generally depicted on the 
 Thompson Divide map as ``Wolf Creek Storage 
 Agreement''.
 (B) Exclusions.--The term ``Wolf Creek Storage 
 Field development right'' does not include any storage 
 right or related activity within the area described in 
 subparagraph (A).

SEC. 7143. THOMPSON DIVIDE WITHDRAWAL AND PROTECTION AREA.

 (a) Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, the Thompson 
Divide Withdrawal and Protection Area is withdrawn from--
 (1) entry, appropriation, and disposal under the public 
 land laws;
 (2) location, entry, and patent under the mining laws; and
 (3) operation of the mineral leasing, mineral materials, 
 and geothermal leasing laws.
 (b) Surveys.--The exact acreage and legal description of the 
Thompson Divide Withdrawal and Protection Area shall be determined by 
surveys approved by the Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary 
of Agriculture.
 (c) Grazing.--Nothing in this subtitle affects the administration 
of grazing in the Thompson Divide Withdrawal and Protection Area.

SEC. 7144. THOMPSON DIVIDE LEASE CREDITS.

 (a) In General.--In exchange for the relinquishment by a 
leaseholder of all Thompson Divide leases of the leaseholder, the 
Secretary may issue to the leaseholder credits for any bid, royalty, or 
rental payment due under any Federal oil or gas lease on Federal land 
in the State, in accordance with subsection (b).
 (b) Amount of Credits.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the amount of 
 the credits issued to a leaseholder of a Thompson Divide lease 
 relinquished under subsection (a) shall--
 (A) be equal to the sum of--
 (i) the amount of the bonus bids paid for 
 the applicable Thompson Divide leases;
 (ii) the amount of any rental paid for the 
 applicable Thompson Divide leases as of the 
 date on which the leaseholder submits to the 
 Secretary a notice of the decision to 
 relinquish the applicable Thompson Divide 
 leases; and
 (iii) the amount of any reasonable expenses 
 incurred by the leaseholder of the applicable 
 Thompson Divide leases in the preparation of 
 any drilling permit, sundry notice, or other 
 related submission in support of the 
 development of the applicable Thompson Divide 
 leases as of January 28, 2019, including any 
 expenses relating to the preparation of any 
 analysis under the National Environmental 
 Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.); 
 and
 (B) require the approval of the Secretary.
 (2) Exclusion.--The amount of a credit issued under 
 subsection (a) shall not include any expenses paid by the 
 leaseholder of a Thompson Divide lease for--
 (A) legal fees or related expenses for legal work 
 with respect to a Thompson Divide lease; or
 (B) any expenses incurred before the issuance of a 
 Thompson Divide lease.
 (c) Cancellation.--Effective on relinquishment under this section, 
and without any additional action by the Secretary, a Thompson Divide 
lease--
 (1) shall be permanently cancelled; and
 (2) shall not be reissued.
 (d) Conditions.--
 (1) Applicable law.--Except as otherwise provided in this 
 section, each exchange under this section shall be conducted in 
 accordance with--
 (A) this subtitle; and
 (B) other applicable laws (including regulations).
 (2) Acceptance of credits.--The Secretary shall accept 
 credits issued under subsection (a) in the same manner as cash 
 for the payments described in that subsection.
 (3) Applicability.--The use of a credit issued under 
 subsection (a) shall be subject to the laws (including 
 regulations) applicable to the payments described in that 
 subsection, to the extent that the laws are consistent with 
 this section.
 (4) Treatment of credits.--All amounts in the form of 
 credits issued under subsection (a) accepted by the Secretary 
 shall be considered to be amounts received for the purposes 
 of--
 (A) section 35 of the Mineral Leasing Act (30 
 U.S.C. 191); and
 (B) section 20 of the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970 
 (30 U.S.C. 1019).
 (e) Wolf Creek Storage Field Development Rights.--
 (1) Conveyance to secretary.--As a condition precedent to 
 the relinquishment of a Thompson Divide lease under this 
 section, any leaseholder with a Wolf Creek Storage Field 
 development right shall permanently relinquish, transfer, and 
 otherwise convey to the Secretary, in a form acceptable to the 
 Secretary, all Wolf Creek Storage Field development rights of 
 the leaseholder.
 (2) Credits.--
 (A) In general.--In consideration for the transfer 
 of development rights under paragraph (1), the 
 Secretary may issue to a leaseholder described in that 
 paragraph credits for any reasonable expenses incurred 
 by the leaseholder in acquiring the Wolf Creek Storage 
 Field development right or in the preparation of any 
 drilling permit, sundry notice, or other related 
 submission in support of the development right as of 
 January 28, 2019, including any reasonable expenses 
 relating to the preparation of any analysis under the 
 National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 
 4321 et seq.).
 (B) Approval.--Any credits for a transfer of the 
 development rights under paragraph (1), shall be 
 subject to--
 (i) the exclusion described in subsection 
 (b)(2);
 (ii) the conditions described in subsection 
 (d); and
 (iii) the approval of the Secretary.
 (3) Limitation of transfer.--Development rights acquired by 
 the Secretary under paragraph (1)--
 (A) shall be held for as long as the parent leases 
 in the Wolf Creek Storage Field remain in effect; and
 (B) shall not be--
 (i) transferred;
 (ii) reissued; or
 (iii) otherwise used for mineral 
 extraction.

SEC. 7145. GREATER THOMPSON DIVIDE FUGITIVE COAL MINE METHANE USE PILOT 
 PROGRAM.

 (a) Fugitive Coal Mine Methane Use Pilot Program.--
 (1) Establishment.--There is established in the Bureau of 
 Land Management a pilot program, to be known as the ``Greater 
 Thompson Divide Fugitive Coal Mine Methane Use Pilot Program''.
 (2) Purpose.--The purpose of the pilot program is to 
 promote the capture, beneficial use, mitigation, and 
 sequestration of fugitive methane emissions--
 (A) to reduce methane emissions;
 (B) to promote economic development;
 (C) to improve air quality; and
 (D) to improve public safety.
 (3) Plan.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall 
 develop a plan--
 (i) to complete an inventory of fugitive 
 methane emissions in accordance with subsection 
 (b);
 (ii) to provide for the leasing of fugitive 
 methane emissions in accordance with subsection 
 (c); and
 (iii) to provide for the capping or 
 destruction of fugitive methane emissions in 
 accordance with subsection (d).
 (B) Coordination.--In developing the plan under 
 this paragraph, the Secretary shall coordinate with--
 (i) the State;
 (ii) Garfield, Gunnison, Delta, and Pitkin 
 Counties in the State;
 (iii) lessees of Federal coal within the 
 counties referred to in clause (ii);
 (iv) interested institutions of higher 
 education in the State; and
 (v) interested members of the public.
 (b) Fugitive Methane Emissions Inventory.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall complete an 
 inventory of fugitive methane emissions.
 (2) Conduct.--
 (A) Collaboration.--The Secretary may conduct the 
 inventory under paragraph (1) through, or in 
 collaboration with--
 (i) the Bureau of Land Management;
 (ii) the United States Geological Survey;
 (iii) the Environmental Protection Agency;
 (iv) the United States Forest Service;
 (v) State departments or agencies;
 (vi) Garfield, Gunnison, Delta, or Pitkin 
 County in the State;
 (vii) the Garfield County Federal Mineral 
 Lease District;
 (viii) institutions of higher education in 
 the State;
 (ix) lessees of Federal coal within a 
 county referred to in subparagraph (F);
 (x) the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
 Administration;
 (xi) the National Center for Atmospheric 
 Research; or
 (xii) other interested entities, including 
 members of the public.
 (B) Federal split estate.--
 (i) In general.--In conducting the 
 inventory under paragraph (1) for Federal 
 minerals on split estate land, the Secretary 
 shall rely on available data.
 (ii) Limitation.--Nothing in this section 
 requires or authorizes the Secretary to enter 
 or access private land to conduct the inventory 
 under paragraph (1).
 (3) Contents.--The inventory conducted under paragraph (1) 
 shall include--
 (A) the general location and geographic coordinates 
 of vents, seeps, or other sources producing significant 
 fugitive methane emissions;
 (B) an estimate of the volume and concentration of 
 fugitive methane emissions from each source of 
 significant fugitive methane emissions, including 
 details of measurements taken and the basis for that 
 emissions estimate;
 (C) relevant data and other information available 
 from--
 (i) the Environmental Protection Agency;
 (ii) the Mine Safety and Health 
 Administration;
 (iii) the Colorado Department of Natural 
 Resources;
 (iv) the Colorado Public Utility 
 Commission;
 (v) the Colorado Department of Health and 
 Environment; and
 (vi) the Office of Surface Mining 
 Reclamation and Enforcement; and
 (D) such other information as may be useful in 
 advancing the purposes of the pilot program.
 (4) Public participation; disclosure.--
 (A) Public participation.--The Secretary shall, as 
 appropriate, provide opportunities for public 
 participation in the conduct of the inventory under 
 paragraph (1).
 (B) Availability.--The Secretary shall make the 
 inventory conducted under paragraph (1) publicly 
 available.
 (C) Disclosure.--Nothing in this subsection 
 requires the Secretary to publicly release information 
 that--
 (i) poses a threat to public safety;
 (ii) is confidential business information; 
 or
 (iii) is otherwise protected from public 
 disclosure.
 (5) Impact on coal mines subject to lease.--
 (A) In general.--For the purposes of conducting the 
 inventory under paragraph (1), for land subject to a 
 Federal coal lease, the Secretary shall use readily 
 available methane emissions data.
 (B) Effect.--Nothing in this section requires the 
 holder of a Federal coal lease to report additional 
 data or information to the Secretary.
 (6) Use.--The Secretary shall use the inventory conducted 
 under paragraph (1) in carrying out--
 (A) the leasing program under subsection (c); and
 (B) the capping or destruction of fugitive methane 
 emissions under subsection (d).
 (c) Fugitive Methane Emissions Leasing Program and Sequestration.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to valid existing rights and in 
 accordance with this section, not later than 1 year after the 
 date of completion of the inventory required under subsection 
 (b), the Secretary shall carry out a program to encourage the 
 use and destruction of fugitive methane emissions.
 (2) Fugitive methane emissions from coal mines subject to 
 lease.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary shall authorize the 
 holder of a valid existing Federal coal lease for a 
 mine that is producing fugitive methane emissions to 
 capture for use or destroy the fugitive methane 
 emissions.
 (B) Conditions.--The authority under subparagraph 
 (A) shall be subject to--
 (i) valid existing rights; and
 (ii) such terms and conditions as the 
 Secretary may require.
 (C) Limitations.--The program carried out under 
 paragraph (1) shall only include fugitive methane 
 emissions that can be captured for use or destroyed in 
 a manner that does not--
 (i) endanger the safety of any coal mine 
 worker; or
 (ii) unreasonably interfere with any 
 ongoing operation at a coal mine.
 (D) Cooperation.--
 (i) In general.--The Secretary shall work 
 cooperatively with the holders of valid 
 existing Federal coal leases for mines that 
 produce fugitive methane emissions to 
 encourage--
 (I) the capture of fugitive methane 
 emissions for beneficial use, such as 
 generating electrical power, producing 
 usable heat, transporting the methane 
 to market, or transforming the fugitive 
 methane emissions into a different 
 marketable material; or
 (II) if the beneficial use of the 
 fugitive methane emissions is not 
 feasible, the destruction of the 
 fugitive methane emissions.
 (ii) Guidance.--In support of cooperative 
 efforts with holders of valid existing Federal 
 coal leases to capture for use or destroy 
 fugitive methane emissions, not later than 1 
 year after the date of enactment of this Act, 
 the Secretary shall issue guidance to the 
 public for the implementation of authorities 
 and programs to encourage the capture for use 
 and destruction of fugitive methane emissions, 
 while minimizing impacts on natural resources 
 or other public interest values.
 (E) Royalties.--The Secretary shall determine 
 whether any fugitive methane emissions used or 
 destroyed pursuant to this paragraph are subject to the 
 payment of a royalty under applicable law.
 (3) Fugitive methane emissions from land not subject to a 
 federal coal lease.--
 (A) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in 
 this section, notwithstanding section 7143 and subject 
 to valid existing rights and any other applicable law, 
 the Secretary shall, for land not subject to a Federal 
 coal lease--
 (i) authorize the capture for use or 
 destruction of fugitive methane emissions; and
 (ii) make available for leasing such 
 fugitive methane emissions as the Secretary 
 determines to be in the public interest.
 (B) Source.--To the extent practicable, the 
 Secretary shall offer for lease, individually or in 
 combination, each significant source of fugitive 
 methane emissions on land not subject to a Federal coal 
 lease.
 (C) Bid qualifications.--A bid to lease fugitive 
 methane emissions under this paragraph shall specify 
 whether the prospective lessee intends--
 (i) to capture the fugitive methane 
 emissions for beneficial use, such as 
 generating electrical power, producing usable 
 heat, transporting the methane to market, or 
 transforming the fugitive methane emissions 
 into a different marketable material;
 (ii) to destroy the fugitive methane 
 emissions; or
 (iii) to employ a specific combination of--
 (I) capturing the fugitive methane 
 emissions for beneficial use; and
 (II) destroying the fugitive 
 methane emissions.
 (D) Priority.--
 (i) In general.--If there is more than 1 
 qualified bid for a lease under this paragraph, 
 the Secretary shall select the bid that the 
 Secretary determines is likely to most 
 significantly advance the public interest.
 (ii) Considerations.--In determining the 
 public interest under clause (i), the Secretary 
 shall take into consideration--
 (I) the overall decrease in the 
 fugitive methane emissions;
 (II) the impacts to other natural 
 resource values, including wildlife, 
 water, and air; and
 (III) other public interest values, 
 including scenic, economic, recreation, 
 and cultural values.
 (E) Lease form.--
 (i) In general.--The Secretary shall 
 develop and provide to prospective bidders a 
 lease form for leases issued under this 
 paragraph.
 (ii) Due diligence.--The lease form 
 developed under clause (i) shall include terms 
 and conditions requiring the leased fugitive 
 methane emissions to be put to beneficial use 
 or destroyed by not later than 3 years after 
 the date of issuance of the lease.
 (F) Royalty rate.--The Secretary shall develop a 
 minimum bid, as the Secretary determines to be 
 necessary, and royalty rate for leases under this 
 paragraph.
 (d) Sequestration.--If, by not later than 4 years after the date of 
completion of the inventory under subsection (b), any significant 
fugitive methane emissions are not leased under subsection (c)(3), the 
Secretary shall, subject to the availability of appropriations and in 
accordance with applicable law, take all reasonable measures--
 (1) to provide incentives for new leases under subsection 
 (c)(3);
 (2) to cap those fugitive methane emissions at the source 
 in any case in which the cap will result in the long-term 
 sequestration of all or a significant portion of the fugitive 
 methane emissions; or
 (3) to destroy the fugitive methane emissions, if 
 incentivizing leases under paragraph (1) or sequestration under 
 paragraph (2) is not feasible, with priority for locations that 
 destroy the greatest quantity of fugitive methane emissions at 
 the lowest cost.
 (e) Report to Congress.--Not later than 4 years after the date of 
enactment of this Act the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on 
Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Natural 
Resources of the House of Representatives a report detailing--
 (1) the economic and environmental impacts of the pilot 
 program, including information on increased royalties and 
 estimates of avoided greenhouse gas emissions; and
 (2) any recommendations of the Secretary on whether the 
 pilot program could be expanded to include--
 (A) other significant sources of emissions of 
 fugitive methane located outside the boundaries of the 
 area depicted as ``Fugitive Coal Mine Methane Use Pilot 
 Program Area'' on the pilot program map; and
 (B) the leasing of natural methane seeps under the 
 activities authorized pursuant to subsection (c)(3).

SEC. 7146. EFFECT.

 Except as expressly provided in this subtitle, nothing in this 
subtitle--
 (1) expands, diminishes, or impairs any valid existing 
 mineral leases, mineral interest, or other property rights 
 wholly or partially within the Thompson Divide Withdrawal and 
 Protection Area, including access to the leases, interests, 
 rights, or land in accordance with applicable Federal, State, 
 and local laws (including regulations);
 (2) prevents the capture of methane from any active, 
 inactive, or abandoned coal mine covered by this subtitle, in 
 accordance with applicable laws; or
 (3) prevents access to, or the development of, any new or 
 existing coal mine or lease in Delta or Gunnison County in the 
 State.

 Subtitle D--Curecanti National Recreation Area

SEC. 7151. DEFINITIONS.

 In this subtitle:
 (1) Map.--The term ``map'' means the map entitled 
 ``Curecanti National Recreation Area, Proposed Boundary'', 
 numbered 616/100,485D, and dated April 25, 2022 .
 (2) National recreation area.--The term ``National 
 Recreation Area'' means the Curecanti National Recreation Area 
 established by section 7152(a).
 (3) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of the Interior.

SEC. 7152. CURECANTI NATIONAL RECREATION AREA.

 (a) Establishment.--Effective beginning on the earlier of the date 
on which the Secretary approves a request under subsection 
(c)(2)(B)(i)(I) and the date that is 1 year after the date of enactment 
of this Act, there shall be established as a unit of the National Park 
System the Curecanti National Recreation Area, in accordance with this 
subtitle, consisting of approximately 50,300 acres of land in the 
State, as generally depicted on the map as ``Curecanti National 
Recreation Area Proposed Boundary''.
 (b) Availability of Map.--The map shall be on file and available 
for public inspection in the appropriate offices of the National Park 
Service.
 (c) Administration.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall administer the 
 National Recreation Area in accordance with--
 (A) this subtitle; and
 (B) the laws (including regulations) generally 
 applicable to units of the National Park System, 
 including section 100101(a), chapter 1003, and sections 
 100751(a), 100752, 100753, and 102101 of title 54, 
 United States Code.
 (2) Dam, power plant, and reservoir management and 
 operations.--
 (A) In general.--Nothing in this subtitle affects 
 or interferes with the authority of the Secretary--
 (i) to operate the Uncompahgre Valley 
 Reclamation Project under the reclamation laws;
 (ii) to operate the Wayne N. Aspinall Unit 
 of the Colorado River Storage Project under the 
 Act of April 11, 1956 (commonly known as the 
 ``Colorado River Storage Project Act'') (43 
 U.S.C. 620 et seq.); or
 (iii) under the Federal Water Project 
 Recreation Act (16 U.S.C. 460l-12 et seq.).
 (B) Reclamation land.--
 (i) Submission of request to retain 
 administrative jurisdiction.--If, before the 
 date that is 1 year after the date of enactment 
 of this Act, the Commissioner of Reclamation 
 submits to the Secretary a request for the 
 Commissioner of Reclamation to retain 
 administrative jurisdiction over the minimum 
 quantity of land within the land identified on 
 the map as ``Lands withdrawn or acquired for 
 Bureau of Reclamation projects'' that the 
 Commissioner of Reclamation identifies as 
 necessary for the effective operation of Bureau 
 of Reclamation water facilities, the Secretary 
 may--
 (I) approve, approve with 
 modifications, or disapprove the 
 request; and
 (II) if the request is approved 
 under subclause (I), make any 
 modifications to the map that are 
 necessary to reflect that the 
 Commissioner of Reclamation retains 
 management authority over the minimum 
 quantity of land required to fulfill 
 the reclamation mission.
 (ii) Transfer of land.--
 (I) In general.--Administrative 
 jurisdiction over the land identified 
 on the map as ``Lands withdrawn or 
 acquired for Bureau of Reclamation 
 projects'', as modified pursuant to 
 clause (i)(II), if applicable, shall be 
 transferred from the Commissioner of 
 Reclamation to the Director of the 
 National Park Service by not later than 
 the date that is 1 year after the date 
 of enactment of this Act.
 (II) Access to transferred land.--
 (aa) In general.--Subject 
 to item (bb), the Commissioner 
 of Reclamation shall retain 
 access to the land transferred 
 to the Director of the National 
 Park Service under subclause 
 (I) for reclamation purposes, 
 including for the operation, 
 maintenance, and expansion or 
 replacement of facilities.
 (bb) Memorandum of 
 understanding.--The terms of 
 the access authorized under 
 item (aa) shall be determined 
 by a memorandum of 
 understanding entered into 
 between the Commissioner of 
 Reclamation and the Director of 
 the National Park Service not 
 later than 1 year after the 
 date of enactment of this Act.
 (3) Management agreements.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary may enter into 
 management agreements, or modify management agreements 
 in existence on the date of enactment of this Act, 
 relating to the authority of the Director of the 
 National Park Service, the Commissioner of Reclamation, 
 the Director of the Bureau of Land Management, or the 
 Chief of the Forest Service to manage Federal land 
 within or adjacent to the boundary of the National 
 Recreation Area.
 (B) State land.--The Secretary may enter into 
 cooperative management agreements for any land 
 administered by the State that is within or adjacent to 
 the National Recreation Area, in accordance with the 
 cooperative management authority under section 101703 
 of title 54, United States Code.
 (4) Recreational activities.--
 (A) Authorization.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), the Secretary shall allow boating, 
 boating-related activities, hunting, and fishing in the 
 National Recreation Area in accordance with applicable 
 Federal and State laws.
 (B) Closures; designated zones.--
 (i) In general.--The Secretary, acting 
 through the Superintendent of the National 
 Recreation Area, may designate zones in which, 
 and establish periods during which, no boating, 
 hunting, or fishing shall be permitted in the 
 National Recreation Area under subparagraph (A) 
 for reasons of public safety, administration, 
 or compliance with applicable laws.
 (ii) Consultation required.--Except in the 
 case of an emergency, any closure proposed by 
 the Secretary under clause (i) shall not take 
 effect until after the date on which the 
 Superintendent of the National Recreation Area 
 consults with--
 (I) the appropriate State agency 
 responsible for hunting and fishing 
 activities; and
 (II) the Board of County 
 Commissioners in each county in which 
 the zone is proposed to be designated.
 (5) Landowner assistance.--On the written request of an 
 individual that owns private land located within the area 
 generally depicted as ``Conservation Opportunity Area'' on the 
 map entitled ``Preferred Alternative'' in the document entitled 
 ``Report to Congress: Curecanti Special Resource Study'' and 
 dated June 2009, the Secretary may work in partnership with the 
 individual to enhance the long-term conservation of natural, 
 cultural, recreational, and scenic resources in and around the 
 National Recreation Area--
 (A) by acquiring all or a portion of the private 
 land or interests in private land within the 
 Conservation Opportunity Area by purchase, exchange, or 
 donation, in accordance with section 7153;
 (B) by providing technical assistance to the 
 individual, including cooperative assistance;
 (C) through available grant programs; and
 (D) by supporting conservation easement 
 opportunities.
 (6) Incorporation of acquired land and interests.--Any land 
 or interest in land acquired by the United States under 
 paragraph (5) shall--
 (A) become part of the National Recreation Area; 
 and
 (B) be managed in accordance with this subtitle.
 (7) Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, all 
 Federal land within the National Recreation Area, including 
 land acquired pursuant to this section, is withdrawn from--
 (A) entry, appropriation, and disposal under the 
 public land laws;
 (B) location, entry, and patent under the mining 
 laws; and
 (C) operation of the mineral leasing, mineral 
 materials, and geothermal leasing laws.
 (8) Grazing.--
 (A) State land subject to a state grazing lease.--
 (i) In general.--If State land acquired 
 under this subtitle is subject to a State 
 grazing lease in effect on the date of 
 acquisition, the Secretary shall allow the 
 grazing to continue for the remainder of the 
 term of the lease, subject to the related terms 
 and conditions of user agreements, including 
 permitted stocking rates, grazing fee levels, 
 access rights, and ownership and use of range 
 improvements.
 (ii) Access.--A lessee of State land may 
 continue to use established routes within the 
 National Recreation Area to access State land 
 for purposes of administering the lease if the 
 use was permitted before the date of enactment 
 of this Act, subject to such terms and 
 conditions as the Secretary may require.
 (B) State and private land.--The Secretary may, in 
 accordance with applicable laws, authorize grazing on 
 land acquired from the State or private landowners 
 under section 7153, if grazing was established before 
 the date of acquisition.
 (C) Private land.--On private land acquired under 
 section 7153 for the National Recreation Area on which 
 authorized grazing is occurring before the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in consultation 
 with the lessee, may allow the continuation and renewal 
 of grazing on the land based on the terms of 
 acquisition or by agreement between the Secretary and 
 the lessee, subject to applicable law (including 
 regulations).
 (D) Federal land.--The Secretary shall--
 (i) allow, consistent with the grazing 
 leases, uses, and practices in effect as of the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the continuation 
 and renewal of grazing on Federal land located 
 within the boundary of the National Recreation 
 Area on which grazing is allowed before the 
 date of enactment of this Act, unless the 
 Secretary determines that grazing on the 
 Federal land would present unacceptable impacts 
 (as defined in section 1.4.7.1 of the National 
 Park Service document entitled ``Management 
 Policies 2006: The Guide to Managing the 
 National Park System'') to the natural, 
 cultural, recreational, and scenic resource 
 values and the character of the land within the 
 National Recreation Area; and
 (ii) retain all authorities to manage 
 grazing in the National Recreation Area.
 (E) Termination of leases.--Within the National 
 Recreation Area, the Secretary may--
 (i) accept the voluntary termination of a 
 lease or permit for grazing; or
 (ii) in the case of a lease or permit 
 vacated for a period of 3 or more years, 
 terminate the lease or permit.
 (9) Water rights.--Nothing in this subtitle--
 (A) affects any use or allocation in existence on 
 the date of enactment of this Act of any water, water 
 right, or interest in water;
 (B) affects any vested absolute or decreed 
 conditional water right in existence on the date of 
 enactment of this Act, including any water right held 
 by the United States;
 (C) affects any interstate water compact in 
 existence on the date of enactment of this Act;
 (D) shall be considered to be a relinquishment or 
 reduction of any water right reserved or appropriated 
 by the United States in the State on or before the date 
 of enactment of this Act; or
 (E) constitutes an express or implied Federal 
 reservation of any water or water rights with respect 
 to the National Recreation Area.
 (10) Fishing easements.--
 (A) In general.--Nothing in this subtitle 
 diminishes or alters the fish and wildlife program for 
 the Aspinall Unit developed under section 8 of the Act 
 of April 11, 1956 (commonly known as the ``Colorado 
 River Storage Project Act'') (70 Stat. 110, chapter 
 203; 43 U.S.C. 620g), by the United States Fish and 
 Wildlife Service, the Bureau of Reclamation, and the 
 Colorado Division of Wildlife (including any successor 
 in interest to that division) that provides for the 
 acquisition of public access fishing easements as 
 mitigation for the Aspinall Unit (referred to in this 
 paragraph as the ``program'').
 (B) Acquisition of fishing easements.--The 
 Secretary shall continue to fulfill the obligation of 
 the Secretary under the program to acquire 26 miles of 
 class 1 public fishing easements to provide to 
 sportsmen access for fishing within the Upper Gunnison 
 Basin upstream of the Aspinall Unit, subject to the 
 condition that no existing fishing access downstream of 
 the Aspinall Unit shall be counted toward the minimum 
 mileage requirement under the program.
 (C) Plan.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall develop a 
 plan for fulfilling the obligation of the Secretary 
 described in subparagraph (B) by the date that is 10 
 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (D) Reports.--Not later than each of 2 years, 5 
 years, and 8 years after the date of enactment of this 
 Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report 
 that describes the progress made in fulfilling the 
 obligation of the Secretary described in subparagraph 
 (B).
 (d) Tribal Rights and Uses.--
 (1) Treaty rights.--Nothing in this subtitle affects the 
 treaty rights of any Indian Tribe.
 (2) Traditional tribal uses.--Subject to any terms and 
 conditions as the Secretary determines to be necessary and in 
 accordance with applicable law, the Secretary shall allow for 
 the continued use of the National Recreation Area by members of 
 Indian Tribes--
 (A) for traditional ceremonies; and
 (B) as a source of traditional plants and other 
 materials.

SEC. 7153. ACQUISITION OF LAND; BOUNDARY MANAGEMENT.

 (a) Acquisition.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary may acquire any land or 
 interest in land within the boundary of the National Recreation 
 Area.
 (2) Manner of acquisition.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), land 
 described in paragraph (1) may be acquired under this 
 subsection by--
 (i) donation;
 (ii) purchase from willing sellers with 
 donated or appropriated funds;
 (iii) transfer from another Federal agency; 
 or
 (iv) exchange.
 (B) State land.--Land or interests in land owned by 
 the State or a political subdivision of the State may 
 only be acquired by purchase, donation, or exchange.
 (b) Transfer of Administrative Jurisdiction.--
 (1) Forest service land.--
 (A) In general.--Administrative jurisdiction over 
 the approximately 2,500 acres of land identified on the 
 map as ``U.S. Forest Service proposed transfer to the 
 National Park Service'' is transferred to the 
 Secretary, to be administered by the Director of the 
 National Park Service as part of the National 
 Recreation Area.
 (B) Boundary adjustment.--The boundary of the 
 Gunnison National Forest shall be adjusted to exclude 
 the land transferred to the Secretary under 
 subparagraph (A).
 (2) Bureau of land management land.--Administrative 
 jurisdiction over the approximately 6,100 acres of land 
 identified on the map as ``Bureau of Land Management proposed 
 transfer to National Park Service'' is transferred from the 
 Director of the Bureau of Land Management to the Director of 
 the National Park Service, to be administered as part of the 
 National Recreation Area.
 (3) Withdrawal.--Administrative jurisdiction over the land 
 identified on the map as ``Proposed for transfer to the Bureau 
 of Land Management, subject to the revocation of Bureau of 
 Reclamation withdrawal'' shall be transferred to the Director 
 of the Bureau of Land Management on relinquishment of the land 
 by the Bureau of Reclamation and revocation by the Bureau of 
 Land Management of any withdrawal as may be necessary.
 (c) Potential Land Exchange.--
 (1) In general.--The withdrawal for reclamation purposes of 
 the land identified on the map as ``Potential exchange lands'' 
 shall be relinquished by the Commissioner of Reclamation and 
 revoked by the Director of the Bureau of Land Management and 
 the land shall be transferred to the National Park Service.
 (2) Exchange; inclusion in national recreation area.--On 
 transfer of the land described in paragraph (1), the 
 transferred land--
 (A) may be exchanged by the Secretary for private 
 land described in section 7152(c)(5)--
 (i) subject to a conservation easement 
 remaining on the transferred land, to protect 
 the scenic resources of the transferred land; 
 and
 (ii) in accordance with the laws (including 
 regulations) and policies governing National 
 Park Service land exchanges; and
 (B) if not exchanged under subparagraph (A), shall 
 be added to, and managed as a part of, the National 
 Recreation Area.
 (d) Addition to National Recreation Area.--Any land within the 
boundary of the National Recreation Area that is acquired by the United 
States shall be added to, and managed as a part of, the National 
Recreation Area.

SEC. 7154. GENERAL MANAGEMENT PLAN.

 Not later than 3 years after the date on which funds are made 
available to carry out this subtitle, the Director of the National Park 
Service, in consultation with the Commissioner of Reclamation, shall 
prepare a general management plan for the National Recreation Area in 
accordance with section 100502 of title 54, United States Code.

SEC. 7155. BOUNDARY SURVEY.

 The Secretary (acting through the Director of the National Park 
Service) shall prepare a boundary survey and legal description of the 
National Recreation Area.

 Subtitle E--Grand Canyon Protection

SEC. 7161. WITHDRAWAL OF CERTAIN FEDERAL LAND IN THE STATE OF ARIZONA.

 (a) Definition Of Map.--In this section, the term ``Map'' means the 
map prepared by the Bureau of Land Management entitled ``Grand Canyon 
Protection Act'' and dated January 22, 2021.
 (b) Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, the 
approximately 1,006,545 acres of Federal land in the State of Arizona, 
generally depicted on the Map as ``Federal Mineral Estate to be 
Withdrawn'', including any land or interest in land that is acquired by 
the United States after the date of the enactment of this subtitle, are 
hereby withdrawn from--
 (1) all forms of entry, appropriation, and disposal under 
 the public land laws;
 (2) location, entry, and patent under the mining laws; and
 (3) operation of the mineral leasing, mineral materials, 
 and geothermal leasing laws.
 (c) Availability Of Map.--The Map shall be kept on file and made 
available for public inspection in the appropriate offices of the 
Forest Service and the Bureau of Land Management.

 DIVISION G--DON YOUNG COAST GUARD AUTHORIZATION ACT OF 2022

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This division may be cited as the ``Don Young 
Coast Guard Authorization Act of 2022''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this division is 
as follows:

 DIVISION G--DON YOUNG COAST GUARD AUTHORIZATION ACT OF 2022

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
 TITLE I--AUTHORIZATION

Sec. 101. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 102. Authorized levels of military strength and training.
Sec. 103. Shoreside infrastructure and facilities.
Sec. 104. Availability of amounts for acquisition of additional 
 cutters.
 TITLE II--COAST GUARD

 Subtitle A--Military Personnel Matters

Sec. 201. Authorized strength.
Sec. 202. Continuation of officers with certain critical skills on 
 active duty.
Sec. 203. Number and distribution of officers on active duty promotion 
 list.
Sec. 204. Coast Guard behavioral health policy.
Sec. 205. Improving representation of women and of racial and ethnic 
 minorities among Coast Guard active-duty 
 members.
 Subtitle B--Operational Matters

Sec. 206. Pilot project for enhancing Coast Guard cutter readiness 
 through condition-based maintenance.
Sec. 207. Unmanned systems strategy.
Sec. 208. Budgeting of Coast Guard relating to certain operations.
Sec. 209. Report on San Diego maritime domain awareness.
Sec. 210. Great Lakes winter shipping.
Sec. 211. Center of expertise for Great Lakes oil spill search and 
 response.
Sec. 212. Study on laydown of Coast Guard cutters.
 Subtitle C--Other Matters

Sec. 213. Responses of Commandant of the Coast Guard to safety 
 recommendations.
Sec. 214. Conveyance of Coast Guard vessels for public purposes.
Sec. 215. Acquisition life-cycle cost estimates.
Sec. 216. National Coast Guard Museum funding plan.
Sec. 217. Report on Coast Guard explosive ordnance disposal.
Sec. 218. Pribilof Island transition completion actions.
Sec. 219. Notification of communication outages.
 TITLE III--MARITIME

 Subtitle A--Shipping

Sec. 301. Nonoperating individual.
Sec. 302. Oceanographic research vessels.
Sec. 303. Atlantic Coast port access routes briefing.
 Subtitle B--Vessel Safety

Sec. 304. Fishing vessel safety.
Sec. 305. Requirements for DUKW-type amphibious passenger vessels.
Sec. 306. Exoneration and limitation of liability for small passengers 
 vessels.
Sec. 307. Automatic identification system requirements.
 Subtitle C--Shipbuilding Program

Sec. 308. Qualified vessel.
Sec. 309. Establishing a capital construction fund.
 TITLE IV--FEDERAL MARITIME COMMISSION

Sec. 401. Terms and vacancies.
 TITLE V--MISCELLANEOUS

 Subtitle A--Navigation

Sec. 501. Restriction on changing salvors.
Sec. 502. Providing requirements for vessels anchored in established 
 anchorage grounds.
Sec. 503. Aquatic Nuisance Species Task Force.
Sec. 504. Limitation on recovery for certain injuries incurred in 
 aquaculture activities.
 Subtitle B--Other Matters

Sec. 505. Information on type approval certificates.
Sec. 506. Passenger vessel security and safety requirements.
Sec. 507. Cargo waiting time reduction.
Sec. 508. Limited indemnity provisions in standby oil spill response 
 contracts.
Sec. 509. Port Coordination Council for Point Spencer.
Sec. 510. Western Alaska oil spill planning criteria.
Sec. 511. Nonapplicability.
Sec. 512. Report on enforcement of coastwise laws.
Sec. 513. Land conveyance, Sharpe Army Depot, Lathrop, California.
Sec. 514. Center of Expertise for Marine Environmental Response.
Sec. 515. Prohibition on entry and operation.
Sec. 516. St. Lucie River railroad bridge.
Sec. 517. Assistance related to marine mammals.
Sec. 518. Manning and crewing requirements for certain vessels, 
 vehicles, and structures.
 TITLE VI--SEXUAL ASSAULT AND SEXUAL HARASSMENT PREVENTION AND RESPONSE

Sec. 601. Definitions.
Sec. 602. Convicted sex offender as grounds for denial.
Sec. 603. Sexual harassment or sexual assault as grounds for suspension 
 or revocation.
Sec. 604. Accommodation; notices.
Sec. 605. Protection against discrimination.
Sec. 606. Alcohol prohibition.
Sec. 607. Surveillance requirements.
Sec. 608. Master key control.
Sec. 609. Safety management systems.
Sec. 610. Requirement to report sexual assault and harassment.
Sec. 611. Civil actions for personal injury or death of seamen.
Sec. 612. Administration of sexual assault forensic examination kits.
 TITLE VII--TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING PROVISIONS

Sec. 701. Technical corrections.
Sec. 702. Transportation worker identification credential technical 
 amendments.
Sec. 703. Reinstatement.

 TITLE I--AUTHORIZATION

SEC. 101. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 Section 4902 of title 14, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1) by striking 
 ``years 2020 and 2021'' and inserting ``years 2022 and 2023'';
 (2) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A)--
 (i) by striking ``$8,151,620,850 for fiscal 
 year 2020'' and inserting ``$9,282,360,000 for 
 fiscal year 2022''; and
 (ii) by striking ``$8,396,169,475 for 
 fiscal year 2021'' and inserting 
 ``$10,210,596,000 for fiscal year 2023'';
 (B) in subparagraph (B) by striking ``$17,035,000'' 
 and inserting ``$17,723,520''; and
 (C) in subparagraph (C) by striking ``$17,376,000'' 
 and inserting ``$18,077,990'';
 (3) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) in subparagraph (A)--
 (i) by striking ``$2,794,745,000 for fiscal 
 year 2020'' and inserting ``$3,312,114,000 for 
 fiscal year 2022''; and
 (ii) by striking ``$3,312,114,000 for 
 fiscal year 2021'' and inserting 
 ``$3,477,600,000 for fiscal year 2023''; and
 (B) in subparagraph (B)--
 (i) by striking ``$10,000,000 for fiscal 
 year 2020'' and inserting ``$20,400,000 for 
 fiscal year 2022''; and
 (ii) by striking ``$20,000,000 for fiscal 
 year 2021'' and inserting ``$20,808,000 for 
 fiscal year 2023'';
 (4) in paragraph (3)--
 (A) by striking ``$13,834,000 for fiscal year 
 2020'' and inserting ``$14,393,220 for fiscal year 
 2022''; and
 (B) by striking ``$14,111,000 for fiscal year 
 2021'' and inserting ``$14,681,084 for fiscal year 
 2023''; and
 (5) in paragraph (4)--
 (A) by striking ``$205,107,000 for fiscal year 
 2020'' and inserting ``$213,393,180 for fiscal year 
 2022''; and
 (B) by striking ``$209,209,000 for fiscal year 
 2021'' and inserting ``$217,661,044 for fiscal year 
 2023''.

SEC. 102. AUTHORIZED LEVELS OF MILITARY STRENGTH AND TRAINING.

 Section 4904 of title 14, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a) by striking ``fiscal years 2020 and 
 2021'' and inserting ``fiscal years 2022 and 2023''; and
 (2) in subsection (b) by striking ``fiscal years 2020 and 
 2021'' and inserting ``fiscal years 2022 and 2023''.

SEC. 103. SHORESIDE INFRASTRUCTURE AND FACILITIES.

 (a) In General.--Of the amounts authorized to be appropriated under 
section 4902(2)(A) of title 14, United States Code, for each of fiscal 
years 2022 and 2023, up to $585,000,000 shall be authorized for the 
Secretary of the department in which the Coast Guard is operating to 
fund the acquisition, construction, rebuilding, or improvement of Coast 
Guard shoreside infrastructure and facilities necessary to support 
Coast Guard operations and readiness.
 (b) Baltimore Coast Guard Yard.--Of the amounts set aside under 
subsection (a), up to $175,000,000 shall be authorized to improve 
facilities at the Coast Guard Yard in Baltimore, Maryland, including 
improvements to piers and wharves, dry dock, capital equipment 
utilities, or dredging necessary to facilitate access to such Yard.
 (c) Training Center Cape May.--Of the amounts set aside under 
subsection (a), up to $60,000,000 shall be authorized to fund Phase I, 
in fiscal year 2022, and Phase II, in fiscal year 2023, for the 
recapitalization of the barracks at the United States Coast Guard 
Training Center Cape May in Cape May, New Jersey.
 (d) Mitigation of Hazard Risks.--In carrying out projects with 
funds authorized under this section, the Coast Guard shall mitigate, to 
the greatest extent practicable, natural hazard risks identified in any 
Shore Infrastructure Vulnerability Assessment for Phase I related to 
such projects.
 (e) Fort Wadsworth, New York.--Of the amounts set aside under 
subsection (a), up to $1,200,000 shall be authorized to fund a 
construction project to--
 (1) complete repairs to the United States Coast Guard 
 Station, New York, waterfront, including repairs to the 
 concrete pier; and
 (2) replace floating piers Alpha and Bravo, the South 
 Breakwater and Ice Screen, the North Breakwater and Ice Screen, 
 and the seawall.

SEC. 104. AVAILABILITY OF AMOUNTS FOR ACQUISITION OF ADDITIONAL 
 CUTTERS.

 (a) In General.--Of the amounts authorized to be appropriated 
under--
 (1) section 4902(2)(A)(i) of title 14, United States Code, 
 as amended by section 101 of this title, for fiscal year 2022;
 (A) $300,000,000 shall be authorized for the 
 acquisition of a twelfth National Security Cutter; and
 (B) $210,000,000 shall be authorized for the 
 acquisition of 3 Fast Response Cutters; and
 (2) section 4902(2)(A)(ii) of title 14, United States Code, 
 as amended by section 101 of this title, for fiscal year 2023;
 (A) $300,000,000 shall be authorized for the 
 acquisition of a twelfth National Security Cutter; and
 (B) $210,000,000 shall be authorized for the 
 acquisition of 3 Fast Response Cutters.
 (b) Treatment of Acquired Cutter.--Any cutter acquired using 
amounts authorized under subsection (a) shall be in addition to the 
National Security Cutters and Fast Response Cutters approved under the 
existing acquisition baseline in the program of record for the National 
Security Cutter and Fast Response Cutter.
 (c) Great Lakes Icebreaker Acquisition.--Of the amounts authorized 
to be appropriated under section 4902(2)(A)(ii) of title 14, United 
States Code--
 (1) for fiscal year 2022, $350,000,000 shall be authorized 
 for the acquisition of a Great Lakes icebreaker at least as 
 capable as Coast Guard Cutter Mackinaw (WLBB-30); and
 (2) for fiscal year 2023, $20,000,000 shall be authorized 
 for the design and selection of icebreaking cutters for 
 operation in the Great Lakes, the Northeastern United States, 
 and the Arctic, as appropriate, that are at least as capable as 
 the Coast Guard 140-foot icebreaking tugs.
 (d) Drug and Migrant Interdiction.--Of the Fast Response Cutters 
authorized for acquisition under subsection (a), at least 1 shall be 
used for drug and migrant interdiction in the Caribbean Basin 
(including the Gulf of Mexico).

 TITLE II--COAST GUARD

 Subtitle A--Military Personnel Matters

SEC. 201. AUTHORIZED STRENGTH.

 Section 3702 of title 14, United States Code, is amended by adding 
at the end the following:
 ``(c) The Secretary may vary the authorized end strength of the 
Coast Guard Selected Reserves for a fiscal year by a number equal to 
not more than 3 percent of such end strength upon a determination by 
the Secretary that varying such authorized end strength is in the 
national interest.
 ``(d) The Commandant may increase the authorized end strength of 
the Coast Guard Selected Reserves by a number equal to not more than 2 
percent of such authorized end strength upon a determination by the 
Commandant that such increase would enhance manning and readiness in 
essential units or in critical specialties or ratings.''.

SEC. 202. CONTINUATION OF OFFICERS WITH CERTAIN CRITICAL SKILLS ON 
 ACTIVE DUTY.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 21 of title 14, United States Code, is 
amended by inserting after section 2165 the following:
``Sec. 2166. Continuation on active duty; Coast Guard officers with 
 certain critical skills
 ``(a) In General.--The Commandant may authorize an officer in a 
grade above grade O-2 to remain on active duty after the date otherwise 
provided for the retirement of such officer in section 2154 of this 
title, if the officer possesses a critical skill, or specialty, or is 
in a career field designated pursuant to subsection (b).
 ``(b) Critical Skills, Specialty, or Career Field.--The Commandant 
shall designate any critical skill, specialty, or career field eligible 
for continuation on active duty as provided in subsection (a).
 ``(c) Duration of Continuation.--An officer continued on active 
duty pursuant to this section shall, if not earlier retired, be retired 
on the first day of the month after the month in which the officer 
completes 40 years of active service.
 ``(d) Policy.--The Commandant shall carry out this section by 
prescribing policy which shall specify the criteria to be used in 
designating any critical skill, specialty, or career field for purposes 
of subsection (b).''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 21 of title 14, 
United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to 
section 2165 the following:

``2166. Continuation on active duty; Coast Guard officers with certain 
 critical skills.''.

SEC. 203. NUMBER AND DISTRIBUTION OF OFFICERS ON ACTIVE DUTY PROMOTION 
 LIST.

 (a) Maximum Number of Officers.--Section 2103(a) of title 14, 
United States Code, is amended to read as follows:
 ``(a) Maximum Total Number.--
 ``(1) In general.--The total number of Coast Guard 
 commissioned officers on the active duty promotion list, 
 excluding warrant officers, shall not exceed--
 ``(A) 7,100 in fiscal year 2022;
 ``(B) 7,200 in fiscal year 2023;
 ``(C) 7,300 in fiscal year 2024; and
 ``(D) 7,400 in fiscal year 2025 and each subsequent 
 fiscal year.
 ``(2) Temporary increase.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1), 
 the Commandant may temporarily increase the total number of 
 commissioned officers permitted under such paragraph by up to 2 
 percent for no more than 60 days following the date of the 
 commissioning of a Coast Guard Academy class.
 ``(3) Notification.--Not later than 30 days after exceeding 
 the total number of commissioned officers permitted under 
 paragraph (1), and each 30 days thereafter until the total 
 number of commissioned officers no longer exceeds the number of 
 such officers permitted under paragraph (1), the Commandant 
 shall notify the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure 
 of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, 
 Science, and Transportation of the Senate of the number of 
 officers on the active duty promotion list on the last day of 
 the preceding 30-day period.''.
 (b) Officers Not on Active Duty Promotion List.--
 (1) In general.--Chapter 51 of title 14, United States 
 Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 5113. Officers not on active duty promotion list
 ``Not later than 60 days after the date on which the President 
submits to Congress a budget pursuant to section 1105 of title 31, the 
Commandant shall submit to the Committee on Transportation and 
Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and the Committee on 
Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate the number of Coast 
Guard officers serving at other Federal entities on a reimbursable 
basis but not on the active duty promotion list.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The analysis for chapter 51 of 
 title 14, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end 
 the following:

``5113. Officers not on active duty promotion list.''.

SEC. 204. COAST GUARD BEHAVIORAL HEALTH POLICY.

 (a) Interim Behavioral Health Policy.--Not later than 60 days after 
the date of enactment of this Act, the Commandant of the Coast Guard 
shall establish an interim behavioral health policy for members of the 
Coast Guard equivalent to the policy described in section 5.28 
(relating to behavioral health) of Department of Defense Instruction 
6130.03, volume 2, ``Medical Standards for Military Service: 
Retention''.
 (b) Termination.--The interim policy established under subsection 
(a) shall remain in effect until the date on which the Commandant 
issues a permanent behavior health policy for members of the Coast 
Guard which is, to the extent practicable, equivalent to such section 
5.28.

SEC. 205. IMPROVING REPRESENTATION OF WOMEN AND OF RACIAL AND ETHNIC 
 MINORITIES AMONG COAST GUARD ACTIVE-DUTY MEMBERS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Commandant of the Coast Guard shall--
 (1) determine which recommendations in the RAND 
 representation report can practicably be implemented to promote 
 improved representation in the Coast Guard of--
 (A) women; and
 (B) racial and ethnic minorities; and
 (2) submit to the Committee on Transportation and 
 Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and the 
 Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the 
 Senate a report on the actions the Commandant has taken, or 
 plans to take, to implement such recommendations.
 (b) Curriculum and Training.--The Commandant shall update, to 
reflect actions described under subsection (a)(2), the curriculum and 
training materials used at--
 (1) officer accession points, including the Coast Guard 
 Academy and the Leadership Development Center;
 (2) enlisted member accession at the United States Coast 
 Guard Training Center Cape May in Cape May, New Jersey; and
 (3) the officer, enlisted member, and civilian leadership 
 courses managed by the Leadership Development Center.
 (c) Definition.--In this section, the term ``RAND representation 
report'' means the report titled ``Improving the Representation of 
Women and Racial/Ethnic Minorities Among U.S. Coast Guard Active-Duty 
Members'' issued by the Homeland Security Operational Analysis Center 
of the RAND Corporation on August 11, 2021.

 Subtitle B--Operational Matters

SEC. 206. PILOT PROJECT FOR ENHANCING COAST GUARD CUTTER READINESS 
 THROUGH CONDITION-BASED MAINTENANCE.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Commandant of the Coast Guard shall conduct a pilot 
project to enhance cutter readiness and reduce lost patrol days through 
the deployment of commercially developed condition-based program 
standards for cutter maintenance, in accordance with the criteria set 
forth in subsection (b).
 (b) Criteria for Condition-Based Maintenance Evaluation.--In 
conducting the pilot project under subsection (a), the Commandant 
shall--
 (1) select at least 1 legacy cutter asset and 1 class of 
 cutters under construction with respect to which the 
 application of the pilot project would enhance readiness;
 (2) use commercially developed condition-based program 
 standards similar to those applicable to privately owned and 
 operated vessels or vessels owned or operated by other Federal 
 agencies (such as those currently operating under the direction 
 of Military Sealift Command);
 (3) create and model a full ship digital twin for the 
 cutters selected under paragraph (1);
 (4) install or modify instrumentation capable of producing 
 full hull, mechanical, and electrical data necessary to analyze 
 cutter operational conditions with active maintenance alerts; 
 and
 (5) deploy artificial intelligence, prognostic-based 
 integrated maintenance planning modeled after standards 
 described in paragraph (2).
 (c) Report to Congress.--The Commandant shall submit to the 
Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and 
the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of 
Representatives--
 (1) an interim report not later than 6 months after the 
 date of enactment of this Act on the progress in carrying out 
 the pilot project described in subsection (a); and
 (2) a final report not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act on the results of the pilot project 
 described in subsection (a) that includes--
 (A) options to integrate commercially developed 
 condition-based program standards for cutter 
 maintenance to Coast Guard cutters; and
 (B) plans to deploy commercially developed 
 condition-based program standards for cutter 
 maintenance to Coast Guard cutters.

SEC. 207. UNMANNED SYSTEMS STRATEGY.

 (a) Submission to Congress.--Not later than 180 days after the date 
of enactment of this Act, the Commandant of the Coast Guard shall 
submit to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the 
House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation of the Senate a detailed description of the strategy of 
the Coast Guard to implement unmanned systems across mission areas, 
including--
 (1) the steps taken to implement actions recommended in the 
 consensus study report of the National Academies of Sciences, 
 Engineering, and Medicine published on November 12, 2020, 
 titled ``Leveraging Unmanned Systems for Coast Guard Missions: 
 A Strategic Imperative'';
 (2) the strategic goals and acquisition strategies for 
 proposed uses and procurements of unmanned systems;
 (3) a strategy to sustain competition and innovation for 
 procurement of unmanned systems and services for the Coast 
 Guard, including defining opportunities for new and existing 
 technologies; and
 (4) an estimate of the timeline, costs, staff resources, 
 technology, or other resources necessary to accomplish the 
 strategy.
 (b) Pilot Project.--
 (1) Autonomous control and computer vision technology.--The 
 Commandant of the Coast Guard, acting through the Blue 
 Technology Center of Expertise, shall conduct a pilot project 
 to retrofit an existing Coast Guard small boat with--
 (A) commercially available autonomous control and 
 computer vision technology; and
 (B) such sensors and methods of communication as 
 are necessary to demonstrate the ability of such 
 control and technology to assist in conducting search 
 and rescue, surveillance, and interdiction missions.
 (2) Collection of data.--The pilot project under paragraph 
 (1) shall evaluate commercially available products in the field 
 and collect operational data to inform future requirements.
 (3) Briefing.--Not later than 6 months after completing the 
 pilot project required under paragraph (1), the Commandant 
 shall brief the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure 
 of the House of Representatives and the Committee on commerce, 
 Science, and Transportation of the Senate on the evaluation of 
 the data derived from the project.

SEC. 208. BUDGETING OF COAST GUARD RELATING TO CERTAIN OPERATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 51 of title 14, United States Code, is 
further amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 5114. Expenses of performing and executing defense readiness 
 mission activities
 ``The Commandant of the Coast Guard shall include in the annual 
budget submission of the President under section 1105(a) of title 31, a 
dedicated budget line item that adequately represents a calculation of 
the annual costs and expenditures of performing and executing all 
defense readiness mission activities, including--
 ``(1) all expenses related to the Coast Guard's 
 coordination, training, and execution of defense readiness 
 mission activities in the Coast Guard's capacity as an Armed 
 Force (as such term is defined in section 101 of title 10) in 
 support of Department of Defense national security operations 
 and activities or for any other military department or defense 
 agency (as such terms are defined in such section);
 ``(2) costs associated with Coast Guard detachments 
 assigned in support of the Coast Guard's defense readiness 
 mission; and
 ``(3) any other expenses, costs, or matters the Commandant 
 determines appropriate or otherwise of interest to Congress.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 51 of title 14, 
United States Code, is further amended by adding at the end the 
following:

``5114. Expenses of performing and executing defense readiness mission 
 activities.''.

SEC. 209. REPORT ON SAN DIEGO MARITIME DOMAIN AWARENESS.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, 
the Commandant of the Coast Guard shall submit to the Committee on 
Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and 
the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate a 
report containing--
 (1) an overview of the maritime domain awareness in the 
 area of responsibility of the Coast Guard sector responsible 
 for San Diego, California, including--
 (A) the average volume of known maritime traffic 
 that transited the area during fiscal years 2020 
 through 2022;
 (B) current sensor platforms deployed by such 
 sector to monitor illicit activity occurring at sea in 
 such area;
 (C) the number of illicit activity incidents at sea 
 in such area that the sector responded to during fiscal 
 years 2020 through 2022;
 (D) an estimate of the volume of traffic engaged in 
 illicit activity at sea in such area and the type and 
 description of any vessels used to carry out illicit 
 activities that such sector responded to during fiscal 
 years 2020 through 2022; and
 (E) the maritime domain awareness requirements to 
 effectively meet the mission of such sector;
 (2) a description of current actions taken by the Coast 
 Guard to partner with Federal, regional, State, and local 
 entities to meet the maritime domain awareness needs of such 
 area;
 (3) a description of any gaps in maritime domain awareness 
 within the area of responsibility of such sector resulting from 
 an inability to meet the enduring maritime domain awareness 
 requirements of the sector or adequately respond to maritime 
 disorder;
 (4) an identification of current technology and assets the 
 Coast Guard has to mitigate the gaps identified in paragraph 
 (3);
 (5) an identification of capabilities needed to mitigate 
 such gaps, including any capabilities the Coast Guard currently 
 possesses that can be deployed to the sector;
 (6) an identification of technology and assets the Coast 
 Guard does not currently possess and are needed to acquire in 
 order to address such gaps; and
 (7) an identification of any financial obstacles that 
 prevent the Coast Guard from deploying existing commercially 
 available sensor technology to address such gaps.

SEC. 210. GREAT LAKES WINTER SHIPPING.

 (a) Great Lakes Icebreaking Operations.--
 (1) Government accountability office report.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General 
 of the United States shall submit to the Committee on 
 Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and 
 the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of 
 the House of Representatives a report on Coast Guard 
 icebreaking in the Great Lakes.
 (B) Elements.--The report required under 
 subparagraph (A) shall--
 (i) evaluate--
 (I) the economic impact related to 
 vessel delays or cancellations 
 associated with ice coverage on the 
 Great Lakes;
 (II) the impact the standards 
 proposed in paragraph (2) would have on 
 Coast Guard operations in the Great 
 Lakes if such standards were adopted;
 (III) the fleet mix of medium 
 icebreakers and icebreaking tugs 
 necessary to meet the standards 
 proposed in paragraph (2); and
 (IV) the resources necessary to 
 support the fleet described in 
 subclause (III), including billets for 
 crew and operating costs; and
 (ii) make recommendations to the Commandant 
 for improvements to the Great Lakes icebreaking 
 program, including with respect to facilitating 
 shipping and meeting all Coast Guard mission 
 needs.
 (2) Proposed standards for icebreaking operations.--The 
 proposed standards, the impact of the adoption of which is 
 evaluated in subclauses (II) and (III) of paragraph (1)(B)(i), 
 are the following:
 (A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the 
 ice-covered waterways in the Great Lakes shall be open 
 to navigation not less than 90 percent of the hours 
 that vessels engaged in commercial service and ferries 
 attempt to transit such ice-covered waterways.
 (B) In a year in which the Great Lakes are not open 
 to navigation, as described in subparagraph (A), 
 because of ice of a thickness that occurs on average 
 only once every 10 years, ice-covered waterways in the 
 Great Lakes shall be open to navigation at least 70 
 percent of the hours that vessels engaged in commercial 
 service and ferries attempt to transit such ice-covered 
 waterways.
 (3) Report by commandant.--Not later than 90 days after the 
 date on which the Comptroller General submits the report under 
 paragraph (1), the Commandant shall submit to the Committee on 
 Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the 
 Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of 
 Representatives a report that includes the following:
 (A) A plan for Coast Guard implementation of any 
 recommendation made by the Comptroller General under 
 paragraph (1)(B)(ii) with which the Commandant concurs.
 (B) With respect to any recommendation made under 
 paragraph (1)(B)(ii) with which the Commandant does not 
 concur, an explanation of the reasons why the 
 Commandant does not concur.
 (C) A review of, and a proposed implementation plan 
 for, the results of the fleet mix analysis under 
 paragraph (1)(B)(i)(III).
 (D) Any proposed modifications to current Coast 
 Guard standards for icebreaking operations in the Great 
 Lakes.
 (4) Pilot program.--During the 5 ice seasons following the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Coast Guard shall conduct a 
 pilot program to determine the extent to which the current 
 Coast Guard Great Lakes icebreaking cutter fleet can meet the 
 proposed standards described in paragraph (2).
 (b) Data on Icebreaking Operations in the Great Lakes.--
 (1) In general.--The Commandant shall collect, during ice 
 season, archive, and disseminate data on icebreaking operations 
 and transits on ice-covered waterways in the Great Lakes of 
 vessels engaged in commercial service and ferries.
 (2) Elements.--Data collected, archived, and disseminated 
 under paragraph (1) shall include the following:
 (A) Voyages by vessels engaged in commercial 
 service and ferries to transit ice-covered waterways in 
 the Great Lakes that are delayed or canceled because of 
 the nonavailability of a suitable icebreaking vessel.
 (B) Voyages attempted by vessels engaged in 
 commercial service and ferries to transit ice-covered 
 waterways in the Great Lakes that do not reach their 
 intended destination because of the nonavailability of 
 a suitable icebreaking vessel.
 (C) The period of time that each vessel engaged in 
 commercial service or ferry was delayed in getting 
 underway or during a transit of ice-covered waterways 
 in the Great Lakes due to the nonavailability of a 
 suitable icebreaking vessel.
 (D) The period of time elapsed between each request 
 for icebreaking assistance by a vessel engaged in 
 commercial service or ferry and the arrival of a 
 suitable icebreaking vessel and whether such 
 icebreaking vessel was a Coast Guard or commercial 
 asset.
 (E) The percentage of hours that Great Lakes ice-
 covered waterways were open to navigation while vessels 
 engaged in commercial service and ferries attempted to 
 transit such waterways for each ice season after the 
 date of enactment of this Act.
 (F) Relevant communications of each vessel engaged 
 in commercial service or ferry with the Coast Guard or 
 commercial icebreaking service providers with respect 
 to subparagraphs (A) through (D).
 (G) A description of any mitigating circumstance, 
 such as Coast Guard Great Lakes icebreaker diversions 
 to higher priority missions, that may have contributed 
 to the amount of time described in subparagraphs (C) 
 and (D) or the percentage of time described in 
 subparagraph (E).
 (3) Voluntary reporting.--Any reporting by operators of 
 commercial vessels engaged in commercial service or ferries 
 under this section shall be voluntary.
 (4) Public availability.--The Commandant shall make the 
 data collected, archived, and disseminated under this 
 subsection available to the public on a publicly accessible 
 internet website of the Coast Guard.
 (5) Consultation with industry.--With respect to the Great 
 Lakes icebreaking operations of the Coast Guard and the 
 development of the data collected, archived, and disseminated 
 under this subsection, the Commandant shall consult operators 
 of--
 (A) vessels engaged in commercial service; and
 (B) ferries.
 (c) Report on Common Hull Design.--Section 8105 of the William M. 
(Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
2021 (Public Law 116-283) is amended by striking subsection (b) and 
inserting the following:
 ``(b) Report.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment 
of this subsection, the Commandant shall submit to the Committee on 
Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee 
on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives a 
report on the operational benefits and limitations of a common hull 
design for icebreaking cutters for operation in the Great Lakes, the 
Northeastern United States, and the Arctic, as appropriate, that are at 
least as capable as the Coast Guard 140-foot icebreaking tugs.''.
 (d) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Commercial service.--The term ``commercial service'' 
 has the meaning given such term in section 2101 of title 46, 
 United States Code.
 (2) Great lakes.--The term ``Great Lakes''--
 (A) has the meaning given such term in section 118 
 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 
 1268); and
 (B) includes harbors adjacent to such waters.
 (3) Ice-covered waterway.--The term ``ice-covered 
 waterway'' means any portion of the Great Lakes in which 
 vessels engaged in commercial service or ferries operate that 
 is 70 percent or greater covered by ice, but does not include 
 any waters adjacent to piers or docks for which commercial 
 icebreaking services are available and adequate for the ice 
 conditions.
 (4) Open to navigation.--The term ``open to navigation'' 
 means navigable to the extent necessary to--
 (A) meet the reasonable demands of shipping;
 (B) minimize delays to passenger ferries;
 (C) extricate vessels and persons from danger;
 (D) prevent damage due to flooding; and
 (E) conduct other Coast Guard missions, as 
 required.
 (5) Reasonable demands of shipping.--The term ``reasonable 
 demands of shipping'' means the safe movement of vessels 
 engaged in commercial service and ferries transiting ice-
 covered waterways in the Great Lakes to their intended 
 destination, regardless of type of cargo.

SEC. 211. CENTER OF EXPERTISE FOR GREAT LAKES OIL SPILL SEARCH AND 
 RESPONSE.

 Section 807(d) of the Frank LoBiondo Coast Guard Authorization Act 
of 2018 (14 U.S.C. 313 note) is amended to read as follows:
 ``(d) Definition.--In this section, the term `Great Lakes' means--
 ``(1) Lake Ontario;
 ``(2) Lake Erie;
 ``(3) Lake Huron (including Lake St. Clair);
 ``(4) Lake Michigan;
 ``(5) Lake Superior; and
 ``(6) the connecting channels (including the following 
 rivers and tributaries of such rivers: Saint Mary's River, 
 Saint Clair River, Detroit River, Niagara River, Illinois 
 River, Chicago River, Fox River, Grand River, St. Joseph River, 
 St. Louis River, Menominee River, Muskegon River, Kalamazoo 
 River, and Saint Lawrence River to the Canadian border).''.

SEC. 212. STUDY ON LAYDOWN OF COAST GUARD CUTTERS.

 Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary of Homeland Security, in consultation with the Secretary 
of Transportation, shall conduct a study on the laydown of Coast Guard 
Fast Response Cutters to assess Coast Guard mission readiness and to 
identify areas of need for asset coverage.

 Subtitle C--Other Matters

SEC. 213. RESPONSES OF COMMANDANT OF THE COAST GUARD TO SAFETY 
 RECOMMENDATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 7 of title 14, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 721. Responses to safety recommendations
 ``(a) In General.--Not later than 90 days after the submission to 
the Commandant of the Coast Guard of a recommendation by the National 
Transportation Safety Board relating to transportation safety, the 
Commandant shall submit to the Board a written response to each 
recommendation, which shall include whether the Commandant--
 ``(1) concurs with the recommendation;
 ``(2) partially concurs with the recommendation; or
 ``(3) does not concur with the recommendation.
 ``(b) Explanation of Concurrence.--A response under subsection (a) 
shall include--
 ``(1) with respect to a recommendation to which the 
 Commandant concurs, an explanation of the actions the 
 Commandant intends to take to implement such recommendation;
 ``(2) with respect to a recommendation to which the 
 Commandant partially concurs, an explanation of the actions the 
 Commandant intends to take to implement the portion of such 
 recommendation with which the Commandant partially concurs; and
 ``(3) with respect to a recommendation to which the 
 Commandant does not concur, the reasons why the Commandant does 
 not concur with such recommendation.
 ``(c) Failure To Respond.--If the Board has not received the 
written response required under subsection (a) by the end of the time 
period described in such subsection, the Board shall notify the 
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of 
Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation of the Senate that such response has not been 
received.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 7 of title 14, 
United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to 
section 720 the following:

``721. Responses to safety recommendations.''.

SEC. 214. CONVEYANCE OF COAST GUARD VESSELS FOR PUBLIC PURPOSES.

 (a) Redesignation and Transfer.--
 (1) In general.--Section 914 of the Coast Guard 
 Authorization Act of 2010 (Public Law 111-281) is transferred 
 to chapter 5 of title 14, United States Code, inserted after 
 section 508, redesignated as section 509, and amended so that 
 the enumerator, section heading, typeface, and typestyle 
 conform to those appearing in other sections in title 46, 
 United States Code.
 (2) Clerical amendments.--
 (A) Coast guard authorization act of 2010.--The 
 table of contents in section 1(b) of the Coast Guard 
 Authorization Act of 2010 (Public Law 111-281) is 
 amended by striking the item relating to section 914.
 (B) Title 46.--The analysis for chapter 5 of title 
 14, United States Code, is amended by inserting after 
 the item relating to section 508 the following:

``509. Conveyance of Coast Guard vessels for public purposes.''.
 (b) Conveyance of Coast Guard Vessels for Public Purposes.--Section 
509 of title 14, United States Code (as transferred and redesignated 
under subsection (a)), is amended--
 (1) by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
 ``(a) In General.--At the request of the Commandant, the 
Administrator of the General Services Administration may transfer 
ownership of a Coast Guard vessel or aircraft to an eligible entity for 
use for educational, cultural, historical, charitable, recreational, or 
other public purposes if such transfer is authorized by law.''; and
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by inserting ``as if such a request 
 were being processed'' after ``vessels''; and
 (ii) by inserting ``, as in effect on the 
 date of enactment of the Don Young Coast Guard 
 Authorization Act of 2022'' after ``Code of 
 Federal Regulations''; and
 (B) in paragraph (2) by inserting ``, as in effect 
 on the date of enactment of the Don Young Coast Guard 
 Authorization Act of 2022'' after ``such title''.

SEC. 215. ACQUISITION LIFE-CYCLE COST ESTIMATES.

 Section 1132(e) of title 14, United States Code, is amended by 
striking paragraphs (2) and (3) and inserting the following:
 ``(2) Types of estimates.--For each Level 1 or Level 2 
 acquisition project or program, in addition to life-cycle cost 
 estimates developed under paragraph (1), the Commandant shall 
 require that--
 ``(A) such life-cycle cost estimates be updated 
 before--
 ``(i) each milestone decision is concluded; 
 and
 ``(ii) the project or program enters a new 
 acquisition phase; and
 ``(B) an independent cost estimate or independent 
 cost assessment, as appropriate, be developed to 
 validate such life-cycle cost estimates developed under 
 paragraph (1).''.

SEC. 216. NATIONAL COAST GUARD MUSEUM FUNDING PLAN.

 Section 316(c)(4) of title 14, United States Code, is amended by 
striking ``the Inspector General of the department in which the Coast 
Guard is operating'' and inserting ``a third party entity qualified to 
undertake such a certification process''.

SEC. 217. REPORT ON COAST GUARD EXPLOSIVE ORDNANCE DISPOSAL.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Commandant of the Coast Guard shall submit to the 
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of 
Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation of the Senate a report on the viability of establishing 
an explosive ordnance disposal program (hereinafter referred to as the 
``Program'') in the Coast Guard.
 (b) Contents.--The report required under subsection (a) shall 
contain, at a minimum, an explanation of the following with respect to 
such a Program:
 (1) Where within the organizational structure of the Coast 
 Guard the Program would be located, including a discussion of 
 whether the Program should reside in--
 (A) Maritime Safety and Security Teams;
 (B) Maritime Security Response Teams;
 (C) a combination of the teams described under 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B); or
 (D) elsewhere within the Coast Guard.
 (3) The vehicles and dive craft that are Coast Guard 
 airframe and vessel transportable that would be required for 
 the transportation of explosive ordnance disposal elements.
 (4) The Coast Guard stations at which--
 (A) portable explosives storage magazines would be 
 available for explosive ordnance disposal elements; and
 (B) explosive ordnance disposal elements equipment 
 would be pre-positioned.
 (5) How the Program would support other elements within the 
 Department of Homeland Security, the Department of Justice, and 
 in wartime, the Department of Defense to--
 (A) counter improvised explosive devices;
 (B) counter unexploded ordnance;
 (C) combat weapons of destruction;
 (D) provide service in support of the President; 
 and
 (E) support national security special events.
 (6) The career progression of Coast Guardsman participating 
 in the Program from--
 (A) Seaman Recruit to Command Master Chief Petty 
 Officer;
 (B) Chief Warrant Officer 2 to that of Chief 
 Warrant Officer 4; and
 (C) Ensign to that of Rear Admiral.
 (7) Initial and annual budget justification estimates on a 
 single program element of the Program for--
 (A) civilian and military pay with details on 
 military pay, including special and incentive pays such 
 as--
 (i) officer responsibility pay;
 (ii) officer SCUBA diving duty pay;
 (iii) officer demolition hazardous duty 
 pay;
 (iv) enlisted SCUBA diving duty pay;
 (v) enlisted demolition hazardous duty pay;
 (vi) enlisted special duty assignment pay 
 at level special duty-5;
 (vii) enlisted assignment incentive pays;
 (viii) enlistment and reenlistment bonuses;
 (ix) officer and enlisted full civilian 
 clothing allowances;
 (x) an exception to the policy allowing a 
 third hazardous duty pay for explosive ordnance 
 disposal-qualified officers and enlisted; and
 (xi) parachutist hazardous duty pay;
 (B) research, development, test, and evaluation;
 (C) procurement;
 (D) other transaction agreements;
 (E) operations and support; and
 (F) overseas contingency operations.

SEC. 218. PRIBILOF ISLAND TRANSITION COMPLETION ACTIONS.

 (a) Extensions.--Section 524 of the Pribilof Island Transition 
Completion Act of 2016 (Public Law 114-120) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)(5) by striking ``5 years'' and 
 inserting ``6 years''; and
 (2) in subsection (c)(3) by striking ``60 days'' and 
 inserting ``120 days''.
 (b) Actual Use and Occupancy Reports.--Not later than 90 days after 
enactment of this Act, and quarterly thereafter, the Secretary of the 
department in which the Coast Guard is operating shall submit to the 
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of 
Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation of the Senate a report describing--
 (1) the degree to which Coast Guard personnel and equipment 
 are deployed to St. Paul Island, Alaska, in actual occupancy of 
 the facilities, as required under section 524 of the Pribilof 
 Island Transition Completion Act of 2016 (Public Law 114-120); 
 and
 (2) the status of the activities described in subsections 
 (c) and (d) until such activities have been completed.
 (c) Aircraft Hanger.--The Secretary may--
 (1) enter into a lease for a hangar to house deployed Coast 
 Guard aircraft if such hanger was previously under lease by the 
 Coast Guard for purposes of housing such aircraft; and
 (2) may enter into an agreement with the lessor of such a 
 hanger in which the Secretary may carry out repairs necessary 
 to support the deployment of such aircraft and the cost such 
 repairs may be offset under the terms of the lease.
 (d) Fuel Tank.--
 (1) Determination.--Not later than 30 days after the date 
 of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall determine whether 
 the fuel tank located on St. Paul Island, Alaska, that is owned 
 by the Coast Guard is needed for Coast Guard operations.
 (2) Transfer.--Subject to paragraph (3), if the Secretary 
 determines such tank is not needed for operations, the 
 Secretary shall, not later than 90 days after making such 
 determination, transfer such tank to the Alaska Native Village 
 Corporation for St. Paul Island, Alaska.
 (3) Fair market value exception.--The Secretary may only 
 carry out a transfer under paragraph (2) if the fair market 
 value of such tank is less than the aggregate value of any 
 lease payments for the property on which the tank is located 
 that the Coast Guard would have paid to the Alaska Native 
 Village Corporation for St. Paul Island, Alaska, had such lease 
 been extended at the same rate.
 (e) Savings Clause.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to 
limit any rights of the Alaska Native Village Corporation for St. Paul 
to receive conveyance of all or part of the lands and improvements 
related to Tract 43 under the same terms and conditions as prescribed 
in section 524 of the Pribilof Island Transition Completion Act of 2016 
(Public Law 114-120).

SEC. 219. NOTIFICATION OF COMMUNICATION OUTAGES.

 Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, 
the Commandant of the Coast Guard shall submit to the Committee on 
Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and 
the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate a 
report that--
 (1) contains a plan for the Coast Guard to notify mariners 
 of radio outages for towers owned and operated by the Coast 
 Guard in District 17;
 (2) address in such plan how the Coast Guard in District 17 
 will--
 (A) disseminate outage updates regarding outages on 
 social media at least every 48 hours;
 (B) provide updates on a publicly accessible 
 website at least every 48 hours;
 (C) develop methods for notifying mariners where 
 cellular connectivity does not exist;
 (D) generate receipt confirmation and 
 acknowledgment of outages from mariners; and
 (E) develop and advertise a web-based 
 communications update hub on AM/FM radio for mariners; 
 and
 (3) identifies technology gaps necessary to implement the 
 plan and provide a budgetary assessment necessary to implement 
 the plan.

 TITLE III--MARITIME

 Subtitle A--Shipping

SEC. 301. NONOPERATING INDIVIDUAL.

 Section 8313(b) of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283) is amended 
by striking ``the date that is 2 years after the date of the enactment 
of this Act'' and inserting ``January 1, 2025''.

SEC. 302. OCEANOGRAPHIC RESEARCH VESSELS.

 (a) Report Required.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation, in consultation 
with the Secretary of the department in which the Coast Guard is 
operating, shall submit to the Committee on Transportation and 
Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and the Committee on 
Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate a report detailing 
the total number of vessels known or estimated to operate or to have 
operated under section 50503 of title 46, United States Code, during 
each of the past 10 fiscal years.
 (b) Contents.--The report required by subsection (a) shall include 
the following elements:
 (1) The total number of foreign-flagged vessels known or 
 estimated to operate or to have operated as oceanographic 
 research vessels (as such term is defined in section 2101 of 
 title 46, United States Code) during each of the past 10 fiscal 
 years.
 (2) The total number of United States-flagged vessels known 
 or estimated to operate or to have operated as oceanographic 
 research vessels (as such term is defined section 2101 of title 
 46, United States Code) during each of the past 10 fiscal 
 years.

SEC. 303. ATLANTIC COAST PORT ACCESS ROUTES BRIEFING.

 Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, and 
every 30 days thereafter until the requirements of section 70003 of 
title 46, United States Code, are fully executed with respect to the 
Atlantic Coast Port Access Route, the Secretary of the department in 
which the Coast Guard is operating shall brief the Committee on 
Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and 
the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate on 
any progress made to execute such requirements.

 Subtitle B--Vessel Safety

SEC. 304. FISHING VESSEL SAFETY.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 45 of title 46, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) in section 4502(f)(2) by striking ``certain vessels 
 described in subsection (b) if requested by the owner or 
 operator; and'' and inserting ``vessels described in subsection 
 (b) if--
 ``(A) requested by an owner or operator; or
 ``(B) the vessel is--
 ``(i) at least 50 feet overall in length;
 ``(ii) built before July 1, 2013; and
 ``(iii) 25 years of age or older; and'';
 (2) in section 4503(b) by striking ``Except as provided in 
 section 4503a, subsection (a)'' and inserting ``Subsection 
 (a)''; and
 (3) by repealing section 4503a.
 (b) Alternative Safety Compliance Agreements.--Nothing in this 
section or the amendments made by this section shall be construed to 
affect or apply to any alternative compliance and safety agreement 
entered into by the Coast Guard that is in effect on the date of 
enactment of this Act.
 (c) Conforming Amendments.--The table of sections in chapter 45 of 
title 46, United States Code, is amended by striking the item relating 
to section 4503a.

SEC. 305. REQUIREMENTS FOR DUKW-TYPE AMPHIBIOUS PASSENGER VESSELS.

 (a) Regulations Required.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Commandant of the Coast Guard shall issue 
regulations for DUKW-type amphibious passenger vessels operating in 
waters subject to the jurisdiction of the United States, as defined in 
section 2.38 of title 33, Code of Federal Regulations (as in effect on 
the date of enactment of this Act).
 (b) Deadline for Compliance.--The regulations issued under 
subsection (a) shall take effect not later than 24 months after the 
date of enactment of this Act.
 (c) Requirements.--The regulations required under subsection (a) 
shall include the following:
 (1) A requirement that operators of DUKW-type amphibious 
 passenger vessels provide reserve buoyancy for such vessels 
 through passive means, including watertight 
 compartmentalization, built-in flotation, or such other means 
 as determined appropriate by the Commandant, in order to ensure 
 that such vessels remain afloat and upright in the event of 
 flooding, including when carrying a full complement of 
 passengers and crew.
 (2) A requirement that an operator of a DUKW-type 
 amphibious passenger vessel--
 (A) review and notate the forecast of the National 
 Weather Service of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
 Administration in the logbook of the vessel before 
 getting underway and periodically while underway;
 (B) proceed to the nearest harbor or safe refuge in 
 any case in which a watch or warning is issued for wind 
 speeds exceeding the wind speed equivalent used to 
 certify the stability of such DUKW-type amphibious 
 passenger vessel; and
 (C) maintain and monitor a weather monitor radio 
 receiver at the operator station of the vessel that is 
 automatically activated by the warning alarm device of 
 the National Weather Service.
 (3) A requirement that--
 (A) operators of DUKW-type amphibious passenger 
 vessels inform passengers that seat belts may not be 
 worn during waterborne operations;
 (B) before the commencement of waterborne 
 operations, a crew member shall visually check that the 
 seatbelt of each passenger is unbuckled; and
 (C) operators or crew maintain a log recording the 
 actions described in subparagraphs (A) and (B).
 (4) A requirement for annual training for operators and 
 crew of DUKW-type amphibious passengers vessels, including--
 (A) training for personal flotation and seat belt 
 requirements, verifying the integrity of the vessel at 
 the onset of each waterborne departure, identification 
 of weather hazards, and use of National Weather Service 
 resources prior to operation; and
 (B) training for crew to respond to emergency 
 situations, including flooding, engine compartment 
 fires, man-overboard situations, and in water emergency 
 egress procedures.
 (d) Consideration.--In issuing the regulations required under 
subsection (a), the Commandant shall consider whether personal 
flotation devices should be required for the duration of the waterborne 
transit of a DUKW-type amphibious passenger vessel.
 (e) Interim Requirements.--Beginning on the date on which the 
regulations under subsection (a) are issued, the Commandant shall 
require that operators of DUKW-type amphibious passenger vessels that 
are not in compliance with such regulations shall be subject to the 
following requirements:
 (1) Remove the canopies and any window coverings of such 
 vessels for waterborne operations, or install in such vessels a 
 canopy that does not restrict horizontal or vertical escape by 
 passengers in the event of flooding or sinking.
 (2) If a canopy and window coverings are removed from any 
 such vessel pursuant to paragraph (1), require that all 
 passengers wear a personal flotation device approved by the 
 Coast Guard before the onset of waterborne operations of such 
 vessel.
 (3) Reengineer such vessels to permanently close all 
 unnecessary access plugs and reduce all through-hull 
 penetrations to the minimum number and size necessary for 
 operation.
 (4) Install in such vessels independently powered electric 
 bilge pumps that are capable of dewatering such vessels at the 
 volume of the largest remaining penetration in order to 
 supplement an operable Higgins pump or a dewatering pump of 
 equivalent or greater capacity.
 (5) Install in such vessels not fewer than 4 independently 
 powered bilge alarms.
 (6) Conduct an in-water inspection of any such vessel after 
 each time a through-hull penetration of such vessel has been 
 removed or uncovered.
 (7) Verify through an in-water inspection the watertight 
 integrity of any such vessel at the outset of each waterborne 
 departure of such vessel.
 (8) Install underwater LED lights that activate 
 automatically in an emergency.
 (9) Otherwise comply with any other provisions of relevant 
 Coast Guard guidance or instructions in the inspection, 
 configuration, and operation of such vessels.

SEC. 306. EXONERATION AND LIMITATION OF LIABILITY FOR SMALL PASSENGERS 
 VESSELS.

 (a) Restructuring.--Chapter 305 of title 46, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) by inserting the following before section 30501 the 
 following:

 ``Subchapter I--General Provisions'';

 (2) by inserting the following before section 30503:

 ``Subchapter II--Exoneration and Limitation of Liability'';

 and
 (3) by redesignating sections 30503 through 30512 as 
 sections 30521 through 30530, respectively.
 (b) Definitions.--Section 30501 of title 46, United States Code, is 
amended to read as follows:
``Sec. 30501. Definitions
 ``In this chapter:
 ``(1) Covered small passenger vessel.--The term `covered 
 small passenger vessel'--
 ``(A) means a small passenger vessel, as defined in 
 section 2101 that is--
 ``(i) not a wing-in-ground craft; and
 ``(ii) carrying--
 ``(I) not more than 49 passengers 
 on an overnight domestic voyage; and
 ``(II) not more than 150 passengers 
 on any voyage that is not an overnight 
 domestic voyage; and
 ``(B) includes any wooden vessel constructed prior 
 to March 11, 1996, carrying at least 1 passenger for 
 hire.
 ``(2) Owner.--The term `owner' includes a charterer that 
 mans, supplies, and navigates a vessel at the charterer's own 
 expense or by the charterer's own procurement.''.
 (c) Clerical Amendment.--The item relating to section 30501 in the 
analysis for chapter 305 of title 46, United States Code, is amended to 
read as follows:

``30501. Definitions.''.
 (d) Applicability.--Section 30502 of title 46, United States Code, 
is amended by inserting ``as to covered small passenger vessels, and'' 
before ``as otherwise provided''.
 (e) Provisions Requiring Notice of Claim or Limiting Time for 
Bringing Action.--Section 30526 of title 46, United States Code, as 
redesignated by subsection (a), is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by inserting ``and covered small 
 passenger vessels'' after ``seagoing vessels'';
 (2) in subsection (b)(1), by striking ``6 months'' and 
 inserting ``2 years''; and
 (3) in subsection (b)(2), by striking ``one year'' and 
 inserting ``2 years''.
 (f) Tables of Subchapters and Tables of Sections.--The table of 
sections for chapter 305 of title 46, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by inserting before section 30501 the following:

 ``subchapter i--general provisions'';

 (2) by inserting after section 30502 the following:

 ``subchapter ii--exoneration and limitation of liability'';

 and
 (3) by redesignating the items relating to sections 30503 
 through 30512 as items relating to sections 30521 through 
 30530, respectively.
 (g) Conforming Amendments.--Title 46, United States Code, is 
further amended--
 (1) in section 14305(a)(5), by striking ``section 30506'' 
 and inserting ``section 30524'';
 (2) in section 30523(a), as redesignated by subsection (a), 
 by striking ``section 30506'' and inserting ``section 30524'';
 (3) in section 30524(b), as redesignated by subsection (a), 
 by striking ``section 30505'' and inserting ``section 30523''; 
 and
 (4) in section 30525, as redesignated by subsection (a)--
 (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by 
 striking ``sections 30505 and 30506'' and inserting 
 ``sections 30523 and 30524'';
 (B) in paragraph (1) by striking ``section 30505'' 
 and inserting ``section 30523''; and
 (C) in paragraph (2) by striking ``section 
 30506(b)'' and inserting ``section 30524(b)''.

SEC. 307. AUTOMATIC IDENTIFICATION SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) Requirement for Fishing Vessels To Have Automatic 
Identification Systems.--Section 70114(a)(1) of title 46, United States 
Code, is amended--
 (1) by striking ``, while operating on the navigable waters 
 of the United States,'';
 (2) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) through (D) as 
 clauses (i) through (iv);
 (3) by inserting before clauses (i) through (iv), as 
 redesignated by paragraph (2), the following:
 ``(A) While operating on the navigable waters of the United 
 States:''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(B) A vessel of the United States that is more than 65 
 feet overall in length, while engaged in fishing, fish 
 processing, or fish tendering operations on the navigable 
 waters of the United States or in the United States exclusive 
 economic zone.''.
 (b) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce for fiscal year 2022, 
$5,000,000, to remain available until expended, to purchase automatic 
identification systems for fishing vessels, fish processing vessels, 
fish tender vessels more than 50 feet in length, as described under 
this section and the amendments made by this section.

 Subtitle C--Shipbuilding Program

SEC. 308. QUALIFIED VESSEL.

 (a) Eligible Vessel.--Section 53501(2) of title 46, United States 
Code, is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A)(iii) by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (2) in subparagraph (B)(v) by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting a semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C) a ferry, as such term is defined in section 
 2101; and
 ``(D) a passenger vessel or small passenger vessel, 
 as such terms are defined in section 2101, that has a 
 passenger capacity of 50 passengers or greater.''.
 (b) Qualified Vessel.--Section 53501(5) of title 46, United States 
Code, is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A)(iii) by striking ``and'' at the 
 end;
 (2) in subparagraph (B)(v) by striking the period at the 
 end and inserting a semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C) a ferry, as such term is defined in section 
 2101; and
 ``(D) a passenger vessel or small passenger vessel, 
 as such terms are defined in section 2101, that has a 
 passenger capacity of 50 passengers or greater.''.

SEC. 309. ESTABLISHING A CAPITAL CONSTRUCTION FUND.

 Section 53503(b) of title 46, United States Code, is amended by 
inserting ``(including transportation on a ferry, passenger vessel, or 
small passenger vessel, as such terms are defined in section 2101, that 
has a passenger capacity of 50 passengers or greater)'' after ``short 
sea transportation''.

 TITLE IV--FEDERAL MARITIME COMMISSION

SEC. 401. TERMS AND VACANCIES.

 Section 46101(b) of title 46, United States Code, is amended by--
 (1) in paragraph (2)--
 (A) by striking ``one year'' and inserting ``2 
 years''; and
 (B) by striking ``2 terms'' and inserting ``3 
 terms''; and
 (2) in paragraph (3)--
 (A) by striking ``of the individual being 
 succeeded'' and inserting ``to which such individual is 
 appointed'';
 (B) by striking ``2 terms'' and inserting ``3 
 terms''; and
 (C) by striking ``the predecessor of that'' and 
 inserting ``such''.

 TITLE V--MISCELLANEOUS

 Subtitle A--Navigation

SEC. 501. RESTRICTION ON CHANGING SALVORS.

 Section 311(c)(3) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 
U.S.C. 1321(c)(3)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C) An owner or operator may not change salvors as part 
 of a deviation under subparagraph (B) in cases in which the 
 original salvor satisfies the Coast Guard requirements in 
 accordance with the National Contingency Plan and the 
 applicable response plan required under subsection (j).
 ``(D) In any case in which the Coast Guard authorizes a 
 deviation from the salvor as part of a deviation under 
 subparagraph (B) from the applicable response plan required 
 under subsection (j), the Commandant shall submit to the 
 Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of 
 Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate a report describing the deviation 
 and the reasons for such deviation.''.

SEC. 502. PROVIDING REQUIREMENTS FOR VESSELS ANCHORED IN ESTABLISHED 
 ANCHORAGE GROUNDS.

 (a) In General.--Section 70006 of title 46, United States Code, is 
amended to read as follows:
``Sec. 70006. Anchorage grounds
 ``(a) Anchorage Grounds.--
 ``(1) Establishment.--The Secretary of the department in 
 which the Coast Guard is operating shall define and establish 
 anchorage grounds in the navigable waters of the United States 
 for vessels operating in such waters.
 ``(2) Relevant factors for establishment.--In carrying out 
 paragraph (1), the Secretary shall take into account all 
 relevant factors concerning navigational safety, protection of 
 the marine environment, proximity to undersea pipelines and 
 cables, safe and efficient use of Marine Transportation System, 
 and national security.
 ``(b) Vessel Requirements.--Vessels, of certain sizes or type 
determined by the Secretary, shall--
 ``(1) set and maintain an anchor alarm for the duration of 
 an anchorage;
 ``(2) comply with any directions or orders issued by the 
 Captain of the Port; and
 ``(3) comply with any applicable anchorage regulations.
 ``(c) Prohibitions.--A vessel may not--
 ``(1) anchor in any Federal navigation channel unless 
 authorized or directed to by the Captain of the Port;
 ``(2) anchor in near proximity, within distances determined 
 by the Coast Guard, to an undersea pipeline or cable, unless 
 authorized or directed to by the Captain of the Port; and
 ``(3) anchor or remain anchored in an anchorage ground 
 during any period in which the Captain of the Port orders 
 closure of the anchorage ground due to inclement weather, 
 navigational hazard, a threat to the environment, or other 
 safety or security concern.
 ``(d) Safety Exception.--Nothing in this section shall be construed 
to prevent a vessel from taking actions necessary to maintain the 
safety of the vessel or to prevent the loss of life or property.''.
 (b) Regulatory Review.--
 (1) Review required.--Not later than 1 year after the date 
 of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the department in 
 which the Coast Guard is operating shall complete a review of 
 existing anchorage regulations and identify regulations that 
 may need modification--
 (A) in the interest of marine safety, security, and 
 environmental concerns, taking into account undersea 
 pipelines, cables, or other infrastructure; and
 (B) to implement the amendments made by this 
 section.
 (2) Briefing.--Upon completion of the review under 
 paragraph (1), but not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall provide a briefing 
 to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of 
 the Senate and the Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime 
 Transportation of the Committee on Transportation and 
 Infrastructure of the House of Representatives that summarizes 
 the review.
 (c) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 700 of 
title 46, United States Code, is amended by striking the item relating 
to section 70006 and inserting the following:

``70006. Anchorage grounds.''.
 (d) Applicability of Regulations.--The amendments made by 
subsection (a) may not be construed to alter any existing rules, 
regulations, or final agency actions issued under section 70006 of 
title 46, United States Code, as in effect on the day before the date 
of enactment of this Act until all regulations required under 
subsection (b) take effect.

SEC. 503. AQUATIC NUISANCE SPECIES TASK FORCE.

 (a) Recreational Vessel Defined.--Section 1003 of the Nonindigenous 
Aquatic Nuisance Prevention and Control Act of 1990 (16 U.S.C. 4702) is 
amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (13) through (17) as 
 paragraphs (15) through (19), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (12) the following:
 ``(13) `State' means each of the several States, the 
 District of Columbia, American Samoa, Guam, Puerto Rico, the 
 Northern Mariana Islands, and the Virgin Islands of the United 
 States;
 ``(14) `recreational vessel' has the meaning given that 
 term in section 502 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act 
 (33 U.S.C. 1362);''.
 (b) Observers.--Section 1201 of the Nonindigenous Aquatic Nuisance 
Prevention and Control Act of 1990 (16 U.S.C. 4721) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(g) Observers.--The chairpersons designated under subsection (d) 
may invite representatives of nongovernmental entities to participate 
as observers of the Task Force.''.
 (c) Aquatic Nuisance Species Task Force.--Section 1201(b) of the 
Nonindigenous Aquatic Nuisance Prevention and Control Act of 1990 (16 
U.S.C. 4721(b)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (6), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) by redesignating paragraph (7) as paragraph (10); and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (6) the following:
 ``(7) the Director of the National Park Service;
 ``(8) the Director of the Bureau of Land Management;
 ``(9) the Commissioner of Reclamation; and''.
 (d) Aquatic Nuisance Species Program.--Section 1202 of the 
Nonindigenous Aquatic Nuisance Prevention and Control Act of 1990 (16 
U.S.C. 4722) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (e) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) Technical assistance and recommendations.--The Task 
 Force may provide technical assistance and recommendations for 
 best practices to an agency or entity engaged in vessel 
 inspections or decontaminations for the purpose of--
 ``(A) effectively managing and controlling the 
 movement of aquatic nuisance species into, within, or 
 out of water of the United States; and
 ``(B) inspecting recreational vessels in a manner 
 that minimizes disruptions to public access for boating 
 and recreation in non-contaminated vessels.
 ``(5) Consultation.--In carrying out paragraph (4), 
 including the development of recommendations, the Task Force 
 may consult with--
 ``(A) State fish and wildlife management agencies;
 ``(B) other State agencies that manage fishery 
 resources of the State or sustain fishery habitat; and
 ``(C) relevant nongovernmental entities.''; and
 (2) in subsection (k) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of 
 the Don Young Coast Guard Authorization Act of 2022, the Task 
 Force shall submit a report to Congress recommending 
 legislative, programmatic, or regulatory changes to eliminate 
 remaining gaps in authorities between members of the Task Force 
 to effectively manage and control the movement of aquatic 
 nuisance species.''.
 (e) Technical Corrections and Conforming Amendments.--The 
Nonindigenous Aquatic Nuisance Prevention and Control Act of 1990 (16 
U.S.C. 4701 et seq.) is further amended--
 (1) in section 1002(b)(2), by inserting a comma after 
 ``funded'';
 (2) in section 1003, in paragraph (7), by striking 
 ``Canandian'' and inserting ``Canadian'';
 (3) in section 1203(a)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)(F), by inserting ``and'' after 
 ``research,''; and
 (B) in paragraph (3), by striking ``encourage'' and 
 inserting ``encouraged'';
 (4) in section 1204(b)(4), in the paragraph heading, by 
 striking ``Adminisrative'' and inserting ``Administrative''; 
 and
 (5) in section 1209, by striking ``subsection (a)'' and 
 inserting ``section 1202(a)''.

SEC. 504. LIMITATION ON RECOVERY FOR CERTAIN INJURIES INCURRED IN 
 AQUACULTURE ACTIVITIES.

 (a) In General.--Section 30104 of title 46, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(a) In General.--'' before the first 
 sentence; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(b) Limitation on Recovery by Aquaculture Workers.--
 ``(1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a), the term 
 `seaman' does not include an individual who--
 ``(A) is an aquaculture worker if State workers' 
 compensation is available to such individual; and
 ``(B) was, at the time of injury, engaged in 
 aquaculture in a place where such individual had lawful 
 access.
 ``(2) Aquaculture worker defined.--In this subsection, the 
 term `aquaculture worker' means an individual who--
 ``(A) is employed by a commercial enterprise that 
 is involved in the controlled cultivation and harvest 
 of aquatic plants and animals, including--
 ``(i) the cleaning, processing, or canning 
 of fish and fish products;
 ``(ii) the cultivation and harvesting of 
 shellfish; and
 ``(iii) the controlled growing and 
 harvesting of other aquatic species;
 ``(B) does not hold a license issued under section 
 7101(c); and
 ``(C) is not required to hold a merchant mariner 
 credential under part F of subtitle II.''.
 (b) Applicability.--The amendments made by this section shall apply 
to an injury incurred on or after the date of enactment of this Act.

 Subtitle B--Other Matters

SEC. 505. INFORMATION ON TYPE APPROVAL CERTIFICATES.

 (a) In General.--Title IX of the Frank LoBiondo Coast Guard 
Authorization Act of 2018 (Public Law 115-282) is amended by adding at 
the end the following:

``SEC. 904. INFORMATION ON TYPE APPROVAL CERTIFICATES.

 ``The Commandant of the Coast Guard shall, upon request by any 
State, the District of Columbia, or territory of the United States, 
provide all data possessed by the Coast Guard pertaining to challenge 
water quality characteristics, challenge water biological organism 
concentrations, post-treatment water quality characteristics, and post-
treatment biological organism concentrations data for a ballast water 
management system with a type approval certificate approved by the 
Coast Guard pursuant to subpart 162.060 of title 46, Code of Federal 
Regulations.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents for the Frank 
LoBiondo Coast Guard Authorization Act of 2018 (Public Law 115-282) is 
amended by inserting after the item relating to section 903 the 
following:

``904. Information on type approval certificates.''.

SEC. 506. PASSENGER VESSEL SECURITY AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.

 Section 3507(k)(1) of title 46, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (A) by striking ``at least 250'' and 
 inserting ``250 or more''; and
 (2) by striking subparagraph (B) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(B) has overnight accommodations for 250 or more 
 passengers; and''.

SEC. 507. CARGO WAITING TIME REDUCTION.

 (a) Interagency Task Force.--The President shall, acting through 
the Supply Chain Disruptions Task Force established under Executive 
Order 14017 (relating to supply chains) of February 24, 2021 (86 Fed. 
Reg. 11849) (hereinafter referred to as the ``Task Force''), carry out 
the duties described in subsection (c).
 (b) Duties.--In carrying out this section, the Task Force shall--
 (1) evaluate and quantify the economic and environmental 
 impact of cargo backlogs;
 (2) evaluate and quantify the costs incurred by each 
 Federal agency represented on the Task Force, and by State and 
 local governments, due to such cargo backlogs;
 (3) evaluate the responses of each such Federal agency to 
 such cargo backlogs; and
 (4) not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of 
 this Act--
 (A) develop a plan to--
 (i) significantly reduce or eliminate such 
 cargo backlog; and
 (ii) reduce nationwide cargo processing 
 delays, including the Port of Los Angeles and 
 the Port of Long Beach; and
 (B) submit to the Committee on Transportation and 
 Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and the 
 Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of 
 the Senate a report containing the plan developed under 
 subparagraph (A).
 (c) Report of the Commandant.--No later than 90 days after the date 
of enactment of this Act, the Commandant of the Coast Guard shall 
submit to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the 
House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation of the Senate a report on cargo backlogs that includes--
 (1) an explanation of the extent to which vessels carrying 
 cargo are complying with the requirements of chapter 700 of 
 title 46, United States Code;
 (2) the status of the investigation on the cause of the oil 
 spill that occurred in October 2021 on the waters over the San 
 Pedro Shelf related to an anchor strike, including the expected 
 date on which the Marine Casualty Investigation Report with 
 respect to such spill will be released; and
 (3) with respect to such vessels, a summary of actions 
 taken or planned to be taken by the Commandant to--
 (A) provide additional protections against oil 
 spills caused by anchor strikes; and
 (B) address other safety concerns and environmental 
 impacts.

SEC. 508. LIMITED INDEMNITY PROVISIONS IN STANDBY OIL SPILL RESPONSE 
 CONTRACTS.

 (a) In General.--Subject to subsections (b) and (c), a contract for 
the containment or removal of a discharge entered into by the President 
under section 311(c) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 
U.S.C. 1321(c)) shall contain a provision to indemnify a contractor for 
liabilities and expenses incidental to the containment or removal 
arising out of the performance of the contract that is substantially 
identical to the terms contained in subsections (d) through (h) of 
section H.4 (except for paragraph (1) of subsection (d)) of the 
contract offered by the Coast Guard in the solicitation numbered 
DTCG89-98- A-68F953, dated November 17, 1998.
 (b) Requirements.--
 (1) Source of funds.--The provision required under 
 subsection (a) shall include a provision that the obligation to 
 indemnify is limited to funds available in the Oil Spill 
 Liability Trust Fund established by section 9509(a) of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 at the time the claim for 
 indemnity is made.
 (2) Uncompensated removal.--A claim for indemnity under a 
 contract described in subsection (a) shall be made as a claim 
 for uncompensated removal costs under section 1012(a)(4) of the 
 Oil Pollution Act of 1990 (33 U.S.C. 2712(a)(4)).
 (3) Limitation.--The total indemnity for a claim under a 
 contract described in subsection (a) may not be more than 
 $50,000 per incident.
 (c) Applicability of Exemptions.--Notwithstanding subsection (a), 
the United States shall not be obligated to indemnify a contractor for 
any act or omission of the contractor carried out pursuant to a 
contract entered into under this section where such act or omission is 
grossly negligent or which constitutes willful misconduct.

SEC. 509. PORT COORDINATION COUNCIL FOR POINT SPENCER.

 Section 541 of the Coast Guard Authorization Act of 2016 (Public 
Law 114-120) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b) by striking paragraphs (1) and (2) 
 and inserting the following:
 ``(1) BSNC (to serve as Council Chair).
 ``(2) The Secretary of Homeland Security.
 ``(3) An Oil Spill Response Organization that serves the 
 area in which such Port is located.
 ``(4) The State.'';
 (2) in subsection (c)(1)--
 (A) in subparagraph (B) by adding ``and'' at the 
 end; and
 (B) by striking subparagraphs (C) and (D) and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(C) land use planning and development at Point 
 Spencer in support of the following activities within 
 the Bearing Sea, the Chukchi Sea, and the Arctic Ocean:
 ``(i) Search and rescue.
 ``(ii) Shipping safety.
 ``(iii) Economic development.
 ``(iv) Oil spill prevention and response.
 ``(v) National security.
 ``(vi) Major marine casualties.
 ``(vii) Protection of Alaska Native 
 archaeological and cultural resources.
 ``(viii) Port of refuge, arctic research, 
 and maritime law enforcement.'';
 (3) by amending subsection (c)(3) to read as follows:
 ``(3) Facilitate coordination among members of the Council 
 on the development and use of the land and coastline of Point 
 Spencer, as such development and use relate to activities of 
 the Council at the Port of Point Spencer.''; and
 (4) in subsection (e)--
 (A) by striking ``Operations and management costs'' 
 and inserting the following:
 ``(1) Determination of costs.--Operations and management 
 costs''; and
 (B) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(2) Funding.--To facilitate the mooring buoy system in 
 Port Clarence and to assist the Council in the development of 
 other oil spill prevention and response infrastructure, 
 including reactivating the airstrip at Point Spencer with 
 appropriate technology and safety equipment in support of 
 response operations, there is authorized to be made available 
 $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2023 through 2025 from the 
 interest generated from the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund.''.

SEC. 510. WESTERN ALASKA OIL SPILL PLANNING CRITERIA.

 (a) Western Alaska Oil Spill Planning Criteria.--Section 311(j)(5) 
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1321(j)(5)) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(J)(i) Except as provided in clause (iv) 
 (including with respect to Cook Inlet), in any case in 
 which the Secretary has determined that the national 
 planning criteria established pursuant to this 
 subsection are inappropriate for a vessel operating in 
 the area of responsibility of the Western Alaska 
 Captain of the Port Zone, a response plan required 
 under this paragraph with respect to a discharge of oil 
 for the vessel shall comply with the planning criteria 
 established under clause (ii), which planning criteria 
 shall, with respect to a discharge of oil from the 
 vessel, apply in lieu of any alternative planning 
 criteria approved for vessels operating in such area.
 ``(ii) The President shall establish planning 
 criteria for a worst case discharge of oil, and a 
 substantial threat of such a discharge, within the area 
 of responsibility of Western Alaska Captain of the Port 
 Zone, including planning criteria for the following:
 ``(I) Oil spill response resources that are 
 required to be located within such area.
 ``(II) Response times for mobilization of 
 oil spill response resources and arrival on the 
 scene of a worst case discharge of oil, or 
 substantial threat of such a discharge, 
 occurring within such area.
 ``(III) Pre-identified vessels for oil 
 spill response that are capable of operating in 
 the ocean environment and required to be 
 located within such area.
 ``(IV) Real-time continuous vessel 
 tracking, monitoring, and engagement protocols 
 that detect and address vessel operation 
 anomalies.
 ``(V) Vessel routing measures consistent 
 with international routing measure deviation 
 protocols.
 ``(VI) Ensuring the availability of at 
 least one oil spill removal organization that 
 is classified by the Coast Guard and that--
 ``(aa) is capable of responding in 
 all operating environments in such 
 area;
 ``(bb) controls oil spill response 
 resources of dedicated and nondedicated 
 resources within such area, through 
 ownership, contracts, agreements, or 
 other means approved by the President, 
 sufficient to mobilize and sustain a 
 response to a worst case discharge of 
 oil and to contain, recover, and 
 temporarily store discharged oil; and
 ``(cc) has pre-positioned oil spill 
 response resources in strategic 
 locations throughout such area in a 
 manner that ensures the ability to 
 support response personnel, marine 
 operations, air cargo, or other related 
 logistics infrastructure.
 ``(VII) Temporary storage capability using 
 both dedicated and non-dedicated assets located 
 within such area.
 ``(VIII) Non-mechanical oil spill response 
 resources, to be available under contracts, 
 agreements, or other means approved by the 
 President, capable of responding to both a 
 discharge of persistent oil and a discharge of 
 non-persistent oil, whether the discharged oil 
 was carried by a vessel as fuel or cargo.
 ``(IX) With respect to tank barges carrying 
 non-persistent oil in bulk as cargo, oil spill 
 response resources that are required to be 
 carried on board.
 ``(X) Ensuring that oil spill response 
 resources required to comply with this 
 subparagraph are separate from and in addition 
 to resources otherwise required to be included 
 in a response plan for purposes of compliance 
 with salvage and marine firefighting planning 
 requirements under this subsection.
 ``(XI) Specifying a minimum length of time 
 that approval of a response plan under this 
 subparagraph is valid.
 ``(XII) Ensuring compliance with 
 requirements for the preparation and submission 
 of vessel response plans established by 
 regulations pursuant to this paragraph.
 ``(iii) The President may approve a response plan 
 for a vessel under this subparagraph only if the owner 
 or operator of the vessel demonstrates the availability 
 of the oil spill response resources required to be 
 included in the response plan under the planning 
 criteria established under clause (ii).
 ``(iv) Nothing in this subparagraph affects--
 ``(I) the requirements under this 
 subsection applicable to vessel response plans 
 for vessels operating within the area of 
 responsibility of the Western Alaska Captain of 
 the Port Zone within Cook Inlet, Alaska;
 ``(II) the requirements applicable to tank 
 vessels operating within Prince William Sound 
 Captain of the Port Zone that are subject to 
 section 5005 of the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 
 (33 U.S.C. 2735); or
 ``(III) the authority of a Federal On-Scene 
 Coordinator to use any available resources when 
 responding to an oil spill.
 ``(v) The Secretary shall review any determination 
 that the national planning criteria are inappropriate 
 for a vessel operating in the area of responsibility of 
 Western Alaska Captain of the Port Zone not less 
 frequently than once every five years.
 ``(vi) For purposes of this subparagraph, the term 
 `Western Alaska Captain of the Port Zone' means the 
 area described in section 3.85-15 of title 33, Code of 
 Federal Regulations, as in effect on the date of 
 enactment of this subparagraph.''.
 (b) Establishment of Alaska Oil Spill Planning Criteria.--
 (1) Deadline.--Not later than 2 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the President shall establish the 
 planning criteria required to be established under subparagraph 
 (J) of section 311(j)(5) of the Federal Water Pollution Control 
 Act of (33 U.S.C. 1321(j)(5)), as added by this section.
 (2) Consultation.--In establishing such planning criteria, 
 the President shall consult with the State of Alaska, owners 
 and operators of vessels subject to such planning criteria, oil 
 spill removal organizations, Alaska Native organizations, and 
 environmental nongovernmental organizations located within the 
 State of Alaska.
 (3) Vessels in cook inlet.--Unless otherwise authorized by 
 the Secretary of the department in which the Coast Guard, a 
 vessel may only operate in Cook Inlet, Alaska, under a vessel 
 response plan that meets the requirements of the national 
 planning criteria established pursuant to section 311(j)(5) of 
 the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1321(j)(5)).
 (c) Congressional Report.--Not later than one year after the date 
of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the department in which the 
Coast Guard is operating shall submit to Congress a report regarding 
the status of implementing the requirements of subparagraph (J) of 
section 311(j)(5) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 
1321(j)(5)), as added by this section.

SEC. 511. NONAPPLICABILITY.

 Requirements under sections 3507(d), 3507(e), 3508, and 3509 of 
title 46, United States Code, shall not apply to the passenger vessel 
American Queen (U.S. Coast Guard Official Number 1030765) or any other 
passenger vessel--
 (1) on which construction identifiable with the specific 
 vessel begins prior to the date of enactment of this Act; and
 (2) to which sections 3507 and 3508 would otherwise apply 
 when such vessels are operating inside the boundary line.

SEC. 512. REPORT ON ENFORCEMENT OF COASTWISE LAWS.

 The Commandant of the Coast Guard shall submit to Congress a report 
describing any changes to the enforcement of chapters 121 and 551 of 
title 46, United States Code, as a result of the amendments to section 
4(a)(1) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1333(a)(1)) 
made by section 9503 of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National 
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public Law 116-283).

SEC. 513. LAND CONVEYANCE, SHARPE ARMY DEPOT, LATHROP, CALIFORNIA.

 Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
Administrator of the Maritime Administration shall complete the land 
conveyance required under section 2833 of the William M. (Mac) 
Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 
(Public Law 116-283).

SEC. 514. CENTER OF EXPERTISE FOR MARINE ENVIRONMENTAL RESPONSE.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Commandant of the Coast Guard, in consultation with 
the Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration, shall establish a Center of Expertise for Marine 
Environmental Response (referred to in this section as the ``Center of 
Expertise'') in accordance with section 313 of title 14, United States 
Code.
 (b) Location.--The Center of Expertise shall be located in close 
proximity to--
 (1) an area of the country with quick access to State, 
 Federal, and international waters, port and marine 
 environments, coastal and estuary environments, and the 
 intercoastal waterway;
 (2) multiple Coast Guard sea and air stations;
 (3) multiple Federal agencies that are engaged in coastal 
 and fisheries management;
 (4) one or more designated national estuaries;
 (5) State coastal and wildlife management agencies; and
 (6) an institution of higher education with adequate marine 
 science search laboratory facilities and capabilities and 
 expertise in coastal marine ecology, ecosystems, environmental 
 chemistry, fish and wildlife management, coastal mapping, water 
 resources, and marine technology development.
 (c) Functions.--The Center of Expertise shall--
 (1) monitor and assess, on an ongoing basis, the state of 
 knowledge regarding training, education, and technology 
 development for marine environmental response protocols in 
 State, Federal, and international waters, port and marine 
 environments, coastal and estuary environments, and the 
 intercoastal waterway;
 (2) identify any significant gaps in research related to 
 marine environmental response protocols, including an 
 assessment of major scientific or technological deficiencies in 
 responses to past incidents in these waterways that are 
 interconnected, and seek to fill such gaps;
 (3) conduct research, development, testing, and evaluation 
 for marine environmental response equipment, technologies, and 
 techniques to mitigate and respond to environmental incidents 
 in these waterways;
 (4) educate and train Federal, State, and local first 
 responders in--
 (A) the incident command system structure;
 (B) marine environmental response techniques and 
 strategies; and
 (C) public affairs; and
 (5) work with academic and private sector response training 
 centers to develop and standardize marine environmental 
 response training and techniques.
 (d) Marine Environmental Response Defined.--In this section, the 
term ``marine environmental response'' means any response to incidents 
that--
 (1) impacts--
 (A) the marine environment of State, Federal or 
 international waterways;
 (B) port and marine environments;
 (C) coastal and estuary environments; or
 (D) the intercoastal waterway; and
 (2) promotes--
 (A) the protection and conservation of the marine 
 environment;
 (B) the health of fish, animal populations, and 
 endangered species; and
 (C) the resilience of coastal ecosystems and 
 infrastructure.

SEC. 515. PROHIBITION ON ENTRY AND OPERATION.

 (a) Prohibition.--
 (1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this 
 section, during the period in which Executive Order 14065 (87 
 Fed. Reg. 10293, relating to blocking certain Russian property 
 or transactions), or any successor Executive Order is in 
 effect, no vessel described in subsection (b) may enter or 
 operate in the navigable waters of the United States or 
 transfer cargo in any port or place under the jurisdiction of 
 the United States.
 (2) Limitations on application.----
 (A) In general.--The prohibition under paragraph 
 (1) shall not apply with respect to vessel described in 
 subsection (b) if the Secretary of State determines 
 that--
 (i) the vessel is owned or operated by a 
 Russian national or operated by the government 
 of the Russian Federation; and
 (ii) it is in the national security 
 interest not to apply the prohibition to such 
 vessel.
 (B) Notice.--Not later than 15 days after making a 
 determination under subparagraph (A), the Secretary of 
 State shall submit to the Committee on Foreign Affairs 
 and the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure 
 of the House of Representatives and the Committee on 
 Foreign Relations and the Committee on Commerce, 
 Science, and Transportation of the Senate written 
 notice of the determination and the basis upon which 
 the determination was made.
 (C) Publication.--The Secretary of State shall 
 publish a notice in the Federal Register of each 
 determination made under subparagraph (A).
 (b) Vessels Described.--A vessel referred to in subsection (a) is a 
vessel owned or operated by a Russian national or operated by the 
government of the Russian Federation.
 (c) Information and Publication.--The Secretary of the department 
in which the Coast Guard is operating, with the concurrence of the 
Secretary of State, shall--
 (1) maintain timely information on the registrations of all 
 foreign vessels owned or operated by or on behalf of the 
 Government of the Russian Federation, a Russian national, or a 
 entity organized under the laws of the Russian Federation or 
 any jurisdiction within the Russian Federation; and
 (2) periodically publish in the Federal Register a list of 
 the vessels described in paragraph (1).
 (d) Notification of Governments.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of State shall notify each 
 government, the agents or instrumentalities of which are 
 maintaining a registration of a foreign vessel that is included 
 on a list published under subsection (c)(2), not later than 30 
 days after such publication, that all vessels registered under 
 such government's authority are subject to subsection (a).
 (2) Additional notification.--In the case of a government 
 that continues to maintain a registration for a vessel that is 
 included on such list after receiving an initial notification 
 under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall issue an additional 
 notification to such government not later than 120 days after 
 the publication of a list under subsection (c)(2).
 (e) Notification of Vessels.--Upon receiving a notice of arrival 
under section 70001(a)(5) of title 46, United States Code, from a 
vessel described in subsection (b), the Secretary of the department in 
which the Coast Guard is operating shall notify the master of such 
vessel that the vessel may not enter or operate in the navigable waters 
of the United States or transfer cargo in any port or place under the 
jurisdiction of the United States, unless--
 (1) the Secretary of State has made a determination under 
 subsection (a)(2); or
 (2) the Secretary of the department in which the Coast 
 Guard is operating allows provisional entry of the vessel, or 
 transfer of cargo from the vessel, under subsection (f).
 (f) Provisional Entry or Cargo Transfer.--Notwithstanding any other 
provision of this section, the Secretary of the department in which the 
Coast Guard is operating may allow provisional entry of, or transfer of 
cargo from, a vessel, if such entry or transfer is necessary for the 
safety of the vessel or persons aboard.

SEC. 516. ST. LUCIE RIVER RAILROAD BRIDGE.

 The Commandant of the Coast Guard shall take such actions as are 
necessary to implement any recommendations for the St. Lucie River 
railroad bridge made by the Coast Guard in the document titled 
``Waterways Analysis and Management System for Intracoastal Waterway 
Miles 925-1005 (WAMS #07301)'' published by Coast Guard Sector Miami in 
2018.

SEC. 517. ASSISTANCE RELATED TO MARINE MAMMALS.

 (a) Maritime Environmental and Technical Assistance Program.--
Section 50307(b) of title 46, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(D) by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in paragraph (2) by striking the period and insert ``; 
 and''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) technologies that quantifiably reduce underwater 
 noise from marine vessels, including noise produced incidental 
 to the propulsion of marine vessels.''.
 (b) Assistance to Reduce Impacts of Vessel Strikes and Noise on 
Marine Mammals.--
 (1) In general.--Chapter 541 of title 46, United States 
 Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 54102. Assistance to reduce impacts of vessel strikes and noise 
 on marine mammals
 ``(a) In General.--The Administrator of the Maritime 
Administration, in coordination with the Secretary of the department in 
which the Coast Guard is operating, may make grants to, or enter into 
contracts or cooperative agreements with, academic, public, private, 
and nongovernmental entities to develop and implement mitigation 
measures that will lead to a quantifiable reduction in--
 ``(1) impacts to marine mammals from vessels; and
 ``(2) underwater noise from vessels, including noise 
 produced incidental to the propulsion of vessels.
 ``(b) Eligible Use.--Assistance under this section may be used to 
develop, assess, and carry out activities that reduce threats to marine 
mammals by--
 ``(1) reducing--
 ``(A) stressors related to vessel traffic; and
 ``(B) vessel strike mortality, and serious injury; 
 or
 ``(2) monitoring--
 ``(A) sound; and
 ``(B) vessel interactions with marine mammals.
 ``(c) Priority.--The Administrator shall prioritize assistance 
under this section for projects that--
 ``(1) is based on the best available science on methods to 
 reduce threats related to vessels traffic;
 ``(2) collect data on the reduction of such threats;
 ``(3) reduce--
 ``(A) disturbances from vessel presence;
 ``(B) mortality risk; or
 ``(C) serious injury from vessel strikes; or
 ``(4) conduct risk assessments, or tracks progress toward 
 threat reduction.
 ``(d) Briefing.--The Administrator shall provide to the Committee 
on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives, 
and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the 
Senate, an annual briefing that includes the following:
 ``(1) The name and location of each entity receiving a 
 grant under this section.
 ``(2) The amount of each such grant.
 ``(3) A description of the activities carried out with 
 assistance provided under this section.
 ``(4) An estimate of the impact that a project carried out 
 with such assistance has on the reduction of threats to marine 
 mammals.
 ``(e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to the Administrator to carry out this section $10,000,000 
for each of fiscal years 2022 through 2026, to remain available until 
expended.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The analysis for chapter 541 of 
 title 46, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end 
 the following:

``54102. Assistance to reduce impacts of vessel strikes and noise on 
 marine mammals.''.
 (c) Near Real-time Monitoring and Mitigation Program for Large 
Whales.--
 (1) In general.--Part of A of subtitle V of title 46, 
 United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the 
 following:

 ``CHAPTER 507--MONITORING AND MITIGATION

``Sec.
``50701. Near real-time monitoring and mitigation program for large 
 whales.
``50702. Pilot project.
``Sec. 50701. Near real-time monitoring and mitigation program for 
 large whales
 ``(a) Establishment.--The Administrator of the Maritime 
Administration, in consultation with the Commandant of the Coast Guard, 
shall design and deploy a near real-time large whale monitoring and 
mitigation program (in this section referred to as the Program) 
informed by the technologies, monitoring methods, and mitigation 
protocols developed pursuant to the pilot program required under 
section 50702.
 ``(b) Purpose.--The purpose of the Program will be to reduce the 
risk to large whales of vessel collisions and to minimize other 
impacts.
 ``(c) Requirements.--In designing and deploying the Program, the 
Administrator shall--
 ``(1) prioritize species of large whales for which vessel 
 collision impacts are of particular concern;
 ``(2) prioritize areas where such vessel impacts are of 
 particular concern;
 ``(3) develop technologies capable of detecting and 
 alerting individuals and enforcement agencies of the probable 
 location of large whales on a near real-time basis, to include 
 real time data whenever possible;
 ``(4) inform sector-specific mitigation protocols to 
 effectively reduce takes of large whales; and
 ``(5) integrate technology improvements as such 
 improvements become available.
 ``(d) Authority.--The Administrator may make grants or enter into 
and contracts, leases, or cooperative agreements as may be necessary to 
carry out the purposes of this section on such terms as the 
Administrator considers appropriate, consistent with Federal 
acquisition regulations.
``Sec. 50702. Pilot project
 ``(a) Establishment.--The Administrator of the Maritime 
Administration shall carry out a pilot monitoring and mitigation 
project for North Atlantic right whales (in this section referred to as 
the `Pilot Program') for purposes of informing a cost-effective, 
efficient, and results-oriented near real-time monitoring and 
mitigation program for large whales under 50701.
 ``(b) Pilot Project Requirements.--In carrying out the pilot 
program, the Administrator, in coordination with the Commandant of the 
Coast Guard, using best available scientific information, shall 
identify and ensure coverage of--
 ``(1) core foraging habitats of North Atlantic right 
 whales, including--
 ``(A) the South of the Islands core foraging 
 habitat;
 ``(B) the Cape Cod Bay Area core foraging habitat;
 ``(C) the Great South Channel core foraging 
 habitat; and
 ``(D) the Gulf of Maine; and
 ``(2) important feeding, breeding, calving, rearing, or 
 migratory habitats of North Atlantic right whales that co-occur 
 with areas of high risk of mortality, serious injury, or other 
 impacts to such whales, including from vessels or vessel 
 strikes.
 ``(c) Pilot Project Components.--
 ``(1) In general.--Not later than 3 years after the date of 
 enactment of the Don Young Coast Guard Authorization Act of 
 2022, the Administrator, in consultation with the Commandant, 
 Tribal governments, and with input from affected stakeholders, 
 shall design and deploy a near real-time monitoring system for 
 North Atlantic right whales that--
 ``(A) comprises the best available detection and 
 survey technologies to detect North Atlantic right 
 whales within core foraging habitats;
 ``(B) uses dynamic habitat suitability models to 
 inform the likelihood of North Atlantic right whale 
 occurrence in core foraging habitat at any given time;
 ``(C) coordinates with the Integrated Ocean 
 Observing System and Coast Guard vessel traffic service 
 centers, and may coordinate with Regional Ocean 
 Partnerships to leverage monitoring assets;
 ``(D) integrates historical data;
 ``(E) integrates new near real-time monitoring 
 methods and technologies as they become available;
 ``(F) accurately verifies and rapidly communicates 
 detection data;
 ``(G) creates standards for allowing ocean users to 
 contribute data to the monitoring system using 
 comparable near real-time monitoring methods and 
 technologies; and
 ``(H) communicates the risks of injury to large 
 whales to ocean users in a way that is most likely to 
 result in informed decision making regarding the 
 mitigation of those risks.
 ``(2) National security considerations.--All monitoring 
 methods, technologies, and protocols under this section shall 
 be consistent with national security considerations and 
 interests.
 ``(3) Access to data.--The Administrator shall provide 
 access to data generated by the monitoring system deployed 
 under paragraph (1) for purposes of scientific research and 
 evaluation, and public awareness and education, including 
 through the NOAA Right Whale Sighting Advisory System and 
 WhaleMap or other successive public web portals, subject to 
 review for national security considerations.
 ``(d) Mitigation Protocols.--The Administrator, in consultation 
with the Commandant, and with input from affected stakeholders, develop 
and deploy mitigation protocols that make use of the near real-time 
monitoring system deployed under subsection (c) to direct sector-
specific mitigation measures that avoid and significantly reduce risk 
of serious injury and mortality to North Atlantic right whales.
 ``(e) Reporting.--
 ``(1) Preliminary report.--Not later than 2 years after the 
 date of the enactment of the Don Young Coast Guard 
 Authorization Act of 2022, the Administrator, in consultation 
 with the Commandant, shall submit to the appropriate 
 Congressional Committees and make available to the public a 
 preliminary report which shall include--
 ``(A) a description of the monitoring methods and 
 technology in use or planned for deployment;
 ``(B) analyses of the efficacy of the methods and 
 technology in use or planned for deployment for 
 detecting North Atlantic right whales;
 ``(C) how the monitoring system is directly 
 informing and improving North American right whale 
 management, health, and survival;
 ``(D) a prioritized identification of technology or 
 research gaps;
 ``(E) a plan to communicate the risks of injury to 
 large whales to ocean users in a way that is most 
 likely to result in informed decision making regarding 
 the mitigation of those risks; and
 ``(F) additional information, as appropriate.
 ``(2) Final report.--Not later than 6 years after the date 
 of the enactment of the Don Young Coast Guard Authorization Act 
 of 2022, the Administrator, in consultation with the 
 Commandant, shall submit to the appropriate congressional 
 committees and make available to the public a final report, 
 addressing the components in subparagraph (A) and including--
 ``(A) an assessment of the benefits and efficacy of 
 the near real-time monitoring and mitigation program;
 ``(B) a strategic plan to expand the pilot program 
 to provide near real-time monitoring and mitigation 
 measures;
 ``(i) to additional large whale species of 
 concern for which such measures would reduce 
 risk of serious injury or death; and
 ``(ii) in important feeding, breeding, 
 calving, rearing, or migratory habitats of 
 whales that co-occur with areas of high risk of 
 mortality or serious injury of such whales from 
 vessel strikes or disturbance;
 ``(C) a prioritized plan for acquisition, 
 deployment, and maintenance of monitoring technologies;
 ``(D) the locations or species for which the plan 
 would apply; and
 ``(E) a budget and description of funds necessary 
 to carry out the strategic plan.
 ``(f) Additional Authority.--The Administrator may make grants 
enter into contracts, leases, or cooperative agreements as may be 
necessary to carry out the purposes of this section on such terms as 
the Administrator considers appropriate, consistent with Federal 
acquisition regulations.
 ``(g) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to the Administrator to carry out this section $17,000,000 
for each of fiscal years 2022 through 2026.
 ``(h) Definitions.--In this section and section 50701:
 ``(1) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term 
 `appropriate congressional committees' means the Committee 
 Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of 
 Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
 Transportation of the Senate.
 ``(2) Core foraging habitats.--The term `core foraging 
 habitats' means areas with biological and physical 
 oceanographic features that aggregate Calanus finmarchicus and 
 where North Atlantic right whales foraging aggregations have 
 been well documented.
 ``(3) Near real-time.--The term `near real-time' means 
 detected activity that is visual, acoustic, or in any other 
 form, of North Atlantic right whales that are transmitted and 
 reported as soon as technically feasible after such detected 
 activity has occurred.
 ``(4) Large whale.--The term `large whale' means all 
 Mysticeti species and species within the genera Physeter and 
 Orcinus.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of chapters for subtitle 
 V of title 46, United States Code is amended by adding after 
 the item related to chapter 505 the following:

``507. Monitoring and Mitigation............................ 50701''.

SEC. 518. MANNING AND CREWING REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN VESSELS, 
 VEHICLES, AND STRUCTURES.

 (a) Authorization of Limited Exemptions From Manning and Crew 
Requirement.--Chapter 81 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 8108. Exemptions from manning and crew requirements
 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary may provide an exemption described 
in subsection (b) to the owner or operator of a covered facility if 
each individual who is manning or crewing the covered facility is--
 ``(1) a citizen of the United States;
 ``(2) an alien lawfully admitted to the United States for 
 permanent residence; or
 ``(3) a citizen of the nation under the laws of which the 
 vessel is documented.
 ``(b) Requirements for Eligibility for Exemption.--An exemption 
under this subsection is an exemption from the regulations established 
pursuant to section 30(a)(3) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act 
(43 U.S.C. 1356(a)(3)).
 ``(c) Limitations.--An exemption under this section--
 ``(1) shall provide that the number of individuals manning 
 or crewing the covered facility who are described in paragraphs 
 (2) and (3) of subsection (a) may not exceed two and one- half 
 times the number of individuals required to man or crew the 
 covered facility under the laws of the nation under the laws of 
 which the covered facility is documented; and
 ``(2) shall be effective for not more than 12 months, but 
 may be renewed by application to and approval by the Secretary.
 ``(d) Application.--To be eligible for an exemption or a renewal of 
an exemption under this section, the owner or operator of a covered 
facility shall apply to the Secretary with an application that includes 
a sworn statement by the applicant of all information required for the 
issuance of the exemption.
 ``(e) Revocation.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary--
 ``(A) may revoke an exemption for a covered 
 facility under this section if the Secretary determines 
 that information provided in the application for the 
 exemption was false or incomplete, or is no longer true 
 or complete; and
 ``(B) shall immediately revoke such an exemption if 
 the Secretary determines that the covered facility, in 
 the effective period of the exemption, was manned or 
 crewed in a manner not authorized by the exemption.
 ``(2) Notice required.--The Secretary shall provides notice 
 of a determination under subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph 
 (1) to the owner or operator of the covered facility.
 ``(f) Review of Compliance.--The Secretary shall periodically, but 
not less than once annually, inspect each covered facility that 
operates under an exemption under this section to verify the owner or 
operator of the covered facility's compliance with the exemption. 
During an inspection under this subsection, the Secretary shall require 
all crew members serving under the exemption to hold a valid 
transportation security card issued under section 70105.
 ``(g) Penalty.--In addition to revocation under subsection (e), the 
Secretary may impose on the owner or operator of a covered facility a 
civil penalty of $10,000 per day for each day the covered facility--
 ``(1) is manned or crewed in violation of an exemption 
 under this subsection; or
 ``(2) operated under an exemption under this subsection 
 that the Secretary determines was not validly obtained.
 ``(h) Notification of Secretary of State.--The Secretary shall 
notify the Secretary of State of each exemption issued under this 
section, including the effective period of the exemption.
 ``(i) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Covered facility.--The term `covered facility' means 
 any vessel, rig, platform, or other vehicle or structure, over 
 50 percent of which is owned by citizens of a foreign nation or 
 with respect to which the citizens of a foreign nation have the 
 right effectively to control, except to the extent and to the 
 degree that the President determines that the government of 
 such foreign nation or any of its political subdivisions has 
 implemented, by statute, regulation, policy, or practice, a 
 national manning requirement for equipment engaged in the 
 exploring for, developing, or producing resources, including 
 non-mineral energy resources in its offshore areas.
 ``(2) Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the Secretary 
 of the department in which the Coast Guard is operating.''.
 (b) Annual Report.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary 
 shall submit to Congress a report containing information on 
 each letter of nonapplicability of section 8109 of title 46, 
 United States Code, with respect to a covered facility that was 
 issued by the Secretary during the preceding year.
 (2) Contents.--The report under paragraph (1) shall 
 include, for each covered facility--
 (A) the name and International Maritime 
 Organization number;
 (B) the nation in which the covered facility is 
 documented;
 (C) the nationality of owner or owners; and
 (D) for any covered facility that was previously 
 issued a letter of nonapplicability in a prior year, 
 any changes in the information described in 
 subparagraphs (A) through (C).
 (c) Regulations.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations that 
specify the documentary and other requirements for the issuance of an 
exemption under the amendment made by this section.
 (d) Existing Exemptions.--
 (1) Effect of amendments; termination.--Each exemption 
 under section 30(c)(2) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act 
 (43 U.S.C. 1356(c)(2)) issued before the date of the enactment 
 of this Act--
 (A) shall not be affected by the amendments made by 
 this section during the 120-day period beginning on the 
 date of the enactment of this Act; and
 (B) shall not be effective after such period.
 (2) Notification of holders.--Not later than 60 days after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall 
 notify all persons that hold such an exemption that it will 
 expire as provided in paragraph (1).
 (e) Clerical Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 81 of the title 
46, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:

``8108. Exemptions from manning and crew requirements.''.

 TITLE VI--SEXUAL ASSAULT AND SEXUAL HARASSMENT PREVENTION AND RESPONSE

SEC. 601. DEFINITIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 2101 of title 46, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraphs (45) through (54) as 
 paragraphs (47) through (56), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after paragraph (44) the following:
 ``(45) `sexual assault' means any form of abuse or contact 
 as defined in chapter 109A of title 18, or a substantially 
 similar State, local, or Tribal offense.
 ``(46) `sexual harassment' means--
 ``(A) conduct that--
 ``(i) involves unwelcome sexual advances, 
 requests for sexual favors, or deliberate or 
 repeated offensive comments or gestures of a 
 sexual nature if any--
 ``(I) submission to such conduct is 
 made either explicitly or implicitly a 
 term or condition of employment, pay, 
 career, benefits, or entitlements of 
 the individual;
 ``(II) submission to, or rejection, 
 of such conduct by an individual is 
 used as a basis for decisions affecting 
 that individual's job, pay, career, 
 benefits, or entitlements;
 ``(III) such conduct has the 
 purpose or effect of unreasonably 
 interfering with an individual's work 
 performance or creates an intimidating, 
 hostile, or offensive work environment; 
 or
 ``(IV) conduct may have been by an 
 individual's supervisor, a supervisor 
 in another area, a co-worker, or 
 another credentialed mariner; and
 ``(ii) is so severe or pervasive that a 
 reasonable person would perceive, and the 
 victim does perceive, the environment as 
 hostile or offensive;
 ``(B) any use or condonation associated with first-
 hand or personal knowledge, by any individual in a 
 supervisory or command position, of any form of sexual 
 behavior to control, influence, or affect the career, 
 pay, benefits, entitlements, or employment of a 
 subordinate; and
 ``(C) any deliberate or repeated unwelcome verbal 
 comment or gesture of a sexual nature by any fellow 
 employee of the complainant.''.
 (b) Report.--The Commandant of the Coast Guard shall submit to the 
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of 
Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation of the Senate a report describing any changes the 
Commandant may propose to the definitions added by the amendments in 
subsection (a).

SEC. 602. CONVICTED SEX OFFENDER AS GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 75 of title 46, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 7511. Convicted sex offender as grounds for denial
 ``(a) Sexual Abuse.--A license, certificate of registry, or 
merchant mariner's document authorized to be issued under this part 
shall be denied to an individual who has been convicted of a sexual 
offense prohibited under chapter 109A of title 18, except for 
subsection (b) of section 2244 of title 18, or a substantially similar 
State, local, or Tribal offense.
 ``(b) Abusive Sexual Contact.--A license, certificate of registry, 
or merchant mariner's document authorized to be issued under this part 
may be denied to an individual who within 5 years before applying for 
the license, certificate, or document, has been convicted of a sexual 
offense prohibited under subsection (b) of section 2244 of title 18, or 
a substantially similar State, local, or Tribal offense.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 75 of title 46, 
United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:

``7511. Convicted sex offender as grounds for denial.''.

SEC. 603. SEXUAL HARASSMENT OR SEXUAL ASSAULT AS GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION 
 OR REVOCATION.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 77 of title 46, United States Code, is 
amended by inserting after section 7704 the following:
``Sec. 7704a. Sexual harassment or sexual assault as grounds for 
 suspension or revocation
 ``(a) Sexual Harassment.--If it is shown at a hearing under this 
chapter that a holder of a license, certificate of registry, or 
merchant mariner's document issued under this part, within 5 years 
before the beginning of the suspension and revocation proceedings, is 
the subject of an official finding of sexual harassment, then the 
license, certificate of registry, or merchant mariner's document may be 
suspended or revoked.
 ``(b) Sexual Assault.--If it is shown at a hearing under this 
chapter that a holder of a license, certificate of registry, or 
merchant mariner's document issued under this part, within 10 years 
before the beginning of the suspension and revocation proceedings, is 
the subject of an official finding of sexual assault, then the license, 
certificate of registry, or merchant mariner's document shall be 
revoked.
 ``(c) Official Finding.--
 ``(1) In general.--In this section, the term `official 
 finding' means--
 ``(A) a legal proceeding or agency finding or 
 decision that determines the individual committed 
 sexual harassment or sexual assault in violation of any 
 Federal, State, local, or Tribal law or regulation; or
 ``(B) a determination after an investigation by the 
 Coast Guard that, by a preponderance of the evidence, 
 the individual committed sexual harassment or sexual 
 assault if the investigation affords appropriate due 
 process rights to the subject of the investigation.
 ``(2) Investigation by the coast guard.--An investigation 
 by the Coast Guard under paragraph (1)(B) shall include, at a 
 minimum, evaluation of the following materials that, upon 
 request, shall be provided to the Coast Guard:
 ``(A) Any inquiry or determination made by the 
 employer or former employer of the individual as to 
 whether the individual committed sexual harassment or 
 sexual assault.
 ``(B) Any investigative materials, documents, 
 records, or files in the possession of an employer or 
 former employer of the individual that are related to 
 the claim of sexual harassment or sexual assault by the 
 individual.
 ``(3) Administrative law judge review.--
 ``(A) Coast guard investigation.--A determination 
 under paragraph (1)(B) shall be reviewed and affirmed 
 by an administrative law judge within the same 
 proceeding as any suspension or revocation of a 
 license, certificate of registry, or merchant mariner's 
 document under subsection (a) or (b).
 ``(B) Legal proceeding.--A determination under 
 paragraph (1)(A) that an individual committed sexual 
 harassment or sexual assault is conclusive in 
 suspension and revocation proceedings.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The chapter analysis of chapter 77 of 
title 46, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item 
relating to section 7704 the following:

``7704a. Sexual harassment or sexual assault as grounds for suspension 
 or revocation.''.

SEC. 604. ACCOMMODATION; NOTICES.

 Section 11101 of title 46, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(3), by striking ``and'' at the end;
 (2) in subsection (a)(4), by striking the period at the end 
 and inserting ``; and'';
 (3) in subsection (a), by adding at the end the following:
 ``(5) each crew berthing area shall be equipped with 
 information regarding--
 ``(A) vessel owner or company policies prohibiting 
 sexual assault and sexual harassment, retaliation, and 
 drug and alcohol usage; and
 ``(B) procedures and resources to report crimes, 
 including sexual assault and sexual harassment, 
 including information--
 ``(i) on the contact information, website 
 address, and mobile application to the Coast 
 Guard Investigative Services for reporting of 
 crimes and the Coast Guard National Command 
 Center;
 ``(ii) on vessel owner or company 
 procedures to report violations of company 
 policy and access resources;
 ``(iii) on resources provided by outside 
 organizations such as sexual assault hotlines 
 and counseling;
 ``(iv) on the retention period for 
 surveillance video recording after an incident 
 of sexual harassment or sexual assault is 
 reported; and
 ``(v) additional items specified in 
 regulations issued by, and at the discretion 
 of, the Secretary of the department in which 
 the Coast Guard is operating.''; and
 (4) in subsection (d), by adding at the end the following: 
 ``In each washing space in a visible location there shall be 
 information regarding procedures and resources to report crimes 
 upon the vessel, including sexual assault and sexual 
 harassment, and vessel owner or company policies prohibiting 
 sexual assault and sexual harassment, retaliation, and drug and 
 alcohol usage.''.

SEC. 605. PROTECTION AGAINST DISCRIMINATION.

 Section 2114(a)(1) of title 46, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (B) through (G) as 
 subparagraphs (C) through (H), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following:
 ``(B) the seaman in good faith has reported or is about to 
 report to the vessel owner, Coast Guard or other appropriate 
 Federal agency or department sexual harassment or sexual 
 assault against the seaman or knowledge of sexual harassment or 
 sexual assault against another seaman;''.

SEC. 606. ALCOHOL PROHIBITION.

 (a) Regulations.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the department in which 
 the Coast Guard is operating shall, taking into account the 
 safety and security of every individual on documented vessels, 
 issue such regulations as are necessary relating to alcohol 
 consumption on documented vessels, according to the following 
 requirements:
 (A) The Secretary shall determine safe levels of 
 alcohol consumption by crewmembers aboard documented 
 vessels engaged in commercial service.
 (B) If the Secretary determines there is no alcohol 
 policy that can be implemented to ensure a safe 
 environment for crew and passengers, the Secretary 
 shall implement a prohibition on possession and 
 consumption of alcohol by crewmembers while aboard a 
 vessel, except when possession is associated with the 
 commercial sale or gift to non-crew members aboard the 
 vessel.
 (C) To the extent a policy establishes safe levels 
 of alcohol consumption in accordance with subparagraph 
 (A), such policy shall not supersede a vessel owner's 
 discretion to further limit or prohibit alcohol on its 
 vessels.
 (2) Immunity from civil liability.--Any crewmember who 
 reports an incident of sexual assault or sexual harassment that 
 is directly related to a violation of the regulations issued 
 under paragraph (1) is immune from civil liability for any 
 related violation of such regulations.

SEC. 607. SURVEILLANCE REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) In General.--Part B of subtitle II of title 46, United States 
Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:

 ``CHAPTER 49--OCEANGOING NON-PASSENGER COMMERCIAL VESSELS

``Sec.
``4901. Surveillance requirements.
``Sec. 4901. Surveillance requirements
 ``(a) In General.--A vessel engaged in commercial service that does 
not carry passengers, shall maintain a video surveillance system.
 ``(b) Applicability.--The requirements in this section shall apply 
to--
 ``(1) documented vessels with overnight accommodations for 
 at least 10 persons on board--
 ``(A) is on a voyage of at least 600 miles and 
 crosses seaward of the Boundary Line; or
 ``(B) is at least 24 meters (79 feet) in overall 
 length and required to have a load line under chapter 
 51;
 ``(2) documented vessels of at least 500 gross tons as 
 measured under section 14502, or an alternate tonnage measured 
 under section 14302 as prescribed by the Secretary under 
 section 14104 on an international voyage; and
 ``(3) vessels with overnight accommodations for at least 10 
 persons on board that are operating for no less than 72 hours 
 on waters superjacent to the Outer Continental Shelf.
 ``(c) Placement of Video and Audio Surveillance Equipment.--
 ``(1) In general.--The owner of a vessel to which this 
 section applies shall install video and audio surveillance 
 equipment aboard the vessel not later than 2 years after 
 enactment of the Don Young Coast Guard Authorization Act of 
 2022, or during the next scheduled drydock, whichever is later.
 ``(2) Locations.--Video and audio surveillance equipment 
 shall be placed in passageways on to which doors from 
 staterooms open. Such equipment shall be placed in a manner 
 ensuring the visibility of every door in each such passageway.
 ``(d) Notice of Video and Audio Surveillance.--The owner of a 
vessel to which this section applies shall provide clear and 
conspicuous signs on board the vessel notifying the crew of the 
presence of video and audio surveillance equipment.
 ``(e) Access to Video and Audio Records.--
 ``(1) In general.--The owner of a vessel to which this 
 section applies shall provide to any Federal, state, or other 
 law enforcement official performing official duties in the 
 course and scope of a criminal or marine safety investigation, 
 upon request, a copy of all records of video and audio 
 surveillance that the official believes is relevant to the 
 investigation.
 ``(2) Civil actions.--Except as proscribed by law 
 enforcement authorities or court order, the owner of a vessel 
 to which this section applies shall, upon written request, 
 provide to any individual or the individual's legal 
 representative a copy of all records of video and audio 
 surveillance--
 ``(A) in which the individual is a subject of the 
 video and audio surveillance;
 ``(B) the request is in conjunction with a legal 
 proceeding or investigation; and
 ``(C) that may provide evidence of any sexual 
 harassment or sexual assault incident in a civil 
 action.
 ``(3) Limited access.--The owner of a vessel to which this 
 section applies shall ensure that access to records of video 
 and audio surveillance is limited to the purposes described in 
 this paragraph and not used as part of a labor action against a 
 crew member or employment dispute unless used in a criminal or 
 civil action.
 ``(f) Retention Requirements.--The owner of a vessel to which this 
section applies shall retain all records of audio and video 
surveillance for not less than 150 days after the footage is obtained. 
Any video and audio surveillance found to be associated with an alleged 
incident should be preserved for not less than 4 years from the date of 
the alleged incident. The Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Coast 
Guard are authorized access to all records of video and audio 
surveillance relevant to an investigation into criminal conduct.
 ``(g) Definition.--In this section, the term `owner' means the 
owner, charterer, managing operator, master, or other individual in 
charge of a vessel.
 ``(h) Exemption.--Fishing vessels, fish processing vessels, and 
fish tender vessels are exempt from this section.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters for subtitle II of 
title 46, United States Code, is amended by adding after the item 
related to chapter 47 the following:

``49. Oceangoing Non-Passenger Commercial Vessels........... 4901''.

SEC. 608. MASTER KEY CONTROL.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 31 of title 46, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 3106. Master key control system
 ``(a) In General.--The owner of a vessel subject to inspection 
under section 3301 shall--
 ``(1) ensure that such vessel is equipped with a vessel 
 master key control system, manual or electronic, which provides 
 controlled access to all copies of the vessel's master key of 
 which access shall only be available to the individuals 
 described in paragraph (2);
 ``(2) establish a list of all crew, identified by position, 
 allowed to access and use the master key and maintain such list 
 upon the vessel, within owner records and included in the 
 vessel safety management system;
 ``(3) record in a log book information on all access and 
 use of the vessel's master key, including--
 ``(A) dates and times of access;
 ``(B) the room or location accessed; and
 ``(C) the name and rank of the crew member that 
 used the master key; and
 ``(4) make the list under paragraph (2) and the log book 
 under paragraph (3) available upon request to any agent of the 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation, any member of the Coast Guard, 
 and any law enforcement officer performing official duties in 
 the course and scope of an investigation.
 ``(b) Prohibited Use.--Crew not included on the list described in 
subsection (a)(2) shall not have access to or use the master key unless 
in an emergency and shall immediately notify the master and owner of 
the vessel following use of such key.
 ``(c) Requirements for Log Book.--The log book described in 
subsection (a)(3) and required to be included in a safety management 
system under section 3203(a)(6)--
 ``(1) may be electronic; and
 ``(2) shall be located in a centralized location that is 
 readily accessible to law enforcement personnel.
 ``(d) Penalty.--Any crew member who uses the master key without 
having been granted access pursuant to subsection (a)(2) shall be 
liable to the United States Government for a civil penalty of not more 
than $1,000 and may be subject to suspension or revocation under 
section 7703.
 ``(e) Exemption.--This section shall not apply to vessels subject 
to section 3507(f).''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 31 of title 46, 
United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following:

``3106. Master key control system.''.

SEC. 609. SAFETY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS.

 Section 3203 of title 46, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by redesignating paragraphs (5) and (6) as 
 paragraphs (7) and (8); and
 (B) by inserting after paragraph (4) the following:
 ``(5) with respect to sexual harassment and sexual assault, 
 procedures for, and annual training requirements for all 
 shipboard personnel on--
 ``(A) prevention;
 ``(B) bystander intervention;
 ``(C) reporting;
 ``(D) response; and
 ``(E) investigation;
 ``(6) the log book required under section 3106;'';
 (2) by redesignating subsections (b) and (c) as subsections 
 (c) and (d), respectively; and
 (3) by inserting after subsection (a) the following:
 ``(b) Procedures and Training Requirements.--In prescribing 
regulations for the procedures and training requirements described in 
subsection (a)(5), such procedures and requirements shall be consistent 
with the requirements to report sexual harassment or sexual assault 
under section 10104.''.

SEC. 610. REQUIREMENT TO REPORT SEXUAL ASSAULT AND HARASSMENT.

 Section 10104 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by 
striking subsections (a) and (b) and inserting the following:
 ``(a) Mandatory Reporting by Crew Member.--
 ``(1) In general.--A crew member of a documented vessel 
 shall report to the Secretary any complaint or incident of 
 sexual harassment or sexual assault of which the crewmember has 
 first-hand or personal knowledge.
 ``(2) Penalty.--A crew member with first-hand or personal 
 knowledge of a sexual assault or sexual harassment incident on 
 a documented vessel who knowingly fails to report in compliance 
 with paragraph (a)(1) is liable to the United States Government 
 for a civil penalty of not more than $5,000.
 ``(3) Amnesty.--A crew member who fails to make the 
 required reporting under paragraph (1) shall not be subject to 
 the penalty described in paragraph (2) if--
 ``(A) the crew member is the victim of such sexual 
 assault or sexual harassment incident;
 ``(B) the complaint is shared in confidence with 
 the crew member directly from the victim; or
 ``(C) the crew member is a victim advocate as 
 defined in section 40002(a) of the Violent Crime 
 Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (34 U.S.C. 
 12291(a)).
 ``(b) Mandatory Reporting by Vessel Owner.--
 ``(1) In general.--A vessel owner or managing operator of a 
 documented vessel or the employer of a seafarer on that vessel 
 shall report to the Secretary any complaint or incident of 
 harassment, sexual harassment, or sexual assault in violation 
 of employer policy or law, of which such vessel owner or 
 managing operator of a vessel engaged in commercial service, or 
 the employer of the seafarer is made aware. Such reporting 
 shall include results of any investigation into the incident, 
 if applicable, and any action taken against the offending 
 crewmember.
 ``(2) Penalty.--A vessel owner or managing operator of a 
 vessel engaged in commercial service, or the employer of a 
 seafarer on that vessel who knowingly fails to report in 
 compliance with paragraph (1) is liable to the United States 
 Government for a civil penalty of not more than $25,000.
 ``(c) Reporting Procedures.--
 ``(1) Crew member reporting.--A report required under 
 subsection (a)--
 ``(A) with respect to a crew member, shall be made 
 as soon as practicable, but no later than 10 days after 
 the crew member develops first-hand or personal 
 knowledge of the sexual assault or sexual harassment 
 incident to the Coast Guard National Command Center by 
 the fastest telecommunication channel available; and
 ``(B) with respect to a master, shall be made 
 immediately after the master develops first-hand or 
 personal knowledge of a sexual assault incident to the 
 Coast Guard National Command Center by the fastest 
 telecommunication channel available.
 ``(2) Vessel owner reporting.--A report required under 
 subsection (b) shall be made immediately after the vessel 
 owner, managing operator, or employer of the seafarer gains 
 knowledge of a sexual assault or sexual harassment incident by 
 the fastest telecommunication channel available, and such 
 report shall be made to the Coast Guard National Command Center 
 and to--
 ``(A) the nearest Coast Guard Captain of the Port; 
 or
 ``(B) the appropriate officer or agency of the 
 government of the country in whose waters the incident 
 occurs.
 ``(3) Contents.--A report required under subsections (a) 
 and (b) shall include, to the best of the reporter's 
 knowledge--
 ``(A) the name, official position or role in 
 relation to the vessel, and contact information of the 
 individual making the report;
 ``(B) the name and official number of the 
 documented vessel;
 ``(C) the time and date of the incident;
 ``(D) the geographic position or location of the 
 vessel when the incident occurred; and
 ``(E) a brief description of the alleged sexual 
 harassment or sexual assault being reported.
 ``(4) Information collection.--After receipt of the report 
 made under this subsection, the Coast Guard will collect 
 information related to the identity of each alleged victim, 
 alleged perpetrator, and witness through means designed to 
 protect, to the extent practicable, the personal identifiable 
 information of such individuals.
 ``(d) Regulations.--The requirements of this section are effective 
as of the date of enactment of the Don Young Coast Guard Authorization 
Act of 2022. The Secretary may issue additional regulations to 
implement the requirements of this section.''.

SEC. 611. CIVIL ACTIONS FOR PERSONAL INJURY OR DEATH OF SEAMEN.

 (a) Personal Injury to or Death of Seamen.--Section 30104(a) of 
title 46, United States Code, as so designated by section 505(a)(1), is 
amended by inserting ``, including an injury resulting from sexual 
assault or sexual harassment,'' after ``in the course of employment''.
 (b) Time Limit on Bringing Maritime Action.--Section 30106 of title 
46, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in the section heading by striking ``for personal 
 injury or death'';
 (2) by striking ``Except as otherwise'' and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(a) In General.--Except as otherwise''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(b) Extension for Sexual Offense.--A civil action under 
subsection (a) arising out of a maritime tort for a claim of sexual 
harassment or sexual assault shall be brought not more than 5 years 
after the cause of action for a claim of sexual harassment or sexual 
assault arose.''.
 (c) Clerical Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 301 of title 46, 
United States Code, is amended by striking the item related to section 
30106 and inserting the following:

``30106. Time limit on bringing maritime action.''.

SEC. 612. ADMINISTRATION OF SEXUAL ASSAULT FORENSIC EXAMINATION KITS.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 5 of title 14, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 564. Administration of sexual assault forensic examination kits
 ``(a) Requirement.--A Coast Guard vessel that embarks on a covered 
voyage shall be--
 ``(1) equipped with no less than 2 sexual assault and 
 forensic examination kits; and
 ``(2) staffed with at least 1 medical professional 
 qualified and trained to administer such kits.
 ``(b) Covered Voyage Defined.--In this section, the term `covered 
voyage' means a prescheduled voyage of a Coast Guard vessel that, at 
any point during such voyage--
 ``(1) would require the vessel to travel 5 consecutive days 
 or longer at 20 knots per hour to reach a land-based or afloat 
 medical facility; and
 ``(2) aeromedical evacuation will be unavailable during the 
 travel period referenced in paragraph (1).''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 5 of 
title 14, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the 
following:

``564. Administration of sexual assault forensic examination kits.''.

 TITLE VII--TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING PROVISIONS

SEC. 701. TECHNICAL CORRECTIONS.

 (a) Section 319(b) of title 14, United States Code, is amended by 
striking ``section 331 of the FAA Modernization and Reform Act of 2012 
(49 U.S.C. 40101 note)'' and inserting ``section 44801 of title 49''.
 (b) Section 1156(c) of title 14, United States Code, is amended by 
striking ``section 331 of the FAA Modernization and Reform Act of 2012 
(49 U.S.C. 40101 note)'' and inserting ``section 44801 of title 49''.

SEC. 702. TRANSPORTATION WORKER IDENTIFICATION CREDENTIAL TECHNICAL 
 AMENDMENTS.

 (a) In General.--Section 70105 of title 46, United States Code, is 
amended--
 (1) in the section heading by striking ``security cards'' 
 and inserting ``worker identification credentials'';
 (2) by striking ``transportation security card'' each place 
 it appears and inserting ``transportation worker identification 
 credential'';
 (3) by striking ``transportation security cards'' each 
 place it appears and inserting ``transportation worker 
 identification credentials'';
 (4) by striking ``card'' each place it appears and 
 inserting ``credential''
 (5) in the heading for subsection (b) by striking ``Cards'' 
 and inserting ``Credentials'';
 (6) in subsection (g), by striking ``Assistant Secretary of 
 Homeland Security for'' and inserting ``Administrator of'';
 (7) by striking subsection (i) and redesignating 
 subsections (j) and (k) as subsections (i) and (j), 
 respectively;
 (8) by striking subsection (l) and redesignating 
 subsections (m) through (q) as subsections (k) through (o), 
 respectively;
 (9) in subsection (j), as so redesignated--
 (A) in the subsection heading by striking 
 ``Security Card'' and inserting ``Worker Identification 
 Credential''; and
 (B) in the heading for paragraph (2) by striking 
 ``security cards'' and inserting ``worker 
 identification credential'';
 (10) in subsection (k)(1), as so redesignated, by striking 
 ``subsection (k)(3)'' and inserting ``subsection (j)(3)''; and
 (11) in subsection (o), as so redesignated--
 (A) in the subsection heading by striking 
 ``Security Card'' and inserting ``Worker Identification 
 Credential'';
 (B) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) by striking ``subsection (k)(3)'' and 
 inserting ``subsection (j)(3)''; and
 (ii) by striking ``This plan shall'' and 
 inserting ``Such receipt and activation 
 shall''; and
 (C) in paragraph (2) by striking ``on-site 
 activation capability'' and inserting ``on-site receipt 
 and activation of transportation worker identification 
 credentials''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 701 of title 46, 
United States Code, is amended by striking the item related to section 
70105 and inserting the following:

``70105. Transportation worker identification credentials.''.

SEC. 703. REINSTATEMENT.

 (a) Reinstatement.--The text of section 12(a) of the Act of June 
21, 1940 (33 U.S.C. 522(a)), popularly known as the Truman-Hobbs Act, 
is--
 (1) reinstated as it appeared on the day before the date of 
 enactment of section 8507(b) of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry 
 National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (Public 
 Law 116-283); and
 (2) redesignated as the sole text of section 12 of the Act 
 of June 21, 1940 (33 U.S.C. 522).
 (b) Effective Date.--The provision reinstated by subsection (a) 
shall be treated as if such section 8507(b) had never taken effect.
 (c) Conforming Amendment.--The provision reinstated under 
subsection (a) is amended by striking ``, except to the extent provided 
in this section''.

 DIVISION H--FINANCIAL TRANSPARENCY

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Financial 
Transparency Act of 2022''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

 DIVISION H--FINANCIAL TRANSPARENCY

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
Sec. 2. Deeming.
 TITLE I--DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY

Sec. 101. Data standards.
Sec. 102. Open data publication by the Department of the Treasury.
Sec. 103. Rulemaking.
Sec. 104. No new disclosure requirements.
Sec. 105. Report.
 TITLE II--SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION

Sec. 201. Data standards requirements for the Securities and Exchange 
 Commission.
Sec. 202. Open data publication by the Securities and Exchange 
 Commission.
Sec. 203. Data transparency at the Municipal Securities Rulemaking 
 Board.
Sec. 204. Data transparency at national securities associations.
Sec. 205. Shorter-term burden reduction and disclosure simplification 
 at the Securities and Exchange Commission; 
 sunset.
Sec. 206. No new disclosure requirements.
 TITLE III--FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION

Sec. 301. Data standards requirements for the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Corporation.
Sec. 302. Open data publication by the Federal Deposit Insurance 
 Corporation.
Sec. 303. Rulemaking.
Sec. 304. No new disclosure requirements.
 TITLE IV--OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER OF THE CURRENCY

Sec. 401. Data standards and open data publication requirements for the 
 Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.
Sec. 402. Rulemaking.
Sec. 403. No new disclosure requirements.
 TITLE V--BUREAU OF CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION

Sec. 501. Data standards and open data publication requirements for the 
 Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection.
Sec. 502. Rulemaking.
Sec. 503. No new disclosure requirements.
 TITLE VI--FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

Sec. 601. Data standards requirements for the Board of Governors of the 
 Federal Reserve System.
Sec. 602. Open data publication by the Board of Governors of the 
 Federal Reserve System.
Sec. 603. Rulemaking.
Sec. 604. No new disclosure requirements.
 TITLE VII--NATIONAL CREDIT UNION ADMINISTRATION

Sec. 701. Data standards.
Sec. 702. Open data publication by the National Credit Union 
 Administration.
Sec. 703. Rulemaking.
Sec. 704. No new disclosure requirements.
 TITLE VIII--FEDERAL HOUSING FINANCE AGENCY

Sec. 801. Data standards requirements for the Federal Housing Finance 
 Agency.
Sec. 802. Open data publication by the Federal Housing Finance Agency.
Sec. 803. Rulemaking.
Sec. 804. No new disclosure requirements.
 TITLE IX--MISCELLANEOUS

Sec. 901. Rules of construction.
Sec. 902. Classified and protected information.
Sec. 903. Discretionary surplus fund.

SEC. 2. DEEMING.

 Any reference in this division to ``this Act'' shall be deemed a 
reference to ``this division''.

 TITLE I--DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY

SEC. 101. DATA STANDARDS.

 (a) In General.--Subtitle A of title I of the Financial Stability 
Act of 2010 (12 U.S.C. 5311 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end 
the following:

``SEC. 124. DATA STANDARDS.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall, by rule, 
promulgate data standards, meaning a standard that specifies rules by 
which data is described and recorded, for the information reported to 
member agencies by financial entities under the jurisdiction of the 
member agency and the data collected from member agencies on behalf of 
the Council.
 ``(b) Standardization.--Member agencies, in consultation with the 
Secretary of the Treasury, shall implement regulations promulgated by 
the Secretary of the Treasury under subsection (a) to standardize data 
reported to member agencies or collected on behalf of the Council, as 
described under subsection (a).
 ``(c) Data Standards.--
 ``(1) Common identifiers.--The data standards promulgated 
 under subsection (a) shall include common identifiers for 
 information reported to member agencies or collected on behalf 
 of the Council. The common identifiers shall include a common 
 nonproprietary legal entity identifier that is available under 
 an open license (as defined under section 3502 of title 44, 
 United States Code) for all entities required to report to 
 member agencies.
 ``(2) Data standard.--The data standards promulgated under 
 subsection (a) shall, to the extent practicable--
 ``(A) render data fully searchable and machine-
 readable (as defined under section 3502 of title 44, 
 United States Code);
 ``(B) enable high quality data through schemas, 
 with accompanying metadata (as defined under section 
 3502 of title 44, United States Code) documented in 
 machine-readable taxonomy or ontology models, which 
 clearly define the data's semantic meaning as defined 
 by the underlying regulatory information collection 
 requirements;
 ``(C) assure that a data element or data asset that 
 exists to satisfy an underlying regulatory information 
 collection requirement be consistently identified as 
 such in associated machine-readable metadata;
 ``(D) be nonproprietary or made available under an 
 open license;
 ``(E) incorporate standards developed and 
 maintained by voluntary consensus standards bodies; and
 ``(F) use, be consistent with, and implement 
 applicable accounting and reporting principles.
 ``(3) Consultation.--In promulgating data standards under 
 subsection (a), the Secretary of the Treasury shall consult 
 with the member agencies and with other Federal departments and 
 agencies and multi-agency initiatives responsible for Federal 
 data standards.
 ``(4) Interoperability of data.--In promulgating data 
 standards under subsection (a), the Secretary of the Treasury 
 shall seek to promote interoperability of financial regulatory 
 data across members of the Council.
 ``(d) Member Agencies Defined.--In this section, the term `member 
agencies' does not include the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents under section 1(b) 
of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act is 
amended by inserting after the item relating to section 123 the 
following:

``Sec. 124. Data standards.''.

SEC. 102. OPEN DATA PUBLICATION BY THE DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY.

 Section 124 of the Financial Stability Act of 2010, as added by 
section 101, is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(e) Open Data Publication.--All public information published by 
the Secretary of the Treasury under this subtitle shall be made 
available as an open Government data asset (as defined under section 
3502 of title 44, United States Code), freely available for download in 
bulk, and rendered in a human-readable format and accessible via 
application programming interface where appropriate.''.

SEC. 103. RULEMAKING.

 Not later than the end of the 2-year period beginning on the date 
of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury shall issue 
the regulations required under the amendments made by this title. The 
Secretary may delegate the functions required under the amendments made 
by this title to an appropriate office within the Department of the 
Treasury.

SEC. 104. NO NEW DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.

 Nothing in this title or the amendments made by this title shall be 
construed to require the Secretary of the Treasury to collect or make 
publicly available additional information under the statutes amended by 
this title, beyond information that was collected or made publicly 
available under such statutes before the date of the enactment of this 
Act.

SEC. 105. REPORT.

 Not later than 1 year after the end of the 2-year period described 
in section 103, the Comptroller General of the United States shall 
submit to Congress a report on the feasibility, costs, and potential 
benefits of building upon the taxonomy established by this Act to 
arrive at a Federal Government-wide regulatory compliance 
standardization mechanism similar to Standard Business Reporting.

 TITLE II--SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION

SEC. 201. DATA STANDARDS REQUIREMENTS FOR THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE 
 COMMISSION.

 (a) Data Standards for Investment Advisers' Reports Under the 
Investment Advisers Act of 1940.--Section 204 of the Investment 
Advisers Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80b-4) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating the second subsection (d) (relating to 
 Records of Persons With Custody of Use) as subsection (e); and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(f) Data Standards for Reports Filed Under This Section.--
 ``(1) Requirement.--The Commission shall, by rule, adopt 
 data standards for all reports filed by investment advisers 
 with the Commission under this section.
 ``(2) Characteristics.--The data standards required by 
 paragraph (1) shall, to the extent practicable--
 ``(A) render data fully searchable and machine-
 readable (as defined under section 3502 of title 44, 
 United States Code);
 ``(B) enable high quality data through schemas, 
 with accompanying metadata (as defined under section 
 3502 of title 44, United States Code) documented in 
 machine-readable taxonomy or ontology models, which 
 clearly define the data's semantic meaning as defined 
 by the underlying regulatory information collection 
 requirements;
 ``(C) assure that a data element or data asset that 
 exists to satisfy an underlying regulatory information 
 collection requirement be consistently identified as 
 such in associated machine-readable metadata;
 ``(D) be nonproprietary or made available under an 
 open license (as defined under section 3502 of title 
 44, United States Code);
 ``(E) incorporate standards developed and 
 maintained by voluntary consensus standards bodies; and
 ``(F) use, be consistent with, and implement 
 applicable accounting and reporting principles.
 ``(3) Incorporation of standards.--In adopting data 
 standards by rule under this subsection, the Commission shall 
 incorporate all applicable data standards promulgated by the 
 Secretary of the Treasury.''.
 (b) Data Standards for Registration Statements and Reports Under 
the Investment Company Act of 1940.--The Investment Company Act of 1940 
(15 U.S.C. 80a-1 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) in section 8, by adding at the end the following:
 ``(g) Data Standards for Registration Statements.--
 ``(1) Requirement.--The Commission shall, by rule, adopt 
 data standards for all registration statements required to be 
 filed with the Commission under this section, except that the 
 Commission may exempt exhibits, signatures, and certifications 
 from such data standards.
 ``(2) Characteristics.--The data standards required by 
 paragraph (1) shall, to the extent practicable--
 ``(A) render data fully searchable and machine-
 readable (as defined under section 3502 of title 44, 
 United States Code);
 ``(B) enable high quality data through schemas, 
 with accompanying metadata (as defined under section 
 3502 of title 44, United States Code) documented in 
 machine-readable taxonomy or ontology models, which 
 clearly define the data's semantic meaning as defined 
 by the underlying regulatory information collection 
 requirements;
 ``(C) assure that a data element or data asset that 
 exists to satisfy an underlying regulatory information 
 collection requirement be consistently identified as 
 such in associated machine-readable metadata;
 ``(D) be nonproprietary or made available under an 
 open license (as defined under section 3502 of title 
 44, United States Code);
 ``(E) incorporate standards developed and 
 maintained by voluntary consensus standards bodies; and
 ``(F) use, be consistent with, and implement 
 applicable accounting and reporting principles.
 ``(3) Incorporation of standards.--In adopting data 
 standards by rule under this subsection, the Commission shall 
 incorporate all applicable data standards promulgated by the 
 Secretary of the Treasury.''; and
 (2) in section 30, by adding at the end the following:
 ``(k) Data Standards for Reports.--
 ``(1) Requirement.--The Commission shall, by rule, adopt 
 data standards for all reports required to be filed with the 
 Commission under this section, except that the Commission may 
 exempt exhibits, signatures, and certifications from such data 
 standards.
 ``(2) Characteristics.--The data standards required by 
 paragraph (1) shall, to the extent practicable--
 ``(A) render data fully searchable and machine-
 readable (as defined under section 3502 of title 44, 
 United States Code);
 ``(B) enable high quality data through schemas, 
 with accompanying metadata (as defined under section 
 3502 of title 44, United States Code) documented in 
 machine-readable taxonomy or ontology models, which 
 clearly define the data's semantic meaning as defined 
 by the underlying regulatory information collection 
 requirements;
 ``(C) assure that a data element or data asset that 
 exists to satisfy an underlying regulatory information 
 collection requirement be consistently identified as 
 such in associated machine-readable metadata;
 ``(D) be nonproprietary or made available under an 
 open license (as defined under section 3502 of title 
 44, United States Code);
 ``(E) incorporate standards developed and 
 maintained by voluntary consensus standards bodies; and
 ``(F) use, be consistent with, and implement 
 applicable accounting and reporting principles.
 ``(3) Incorporation of standards.--In adopting data 
 standards by rule under this subsection, the Commission shall 
 incorporate all applicable data standards promulgated by the 
 Secretary of the Treasury.''.
 (c) Data Standards for Information Required To Be Submitted or 
Published by Nationally Recognized Statistical Rating Organizations.--
Section 15E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78o-7) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(w) Data Standards for Information Required To Be Submitted or 
Published Under This Section.--
 ``(1) Requirement.--The Commission shall, by rule, adopt 
 data standards for all information required to be submitted or 
 published by a nationally recognized statistical rating 
 organization under this section.
 ``(2) Characteristics.--The data standards required by 
 paragraph (1) shall, to the extent practicable--
 ``(A) render data fully searchable and machine-
 readable (as defined under section 3502 of title 44, 
 United States Code);
 ``(B) enable high quality data through schemas, 
 with accompanying metadata (as defined under section 
 3502 of title 44, United States Code) documented in 
 machine-readable taxonomy or ontology models, which 
 clearly define the data's semantic meaning as defined 
 by the underlying regulatory information collection 
 requirements;
 ``(C) assure that a data element or data asset that 
 exists to satisfy an underlying regulatory information 
 collection requirement be consistently identified as 
 such in associated machine-readable metadata;
 ``(D) be nonproprietary or made available under an 
 open license (as defined under section 3502 of title 
 44, United States Code);
 ``(E) incorporate standards developed and 
 maintained by voluntary consensus standards bodies; and
 ``(F) use, be consistent with, and implement 
 applicable accounting and reporting principles.
 ``(3) Incorporation of standards.--In adopting data 
 standards by rule under this subsection, the Commission shall 
 incorporate all applicable data standards promulgated by the 
 Secretary of the Treasury.''.
 (d) Data Standards for Asset-Backed Securities Disclosures.--
Section 7(c) of the Securities Act of 1933 (15 U.S.C. 77g(c)) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Data standards for asset-backed securities 
 disclosures.--
 ``(A) Requirement.--The Commission shall, by rule, 
 adopt data standards for all disclosures required under 
 this subsection.
 ``(B) Characteristics.--The data standards required 
 by subparagraph (A) shall, to the extent practicable--
 ``(i) render data fully searchable and 
 machine-readable (as defined under section 3502 
 of title 44, United States Code);
 ``(ii) enable high quality data through 
 schemas, with accompanying metadata (as defined 
 under section 3502 of title 44, United States 
 Code) documented in machine-readable taxonomy 
 or ontology models, which clearly define the 
 data's semantic meaning as defined by the 
 underlying regulatory information collection 
 requirements;
 ``(iii) assure that a data element or data 
 asset that exists to satisfy an underlying 
 regulatory information collection requirement 
 be consistently identified as such in 
 associated machine-readable metadata;
 ``(iv) be nonproprietary or made available 
 under an open license (as defined under section 
 3502 of title 44, United States Code);
 ``(v) incorporate standards developed and 
 maintained by voluntary consensus standards 
 bodies; and
 ``(vi) use, be consistent with, and 
 implement applicable accounting and reporting 
 principles.
 ``(C) Incorporation of standards.--In adopting data 
 standards by rule under this paragraph, the Commission 
 shall incorporate all applicable data standards 
 promulgated by the Secretary of the Treasury.''.
 (e) Data Standards for Corporate Disclosures Under the Securities 
Act of 1933.--Section 7 of the Securities Act of 1933 (15 U.S.C. 77g) 
is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(e) Data Standards.--
 ``(1) Requirement.--The Commission shall, by rule, adopt 
 data standards for all registration statements and for all 
 prospectuses included in registration statements required to be 
 filed with the Commission under this title, except that the 
 Commission may exempt exhibits, signatures, and certifications 
 from such data standards.
 ``(2) Characteristics.--The data standards required by 
 paragraph (1) shall, to the extent practicable--
 ``(A) render data fully searchable and machine-
 readable (as defined under section 3502 of title 44, 
 United States Code);
 ``(B) enable high quality data through schemas, 
 with accompanying metadata (as defined under section 
 3502 of title 44, United States Code) documented in 
 machine-readable taxonomy or ontology models, which 
 clearly define the data's semantic meaning as defined 
 by the underlying regulatory information collection 
 requirements;
 ``(C) assure that a data element or data asset that 
 exists to satisfy an underlying regulatory information 
 collection requirement be consistently identified as 
 such in associated machine-readable metadata;
 ``(D) be nonproprietary or made available under an 
 open license (as defined under section 3502 of title 
 44, United States Code);
 ``(E) incorporate standards developed and 
 maintained by voluntary consensus standards bodies; and
 ``(F) use, be consistent with, and implement 
 applicable accounting and reporting principles.
 ``(3) Incorporation of standards.--In adopting data 
 standards by rule under this subsection, the Commission shall 
 incorporate all applicable data standards promulgated by the 
 Secretary of the Treasury.''.
 (f) Data Standards for Periodic and Current Corporate Disclosures 
Under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.--Section 13 of the 
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78m) is amended by adding at 
the end the following:
 ``(s) Data Standards.--
 ``(1) Requirement.--The Commission shall, by rule, adopt 
 data standards for all information contained in periodic and 
 current reports required to be filed or furnished under this 
 section or under section 15(d), except that the Commission may 
 exempt exhibits, signatures, and certifications from such data 
 standards.
 ``(2) Characteristics.--The data standards required by 
 paragraph (1) shall, to the extent practicable--
 ``(A) render data fully searchable and machine-
 readable (as defined under section 3502 of title 44, 
 United States Code);
 ``(B) enable high quality data through schemas, 
 with accompanying metadata (as defined under section 
 3502 of title 44, United States Code) documented in 
 machine-readable taxonomy or ontology models, which 
 clearly define the data's semantic meaning as defined 
 by the underlying regulatory information collection 
 requirements;
 ``(C) assure that a data element or data asset that 
 exists to satisfy an underlying regulatory information 
 collection requirement be consistently identified as 
 such in associated machine-readable metadata;
 ``(D) be nonproprietary or made available under an 
 open license (as defined under section 3502 of title 
 44, United States Code);
 ``(E) incorporate standards developed and 
 maintained by voluntary consensus standards bodies; and
 ``(F) use, be consistent with, and implement 
 applicable accounting and reporting principles.
 ``(3) Incorporation of standards.--In adopting data 
 standards by rule under this subsection, the Commission shall 
 incorporate all applicable data standards promulgated by the 
 Secretary of the Treasury.''.
 (g) Data Standards for Corporate Proxy and Consent Solicitation 
Materials Under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.--Section 14 of the 
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78n) is amended by adding at 
the end the following:
 ``(k) Data Standards for Proxy and Consent Solicitation 
Materials.--
 ``(1) Requirement.--The Commission shall, by rule, adopt 
 data standards for all information contained in any proxy or 
 consent solicitation material prepared by an issuer for an 
 annual meeting of the shareholders of the issuer, except that 
 the Commission may exempt exhibits, signatures, and 
 certifications from such data standards.
 ``(2) Characteristics.--The data standards required by 
 paragraph (1) shall, to the extent practicable--
 ``(A) render data fully searchable and machine-
 readable (as defined under section 3502 of title 44, 
 United States Code);
 ``(B) enable high quality data through schemas, 
 with accompanying metadata (as defined under section 
 3502 of title 44, United States Code) documented in 
 machine-readable taxonomy or ontology models, which 
 clearly define the data's semantic meaning as defined 
 by the underlying regulatory information collection 
 requirements;
 ``(C) assure that a data element or data asset that 
 exists to satisfy an underlying regulatory information 
 collection requirement be consistently identified as 
 such in associated machine-readable metadata;
 ``(D) be nonproprietary or made available under an 
 open license (as defined under section 3502 of title 
 44, United States Code);
 ``(E) incorporate standards developed and 
 maintained by voluntary consensus standards bodies; and
 ``(F) use, be consistent with, and implement 
 applicable accounting and reporting principles.
 ``(3) Incorporation of standards.--In adopting data 
 standards by rule under this subsection, the Commission shall 
 incorporate all applicable data standards promulgated by the 
 Secretary of the Treasury.''.
 (h) Data Standards for Security-Based Swap Reporting.--Section 15F 
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78o-10) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(m) Data Standards for Security-Based Swap Reporting.--
 ``(1) Requirement.--The Commission shall, by rule, adopt 
 data standards for all reports related to security-based swaps 
 that are required under this Act.
 ``(2) Characteristics.--The data standards required by 
 paragraph (1) shall, to the extent practicable--
 ``(A) render data fully searchable and machine-
 readable (as defined under section 3502 of title 44, 
 United States Code);
 ``(B) enable high quality data through schemas, 
 with accompanying metadata (as defined under section 
 3502 of title 44, United States Code) documented in 
 machine-readable taxonomy or ontology models, which 
 clearly define the data's semantic meaning as defined 
 by the underlying regulatory information collection 
 requirements;
 ``(C) assure that a data element or data asset that 
 exists to satisfy an underlying regulatory information 
 collection requirement be consistently identified as 
 such in associated machine-readable metadata;
 ``(D) be nonproprietary or made available under an 
 open license (as defined under section 3502 of title 
 44, United States Code);
 ``(E) incorporate standards developed and 
 maintained by voluntary consensus standards bodies; and
 ``(F) use, be consistent with, and implement 
 applicable accounting and reporting principles.
 ``(3) Incorporation of standards.--In adopting data 
 standards by rule under this subsection, the Commission shall 
 incorporate all applicable data standards promulgated by the 
 Secretary of the Treasury.''.
 (i) Rulemaking.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than the end of the 2-year 
 period beginning on the date the final rule is promulgated 
 pursuant to section 124(a) of the Financial Stability Act of 
 2010, the Securities and Exchange Commission shall issue the 
 regulations required under the amendments made by this section.
 (2) Scaling of regulatory requirements.--In issuing the 
 regulations required under the amendments made by this section, 
 the Securities and Exchange Commission may scale data reporting 
 requirements in order to reduce any unjustified burden on 
 emerging growth companies, lending institutions, accelerated 
 filers, smaller reporting companies, and other smaller issuers, 
 as determined by the study required under section 205(c), while 
 still providing searchable information to investors.
 (3) Minimizing disruption.--In issuing the regulations 
 required under the amendments made by this section, the 
 Securities and Exchange Commission shall seek to minimize 
 disruptive changes to the persons affected by such regulations.

SEC. 202. OPEN DATA PUBLICATION BY THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE 
 COMMISSION.

 Section 4 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78d) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(k) Open Data Publication.--All public information published by 
the Commission under the securities laws and the Dodd-Frank Wall Street 
Reform and Consumer Protection Act shall be made available as an open 
Government data asset (as defined under section 3502 of title 44, 
United States Code), freely available for download in bulk and rendered 
in a human-readable format and accessible via application programming 
interface where appropriate.''.

SEC. 203. DATA TRANSPARENCY AT THE MUNICIPAL SECURITIES RULEMAKING 
 BOARD.

 (a) In General.--Section 15B(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 
1934 (15 U.S.C. 78o-4(b)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:
 ``(8) Data Standards.--
 ``(A) Requirement.--If the Board establishes information 
 systems under paragraph (3), the Board shall adopt data 
 standards for information submitted via such systems.
 ``(B) Characteristics.--The data standards required by 
 subparagraph (A) shall, to the extent practicable--
 ``(i) render data fully searchable and machine-
 readable (as defined under section 3502 of title 44, 
 United States Code);
 ``(ii) enable high quality data through schemas, 
 with accompanying metadata (as defined under section 
 3502 of title 44, United States Code) documented in 
 machine-readable taxonomy or ontology models, which 
 clearly define the data's semantic meaning as defined 
 by the underlying regulatory information collection 
 requirements;
 ``(iii) assure that a data element or data asset 
 that exists to satisfy an underlying regulatory 
 information collection requirement be consistently 
 identified as such in associated machine-readable 
 metadata;
 ``(iv) be nonproprietary or made available under an 
 open license (as defined under section 3502 of title 
 44, United States Code);
 ``(v) incorporate standards developed and 
 maintained by voluntary consensus standards bodies; and
 ``(vi) use, be consistent with, and implement 
 applicable accounting and reporting principles.
 ``(C) Incorporation of standards.--In adopting data 
 standards under this paragraph, the Board shall incorporate all 
 applicable data standards promulgated by the Secretary of the 
 Treasury.''.
 (b) Rulemaking.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than the end of the 2-year 
 period beginning on the date the final rule is promulgated 
 pursuant to section 124(a) of the Financial Stability Act of 
 2010, the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board shall issue the 
 regulations required under the amendments made by this section.
 (2) Scaling of regulatory requirements.--In issuing the 
 regulations required under the amendments made by this section, 
 the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board may scale data 
 reporting requirements in order to reduce any unjustified 
 burden on smaller regulated entities.
 (3) Minimizing disruption.--In issuing the regulations 
 required under the amendments made by this section, the 
 Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board shall seek to minimize 
 disruptive changes to the persons affected by such regulations.

SEC. 204. DATA TRANSPARENCY AT NATIONAL SECURITIES ASSOCIATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 15A of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 
(15 U.S.C. 78o-3) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(n) Data Standards.--
 ``(1) Requirement.--A national securities association 
 registered pursuant to subsection (a) shall adopt data 
 standards for all information that is regularly filed with or 
 submitted to the association.
 ``(2) Characteristics.--The data standards required by 
 paragraph (1) shall, to the extent practicable--
 ``(A) render data fully searchable and machine-
 readable (as defined under section 3502 of title 44, 
 United States Code);
 ``(B) enable high quality data through schemas, 
 with accompanying metadata (as defined under section 
 3502 of title 44, United States Code) documented in 
 machine-readable taxonomy or ontology models, which 
 clearly define the data's semantic meaning as defined 
 by the underlying regulatory information collection 
 requirements;
 ``(C) assure that a data element or data asset that 
 exists to satisfy an underlying regulatory information 
 collection requirement be consistently identified as 
 such in associated machine-readable metadata;
 ``(D) be nonproprietary or made available under an 
 open license (as defined under section 3502 of title 
 44, United States Code);
 ``(E) incorporate standards developed and 
 maintained by voluntary consensus standards bodies; and
 ``(F) use, be consistent with, and implement 
 applicable accounting and reporting principles.
 ``(3) Incorporation of standards.--In adopting data 
 standards under this subsection, the association shall 
 incorporate all applicable data standards promulgated by the 
 Secretary of the Treasury.''.
 (b) Rulemaking.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than the end of the 2-year 
 period beginning on the date the final rule is promulgated 
 pursuant to section 124(a) of the Financial Stability Act of 
 2010, a national securities association shall adopt the 
 standards required under the amendments made by this section.
 (2) Scaling of regulatory requirements.--In adopting the 
 standards required under the amendments made by this section, a 
 national securities association may scale data reporting 
 requirements in order to reduce any unjustified burden on 
 smaller regulated entities.
 (3) Minimizing disruption.--In adopting the standards 
 required under the amendments made by this section, a national 
 securities association shall seek to minimize disruptive 
 changes to the persons affected by such standards.

SEC. 205. SHORTER-TERM BURDEN REDUCTION AND DISCLOSURE SIMPLIFICATION 
 AT THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION; SUNSET.

 (a) Better Enforcement of the Quality of Corporate Financial Data 
Submitted to the Securities and Exchange Commission.--
 (1) Data quality improvement program.--Within six months 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission 
 shall establish a program to improve the quality of corporate 
 financial data filed or furnished by issuers under the 
 Securities Act of 1933, the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 
 and the Investment Company Act of 1940. The program shall 
 include the following:
 (A) The designation of an official in the Office of 
 the Chairman responsible for the improvement of the 
 quality of data filed with or furnished to the 
 Commission by issuers.
 (B) The issuance by the Division of Corporation 
 Finance of comment letters requiring correction of 
 errors in data filings and submissions, where 
 necessary.
 (2) Goals.--In establishing the program under this section, 
 the Commission shall seek to--
 (A) improve the quality of data filed with or 
 furnished to the Commission to a commercially 
 acceptable level; and
 (B) make data filed with or furnished to the 
 Commission useful to investors.
 (b) Report on the Use of Machine-Readable Data for Corporate 
Disclosures.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than six months after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, and every six months thereafter, 
 the Commission shall issue a report to the Committee on 
 Financial Services of the House of Representatives and the 
 Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate 
 on the public and internal use of machine-readable data for 
 corporate disclosures.
 (2) Content.--Each report required under paragraph (1) 
 shall include--
 (A) an identification of which corporate 
 disclosures required under section 7 of the Securities 
 Act of 1933, section 13 of the Securities Exchange Act 
 of 1934, or section 14 of the Securities Exchange Act 
 of 1934 are expressed as machine-readable data and 
 which are not;
 (B) an analysis of the costs and benefits of the 
 use of machine-readable data in corporate disclosure to 
 investors, markets, the Commission, and issuers;
 (C) a summary of enforcement actions that result 
 from the use or analysis of machine-readable data 
 collected under section 7 of the Securities Act of 
 1933, section 13 of the Securities Exchange Act of 
 1934, or section 14 of the Securities Exchange Act of 
 1934; and
 (D) an analysis of how the Commission is itself 
 using the machine-readable data collected by the 
 Commission.
 (c) Sunset.--On and after the end of the 7-year period beginning on 
the date of the enactment of this Act, this section shall have no force 
or effect.

SEC. 206. NO NEW DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.

 Nothing in this title or the amendments made by this title shall be 
construed to require the Securities and Exchange Commission, the 
Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board, or a national securities 
association to collect or make publicly available additional 
information under the statutes amended by this title, beyond 
information that was collected or made publicly available under such 
statutes before the date of the enactment of this Act.

 TITLE III--FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION

SEC. 301. DATA STANDARDS REQUIREMENTS FOR THE FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE 
 CORPORATION.

 The Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1811 et seq.) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 52. DATA STANDARDS.

 ``(a) Requirement.--The Corporation shall, by rule, adopt data 
standards for all information that the Corporation receives from any 
depository institution or financial company under this Act or under 
title II of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection 
Act.
 ``(b) Characteristics.--The data standards required by subsection 
(a) shall, to the extent practicable--
 ``(1) render data fully searchable and machine-readable (as 
 defined under section 3502 of title 44, United States Code);
 ``(2) enable high quality data through schemas, with 
 accompanying metadata (as defined under section 3502 of title 
 44, United States Code) documented in machine-readable taxonomy 
 or ontology models, which clearly define the data's semantic 
 meaning as defined by the underlying regulatory information 
 collection requirements;
 ``(3) assure that a data element or data asset that exists 
 to satisfy an underlying regulatory information collection 
 requirement be consistently identified as such in associated 
 machine-readable metadata;
 ``(4) be nonproprietary or made available under an open 
 license (as defined under section 3502 of title 44, United 
 States Code);
 ``(5) incorporate standards developed and maintained by 
 voluntary consensus standards bodies; and
 ``(6) use, be consistent with, and implement applicable 
 accounting and reporting principles.
 ``(c) Incorporation of Standards.--In adopting data standards by 
rule under this section, the Corporation shall incorporate all 
applicable data standards promulgated by the Secretary of the Treasury.
 ``(d) Financial Company Defined.--For purposes of this section, the 
term `financial company' has the meaning given that term under section 
201(a) of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act 
(12 U.S.C. 5381(a)).''.

SEC. 302. OPEN DATA PUBLICATION BY THE FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE 
 CORPORATION.

 The Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 U.S.C. 1811 et seq.), as 
amended by section 301, is further amended by adding at the end the 
following:

``SEC. 53. OPEN DATA PUBLICATION.

 ``All public information published by the Corporation under this 
Act or under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection 
Act shall be made available as an open Government data asset (as 
defined under section 3502 of title 44, United States Code), freely 
available for download in bulk and rendered in a human-readable format 
and accessible via application programming interface where 
appropriate.''.

SEC. 303. RULEMAKING.

 (a) In General.--Not later than the end of the 2-year period 
beginning on the date the final rule is promulgated pursuant to section 
124(a) of the Financial Stability Act of 2010, the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation shall issue the regulations required under the 
amendments made by this title.
 (b) Scaling of Regulatory Requirements.--In issuing the regulations 
required under the amendments made by this title, the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation may scale data reporting requirements in order to 
reduce any unjustified burden on smaller regulated entities.
 (c) Minimizing Disruption.--In issuing the regulations required 
under the amendments made by this title, the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation shall seek to minimize disruptive changes to the persons 
affected by such regulations.

SEC. 304. NO NEW DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.

 Nothing in this title or the amendments made by this title shall be 
construed to require the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to 
collect or make publicly available additional information under the 
statutes amended by this title, beyond information that was collected 
or made publicly available under such statutes before the date of the 
enactment of this Act.

 TITLE IV--OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER OF THE CURRENCY

SEC. 401. DATA STANDARDS AND OPEN DATA PUBLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR THE 
 OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER OF THE CURRENCY.

 The Revised Statutes of the United States is amended by inserting 
after section 332 (12 U.S.C. 14) the following:

``SEC. 333. DATA STANDARDS; OPEN DATA PUBLICATION.

 ``(a) Data Standards.--
 ``(1) Requirement.--The Comptroller of the Currency shall, 
 by rule, adopt data standards for all information that is 
 regularly filed with or submitted to the Comptroller of the 
 Currency by any entity with respect to which the Office of the 
 Comptroller of the Currency is the appropriate Federal banking 
 agency (as defined under section 3 of the Federal Deposit 
 Insurance Act).
 ``(2) Characteristics.--The data standards required by 
 paragraph (1) shall, to the extent practicable--
 ``(A) render data fully searchable and machine-
 readable (as defined under section 3502 of title 44, 
 United States Code);
 ``(B) enable high quality data through schemas, 
 with accompanying metadata (as defined under section 
 3502 of title 44, United States Code) documented in 
 machine-readable taxonomy or ontology models, which 
 clearly define the data's semantic meaning as defined 
 by the underlying regulatory information collection 
 requirements;
 ``(C) assure that a data element or data asset that 
 exists to satisfy an underlying regulatory information 
 collection requirement be consistently identified as 
 such in associated machine-readable metadata;
 ``(D) be nonproprietary or made available under an 
 open license (as defined under section 3502 of title 
 44, United States Code);
 ``(E) incorporate standards developed and 
 maintained by voluntary consensus standards bodies; and
 ``(F) use, be consistent with, and implement 
 applicable accounting and reporting principles.
 ``(3) Incorporation of standards.--In adopting data 
 standards by rule under this subsection, the Comptroller of the 
 Currency shall incorporate all applicable data standards 
 promulgated by the Secretary of the Treasury.
 ``(b) Open Data Publication.--All public information published by 
the Comptroller of the Currency under title LXII or the Dodd-Frank Wall 
Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act shall be made available as an 
open Government data asset (as defined under section 3502 of title 44, 
United States Code), freely available for download in bulk and rendered 
in a human-readable format and accessible via application programming 
interface where appropriate.''.

SEC. 402. RULEMAKING.

 (a) In General.--Not later than the end of the 2-year period 
beginning on the date the final rule is promulgated pursuant to section 
124(a) of the Financial Stability Act of 2010, the Comptroller of the 
Currency shall issue the regulations required under the amendments made 
by this title.
 (b) Scaling of Regulatory Requirements.--In issuing the regulations 
required under the amendments made by this title, the Comptroller of 
the Currency may scale data reporting requirements in order to reduce 
any unjustified burden on smaller regulated entities.
 (c) Minimizing Disruption.--In issuing the regulations required 
under the amendments made by this title, the Comptroller of the 
Currency shall seek to minimize disruptive changes to the persons 
affected by such regulations.

SEC. 403. NO NEW DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.

 Nothing in this title or the amendments made by this title shall be 
construed to require the Comptroller of the Currency to collect or make 
publicly available additional information under the statutes amended by 
this title, beyond information that was collected or made publicly 
available under such statutes before the date of the enactment of this 
Act.

 TITLE V--BUREAU OF CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION

SEC. 501. DATA STANDARDS AND OPEN DATA PUBLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR THE 
 BUREAU OF CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION.

 (a) In General.--The Consumer Financial Protection Act of 2010 (12 
U.S.C. 5481 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 1018 the 
following:

``SEC. 1019. DATA STANDARDS.

 ``(a) Requirement.--The Bureau shall, by rule, adopt data standards 
for all information that is regularly filed with or submitted to the 
Bureau.
 ``(b) Characteristics.--The data standards required by subsection 
(a) shall, to the extent practicable--
 ``(1) render data fully searchable and machine-readable (as 
 defined under section 3502 of title 44, United States Code);
 ``(2) enable high quality data through schemas, with 
 accompanying metadata (as defined under section 3502 of title 
 44, United States Code) documented in machine-readable taxonomy 
 or ontology models, which clearly define the data's semantic 
 meaning as defined by the underlying regulatory information 
 collection requirements;
 ``(3) assure that a data element or data asset that exists 
 to satisfy an underlying regulatory information collection 
 requirement be consistently identified as such in associated 
 machine-readable metadata;
 ``(4) be nonproprietary or made available under an open 
 license (as defined under section 3502 of title 44, United 
 States Code);
 ``(5) incorporate standards developed and maintained by 
 voluntary consensus standards bodies; and
 ``(6) use, be consistent with, and implement applicable 
 accounting and reporting principles.
 ``(c) Incorporation of Standards.--In adopting data standards by 
rule under this section, the Bureau shall incorporate all applicable 
data standards promulgated by the Secretary of the Treasury.

``SEC. 1020. OPEN DATA PUBLICATION.

 ``All public information published by the Bureau shall be made 
available as an open Government data asset (as defined under section 
3502 of title 44, United States Code), freely available for download in 
bulk and rendered in a human-readable format and accessible via 
application programming interface where appropriate.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents under section 1(b) 
of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act is 
amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1018 the 
following:

``Sec. 1019. Data standards.
``Sec. 1020. Open data publication.''.

SEC. 502. RULEMAKING.

 (a) In General.--Not later than the end of the 2-year period 
beginning on the date the final rule is promulgated pursuant to section 
124(a) of the Financial Stability Act of 2010, the Bureau of Consumer 
Financial Protection shall issue the regulations required under the 
amendments made by this title.
 (b) Scaling of Regulatory Requirements.--In issuing the regulations 
required under the amendments made by this title, the Bureau of 
Consumer Financial Protection may scale data reporting requirements in 
order to reduce any unjustified burden on smaller regulated entities.
 (c) Minimizing Disruption.--In issuing the regulations required 
under the amendments made by this title, the Bureau of Consumer 
Financial Protection shall seek to minimize disruptive changes to the 
persons affected by such regulations.

SEC. 503. NO NEW DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.

 Nothing in this title or the amendments made by this title shall be 
construed to require the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection to 
collect or make publicly available additional information under the 
statutes amended by this title, beyond information that was collected 
or made publicly available under such statutes before the date of the 
enactment of this Act.

 TITLE VI--FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

SEC. 601. DATA STANDARDS REQUIREMENTS FOR THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE 
 FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM.

 (a) Data Standards for Information Filed or Submitted by Nonbank 
Financial Companies.--Section 161(a) of the Financial Stability Act of 
2010 (12 U.S.C. 5361(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(4) Data standards for reports under this subsection.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Board of Governors shall 
 adopt data standards for all financial data that is 
 regularly filed with or submitted to the Board of 
 Governors by any nonbank financial company supervised 
 by the Board of Governors pursuant to this subsection.
 ``(B) Characteristics.--The data standards required 
 by this section shall, to the extent practicable--
 ``(i) render data fully searchable and 
 machine-readable (as defined under section 3502 
 of title 44, United States Code);
 ``(ii) enable high quality data through 
 schemas, with accompanying metadata (as defined 
 under section 3502 of title 44, United States 
 Code) documented in machine-readable taxonomy 
 or ontology models, which clearly define the 
 data's semantic meaning as defined by the 
 underlying regulatory information collection 
 requirements;
 ``(iii) assure that a data element or data 
 asset that exists to satisfy an underlying 
 regulatory information collection requirement 
 be consistently identified as such in 
 associated machine-readable metadata;
 ``(iv) be nonproprietary or made available 
 under an open license (as defined under section 
 3502 of title 44, United States Code);
 ``(v) incorporate standards developed and 
 maintained by voluntary consensus standards 
 bodies; and
 ``(vi) use, be consistent with, and 
 implement applicable accounting and reporting 
 principles.
 ``(C) Incorporation of standards.--In adopting data 
 standards by rule under this paragraph, the Board of 
 Governors shall incorporate all applicable data 
 standards promulgated by the Secretary of the 
 Treasury.''.
 (b) Data Standards for Information Filed or Submitted by Savings 
and Loan Holding Companies.--Section 10 of the Home Owners' Loan Act 
(12 U.S.C. 1467a) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(u) Data Standards.--
 ``(1) Requirement.--The Board shall adopt data standards 
 for all information that is regularly filed with or submitted 
 to the Board by any savings and loan holding company, or 
 subsidiary of a savings and loan holding company, other than a 
 depository institution, under this section.
 ``(2) Characteristics.--The data standards required by this 
 subsection shall, to the extent practicable--
 ``(A) render data fully searchable and machine-
 readable (as defined under section 3502 of title 44, 
 United States Code);
 ``(B) enable high quality data through schemas, 
 with accompanying metadata (as defined under section 
 3502 of title 44, United States Code) documented in 
 machine-readable taxonomy or ontology models, which 
 clearly define the data's semantic meaning as defined 
 by the underlying regulatory information collection 
 requirements;
 ``(C) assure that a data element or data asset that 
 exists to satisfy an underlying regulatory information 
 collection requirement be consistently identified as 
 such in associated machine-readable metadata;
 ``(D) be nonproprietary or made available under an 
 open license (as defined under section 3502 of title 
 44, United States Code);
 ``(E) incorporate standards developed and 
 maintained by voluntary consensus standards bodies; and
 ``(F) use, be consistent with, and implement 
 applicable accounting and reporting principles.
 ``(3) Incorporation of standards.--In adopting data 
 standards by rule under this section, the Board of Governors 
 shall incorporate all applicable data standards promulgated by 
 the Secretary of the Treasury.''.
 (c) Data Standards for Information Filed or Submitted by Bank 
Holding Companies.--Section 5 of the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 
(12 U.S.C. 1844) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(h) Data Standards.--
 ``(1) Requirement.--The Board shall adopt data standards 
 for all information that is regularly filed with or submitted 
 to the Board by any bank holding company in a report under 
 subsection (c).
 ``(2) Characteristics.--The data standards required by this 
 subsection shall, to the extent practicable--
 ``(A) render data fully searchable and machine-
 readable (as defined under section 3502 of title 44, 
 United States Code);
 ``(B) enable high quality data through schemas, 
 with accompanying metadata (as defined under section 
 3502 of title 44, United States Code) documented in 
 machine-readable taxonomy or ontology models, which 
 clearly define the data's semantic meaning as defined 
 by the underlying regulatory information collection 
 requirements;
 ``(C) assure that a data element or data asset that 
 exists to satisfy an underlying regulatory information 
 collection requirement be consistently identified as 
 such in associated machine-readable metadata;
 ``(D) be nonproprietary or made available under an 
 open license (as defined under section 3502 of title 
 44, United States Code);
 ``(E) incorporate standards developed and 
 maintained by voluntary consensus standards bodies; and
 ``(F) use, be consistent with, and implement 
 applicable accounting and reporting principles.
 ``(3) Incorporation of standards.--In adopting data 
 standards under this subsection, the Board shall incorporate 
 all applicable data standards promulgated by the Secretary of 
 the Treasury.''.
 (d) Data Standards for Information Submitted by Financial Market 
Utilities or Institutions Under the Payment, Clearing, and Settlement 
Supervision Act of 2010.--Section 809 of the Payment, Clearing, and 
Settlement Supervision Act of 2010 (12 U.S.C. 5468) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:
 ``(h) Data Standards.--
 ``(1) Requirement.--The Board of Governors shall adopt data 
 standards for all information that is regularly filed with or 
 submitted to the Board by any financial market utility or 
 financial institution under subsection (a) or (b).
 ``(2) Characteristics.--The data standards required by this 
 subsection shall, to the extent practicable--
 ``(A) render data fully searchable and machine-
 readable (as defined under section 3502 of title 44, 
 United States Code);
 ``(B) enable high quality data through schemas, 
 with accompanying metadata (as defined under section 
 3502 of title 44, United States Code) documented in 
 machine-readable taxonomy or ontology models, which 
 clearly define the data's semantic meaning as defined 
 by the underlying regulatory information collection 
 requirements;
 ``(C) assure that a data element or data asset that 
 exists to satisfy an underlying regulatory information 
 collection requirement be consistently identified as 
 such in associated machine-readable metadata;
 ``(D) be nonproprietary or made available under an 
 open license (as defined under section 3502 of title 
 44, United States Code);
 ``(E) incorporate standards developed and 
 maintained by voluntary consensus standards bodies; and
 ``(F) use, be consistent with, and implement 
 applicable accounting and reporting principles.
 ``(3) Incorporation of standards.--In adopting data 
 standards under this subsection, the Board of Governors shall 
 incorporate all applicable data standards promulgated by the 
 Secretary of the Treasury.''.

SEC. 602. OPEN DATA PUBLICATION BY THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE 
 FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM.

 The Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 226 et seq.) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 32. OPEN DATA PUBLICATION BY THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS.

 ``All public information published by the Board of Governors under 
this Act, the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, the Financial Stability 
Act of 2010, the Home Owners' Loan Act, the Payment, Clearing, and 
Settlement Supervision Act of 2010, or the Enhancing Financial 
Institution Safety and Soundness Act of 2010 shall be made available as 
an open Government data asset (as defined under section 3502 of title 
44, United States Code), freely available for download in bulk and 
rendered in a human-readable format and accessible via application 
programming interface where appropriate.''.

SEC. 603. RULEMAKING.

 (a) In General.--Not later than the end of the 2-year period 
beginning on the date the final rule is promulgated pursuant to section 
124(a) of the Financial Stability Act of 2010, the Board of Governors 
of the Federal Reserve System shall issue the regulations required 
under the amendments made by this title.
 (b) Scaling of Regulatory Requirements.--In issuing the regulations 
required under the amendments made by this title, the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System may scale data reporting 
requirements in order to reduce any unjustified burden on smaller 
regulated entities.
 (c) Minimizing Disruption.--In issuing the regulations required 
under the amendments made by this title, the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System shall seek to minimize disruptive changes to the 
persons affected by such regulations.

SEC. 604. NO NEW DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.

 Nothing in this title or the amendments made by this title shall be 
construed to require the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System to collect or make publicly available additional information 
under the statutes amended by this title, beyond information that was 
collected or made publicly available under such statutes before the 
date of the enactment of this Act.

 TITLE VII--NATIONAL CREDIT UNION ADMINISTRATION

SEC. 701. DATA STANDARDS.

 Title I of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1752 et seq.) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 132. DATA STANDARDS.

 ``(a) Requirement.--The Board shall, by rule, adopt data standards 
for all information and reports regularly filed with or submitted to 
the Administration under this Act.
 ``(b) Characteristics.--The data standards required by subsection 
(a) shall, to the extent practicable--
 ``(1) render data fully searchable and machine-readable (as 
 defined under section 3502 of title 44, United States Code);
 ``(2) enable high quality data through schemas, with 
 accompanying metadata (as defined under section 3502 of title 
 44, United States Code) documented in machine-readable taxonomy 
 or ontology models, which clearly define the data's semantic 
 meaning as defined by the underlying regulatory information 
 collection requirements;
 ``(3) assure that a data element or data asset that exists 
 to satisfy an underlying regulatory information collection 
 requirement be consistently identified as such in associated 
 machine-readable metadata;
 ``(4) be nonproprietary or made available under an open 
 license (as defined under section 3502 of title 44, United 
 States Code);
 ``(5) incorporate standards developed and maintained by 
 voluntary consensus standards bodies; and
 ``(6) use, be consistent with, and implement applicable 
 accounting and reporting principles.
 ``(c) Incorporation of Standards.--In adopting data standards by 
rule under this section, the Board shall incorporate all applicable 
data standards promulgated by the Secretary of the Treasury.''.

SEC. 702. OPEN DATA PUBLICATION BY THE NATIONAL CREDIT UNION 
 ADMINISTRATION.

 Title I of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1752 et seq.), 
as amended by section 801, is further amended by adding at the end the 
following:

``SEC. 133. OPEN DATA PUBLICATION.

 ``All public information published by the Administration under this 
title shall be made available as an open Government data asset (as 
defined under section 3502 of title 44, United States Code), freely 
available for download in bulk and rendered in a human-readable format 
and accessible via application programming interface where 
appropriate.''.

SEC. 703. RULEMAKING.

 (a) In General.--Not later than the end of the 2-year period 
beginning on the date the final rule is promulgated pursuant to section 
124(a) of the Financial Stability Act of 2010, the National Credit 
Union Administration Board shall issue the regulations required under 
the amendments made by this title.
 (b) Scaling of Regulatory Requirements.--In issuing the regulations 
required under the amendments made by this title, the National Credit 
Union Administration Board may scale data reporting requirements in 
order to reduce any unjustified burden on smaller regulated entities.
 (c) Minimizing Disruption.--In issuing the regulations required 
under the amendments made by this title, the National Credit Union 
Administration Board shall seek to minimize disruptive changes to the 
persons affected by such regulations.

SEC. 704. NO NEW DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.

 Nothing in this title or the amendments made by this title shall be 
construed to require the National Credit Union Administration Board to 
collect or make publicly available additional information under the 
statutes amended by this title, beyond information that was collected 
or made publicly available under such statutes before the date of the 
enactment of this Act.

 TITLE VIII--FEDERAL HOUSING FINANCE AGENCY

SEC. 801. DATA STANDARDS REQUIREMENTS FOR THE FEDERAL HOUSING FINANCE 
 AGENCY.

 Part 1 of subtitle A of the Federal Housing Enterprises Financial 
Safety and Soundness Act of 1992 (12 U.S.C. 4501 et seq.) is amended by 
adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 1319H. DATA STANDARDS.

 ``(a) Requirement.--The Agency shall, by rule, adopt data standards 
for all information that is regularly filed with or submitted to the 
Agency under this Act.
 ``(b) Characteristics.--The data standards required by subsection 
(a) shall, to the extent practicable--
 ``(1) render data fully searchable and machine-readable (as 
 defined under section 3502 of title 44, United States Code);
 ``(2) enable high quality data through schemas, with 
 accompanying metadata (as defined under section 3502 of title 
 44, United States Code) documented in machine-readable taxonomy 
 or ontology models, which clearly define the data's semantic 
 meaning as defined by the underlying regulatory information 
 collection requirements;
 ``(3) assure that a data element or data asset that exists 
 to satisfy an underlying regulatory information collection 
 requirement be consistently identified as such in associated 
 machine-readable metadata;
 ``(4) be nonproprietary or made available under an open 
 license (as defined under section 3502 of title 44, United 
 States Code);
 ``(5) incorporate standards developed and maintained by 
 voluntary consensus standards bodies; and
 ``(6) use, be consistent with, and implement applicable 
 accounting and reporting principles.
 ``(c) Incorporation of Standards.--In adopting data standards by 
rule under this section, the Agency shall incorporate all applicable 
data standards promulgated by the Secretary of the Treasury.''.

SEC. 802. OPEN DATA PUBLICATION BY THE FEDERAL HOUSING FINANCE AGENCY.

 Part 1 of subtitle A of the Federal Housing Enterprises Financial 
Safety and Soundness Act of 1992 (12 U.S.C. 4501 et seq.), as amended 
by section 901, is further amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 1319I. OPEN DATA PUBLICATION.

 ``All public information published by the Agency under this Act 
shall be made available as an open Government data asset (as defined 
under section 3502 of title 44, United States Code), freely available 
for download in bulk and rendered in a human-readable format and 
accessible via application programming interface where appropriate.''.

SEC. 803. RULEMAKING.

 (a) In General.--Not later than the end of the 2-year period 
beginning on the date the final rule is promulgated pursuant to section 
124(a) of the Financial Stability Act of 2010, the Federal Housing 
Finance Agency shall issue the regulations required under the 
amendments made by this title.
 (b) Minimizing Disruption.--In issuing the regulations required 
under the amendments made by this title, the Federal Housing Finance 
Agency shall seek to minimize disruptive changes to the persons 
affected by such regulations.

SEC. 804. NO NEW DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.

 Nothing in this title or the amendments made by this title shall be 
construed to require the Federal Housing Finance Agency to collect or 
make publicly available additional information under the statutes 
amended by this title, beyond information that was collected or made 
publicly available under such statutes before the date of the enactment 
of this Act.

 TITLE IX--MISCELLANEOUS

SEC. 901. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.

 (a) No Effect on Intellectual Property.--Nothing in this Act or the 
amendments made by this Act may be construed to alter the existing 
legal protections of copyrighted material or other intellectual 
property rights of any non-Federal person.
 (b) No Effect on Monetary Policy.--Nothing in this Act or the 
amendments made by this Act may be construed to apply to activities 
conducted, or data standards used, exclusively in connection with a 
monetary policy proposed or implemented by the Board of Governors of 
the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee.
 (c) Preservation of Agency Authority to Tailor Regulations.--
Nothing in this Act or the amendments made by this Act may be construed 
to--
 (1) require Federal agencies to incorporate identical data 
 standards to those promulgated by the Secretary of the 
 Treasury; or
 (2) prohibit Federal agencies from tailoring such standards 
 when issuing rules under this Act and the amendments made by 
 this Act to adopt data standards.

SEC. 902. CLASSIFIED AND PROTECTED INFORMATION.

 (a) In General.--Nothing in this Act or the amendments made by this 
Act shall require the disclosure to the public of--
 (1) information that would be exempt from disclosure under 
 section 552 of title 5, United States Code (commonly known as 
 the ``Freedom of Information Act''); or
 (2) information protected under section 552a of title 5, 
 United States Code (commonly known as the ``Privacy Act of 
 1974''), or section 6103 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (b) Existing Agency Regulations.--Nothing in this Act or the 
amendments made by this Act shall be construed to require the Secretary 
of the Treasury, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Comptroller of the Currency, the 
Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System, the National Credit Union Administration Board, 
or the Federal Housing Finance Agency to amend existing regulations and 
procedures regarding the sharing and disclosure of nonpublic 
information, including confidential supervisory information.

SEC. 903. DISCRETIONARY SURPLUS FUND.

 (a) In General.--The dollar amount specified under section 
7(a)(3)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 289(a)(3)(A)) is 
reduced by $137,000,000.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
take effect on September 30, 2022.

 DIVISION I--PUBLIC LANDS

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This division may be cited as the ``Protecting 
America's Wilderness Act''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this division is 
as follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
 TITLE I--COLORADO WILDERNESS

Sec. 101. Short title; definition.
Sec. 102. Additions to National Wilderness Preservation System in the 
 State of Colorado.
Sec. 103. Administrative provisions.
Sec. 104. Water.
Sec. 105. Sense of Congress.
Sec. 106. Department of defense study on impacts that the expansion of 
 wilderness designations in the western 
 united states would have on the readiness 
 of the armed forces of the united states 
 with respect to aviation training.
 TITLE II--NORTHWEST CALIFORNIA WILDERNESS, RECREATION, AND WORKING 
 FORESTS

Sec. 201. Short title.
Sec. 202. Definitions.
 Subtitle A--Restoration and Economic Development

Sec. 211. South Fork Trinity-Mad River Restoration Area.
Sec. 212. Redwood National and State Parks restoration.
Sec. 213. California Public Lands Remediation Partnership.
Sec. 214. Trinity Lake visitor center.
Sec. 215. Del Norte County visitor center.
Sec. 216. Management plans.
Sec. 217. Study; partnerships related to overnight accommodations.
 Subtitle B--Recreation

Sec. 221. Horse Mountain Special Management Area.
Sec. 222. Bigfoot National Recreation Trail.
Sec. 223. Elk Camp Ridge Recreation Trail.
Sec. 224. Trinity Lake Trail.
Sec. 225. Trails study.
Sec. 226. Construction of mountain bicycling routes.
Sec. 227. Partnerships.
 Subtitle C--Conservation

Sec. 231. Designation of wilderness.
Sec. 232. Administration of wilderness.
Sec. 233. Designation of potential wilderness.
Sec. 234. Designation of wild and scenic rivers.
Sec. 235. Sanhedrin Special Conservation Management Area.
 Subtitle D--Miscellaneous

Sec. 241. Maps and legal descriptions.
Sec. 242. Updates to land and resource management plans.
Sec. 243. Pacific Gas and Electric Company Utility facilities and 
 rights-of-way.
 TITLE III--CENTRAL COAST HERITAGE PROTECTION

Sec. 301. Short title.
Sec. 302. Definitions.
Sec. 303. Designation of wilderness.
Sec. 304. Designation of the Machesna Mountain Potential Wilderness.
Sec. 305. Administration of wilderness.
Sec. 306. Designation of Wild and Scenic Rivers.
Sec. 307. Designation of the Fox Mountain Potential Wilderness.
Sec. 308. Designation of scenic areas.
Sec. 309. Condor National Scenic Trail.
Sec. 310. Forest service study.
Sec. 311. Nonmotorized recreation opportunities.
Sec. 312. Use by members of Tribes.
 TITLE IV--SAN GABRIEL MOUNTAINS FOOTHILLS AND RIVERS PROTECTION

Sec. 401. Short title.
Sec. 402. Definition of State.
 Subtitle A--San Gabriel National Recreation Area

Sec. 411. Purposes.
Sec. 412. Definitions.
Sec. 413. San Gabriel National Recreation Area.
Sec. 414. Management.
Sec. 415. Acquisition of non-Federal land within Recreation Area.
Sec. 416. Water rights; water resource facilities; public roads; 
 utility facilities.
Sec. 417. San Gabriel National Recreation Area Public Advisory Council.
Sec. 418. San Gabriel National Recreation Area Partnership.
Sec. 419. Visitor services and facilities.
 Subtitle B--San Gabriel Mountains

Sec. 421. Definitions.
Sec. 422. National monument boundary modification.
Sec. 423. Designation of Wilderness Areas and Additions.
Sec. 424. Administration of Wilderness Areas and Additions.
Sec. 425. Designation of Wild and Scenic Rivers.
Sec. 426. Water rights.
 TITLE V--RIM OF THE VALLEY CORRIDOR PRESERVATION

Sec. 501. Short title.
Sec. 502. Boundary adjustment; land acquisition; administration.
 TITLE VI--WILD OLYMPICS WILDERNESS AND WILD AND SCENIC RIVERS

Sec. 601. Short title.
Sec. 602. Designation of olympic national forest wilderness areas.
Sec. 603. Wild and scenic river designations.
Sec. 604. Existing rights and withdrawal.
Sec. 605. Treaty rights.
 TITLE VII--CERRO DE LA OLLA WILDERNESS ESTABLISHMENT

Sec. 701. Designation of Cerro de la Olla Wilderness.
 TITLE VIII--STUDY ON FLOOD RISK MITIGATION

Sec. 801. Study on Flood Risk Mitigation.
 TITLE IX--MISCELLANEOUS

Sec. 901. Promoting health and wellness for veterans and 
 servicemembers.
Sec. 902. Fire, insects, and diseases.
Sec. 903. Military activities.

 TITLE I--COLORADO WILDERNESS

SEC. 101. SHORT TITLE; DEFINITION.

 (a) Short Title.--This title may be cited as the ``Colorado 
Wilderness Act of 2020''.
 (b) Secretary Defined.--As used in this title, the term 
``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of 
Agriculture, as appropriate.

SEC. 102. ADDITIONS TO NATIONAL WILDERNESS PRESERVATION SYSTEM IN THE 
 STATE OF COLORADO.

 (a) Additions.--Section 2(a) of the Colorado Wilderness Act of 1993 
(Public Law 103-77; 107 Stat. 756; 16 U.S.C. 1132 note) is amended by 
adding at the end the following paragraphs:
 ``(23) Certain lands managed by the Colorado River Valley 
 Field Office of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately 316 acres, as generally depicted on a map titled 
 `Maroon Bells Addition Proposed Wilderness', dated July 20, 
 2018, which is hereby incorporated in and shall be deemed to be 
 a part of the Maroon Bells-Snowmass Wilderness Area designated 
 by Public Law 88-577.
 ``(24) Certain lands managed by the Gunnison Field Office 
 of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately 
 38,217 acres, as generally depicted on a map titled `Redcloud & 
 Handies Peak Proposed Wilderness', dated October 9, 2019, which 
 shall be known as the Redcloud Peak Wilderness.
 ``(25) Certain lands managed by the Gunnison Field Office 
 of the Bureau of Land Management or located in the Grand Mesa, 
 Uncompahgre, and Gunnison National Forests, which comprise 
 approximately 26,734 acres, as generally depicted on a map 
 titled `Redcloud & Handies Peak Proposed Wilderness', dated 
 October 9, 2019, which shall be known as the Handies Peak 
 Wilderness.
 ``(26) Certain lands managed by the Royal Gorge Field 
 Office of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately 16,481 acres, as generally depicted on a map 
 titled `Table Mountain & McIntyre Hills Proposed Wilderness', 
 dated November 7, 2019, which shall be known as the McIntyre 
 Hills Wilderness.
 ``(27) Certain lands managed by the Colorado River Valley 
 Field Office of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately 10,282 acres, as generally depicted on a map 
 titled `Grand Hogback Proposed Wilderness', dated October 16, 
 2019, which shall be known as the Grand Hogback Wilderness.
 ``(28) Certain lands managed by the Grand Junction Field 
 Office of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately 25,624 acres, as generally depicted on a map 
 titled `Demaree Canyon Proposed Wilderness', dated October 9, 
 2019, which shall be known as the Demaree Canyon Wilderness.
 ``(29) Certain lands managed by the Grand Junction Field 
 Office of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately 28,279 acres, as generally depicted on a map 
 titled `Little Books Cliff Proposed Wilderness', dated October 
 9, 2019, which shall be known as the Little Bookcliffs 
 Wilderness.
 ``(30) Certain lands managed by the Colorado River Valley 
 Field Office of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately 14,886 acres, as generally depicted on a map 
 titled `Bull Gulch & Castle Peak Proposed Wilderness', dated 
 January 29, 2020, which shall be known as the Bull Gulch 
 Wilderness.
 ``(31) Certain lands managed by the Colorado River Valley 
 Field Office of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately 12,016 acres, as generally depicted on a map 
 titled `Bull Gulch & Castle Peak Proposed Wilderness Areas', 
 dated January 29, 2020, which shall be known as the Castle Peak 
 Wilderness.''.
 (b) Further Additions.--The following lands in the State of 
Colorado administered by the Bureau of Land Management or the United 
States Forest Service are hereby designated as wilderness and, 
therefore, as components of the National Wilderness Preservation 
System:
 (1) Certain lands managed by the Colorado River Valley 
 Field Office of the Bureau of Land Management or located in the 
 White River National Forest, which comprise approximately 
 19,240 acres, as generally depicted on a map titled 
 ``Assignation Ridge Proposed Wilderness'', dated November 12, 
 2019, which shall be known as the Assignation Ridge Wilderness.
 (2) Certain lands managed by the Royal Gorge Field Office 
 of the Bureau of Land Management or located in the Pike and San 
 Isabel National Forests, which comprise approximately 23,116 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map titled ``Badger Creek 
 Proposed Wilderness'', dated November 7, 2019, which shall be 
 known as the Badger Creek Wilderness.
 (3) Certain lands managed by the Royal Gorge Field Office 
 of the Bureau of Land Management or located in the Pike and San 
 Isabel National Forests, which comprise approximately 35,251 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map titled ``Beaver Creek 
 Proposed Wilderness'', dated November 7, 2019, which shall be 
 known as the Beaver Creek Wilderness.
 (4) Certain lands managed by the Royal Gorge Field Office 
 of the Bureau of Land Management or the Bureau of Reclamation 
 or located in the Pike and San Isabel National Forests, which 
 comprise approximately 32,884 acres, as generally depicted on a 
 map titled ``Grape Creek Proposed Wilderness'', dated November 
 7, 2019, which shall be known as the Grape Creek Wilderness.
 (5) Certain lands managed by the Grand Junction Field 
 Office of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately 13,351 acres, as generally depicted on a map 
 titled ``North & South Bangs Canyon Proposed Wilderness'', 
 dated October 9, 2019, which shall be known as the North Bangs 
 Canyon Wilderness.
 (6) Certain lands managed by the Grand Junction Field 
 Office of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately 5,144 acres, as generally depicted on a map 
 titled ``North & South Bangs Canyon Proposed Wilderness'', 
 dated October 9, 2019, which shall be known as the South Bangs 
 Canyon Wilderness.
 (7) Certain lands managed by the Grand Junction Field 
 Office of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise 
 approximately 26,624 acres, as generally depicted on a map 
 titled ``Unaweep & Palisade Proposed Wilderness'', dated 
 October 9, 2019, which shall be known as The Palisade 
 Wilderness.
 (8) Certain lands managed by the Grand Junction Field 
 Office of the Bureau of Land Management or located in the Grand 
 Mesa, Uncompaghre, and Gunnison National Forests, which 
 comprise approximately 19,776 acres, as generally depicted on a 
 map titled ``Unaweep & Palisade Proposed Wilderness'', dated 
 October 9, 2019, which shall be known as the Unaweep 
 Wilderness.
 (9) Certain lands managed by the Grand Junction Field 
 Office of the Bureau of Land Management and Uncompaghre Field 
 Office of the Bureau of Land Management and in the Manti-LaSal 
 National Forest, which comprise approximately 37,637 acres, as 
 generally depicted on a map titled ``Sewemup Mesa Proposed 
 Wilderness'', dated November 7, 2019, which shall be known as 
 the Sewemup Mesa Wilderness.
 (10) Certain lands managed by the Kremmling Field Office of 
 the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately 31 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map titled ``Platte River 
 Addition Proposed Wilderness'', dated July 20, 2018, and which 
 are hereby incorporated in and shall be deemed to be part of 
 the Platte River Wilderness designated by Public Law 98-550.
 (11) Certain lands managed by the Uncompahgre Field Office 
 of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately 
 17,587 acres, as generally depicted on a map titled ``Roubideau 
 Proposed Wilderness'', dated October 9, 2019, which shall be 
 known as the Roubideau Wilderness.
 (12) Certain lands managed by the Uncompahgre Field Office 
 of the Bureau of Land Management or located in the Grand Mesa, 
 Uncompaghre, and Gunnison National Forests, which comprise 
 approximately 12,102 acres, as generally depicted on a map 
 titled ``Norwood Canyon Proposed Wilderness'', dated November 
 7, 2019, which shall be known as the Norwood Canyon Wilderness.
 (13) Certain lands managed by the Tres Rios Field Office of 
 the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately 
 24,475 acres, as generally depicted on a map titled ``Papoose & 
 Cross Canyon Proposed Wilderness'', and dated January 29, 2020, 
 which shall be known as the Cross Canyon Wilderness.
 (14) Certain lands managed by the Tres Rios Field Office of 
 the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately 
 21,220 acres, as generally depicted on a map titled ``McKenna 
 Peak Proposed Wilderness'', dated October 16, 2019, which shall 
 be known as the McKenna Peak Wilderness.
 (15) Certain lands managed by the Tres Rios Field Office of 
 the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately 
 14,270 acres, as generally depicted on a map titled ``Weber-
 Menefee Mountain Proposed Wilderness'', dated October 9, 2019, 
 which shall be known as the Weber-Menefee Mountain Wilderness.
 (16) Certain lands managed by the Uncompahgre and Tres Rios 
 Field Offices of the Bureau of Land Management or the Bureau of 
 Reclamation, which comprise approximately 33,351 acres, as 
 generally depicted on a map titled ``Dolores River Canyon 
 Proposed Wilderness'', dated November 7, 2019, which shall be 
 known as the Dolores River Canyon Wilderness.
 (17) Certain lands managed by the Royal Gorge Field Office 
 of the Bureau of Land Management or located in the Pike and San 
 Isabel National Forests, which comprise approximately 17,922 
 acres, as generally depicted on a map titled ``Browns Canyon 
 Proposed Wilderness'', dated October 9, 2019, which shall be 
 known as the Browns Canyon Wilderness.
 (18) Certain lands managed by the San Luis Field Office of 
 the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately 
 10,527 acres, as generally depicted on a map titled ``San Luis 
 Hills Proposed Wilderness'', dated October 9, 2019 which shall 
 be known as the San Luis Hills Wilderness.
 (19) Certain lands managed by the Royal Gorge Field Office 
 of the Bureau of Land Management, which comprise approximately 
 23,559 acres, as generally depicted on a map titled ``Table 
 Mountain & McIntyre Hills Proposed Wilderness'', dated November 
 7, 2019, which shall be known as the Table Mountain Wilderness.
 (20) Certain lands managed by the Tres Rios Field Office of 
 the Bureau of Land Management or located in the San Juan 
 National Forest, which comprise approximately 10,844 acres, as 
 generally depicted on a map titled ``North & South Ponderosa 
 Gorge Proposed Wilderness'', and dated January 31, 2020, which 
 shall be known as the North Ponderosa Gorge Wilderness.
 (21) Certain lands managed by the Tres Rios Field Office of 
 the Bureau of Land Management or located in the San Juan 
 National Forest, which comprise approximately 12,393 acres, as 
 generally depicted on a map titled ``North & South Ponderosa 
 Gorge Proposed Wilderness'', and dated January 31, 2020 which 
 shall be known as the South Ponderosa Gorge Wilderness.
 (22) Certain lands managed by the Little Snake Field Office 
 of the Bureau of Land Management which comprise approximately 
 33,168 acres, as generally depicted on a map titled ``Diamond 
 Breaks Proposed Wilderness'', and dated January 31, 2020 which 
 shall be known as the Diamond Breaks Wilderness.
 (23) Certain lands managed by the Tres Rios Field Office of 
 the Bureau of Land Management which comprises approximately 
 4,782 acres, as generally depicted on the map titled ``Papoose 
 & Cross Canyon Proposed Wilderness'''', and dated January 29, 
 2020 which shall be known as the Papoose Canyon Wilderness.
 (c) West Elk Addition.--Certain lands in the State of Colorado 
administered by the Gunnison Field Office of the Bureau of Land 
Management, the United States National Park Service, and the Bureau of 
Reclamation, which comprise approximately 6,695 acres, as generally 
depicted on a map titled ``West Elk Addition Proposed Wilderness'', 
dated October 9, 2019, are hereby designated as wilderness and, 
therefore, as components of the National Wilderness Preservation System 
and are hereby incorporated in and shall be deemed to be a part of the 
West Elk Wilderness designated by Public Law 88-577. The boundary 
adjacent to Blue Mesa Reservoir shall be 50 feet landward from the 
water's edge, and shall change according to the water level.
 (d) Blue Mesa Reservoir.--If the Bureau of Reclamation determines 
that lands within the West Elk Wilderness Addition are necessary for 
future expansion of the Blue Mesa Reservoir, the Secretary shall by 
publication of a revised boundary description in the Federal Register 
revise the boundary of the West Elk Wilderness Addition.
 (e) Maps and Descriptions.--As soon as practicable after the date 
of enactment of the Act, the Secretary shall file a map and a boundary 
description of each area designated as wilderness by this section with 
the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives and 
the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate. Each map 
and boundary description shall have the same force and effect as if 
included in this title, except that the Secretary may correct clerical 
and typographical errors in the map or boundary description. The maps 
and boundary descriptions shall be on file and available for public 
inspection in the Office of the Director of the Bureau of Land 
Management, Department of the Interior, and in the Office of the Chief 
of the Forest Service, Department of Agriculture, as appropriate.
 (f) State and Private Lands.--Lands within the exterior boundaries 
of any wilderness area designated under this section that are owned by 
a private entity or by the State of Colorado, including lands 
administered by the Colorado State Land Board, shall be included within 
such wilderness area if such lands are acquired by the United States. 
Such lands may be acquired by the United States only as provided in the 
Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.).

SEC. 103. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.

 (a) In General.--Subject to valid existing rights, lands designated 
as wilderness by this title shall be managed by the Secretary in 
accordance with the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.) and this 
title, except that, with respect to any wilderness areas designated by 
this title, any reference in the Wilderness Act to the effective date 
of the Wilderness Act shall be deemed to be a reference to the date of 
enactment of this Act.
 (b) Grazing.--Grazing of livestock in wilderness areas designated 
by this title shall be administered in accordance with the provisions 
of section 4(d)(4) of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1133(d)(4)), as 
further interpreted by section 108 of Public Law 96-560, and the 
guidelines set forth in appendix A of House Report 101-405 of the 101st 
Congress.
 (c) State Jurisdiction.--As provided in section 4(d)(7) of the 
Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1133(d)(7)), nothing in this title shall be 
construed as affecting the jurisdiction or responsibilities of the 
State of Colorado with respect to wildlife and fish in Colorado.
 (d) Buffer Zones.--
 (1) In general.--Nothing in this title creates a protective 
 perimeter or buffer zone around any area designated as 
 wilderness by this title.
 (2) Activities outside wilderness.--The fact that an 
 activity or use on land outside the areas designated as 
 wilderness by this title can be seen or heard within the 
 wilderness shall not preclude the activity or use outside the 
 boundary of the wilderness.
 (e) Military Helicopter Overflights and Operations.--
 (1) In general.--Nothing in this title restricts or 
 precludes--
 (A) low-level overflights of military helicopters 
 over the areas designated as wilderness by this title, 
 including military overflights that can be seen or 
 heard within any wilderness area;
 (B) military flight testing and evaluation;
 (C) the designation or creation of new units of 
 special use airspace, or the establishment of military 
 flight training routes over any wilderness area; or
 (D) helicopter operations at designated landing 
 zones within the potential wilderness areas established 
 by subsection (i)(1).
 (2) Aerial navigation training exercises.--The Colorado 
 Army National Guard, through the High-Altitude Army National 
 Guard Aviation Training Site, may conduct aerial navigation 
 training maneuver exercises over, and associated operations 
 within, the potential wilderness areas designated by this 
 title--
 (A) in a manner and degree consistent with the 
 memorandum of understanding dated August 4, 1987, 
 entered into among the Colorado Army National Guard, 
 the Bureau of Land Management, and the Forest Service; 
 or
 (B) in a manner consistent with any subsequent 
 memorandum of understanding entered into among the 
 Colorado Army National Guard, the Bureau of Land 
 Management, and the Forest Service.
 (f) Running Events.--The Secretary may continue to authorize 
competitive running events currently permitted in the Redcloud Peak 
Wilderness Area and Handies Peak Wilderness Area in a manner compatible 
with the preservation of such areas as wilderness.
 (g) Land Trades.--If the Secretary trades privately owned land 
within the perimeter of the Redcloud Peak Wilderness Area or the 
Handies Peak Wilderness Area in exchange for Federal land, then such 
Federal land shall be located in Hinsdale County, Colorado.
 (h) Recreational Climbing.--Nothing in this title prohibits 
recreational rock climbing activities in the wilderness areas, such as 
the placement, use, and maintenance of fixed anchors, including any 
fixed anchor established before the date of the enactment of this Act--
 (1) in accordance with the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 
 et seq.); and
 (2) subject to any terms and conditions determined to be 
 necessary by the Secretary.
 (i) Potential Wilderness Designations.--
 (1) In general.--The following lands are designated as 
 potential wilderness areas:
 (A) Certain lands managed by the Colorado River 
 Valley Field Office of the Bureau of Land Management, 
 which comprise approximately 7,376 acres, as generally 
 depicted on a map titled ``Pisgah East & West Proposed 
 Wilderness'' and dated October 16, 2019, which, upon 
 designation as wilderness under paragraph (2), shall be 
 known as the Pisgah East Wilderness.
 (B) Certain lands managed by the Colorado River 
 Valley Field Office of the Bureau of Land Management, 
 which comprise approximately 6,828 acres, as generally 
 depicted on a map titled ``Pisgah East & West Proposed 
 Wilderness'' and dated October 16, 2019, which, upon 
 designation as wilderness under paragraph (2), shall be 
 known as the Pisgah West Wilderness.
 (C) Certain lands managed by the Colorado River 
 Valley Field Office of the Bureau of Land Management or 
 located in the White River National Forest, which 
 comprise approximately 16,101 acres, as generally 
 depicted on a map titled ``Flat Tops Proposed 
 Wilderness Addition'', dated October 9, 2019, and 
 which, upon designation as wilderness under paragraph 
 (2), shall be incorporated in and shall be deemed to be 
 a part of the Flat Tops Wilderness designated by Public 
 Law 94-146.
 (2) Designation as wilderness.--Lands designated as a 
 potential wilderness area by subparagraphs (A) through (C) of 
 paragraph (1) shall be designated as wilderness on the date on 
 which the Secretary publishes in the Federal Register a notice 
 that all nonconforming uses of those lands authorized by 
 subsection (e) in the potential wilderness area that would be 
 in violation of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.) 
 have ceased. Such publication in the Federal Register and 
 designation as wilderness shall occur for the potential 
 wilderness area as the nonconforming uses cease in that 
 potential wilderness area and designation as wilderness is not 
 dependent on cessation of nonconforming uses in the other 
 potential wilderness area.
 (3) Management.--Except for activities provided for under 
 subsection (e), lands designated as a potential wilderness area 
 by paragraph (1) shall be managed by the Secretary in 
 accordance with the Wilderness Act as wilderness pending the 
 designation of such lands as wilderness under this subsection.

SEC. 104. WATER.

 (a) Effect on Water Rights.--Nothing in this title--
 (1) affects the use or allocation, in existence on the date 
 of enactment of this Act, of any water, water right, or 
 interest in water;
 (2) affects any vested absolute or decreed conditional 
 water right in existence on the date of enactment of this Act, 
 including any water right held by the United States;
 (3) affects any interstate water compact in existence on 
 the date of enactment of this Act;
 (4) authorizes or imposes any new reserved Federal water 
 rights; and
 (5) shall be considered to be a relinquishment or reduction 
 of any water rights reserved or appropriated by the United 
 States in the State of Colorado on or before the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.
 (b) Midstream Areas.--
 (1) Purpose.--The purpose of this subsection is to protect 
 for the benefit and enjoyment of present and future 
 generations--
 (A) the unique and nationally important values of 
 areas designated as wilderness by section 102(b) 
 (including the geological, cultural, archaeological, 
 paleontological, natural, scientific, recreational, 
 environmental, biological, wilderness, wildlife, 
 riparian, historical, educational, and scenic resources 
 of the public land); and
 (B) the water resources of area streams, based on 
 seasonally available flows, that are necessary to 
 support aquatic, riparian, and terrestrial species and 
 communities.
 (2) Wilderness water rights.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary shall ensure that 
 any water rights within the wilderness designated by 
 section 102(b) required to fulfill the purposes of such 
 wilderness are secured in accordance with subparagraphs 
 (B) through (G).
 (B) State law.--
 (i) Procedural requirements.--Any water 
 rights for which the Secretary pursues 
 adjudication shall be appropriated, 
 adjudicated, changed, and administered in 
 accordance with the procedural requirements and 
 priority system of State law.
 (ii) Establishment of water rights.--
 (I) In general.--Except as provided 
 in subclause (II), the purposes and 
 other substantive characteristics of 
 the water rights pursued under this 
 paragraph shall be established in 
 accordance with State law.
 (II) Exception.--Notwithstanding 
 subclause (I) and in accordance with 
 this title, the Secretary may 
 appropriate and seek adjudication of 
 water rights to maintain surface water 
 levels and stream flows on and across 
 the wilderness designated by section 
 102(b) to fulfill the purposes of such 
 wilderness.
 (C) Deadline.--The Secretary shall promptly, but 
 not earlier than January 1, 2021, appropriate the water 
 rights required to fulfill the purposes of the 
 wilderness designated by section 102(b).
 (D) Required determination.--The Secretary shall 
 not pursue adjudication for any instream flow water 
 rights unless the Secretary makes a determination 
 pursuant to subparagraph (E)(ii) or (F).
 (E) Cooperative enforcement.--
 (i) In general.--The Secretary shall not 
 pursue adjudication of any Federal instream 
 flow water rights established under this 
 paragraph if--
 (I) the Secretary determines, upon 
 adjudication of the water rights by the 
 Colorado Water Conservation Board, that 
 the Board holds water rights sufficient 
 in priority, amount, and timing to 
 fulfill the purposes of this 
 subsection; and
 (II) the Secretary has entered into 
 a perpetual agreement with the Colorado 
 Water Conservation Board to ensure full 
 exercise, protection, and enforcement 
 of the State water rights within the 
 wilderness to reliably fulfill the 
 purposes of this subsection.
 (ii) Adjudication.--If the Secretary 
 determines that the provisions of clause (i) 
 have not been met, the Secretary shall 
 adjudicate and exercise any Federal water 
 rights required to fulfill the purposes of the 
 wilderness in accordance with this paragraph.
 (F) Insufficient water rights.--If the Colorado 
 Water Conservation Board modifies the instream flow 
 water rights obtained under subparagraph (E) to such a 
 degree that the Secretary determines that water rights 
 held by the State are insufficient to fulfill the 
 purposes of this title, the Secretary shall adjudicate 
 and exercise Federal water rights required to fulfill 
 the purposes of this title in accordance with 
 subparagraph (B).
 (G) Failure to comply.--The Secretary shall 
 promptly act to exercise and enforce the water rights 
 described in subparagraph (E) if the Secretary 
 determines that--
 (i) the State is not exercising its water 
 rights consistent with subparagraph (E)(i)(I); 
 or
 (ii) the agreement described in 
 subparagraph (E)(i)(II) is not fulfilled or 
 complied with sufficiently to fulfill the 
 purposes of this title.
 (3) Water resource facility.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of law, beginning on the date of enactment of this 
 title, neither the President nor any other officer, employee, 
 or agent of the United States shall fund, assist, authorize, or 
 issue a license or permit for development of any new irrigation 
 and pumping facility, reservoir, water conservation work, 
 aqueduct, canal, ditch, pipeline, well, hydropower project, 
 transmission, other ancillary facility, or other water, 
 diversion, storage, or carriage structure in the wilderness 
 designated by section 102(b).
 (c) Access and Operation.--
 (1) Definition.--As used in this subsection, the term 
 ``water resource facility'' means irrigation and pumping 
 facilities, reservoirs, water conservation works, aqueducts, 
 canals, ditches, pipelines, wells, hydropower projects, 
 transmission and other ancillary facilities, and other water 
 diversion, storage, and carriage structures.
 (2) Access to water resource facilities.--Subject to the 
 provisions of this subsection, the Secretary shall allow 
 reasonable access to water resource facilities in existence on 
 the date of enactment of this Act within the areas described in 
 sections 102(b) and 102(c), including motorized access where 
 necessary and customarily employed on routes existing as of the 
 date of enactment of this Act.
 (3) Access routes.--Existing access routes within such 
 areas customarily employed as of the date of enactment of this 
 Act may be used, maintained, repaired, and replaced to the 
 extent necessary to maintain their present function, design, 
 and serviceable operation, so long as such activities have no 
 increased adverse impacts on the resources and values of the 
 areas described in sections 102(b) and 102(c) than existed as 
 of the date of enactment of this Act.
 (4) Use of water resource facilities.--Subject to the 
 provisions of this subsection and subsection (a)(4), the 
 Secretary shall allow water resource facilities existing on the 
 date of enactment of this Act within areas described in 
 sections 102(b) and 102(c) to be used, operated, maintained, 
 repaired, and replaced to the extent necessary for the 
 continued exercise, in accordance with Colorado State law, of 
 vested water rights adjudicated for use in connection with such 
 facilities by a court of competent jurisdiction prior to the 
 date of enactment of this Act. The impact of an existing 
 facility on the water resources and values of the area shall 
 not be increased as a result of changes in the adjudicated type 
 of use of such facility as of the date of enactment of this 
 Act.
 (5) Repair and maintenance.--Water resource facilities, and 
 access routes serving such facilities, existing within the 
 areas described in sections 102(b) and 102(c) on the date of 
 enactment of this Act shall be maintained and repaired when and 
 to the extent necessary to prevent increased adverse impacts on 
 the resources and values of the areas described in sections 
 102(b) and 102(c).

SEC. 105. SENSE OF CONGRESS.

 It is the sense of Congress that military aviation training on 
Federal public lands in Colorado, including the training conducted at 
the High-Altitude Army National Guard Aviation Training Site, is 
critical to the national security of the United States and the 
readiness of the Armed Forces.

SEC. 106. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE STUDY ON IMPACTS THAT THE EXPANSION OF 
 WILDERNESS DESIGNATIONS IN THE WESTERN UNITED STATES 
 WOULD HAVE ON THE READINESS OF THE ARMED FORCES OF THE 
 UNITED STATES WITH RESPECT TO AVIATION TRAINING.

 (a) Study Required.--The Secretary of Defense shall conduct a study 
on the impacts that the expansion of wilderness designations in the 
Western United States would have on the readiness of the Armed Forces 
of the United States with respect to aviation training.
 (b) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the Committees on 
Armed Services of the Senate and House of Representatives a report on 
the study required under subsection (a).

 TITLE II--NORTHWEST CALIFORNIA WILDERNESS, RECREATION, AND WORKING 
 FORESTS

SEC. 201. SHORT TITLE.

 This title may be cited as the ``Northwest California Wilderness, 
Recreation, and Working Forests Act''.

SEC. 202. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means--
 (A) with respect to land under the jurisdiction of 
 the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of 
 Agriculture; and
 (B) with respect to land under the jurisdiction of 
 the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of the 
 Interior.
 (2) State.--The term ``State'' means the State of 
 California.

 Subtitle A--Restoration and Economic Development

SEC. 211. SOUTH FORK TRINITY-MAD RIVER RESTORATION AREA.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Collaboratively developed.--The term ``collaboratively 
 developed'' means projects that are developed and implemented 
 through a collaborative process that--
 (A) includes--
 (i) appropriate Federal, State, and local 
 agencies; and
 (ii) multiple interested persons 
 representing diverse interests; and
 (B) is transparent and nonexclusive.
 (2) Plantation.--The term ``plantation'' means a forested 
 area that has been artificially established by planting or 
 seeding.
 (3) Restoration.--The term ``restoration'' means the 
 process of assisting the recovery of an ecosystem that has been 
 degraded, damaged, or destroyed by establishing the 
 composition, structure, pattern, and ecological processes 
 necessary to facilitate terrestrial and aquatic ecosystem 
 sustainability, resilience, and health under current and future 
 conditions.
 (4) Restoration area.--The term ``restoration area'' means 
 the South Fork Trinity-Mad River Restoration Area, established 
 by subsection (b).
 (5) Shaded fuel break.--The term ``shaded fuel break'' 
 means a vegetation treatment that effectively addresses all 
 project-generated slash and that retains: adequate canopy cover 
 to suppress plant regrowth in the forest understory following 
 treatment; the longest lived trees that provide the most shade 
 over the longest period of time; the healthiest and most 
 vigorous trees with the greatest potential for crown-growth in 
 plantations and in natural stands adjacent to plantations; and 
 all mature hardwoods, when practicable.
 (6) Stewardship contract.--The term ``stewardship 
 contract'' means an agreement or contract entered into under 
 section 604 of the Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003 (16 
 U.S.C. 6591c).
 (7) Wildland-urban interface.--The term ``wildland-urban 
 interface'' has the meaning given the term by section 101 of 
 the Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 2003 (16 U.S.C. 6511).
 (b) Establishment.--Subject to valid existing rights, there is 
established the South Fork Trinity-Mad River Restoration Area, 
comprising approximately 729,089 acres of Federal land administered by 
the Forest Service and approximately 1,280 acres of Federal land 
administered by the Bureau of Land Management, as generally depicted on 
the map entitled ``South Fork Trinity-Mad River Restoration Area--
Proposed'' and dated July 3, 2018, to be known as the South Fork 
Trinity-Mad River Restoration Area.
 (c) Purposes.--The purposes of the restoration area are to--
 (1) establish, restore, and maintain fire-resilient forest 
 structures containing late successional forest structure 
 characterized by large trees and multistoried canopies, as 
 ecologically appropriate;
 (2) protect late successional reserves;
 (3) enhance the restoration of Federal lands within the 
 restoration area;
 (4) reduce the threat posed by wildfires to communities 
 within the restoration area;
 (5) protect and restore aquatic habitat and anadromous 
 fisheries;
 (6) protect the quality of water within the restoration 
 area; and
 (7) allow visitors to enjoy the scenic, recreational, 
 natural, cultural, and wildlife values of the restoration area.
 (d) Management.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall manage the restoration 
 area--
 (A) in a manner consistent with the purposes 
 described in subsection (c);
 (B) in a manner that--
 (i) in the case of the Forest Service, 
 prioritizes restoration of the restoration area 
 over other nonemergency vegetation management 
 projects on the portions of the Six Rivers and 
 Shasta-Trinity National Forests in Humboldt and 
 Trinity Counties; and
 (ii) in the case of the United States Fish 
 and Wildlife Service, establishes with the 
 Forest Service an agreement for cooperation to 
 ensure timely completion of consultation 
 required by section 7 of the Endangered Species 
 Act (15 U.S.C. 1536) on restoration projects 
 within the restoration area and agreement to 
 maintain and exchange information on planning 
 schedules and priorities on a regular basis;
 (C) in accordance with--
 (i) the laws (including regulations) and 
 rules applicable to the National Forest System 
 for land managed by the Forest Service;
 (ii) the Federal Land Policy and Management 
 Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) for land 
 managed by the Bureau of Land Management;
 (iii) this title; and
 (iv) any other applicable law (including 
 regulations); and
 (D) in a manner consistent with congressional 
 intent that consultation for restoration projects 
 within the restoration area is completed in a timely 
 and efficient manner.
 (2) Conflict of laws.--
 (A) In general.--The establishment of the 
 restoration area shall not change the management status 
 of any land or water that is designated wilderness or 
 as a wild and scenic river, including lands and waters 
 designated by this title.
 (B) Resolution of conflict.--If there is a conflict 
 between the laws applicable to the areas described in 
 subparagraph (A) and this section, the more restrictive 
 provision shall control.
 (3) Uses.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary shall only allow 
 uses of the restoration area that the Secretary 
 determines would further the purposes described in 
 subsection (c).
 (B) Priority.--The Secretary shall prioritize 
 restoration activities within the restoration area.
 (C) Limitation.--Nothing in this section shall 
 limit the Secretary's ability to plan, approve, or 
 prioritize activities outside of the restoration area.
 (4) Wildland fire.--
 (A) In general.--Nothing in this section prohibits 
 the Secretary, in cooperation with other Federal, 
 State, and local agencies, as appropriate, from 
 conducting wildland fire operations in the restoration 
 area, consistent with the purposes of this section.
 (B) Priority.--The Secretary may use prescribed 
 burning and managed wildland fire to the fullest extent 
 practicable to achieve the purposes of this section.
 (5) Road decommissioning.--
 (A) In general.--To the extent practicable, the 
 Secretary shall decommission unneeded National Forest 
 System roads identified for decommissioning and 
 unauthorized roads identified for decommissioning 
 within the restoration area--
 (i) subject to appropriations;
 (ii) consistent with the analysis required 
 by subparts A and B of part 212 of title 36, 
 Code of Federal Regulations; and
 (iii) in accordance with existing law.
 (B) Additional requirement.--In making 
 determinations regarding road decommissioning under 
 subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall consult with--
 (i) appropriate State, Tribal, and local 
 governmental entities; and
 (ii) members of the public.
 (C) Definition.--As used in subparagraph (A), the 
 term ``decommission'' means--
 (i) to reestablish vegetation on a road; 
 and
 (ii) to restore any natural drainage, 
 watershed function, or other ecological 
 processes that are disrupted or adversely 
 impacted by the road by removing or 
 hydrologically disconnecting the road prism.
 (6) Vegetation management.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraphs (B), (C), 
 and (D), the Secretary may conduct vegetation 
 management projects in the restoration area only where 
 necessary to--
 (i) maintain or restore the characteristics 
 of ecosystem composition and structure;
 (ii) reduce wildfire risk to communities by 
 promoting forests that are fire resilient;
 (iii) improve the habitat of threatened, 
 endangered, or sensitive species;
 (iv) protect or improve water quality; or
 (v) enhance the restoration of lands within 
 the restoration area.
 (B) Additional requirements.--
 (i) Shaded fuel breaks.--In carrying out 
 subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall 
 prioritize, as practicable, the establishment 
 of a network of shaded fuel breaks within--
 (I) the portions of the wildland-
 urban interface that are within 150 
 feet from private property contiguous 
 to Federal land;
 (II) 150 feet from any road that is 
 open to motorized vehicles as of the 
 date of enactment of this Act--
 (aa) except that, where 
 topography or other conditions 
 require, the Secretary may 
 establish shaded fuel breaks up 
 to 275 feet from a road so long 
 as the combined total width of 
 the shaded fuel breaks for both 
 sides of the road does not 
 exceed 300 feet; and
 (bb) provided that the 
 Secretary shall include 
 vegetation treatments within a 
 minimum of 25 feet of the road 
 where practicable, feasible, 
 and appropriate as part of any 
 shaded fuel break; or
 (III) 150 feet of any plantation.
 (ii) Plantations; riparian reserves.--The 
 Secretary may undertake vegetation management 
 projects--
 (I) in areas within the restoration 
 area in which fish and wildlife habitat 
 is significantly compromised as a 
 result of past management practices 
 (including plantations); and
 (II) within designated riparian 
 reserves only where necessary to 
 maintain the integrity of fuel breaks 
 and to enhance fire resilience.
 (C) Compliance.--The Secretary shall carry out 
 vegetation management projects within the restoration 
 area--
 (i) in accordance with--
 (I) this section; and
 (II) existing law (including 
 regulations);
 (ii) after providing an opportunity for 
 public comment; and
 (iii) subject to appropriations.
 (D) Best available science.--The Secretary shall 
 use the best available science in planning and 
 implementing vegetation management projects within the 
 restoration area.
 (7) Grazing.--
 (A) Existing grazing.--The grazing of livestock in 
 the restoration area, where established before the date 
 of enactment of this Act, shall be permitted to 
 continue--
 (i) subject to--
 (I) such reasonable regulations, 
 policies, and practices as the 
 Secretary considers necessary; and
 (II) applicable law (including 
 regulations); and
 (ii) in a manner consistent with the 
 purposes described in subsection (c).
 (B) Targeted new grazing.--The Secretary may issue 
 annual targeted grazing permits for the grazing of 
 livestock in the restoration area, where not 
 established before the date of the enactment of this 
 Act, to control noxious weeds, aid in the control of 
 wildfire within the wildland-urban interface, or to 
 provide other ecological benefits subject to--
 (i) such reasonable regulations, policies, 
 and practices as the Secretary considers 
 necessary; and
 (ii) a manner consistent with the purposes 
 described in subsection (c).
 (C) Best available science.--The Secretary shall 
 use the best available science when determining whether 
 to issue targeted grazing permits within the 
 restoration area.
 (e) Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, the restoration 
area is withdrawn from--
 (1) all forms of entry, appropriation, and disposal under 
 the public land laws;
 (2) location, entry, and patent under the mining laws; and
 (3) disposition under all laws relating to mineral and 
 geothermal leasing or mineral materials.
 (f) Use of Stewardship Contracts.--To the maximum extent 
practicable, the Secretary shall--
 (1) use stewardship contracts to implement this section; 
 and
 (2) use revenue derived from such stewardship contracts for 
 restoration and other activities within the restoration area 
 which shall include staff and administrative costs to support 
 timely consultation activities for restoration projects.
 (g) Collaboration.--In developing and implementing restoration 
projects in the restoration area, the Secretary shall consult with 
collaborative groups with an interest in the restoration area.
 (h) Environmental Review.--A collaboratively developed restoration 
project within the restoration area may be carried out in accordance 
with the provisions for hazardous fuel reduction projects set forth in 
sections 214, 215, and 216 of the Healthy Forests Restoration Act of 
2003 (16 U.S.C. 6514-6516), as applicable.
 (i) Multiparty Monitoring.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall--
 (1) in collaboration with the Secretary of the Interior and 
 interested persons, use a multiparty monitoring, evaluation, 
 and accountability process to assess the positive or negative 
 ecological, social, and economic effects of restoration 
 projects within the restoration area; and
 (2) incorporate the monitoring results into the management 
 of the restoration area.
 (j) Funding.--The Secretary shall use all existing authorities to 
secure as much funding as necessary to fulfill the purposes of the 
restoration area.
 (k) Forest Residues Utilization.--
 (1) In general.--In accordance with applicable law, 
 including regulations, and this section, the Secretary may 
 utilize forest residues from restoration projects, including 
 shaded fuel breaks, in the restoration area for research and 
 development of biobased products that result in net carbon 
 sequestration.
 (2) Partnerships.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the 
 Secretary may enter into partnerships with universities, 
 nongovernmental organizations, industry, Tribes, and Federal, 
 State, and local governmental agencies.

SEC. 212. REDWOOD NATIONAL AND STATE PARKS RESTORATION.

 (a) Partnership Agreements.--The Secretary of the Interior is 
authorized to undertake initiatives to restore degraded redwood forest 
ecosystems in Redwood National and State Parks in partnership with the 
State of California, local agencies, and nongovernmental organizations.
 (b) Compliance.--In carrying out any initiative authorized by 
subsection (a), the Secretary of the Interior shall comply with all 
applicable law.

SEC. 213. CALIFORNIA PUBLIC LANDS REMEDIATION PARTNERSHIP.

 (a) Definitions.--In this section:
 (1) Partnership.--The term ``partnership'' means the 
 California Public Lands Remediation Partnership, established by 
 subsection (b).
 (2) Priority lands.--The term ``priority lands'' means 
 Federal land within the State that is determined by the 
 partnership to be a high priority for remediation.
 (3) Remediation.--The term ``remediation'' means to 
 facilitate the recovery of lands and waters that have been 
 degraded, damaged, or destroyed by illegal marijuana 
 cultivation or another illegal activity. Remediation includes 
 but is not limited to removal of trash, debris, and other 
 material, and establishing the composition, structure, pattern, 
 and ecological processes necessary to facilitate terrestrial 
 and aquatic ecosystem sustainability, resilience, and health 
 under current and future conditions.
 (b) Establishment.--There is hereby established a California Public 
Lands Remediation Partnership.
 (c) Purposes.--The purposes of the partnership are to--
 (1) coordinate the activities of Federal, State, Tribal, 
 and local authorities, and the private sector, in the 
 remediation of priority lands in the State affected by illegal 
 marijuana cultivation or other illegal activities; and
 (2) use the resources and expertise of each agency, 
 authority, or entity in implementing remediation activities on 
 priority lands in the State.
 (d) Membership.--The members of the partnership shall include the 
following:
 (1) The Secretary of Agriculture, or a designee of the 
 Secretary of Agriculture to represent the Forest Service.
 (2) The Secretary of the Interior, or a designee of the 
 Secretary of the Interior, to represent the United States Fish 
 and Wildlife Service, Bureau of Land Management, and National 
 Park Service.
 (3) The Director of the Office of National Drug Control 
 Policy, or a designee of the Director.
 (4) The Secretary of the State Natural Resources Agency, or 
 a designee of the Secretary, to represent the California 
 Department of Fish and Wildlife.
 (5) A designee of the California State Water Resources 
 Control Board.
 (6) A designee of the California State Sheriffs' 
 Association.
 (7) One member to represent federally recognized Indian 
 Tribes, to be appointed by the Secretary of Agriculture.
 (8) One member to represent nongovernmental organizations 
 with an interest in Federal land remediation, to be appointed 
 by the Secretary of Agriculture.
 (9) One member to represent local governmental interests, 
 to be appointed by the Secretary of Agriculture.
 (10) A law enforcement official from each of the following:
 (A) The Department of the Interior.
 (B) The Department of Agriculture.
 (11) A scientist to provide expertise and advise on methods 
 needed for remediation efforts, to be appointed by the 
 Secretary of Agriculture.
 (12) A designee of the National Guard Counter Drug Program.
 (e) Duties.--To further the purposes of this section, the 
partnership shall--
 (1) identify priority lands for remediation in the State;
 (2) secure resources from Federal and non-Federal sources 
 to apply to remediation of priority lands in the State;
 (3) support efforts by Federal, State, Tribal, and local 
 agencies, and nongovernmental organizations in carrying out 
 remediation of priority lands in the State;
 (4) support research and education on the impacts of, and 
 solutions to, illegal marijuana cultivation and other illegal 
 activities on priority lands in the State;
 (5) involve other Federal, State, Tribal, and local 
 agencies, nongovernmental organizations, and the public in 
 remediation efforts, to the extent practicable; and
 (6) take any other administrative or advisory actions as 
 necessary to address remediation of priority lands in the 
 State.
 (f) Authorities.--To implement this section, the partnership may, 
subject to the prior approval of the Secretary of Agriculture--
 (1) make grants to the State, political subdivisions of the 
 State, nonprofit organizations, and other persons;
 (2) enter into cooperative agreements with, or provide 
 grants or technical assistance to, the State, political 
 subdivisions of the State, nonprofit organizations, Federal 
 agencies, and other interested parties;
 (3) hire and compensate staff;
 (4) obtain funds or services from any source, including 
 Federal and non-Federal funds, and funds and services provided 
 under any other Federal law or program;
 (5) contract for goods or services; and
 (6) support activities of partners and any other activities 
 that further the purposes of this section.
 (g) Procedures.--The partnership shall establish such rules and 
procedures as it deems necessary or desirable.
 (h) Local Hiring.--The partnership shall, to the maximum extent 
practicable and in accordance with existing law, give preference to 
local entities and persons when carrying out this section.
 (i) Service Without Compensation.--Members of the partnership shall 
serve without pay.
 (j) Duties and Authorities of the Secretary of Agriculture.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall convene 
 the partnership on a regular basis to carry out this section.
 (2) Technical and financial assistance.--The Secretary of 
 Agriculture and Secretary of the Interior may provide technical 
 and financial assistance, on a reimbursable or nonreimbursable 
 basis, as determined by the appropriate Secretary, to the 
 partnership or any members of the partnership to carry out this 
 title.
 (3) Cooperative agreements.--The Secretary of Agriculture 
 and Secretary of the Interior may enter into cooperative 
 agreements with the partnership, any members of the 
 partnership, or other public or private entities to provide 
 technical, financial, or other assistance to carry out this 
 title.

SEC. 214. TRINITY LAKE VISITOR CENTER.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Agriculture, acting through the 
Chief of the Forest Service, may establish, in cooperation with any 
other public or private entities that the Secretary may determine to be 
appropriate, a visitor center in Weaverville, California--
 (1) to serve visitors; and
 (2) to assist in fulfilling the purposes of the 
 Whiskeytown-Shasta-Trinity National Recreation Area.
 (b) Requirements.--The Secretary shall ensure that the visitor 
center authorized under subsection (a) is designed to interpret the 
scenic, biological, natural, historical, scientific, paleontological, 
recreational, ecological, wilderness, and cultural resources of the 
Whiskeytown-Shasta-Trinity National Recreation Area and other nearby 
Federal lands.
 (c) Cooperative Agreements.--The Secretary of Agriculture may, in a 
manner consistent with this title, enter into cooperative agreements 
with the State and any other appropriate institutions and organizations 
to carry out the purposes of this section.

SEC. 215. DEL NORTE COUNTY VISITOR CENTER.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Agriculture and Secretary of the 
Interior, acting jointly or separately, may establish, in cooperation 
with any other public or private entities that the Secretaries 
determine to be appropriate, a visitor center in Del Norte County, 
California--
 (1) to serve visitors; and
 (2) to assist in fulfilling the purposes of Redwood 
 National and State Parks, the Smith River National Recreation 
 Area, and other nearby Federal lands.
 (b) Requirements.--The Secretaries shall ensure that the visitor 
center authorized under subsection (a) is designed to interpret the 
scenic, biological, natural, historical, scientific, paleontological, 
recreational, ecological, wilderness, and cultural resources of Redwood 
National and State Parks, the Smith River National Recreation Area, and 
other nearby Federal lands.

SEC. 216. MANAGEMENT PLANS.

 (a) In General.--In revising the land and resource management plan 
for the Shasta-Trinity, Six Rivers, Klamath, and Mendocino National 
Forests, the Secretary shall--
 (1) consider the purposes of the South Fork Trinity-Mad 
 River Restoration Area established by section 211; and
 (2) include or update the fire management plan for the 
 wilderness areas and wilderness additions established by this 
 title.
 (b) Requirement.--In carrying out the revisions required by 
subsection (a), the Secretary shall--
 (1) develop spatial fire management plans in accordance 
 with--
 (A) the Guidance for Implementation of Federal 
 Wildland Fire Management Policy dated February 13, 
 2009, including any amendments to that guidance; and
 (B) other appropriate policies;
 (2) ensure that a fire management plan--
 (A) considers how prescribed or managed fire can be 
 used to achieve ecological management objectives of 
 wilderness and other natural or primitive areas; and
 (B) in the case of a wilderness area expanded by 
 section 231, provides consistent direction regarding 
 fire management to the entire wilderness area, 
 including the addition;
 (3) consult with--
 (A) appropriate State, Tribal, and local 
 governmental entities; and
 (B) members of the public; and
 (4) comply with applicable laws (including regulations).

SEC. 217. STUDY; PARTNERSHIPS RELATED TO OVERNIGHT ACCOMMODATIONS.

 (a) Study.--The Secretary of the Interior, in consultation with 
interested Federal, State, Tribal, and local entities, and private and 
nonprofit organizations, shall conduct a study to evaluate the 
feasibility and suitability of establishing overnight accommodations 
near Redwood National and State Parks on--
 (1) Federal land at the northern boundary or on land within 
 20 miles of the northern boundary; and
 (2) Federal land at the southern boundary or on land within 
 20 miles of the southern boundary.
 (b) Partnerships.--
 (1) Agreements authorized.--If the study conducted under 
 subsection (a) determines that establishing the described 
 accommodations is suitable and feasible, the Secretary may 
 enter into agreements with qualified private and nonprofit 
 organizations for the development, operation, and maintenance 
 of overnight accommodations.
 (2) Contents.--Any agreements entered into under paragraph 
 (1) shall clearly define the role and responsibility of the 
 Secretary and the private or nonprofit organization.
 (3) Compliance.--The Secretary shall enter agreements under 
 paragraph (1) in accordance with existing law.
 (4) Effect.--Nothing in this subsection--
 (A) reduces or diminishes the authority of the 
 Secretary to manage land and resources under the 
 jurisdiction of the Secretary; or
 (B) amends or modifies the application of any 
 existing law (including regulations) applicable to land 
 under the jurisdiction of the Secretary.

 Subtitle B--Recreation

SEC. 221. HORSE MOUNTAIN SPECIAL MANAGEMENT AREA.

 (a) Establishment.--Subject to valid existing rights, there is 
established the Horse Mountain Special Management Area (referred to in 
this section as the ``special management area'') comprising 
approximately 7,399 acres of Federal land administered by the Forest 
Service in Humboldt County, California, as generally depicted on the 
map entitled ``Horse Mountain Special Management Area--Proposed'' and 
dated April 13, 2017.
 (b) Purposes.--The purpose of the special management area is to 
enhance the recreational and scenic values of the special management 
area while conserving the plants, wildlife, and other natural resource 
values of the area.
 (c) Management Plan.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 3 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act and in accordance with paragraph (2), the 
 Secretary shall develop a comprehensive plan for the long-term 
 management of the special management area.
 (2) Consultation.--In developing the management plan 
 required under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall consult 
 with--
 (A) appropriate State, Tribal, and local 
 governmental entities; and
 (B) members of the public.
 (3) Additional requirement.--The management plan required 
 under paragraph (1) shall ensure that recreational use within 
 the special management area does not cause significant adverse 
 impacts on the plants and wildlife of the special management 
 area.
 (d) Management.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall manage the special 
 management area--
 (A) in furtherance of the purposes described in 
 subsection (b); and
 (B) in accordance with--
 (i) the laws (including regulations) 
 generally applicable to the National Forest 
 System;
 (ii) this section; and
 (iii) any other applicable law (including 
 regulations).
 (2) Recreation.--The Secretary shall continue to authorize, 
 maintain, and enhance the recreational use of the special 
 management area, including hunting, fishing, camping, hiking, 
 hang gliding, sightseeing, nature study, horseback riding, 
 rafting, mountain biking, and motorized recreation on 
 authorized routes, and other recreational activities, so long 
 as such recreational use is consistent with the purposes of the 
 special management area, this section, other applicable law 
 (including regulations), and applicable management plans.
 (3) Motorized vehicles.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B), the use of motorized vehicles in the special 
 management area shall be permitted only on roads and 
 trails designated for the use of motorized vehicles.
 (B) Use of snowmobiles.--The winter use of 
 snowmobiles shall be allowed in the special management 
 area--
 (i) during periods of adequate snow 
 coverage during the winter season; and
 (ii) subject to any terms and conditions 
 determined to be necessary by the Secretary.
 (4) New trails.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary may construct new 
 trails for motorized or nonmotorized recreation within 
 the special management area in accordance with--
 (i) the laws (including regulations) 
 generally applicable to the National Forest 
 System;
 (ii) this section; and
 (iii) any other applicable law (including 
 regulations).
 (B) Priority.--In establishing new trails within 
 the special management area, the Secretary shall--
 (i) prioritize the establishment of loops 
 that provide high-quality, diverse recreational 
 experiences; and
 (ii) consult with members of the public.
 (e) Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, the special 
management area is withdrawn from--
 (1) all forms of appropriation or disposal under the public 
 land laws;
 (2) location, entry, and patent under the mining laws; and
 (3) disposition under laws relating to mineral and 
 geothermal leasing.

SEC. 222. BIGFOOT NATIONAL RECREATION TRAIL.

 (a) Feasibility Study.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 3 years after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture, in 
 cooperation with the Secretary of the Interior, shall submit to 
 the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of 
 Representatives and Committee on Energy and Natural Resources 
 of the Senate a study that describes the feasibility of 
 establishing a nonmotorized Bigfoot National Recreation Trail 
 that follows the route described in paragraph (2).
 (2) Route.--The trail described in paragraph (1) shall 
 extend from the Ides Cove Trailhead in the Mendocino National 
 Forest to Crescent City, California, by roughly following the 
 route as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Bigfoot 
 National Recreation Trail--Proposed'' and dated July 25, 2018.
 (3) Additional requirement.--In completing the study 
 required by subsection (a), the Secretary of Agriculture shall 
 consult with--
 (A) appropriate Federal, State, Tribal, regional, 
 and local agencies;
 (B) private landowners;
 (C) nongovernmental organizations; and
 (D) members of the public.
 (b) Designation.--
 (1) In general.--Upon a determination that the Bigfoot 
 National Recreation Trail is feasible and meets the 
 requirements for a National Recreation Trail in section 1243 of 
 title 16, United States Code, the Secretary of Agriculture 
 shall designate the Bigfoot National Recreation Trail in 
 accordance with--
 (A) the National Trails System Act (Public Law 90-
 543);
 (B) this title; and
 (C) other applicable law (including regulations).
 (2) Administration.--Upon designation by the Secretary of 
 Agriculture, the Bigfoot National Recreation Trail (referred to 
 in this section as the ``trail'') shall be administered by the 
 Secretary of Agriculture, in consultation with--
 (A) other Federal, State, Tribal, regional, and 
 local agencies;
 (B) private landowners; and
 (C) other interested organizations.
 (3) Private property rights.--
 (A) In general.--No portions of the trail may be 
 located on non-Federal land without the written consent 
 of the landowner.
 (B) Prohibition.--The Secretary of Agriculture 
 shall not acquire for the trail any land or interest in 
 land outside the exterior boundary of any federally 
 managed area without the consent of the owner of the 
 land or interest in the land.
 (C) Effect.--Nothing in this section--
 (i) requires any private property owner to 
 allow public access (including Federal, State, 
 or local government access) to private 
 property; or
 (ii) modifies any provision of Federal, 
 State, or local law with respect to public 
 access to or use of private land.
 (c) Cooperative Agreements.--In carrying out this section, the 
Secretary of Agriculture may enter into cooperative agreements with 
State, Tribal, and local government entities and private entities to 
complete needed trail construction, reconstruction, realignment, 
maintenance, or education projects related to the Bigfoot National 
Recreation Trail.
 (d) Map.--
 (1) Map required.--Upon designation of the Bigfoot National 
 Recreation Trail, the Secretary of Agriculture shall prepare a 
 map of the trail.
 (2) Public availability.--The map referred to in paragraph 
 (1) shall be on file and available for public inspection in the 
 appropriate offices of the Forest Service.

SEC. 223. ELK CAMP RIDGE RECREATION TRAIL.

 (a) Designation.--
 (1) In general.--In accordance with paragraph (2), the 
 Secretary of Agriculture after an opportunity for public 
 comment, shall designate a trail (which may include a system of 
 trails)--
 (A) for use by off-highway vehicles or mountain 
 bicycles, or both; and
 (B) to be known as the Elk Camp Ridge Recreation 
 Trail.
 (2) Requirements.--In designating the Elk Camp Ridge 
 Recreation Trail (referred to in this section as the 
 ``trail''), the Secretary shall only include trails that are--
 (A) as of the date of enactment of this Act, 
 authorized for use by off-highway vehicles or mountain 
 bikes, or both; and
 (B) located on land that is managed by the Forest 
 Service in Del Norte County.
 (3) Map.--A map that depicts the trail shall be on file and 
 available for public inspection in the appropriate offices of 
 the Forest Service.
 (b) Management.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall manage the trail--
 (A) in accordance with applicable laws (including 
 regulations);
 (B) to ensure the safety of citizens who use the 
 trail; and
 (C) in a manner by which to minimize any damage to 
 sensitive habitat or cultural resources.
 (2) Monitoring; evaluation.--To minimize the impacts of the 
 use of the trail on environmental and cultural resources, the 
 Secretary shall annually assess the effects of the use of off-
 highway vehicles and mountain bicycles on--
 (A) the trail;
 (B) land located in proximity to the trail; and
 (C) plants, wildlife, and wildlife habitat.
 (3) Closure.--The Secretary, in consultation with the State 
 and Del Norte County, and subject to paragraph (4), may 
 temporarily close or permanently reroute a portion of the trail 
 if the Secretary determines that--
 (A) the trail is having an adverse impact on--
 (i) wildlife habitats;
 (ii) natural resources;
 (iii) cultural resources; or
 (iv) traditional uses;
 (B) the trail threatens public safety; or
 (C) closure of the trail is necessary--
 (i) to repair damage to the trail; or
 (ii) to repair resource damage.
 (4) Rerouting.--Any portion of the trail that is 
 temporarily closed by the Secretary under paragraph (3) may be 
 permanently rerouted along any road or trail--
 (A) that is--
 (i) in existence as of the date of the 
 closure of the portion of the trail;
 (ii) located on public land; and
 (iii) open to motorized or mechanized use; 
 and
 (B) if the Secretary determines that rerouting the 
 portion of the trail would not significantly increase 
 or decrease the length of the trail.
 (5) Notice of available routes.--The Secretary shall ensure 
 that visitors to the trail have access to adequate notice 
 relating to the availability of trail routes through--
 (A) the placement of appropriate signage along the 
 trail; and
 (B) the distribution of maps, safety education 
 materials, and other information that the Secretary 
 concerned determines to be appropriate.
 (c) Effect.--Nothing in this section affects the ownership, 
management, or other rights relating to any non-Federal land (including 
any interest in any non-Federal land).

SEC. 224. TRINITY LAKE TRAIL.

 (a) Trail Construction.--
 (1) Feasibility study.--Not later than 18 months after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall study the 
 feasibility and public interest of constructing a recreational 
 trail for nonmotorized uses around Trinity Lake.
 (2) Construction.--
 (A) Construction authorized.--Subject to 
 appropriations, and in accordance with paragraph (3), 
 if the Secretary determines under paragraph (1) that 
 the construction of the trail described in such 
 paragraph is feasible and in the public interest, the 
 Secretary may provide for the construction of the 
 trail.
 (B) Use of volunteer services and contributions.--
 The trail may be constructed under this section through 
 the acceptance of volunteer services and contributions 
 from non-Federal sources to reduce or eliminate the 
 need for Federal expenditures to construct the trail.
 (3) Compliance.--In carrying out this section, the 
 Secretary shall comply with--
 (A) the laws (including regulations) generally 
 applicable to the National Forest System; and
 (B) this title.
 (b) Effect.--Nothing in this section affects the ownership, 
management, or other rights relating to any non-Federal land (including 
any interest in any non-Federal land).

SEC. 225. TRAILS STUDY.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture, in accordance with 
subsection (b) and in consultation with interested parties, shall 
conduct a study to improve motorized and nonmotorized recreation trail 
opportunities (including mountain bicycling) on land not designated as 
wilderness within the portions of the Six Rivers, Shasta-Trinity, and 
Mendocino National Forests located in Del Norte, Humboldt, Trinity, and 
Mendocino Counties.
 (b) Consultation.--In carrying out the study required by subsection 
(a), the Secretary of Agriculture shall consult with the Secretary of 
the Interior regarding opportunities to improve, through increased 
coordination, recreation trail opportunities on land under the 
jurisdiction of the Secretary of the Interior that shares a boundary 
with the national forest land described in subsection (a).

SEC. 226. CONSTRUCTION OF MOUNTAIN BICYCLING ROUTES.

 (a) Trail Construction.--
 (1) Feasibility study.--Not later than 18 months after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture 
 shall study the feasibility and public interest of constructing 
 recreational trails for mountain bicycling and other 
 nonmotorized uses on the routes as generally depicted in the 
 report entitled ``Trail Study for Smith River National 
 Recreation Area Six Rivers National Forest'' and dated 2016.
 (2) Construction.--
 (A) Construction authorized.--Subject to 
 appropriations, and in accordance with paragraph (3), 
 if the Secretary determines under paragraph (1) that 
 the construction of one or more routes described in 
 such paragraph is feasible and in the public interest, 
 the Secretary may provide for the construction of the 
 routes.
 (B) Modifications.--The Secretary may modify the 
 routes as necessary in the opinion of the Secretary.
 (C) Use of volunteer services and contributions.--
 Routes may be constructed under this section through 
 the acceptance of volunteer services and contributions 
 from non-Federal sources to reduce or eliminate the 
 need for Federal expenditures to construct the route.
 (3) Compliance.--In carrying out this section, the 
 Secretary shall comply with--
 (A) the laws (including regulations) generally 
 applicable to the National Forest System; and
 (B) this title.
 (b) Effect.--Nothing in this section affects the ownership, 
management, or other rights relating to any non-Federal land (including 
any interest in any non-Federal land).

SEC. 227. PARTNERSHIPS.

 (a) Agreements Authorized.--The Secretary is authorized to enter 
into agreements with qualified private and nonprofit organizations to 
undertake the following activities on Federal lands in Mendocino, 
Humboldt, Trinity, and Del Norte Counties--
 (1) trail and campground maintenance;
 (2) public education, visitor contacts, and outreach; and
 (3) visitor center staffing.
 (b) Contents.--Any agreements entered into under subsection (a) 
shall clearly define the role and responsibility of the Secretary and 
the private or nonprofit organization.
 (c) Compliance.--The Secretary shall enter into agreements under 
subsection (a) in accordance with existing law.
 (d) Effect.--Nothing in this section--
 (1) reduces or diminishes the authority of the Secretary to 
 manage land and resources under the jurisdiction of the 
 Secretary; or
 (2) amends or modifies the application of any existing law 
 (including regulations) applicable to land under the 
 jurisdiction of the Secretary.

 Subtitle C--Conservation

SEC. 231. DESIGNATION OF WILDERNESS.

 (a) In General.--In accordance with the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 
1131 et seq.), the following areas in the State are designated as 
wilderness areas and as components of the National Wilderness 
Preservation System:
 (1) Black butte river wilderness.--Certain Federal land 
 managed by the Forest Service in the State, comprising 
 approximately 11,117 acres, as generally depicted on the map 
 entitled ``Black Butte River Wilderness--Proposed'' and dated 
 April 13, 2017, which shall be known as the Black Butte River 
 Wilderness.
 (2) Chanchelulla wilderness additions.--Certain Federal 
 land managed by the Forest Service in the State, comprising 
 approximately 6,212 acres, as generally depicted on the map 
 entitled ``Chanchelulla Wilderness Additions--Proposed'' and 
 dated July 16, 2018, which is incorporated in, and considered 
 to be a part of, the Chanchelulla Wilderness, as designated by 
 section 101(a)(4) of the California Wilderness Act of 1984 (16 
 U.S.C. 1132 note; 98 Stat. 1619).
 (3) Chinquapin wilderness.--Certain Federal land managed by 
 the Forest Service in the State, comprising approximately 
 27,258 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled 
 ``Chinquapin Wilderness--Proposed'' and dated January 15, 2020, 
 which shall be known as the Chinquapin Wilderness.
 (4) Elkhorn ridge wilderness addition.--Certain Federal 
 land managed by the Bureau of Land Management in the State, 
 comprising approximately 37 acres, as generally depicted on the 
 map entitled ``Proposed Elkhorn Ridge Wilderness Additions'' 
 and dated October 24, 2019, which is incorporated in, and 
 considered to be a part of, the Elkhorn Ridge Wilderness, as 
 designated by section 6(d) of Public Law 109-362 (16 U.S.C. 
 1132 note; 120 Stat. 2070).
 (5) English ridge wilderness.--Certain Federal land managed 
 by the Bureau of Land Management in the State, comprising 
 approximately 6,204 acres, as generally depicted on the map 
 entitled ``English Ridge Wilderness--Proposed'' and dated March 
 29, 2019, which shall be known as the English Ridge Wilderness.
 (6) Headwaters forest wilderness.--Certain Federal land 
 managed by the Bureau of Land Management in the State, 
 comprising approximately 4,360 acres, as generally depicted on 
 the map entitled ``Headwaters Forest Wilderness--Proposed'' and 
 dated October 15, 2019, which shall be known as the Headwaters 
 Forest Wilderness.
 (7) Mad river buttes wilderness.--Certain Federal land 
 managed by the Forest Service in the State, comprising 
 approximately 6,002 acres, as generally depicted on the map 
 entitled ``Mad River Buttes Wilderness--Proposed'' and dated 
 July 25, 2018, which shall be known as the Mad River Buttes 
 Wilderness.
 (8) Mount lassic wilderness addition.--Certain Federal land 
 managed by the Forest Service in the State, comprising 
 approximately 1,292 acres, as generally depicted on the map 
 entitled ``Mount Lassic Wilderness Additions--Proposed'' and 
 dated February 23, 2017, which is incorporated in, and 
 considered to be a part of, the Mount Lassic Wilderness, as 
 designated by section 3(6) of Public Law 109-362 (16 U.S.C. 
 1132 note; 120 Stat. 2065).
 (9) North fork eel wilderness addition.--Certain Federal 
 land managed by the Forest Service and the Bureau of Land 
 Management in the State, comprising approximately 16,274 acres, 
 as generally depicted on the map entitled ``North Fork 
 Wilderness Additions'' and dated January 15, 2020, which is 
 incorporated in, and considered to be a part of, the North Fork 
 Eel Wilderness, as designated by section 101(a)(19) of the 
 California Wilderness Act of 1984 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; 98 
 Stat. 1621).
 (10) Pattison wilderness.--Certain Federal land managed by 
 the Forest Service in the State, comprising approximately 
 28,595 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled 
 ``Pattison Wilderness--Proposed'' and dated July 16, 2018, 
 which shall be known as the Pattison Wilderness.
 (11) Sanhedrin wilderness addition.--Certain Federal land 
 managed by the Forest Service in the State, comprising 
 approximately 112 acres, as generally depicted on the map 
 entitled ``Sanhedrin Wilderness Addition--Proposed'' and dated 
 March 29, 2019, which is incorporated in, and considered to be 
 a part of, the Sanhedrin Wilderness, as designated by section 
 3(2) of Public Law 109-362 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; 120 Stat. 
 2065).
 (12) Siskiyou wilderness addition.--Certain Federal land 
 managed by the Forest Service in the State, comprising 
 approximately 27,747 acres, as generally depicted on the map 
 entitled ``Siskiyou Wilderness Additions and Potential 
 Wildernesses--Proposed'' and dated July 24, 2018, which is 
 incorporated in, and considered to be a part of, the Siskiyou 
 Wilderness, as designated by section 101(a)(30) of the 
 California Wilderness Act of 1984 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; 98 
 Stat. 1623) (as amended by section 3(5) of Public Law 109-362 
 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; 120 Stat. 2065)).
 (13) South fork eel river wilderness addition.--Certain 
 Federal land managed by the Bureau of Land Management in the 
 State, comprising approximately 603 acres, as generally 
 depicted on the map entitled ``South Fork Eel River Wilderness 
 Additions--Proposed'' and dated October 24, 2019, which is 
 incorporated in, and considered to be a part of, the South Fork 
 Eel River Wilderness, as designated by section 3(10) of Public 
 Law 109-362 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; 120 Stat. 2066).
 (14) South fork trinity river wilderness.--Certain Federal 
 land managed by the Forest Service in the State, comprising 
 approximately 26,446 acres, as generally depicted on the map 
 entitled ``South Fork Trinity River Wilderness and Potential 
 Wildernesses--Proposed'' and dated March 11, 2019, which shall 
 be known as the South Fork Trinity River Wilderness.
 (15) Trinity alps wilderness addition.--Certain Federal 
 land managed by the Forest Service in the State, comprising 
 approximately 60,826 acres, as generally depicted on the maps 
 entitled ``Trinity Alps Proposed Wilderness Additions EAST'' 
 and ``Trinity Alps Proposed Wilderness Additions WEST'' and 
 dated January 15, 2020, which is incorporated in, and 
 considered to be a part of, the Trinity Alps Wilderness, as 
 designated by section 101(a)(34) of the California Wilderness 
 Act of 1984 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; 98 Stat. 1623) (as amended by 
 section 3(7) of Public Law 109-362 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; 120 
 Stat. 2065)).
 (16) Underwood wilderness.--Certain Federal land managed by 
 the Forest Service in the State, comprising approximately 
 15,069 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled 
 ``Underwood Wilderness--Proposed'' and dated January 15, 2020, 
 which shall be known as the Underwood Wilderness.
 (17) Yolla bolly-middle eel wilderness additions.--Certain 
 Federal land managed by the Forest Service and the Bureau of 
 Land Management in the State, comprising approximately 10,729 
 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Yolla Bolly 
 Middle Eel Wilderness Additions and Potential Wildernesses--
 Proposed'' and dated June 7, 2018, which is incorporated in, 
 and considered to be a part of, the Yolla Bolly-Middle Eel 
 Wilderness, as designated by section 3 of the Wilderness Act 
 (16 U.S.C. 1132) (as amended by section 3(4) of Public Law 109-
 362 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; 120 Stat. 2065)).
 (18) Yuki wilderness addition.--Certain Federal land 
 managed by the Forest Service and the Bureau of Land Management 
 in the State, comprising approximately 11,076 acres, as 
 generally depicted on the map entitled ``Yuki Wilderness 
 Additions--Proposed'' and dated January 15, 2020, which is 
 incorporated in, and considered to be a part of, the Yuki 
 Wilderness, as designated by section 3(3) of Public Law 109-362 
 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; 120 Stat. 2065).
 (b) Redesignation of North Fork Wilderness as North Fork Eel River 
Wilderness.--Section 101(a)(19) of Public Law 98-425 (16 U.S.C. 1132 
note; 98 Stat. 1621) is amended by striking ``North Fork Wilderness'' 
and inserting ``North Fork Eel River Wilderness''. Any reference in a 
law, map, regulation, document, paper, or other record of the United 
States to the North Fork Wilderness shall be deemed to be a reference 
to the North Fork Eel River Wilderness.
 (c) Elkhorn Ridge Wilderness Adjustments.--The boundary of the 
Elkhorn Ridge Wilderness established by section 6(d) of Public Law 109-
362 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note) is adjusted by deleting approximately 30 
acres of Federal land as generally depicted on the map entitled 
``Proposed Elkhorn Ridge Wilderness Additions'' and dated October 24, 
2019.

SEC. 232. ADMINISTRATION OF WILDERNESS.

 (a) In General.--Subject to valid existing rights, the wilderness 
areas and wilderness additions established by section 231 shall be 
administered by the Secretary in accordance with this subtitle and the 
Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.), except that--
 (1) any reference in the Wilderness Act to the effective 
 date of that Act shall be considered to be a reference to the 
 date of enactment of this Act; and
 (2) any reference in that Act to the Secretary of 
 Agriculture shall be considered to be a reference to the 
 Secretary.
 (b) Fire Management and Related Activities.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary may take such measures in a 
 wilderness area or wilderness addition designated by section 
 231 as are necessary for the control of fire, insects, and 
 diseases in accordance with section 4(d)(1) of the Wilderness 
 Act (16 U.S.C. 1133(d)(1)) and House Report 98-40 of the 98th 
 Congress.
 (2) Funding priorities.--Nothing in this subtitle limits 
 funding for fire and fuels management in the wilderness areas 
 or wilderness additions designated by this title.
 (3) Administration.--Consistent with paragraph (1) and 
 other applicable Federal law, to ensure a timely and efficient 
 response to fire emergencies in the wilderness additions 
 designated by this subtitle, the Secretary of Agriculture 
 shall--
 (A) not later than 1 year after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, establish agency approval 
 procedures (including appropriate delegations of 
 authority to the Forest Supervisor, District Manager, 
 or other agency officials) for responding to fire 
 emergencies; and
 (B) enter into agreements with appropriate State or 
 local firefighting agencies.
 (c) Grazing.--The grazing of livestock in the wilderness areas and 
wilderness additions designated by this title, if established before 
the date of enactment of this Act, shall be administered in accordance 
with--
 (1) section 4(d)(4) of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 
 1133(d)(4)); and
 (2)(A) for lands under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of 
 Agriculture, the guidelines set forth in the report of the 
 Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives accompanying H.R. 5487 of the 96th Congress (H. 
 Rept. 96-617); or
 (B) for lands under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of 
 the Interior, the guidelines set forth in Appendix A of the 
 report of the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs of the 
 House of Representatives accompanying H.R. 2570 of the 101st 
 Congress (H. Rept. 101-405).
 (d) Fish and Wildlife.--
 (1) In general.--In accordance with section 4(d)(7) of the 
 Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1133(d)(7)), nothing in this title 
 affects the jurisdiction or responsibilities of the State with 
 respect to fish and wildlife on public land in the State.
 (2) Management activities.--In furtherance of the purposes 
 and principles of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.), 
 the Secretary may conduct any management activities that are 
 necessary to maintain or restore fish, wildlife, and plant 
 populations and habitats in the wilderness areas or wilderness 
 additions designated by section 231, if the management 
 activities are--
 (A) consistent with relevant wilderness management 
 plans; and
 (B) conducted in accordance with--
 (i) the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et 
 seq.); and
 (ii) appropriate policies, such as the 
 policies established in Appendix B of House 
 Report 101-405.
 (e) Buffer Zones.--
 (1) In general.--Congress does not intend for designation 
 of wilderness or wilderness additions by this title to lead to 
 the creation of protective perimeters or buffer zones around 
 each wilderness area or wilderness addition.
 (2) Activities or uses up to boundaries.--The fact that 
 nonwilderness activities or uses can be seen or heard from 
 within a wilderness area shall not, of itself, preclude the 
 activities or uses up to the boundary of the wilderness area.
 (f) Military Activities.--Nothing in this subtitle precludes--
 (1) low-level overflights of military aircraft over the 
 wilderness areas or wilderness additions designated by section 
 231;
 (2) the designation of new units of special airspace over 
 the wilderness areas or wilderness additions designated by 
 section 231; or
 (3) the use or establishment of military flight training 
 routes over the wilderness areas or wilderness additions 
 designated by section 231.
 (g) Horses.--Nothing in this subtitle precludes horseback riding 
in, or the entry of recreational or commercial saddle or pack stock 
into, an area designated as a wilderness area or wilderness addition by 
section 231--
 (1) in accordance with section 4(d)(5) of the Wilderness 
 Act (16 U.S.C. 1133(d)(5)); and
 (2) subject to any terms and conditions determined to be 
 necessary by the Secretary.
 (h) Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, the wilderness 
areas and wilderness additions designated by section 231 are withdrawn 
from--
 (1) all forms of entry, appropriation, and disposal under 
 the public land laws;
 (2) location, entry, and patent under the mining laws; and
 (3) operation of the mineral materials and geothermal 
 leasing laws.
 (i) Use by Members of Indian Tribes.--
 (1) Access.--In recognition of the past use of wilderness 
 areas and wilderness additions designated by this title by 
 members of Indian Tribes for traditional cultural and religious 
 purposes, the Secretary shall ensure that Indian Tribes have 
 access to the wilderness areas and wilderness additions 
 designated by section 231 for traditional cultural and 
 religious purposes.
 (2) Temporary closures.--
 (A) In general.--In carrying out this section, the 
 Secretary, on request of an Indian Tribe, may 
 temporarily close to the general public one or more 
 specific portions of a wilderness area or wilderness 
 addition to protect the privacy of the members of the 
 Indian Tribe in the conduct of the traditional cultural 
 and religious activities in the wilderness area or 
 wilderness addition.
 (B) Requirement.--Any closure under subparagraph 
 (A) shall be made in such a manner as to affect the 
 smallest practicable area for the minimum period of 
 time necessary for the activity to be carried out.
 (3) Applicable law.--Access to the wilderness areas and 
 wilderness additions under this subsection shall be in 
 accordance with--
 (A) Public Law 95-341 (commonly known as the 
 American Indian Religious Freedom Act) (42 U.S.C. 1996 
 et seq.); and
 (B) the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.).
 (j) Incorporation of Acquired Land and Interests.--Any land within 
the boundary of a wilderness area or wilderness addition designated by 
section 231 that is acquired by the United States shall--
 (1) become part of the wilderness area in which the land is 
 located;
 (2) be withdrawn in accordance with subsection (h); and
 (3) be managed in accordance with this section, the 
 Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.), and any other 
 applicable law.
 (k) Climatological Data Collection.--In accordance with the 
Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.) and subject to such terms and 
conditions as the Secretary may prescribe, the Secretary may authorize 
the installation and maintenance of hydrologic, meteorologic, or 
climatological collection devices in the wilderness areas and 
wilderness additions designated by section 231 if the Secretary 
determines that the facilities and access to the facilities are 
essential to flood warning, flood control, or water reservoir operation 
activities.
 (l) Authorized Events.--The Secretary may continue to authorize the 
competitive equestrian event permitted since 2012 in the Chinquapin 
Wilderness established by section 231 in a manner compatible with the 
preservation of the area as wilderness.
 (m) Recreational Climbing.--Nothing in this title prohibits 
recreational rock climbing activities in the wilderness areas, such as 
the placement, use, and maintenance of fixed anchors, including any 
fixed anchor established before the date of the enactment of this Act--
 (1) in accordance with the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 
 et seq.); and
 (2) subject to any terms and conditions determined to be 
 necessary by the Secretary.

SEC. 233. DESIGNATION OF POTENTIAL WILDERNESS.

 (a) Designation.--In furtherance of the purposes of the Wilderness 
Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.), the following areas in the State are 
designated as potential wilderness areas:
 (1) Certain Federal land managed by the Forest Service, 
 comprising approximately 3,797 acres, as generally depicted on 
 the map entitled ``Chinquapin Proposed Potential Wilderness'' 
 and dated January 15, 2020.
 (2) Certain Federal land administered by the National Park 
 Service, compromising approximately 31,000 acres, as generally 
 depicted on the map entitled ``Redwood National Park--Potential 
 Wilderness'' and dated October 9, 2019.
 (3) Certain Federal land managed by the Forest Service, 
 comprising approximately 8,961 acres, as generally depicted on 
 the map entitled ``Siskiyou Wilderness Additions and Potential 
 Wildernesses--Proposed'' and dated July 24, 2018.
 (4) Certain Federal land managed by the Forest Service, 
 comprising approximately 405 acres, as generally depicted on 
 the map entitled ``South Fork Trinity River Wilderness and 
 Potential Wildernesses--Proposed'' and dated March 11, 2019.
 (5) Certain Federal land managed by the Forest Service, 
 comprising approximately 1,256 acres, as generally depicted on 
 the map entitled ``Trinity Alps Proposed Potential Wilderness'' 
 and dated January 15, 2020.
 (6) Certain Federal land managed by the Forest Service, 
 comprising approximately 4,282 acres, as generally depicted on 
 the map entitled ``Yolla Bolly Middle Eel Wilderness Additions 
 and Potential Wildernesses--Proposed'' and dated June 7, 2018.
 (7) Certain Federal land managed by the Forest Service, 
 comprising approximately 2,909 acres, as generally depicted on 
 the map entitled ``Yuki Proposed Potential Wilderness'' and 
 dated January 15, 2020.
 (b) Management.--Except as provided in subsection (c) and subject 
to valid existing rights, the Secretary shall manage the potential 
wilderness areas designated by subsection (a) (referred to in this 
section as ``potential wilderness areas'') as wilderness until the 
potential wilderness areas are designated as wilderness under 
subsection (d).
 (c) Ecological Restoration.--
 (1) In general.--For purposes of ecological restoration 
 (including the elimination of nonnative species, removal of 
 illegal, unused, or decommissioned roads, repair of skid 
 tracks, and any other activities necessary to restore the 
 natural ecosystems in a potential wilderness area and 
 consistent with paragraph (2)), the Secretary may use motorized 
 equipment and mechanized transport in a potential wilderness 
 area until the potential wilderness area is designated as 
 wilderness under subsection (d).
 (2) Limitation.--To the maximum extent practicable, the 
 Secretary shall use the minimum tool or administrative practice 
 necessary to accomplish ecological restoration with the least 
 amount of adverse impact on wilderness character and resources.
 (d) Eventual Wilderness Designation.--The potential wilderness 
areas shall be designated as wilderness and as a component of the 
National Wilderness Preservation System on the earlier of--
 (1) the date on which the Secretary publishes in the 
 Federal Register notice that the conditions in a potential 
 wilderness area that are incompatible with the Wilderness Act 
 (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.) have been removed; or
 (2) the date that is 10 years after the date of enactment 
 of this Act for potential wilderness areas located on lands 
 managed by the Forest Service.
 (e) Administration as Wilderness.--
 (1) In general.--On its designation as wilderness under 
 subsection (d), a potential wilderness area shall be 
 administered in accordance with section 232 and the Wilderness 
 Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.).
 (2) Designation.--On its designation as wilderness under 
 subsection (d)--
 (A) the land described in subsection (a)(1) shall 
 be incorporated in, and considered to be a part of, the 
 Chinquapin Wilderness established by section 231(a)(3);
 (B) the land described in subsection (a)(3) shall 
 be incorporated in, and considered to be a part of, the 
 Siskiyou Wilderness as designated by section 231(a)(30) 
 of the California Wilderness Act of 1984 (16 U.S.C. 
 1132 note; 98 Stat. 1623) (as amended by section 3(5) 
 of Public Law 109-362 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; 120 Stat. 
 2065) and expanded by section 231(a)(12));
 (C) the land described in subsection (a)(4) shall 
 be incorporated in, and considered to be a part of, the 
 South Fork Trinity River Wilderness established by 
 section 231(a)(14);
 (D) the land described in subsection (a)(5) shall 
 be incorporated in, and considered to be a part of, the 
 Trinity Alps Wilderness as designated by section 
 101(a)(34) of the California Wilderness Act of 1984 (16 
 U.S.C. 1132 note; 98 Stat. 1623) (as amended by section 
 3(7) of Public Law 109-362 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; 120 
 Stat. 2065) and expanded by section 231(a)(15));
 (E) the land described in subsection (a)(6) shall 
 be incorporated in, and considered to be a part of, the 
 Yolla Bolly-Middle Eel Wilderness as designated by 
 section 3 of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1132) (as 
 amended by section 3(4) of Public Law 109-362 (16 
 U.S.C. 1132 note; 120 Stat. 2065) and expanded by 
 section 231(a)(17)); and
 (F) the land described in subsection (a)(7) shall 
 be incorporated in, and considered to be a part of, the 
 Yuki Wilderness as designated by section 3(3) of Public 
 Law 109-362 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; 120 Stat. 2065) and 
 expanded by section 231(a)(18).
 (f) Report.--Within 3 years after the date of enactment of this 
Act, and every 3 years thereafter until the date upon which the 
potential wilderness is designated wilderness under subsection (d), the 
Secretary shall submit a report to the Committee on Natural Resources 
of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural 
Resources of the Senate on the status of ecological restoration within 
the potential wilderness area and the progress toward the potential 
wilderness area's eventual wilderness designation under subsection (d).

SEC. 234. DESIGNATION OF WILD AND SCENIC RIVERS.

 Section 3(a) of the National Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 U.S.C. 
1274(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(231) South fork trinity river.--The following segments 
 from the source tributaries in the Yolla Bolly-Middle Eel 
 Wilderness, to be administered by the Secretary of Agriculture:
 ``(A) The 18.3-mile segment from its multiple 
 source springs in the Cedar Basin of the Yolla Bolly-
 Middle Eel Wilderness in section 15, T. 27 N., R. 10 W. 
 to .25 miles upstream of the Wild Mad Road, as a wild 
 river.
 ``(B) The .65-mile segment from .25 miles upstream 
 of Wild Mad Road to the confluence with the unnamed 
 tributary approximately .4 miles downstream of the Wild 
 Mad Road in section 29, T. 28 N., R. 11 W., as a scenic 
 river.
 ``(C) The 9.8-mile segment from .75 miles 
 downstream of Wild Mad Road to Silver Creek, as a wild 
 river.
 ``(D) The 5.4-mile segment from Silver Creek 
 confluence to Farley Creek, as a scenic river.
 ``(E) The 3.6-mile segment from Farley Creek to 
 Cave Creek, as a recreational river.
 ``(F) The 5.6-mile segment from Cave Creek to the 
 confluence of the unnamed creek upstream of Hidden 
 Valley Ranch in section 5, T. 15, R. 7 E., as a wild 
 river.
 ``(G) The 2.5-mile segment from unnamed creek 
 confluence upstream of Hidden Valley Ranch to the 
 confluence with the unnamed creek flowing west from 
 Bear Wallow Mountain in section 29, T. 1 N., R. 7 E., 
 as a scenic river.
 ``(H) The 3.8-mile segment from the unnamed creek 
 confluence in section 29, T. 1 N., R. 7 E. to Plummer 
 Creek, as a wild river.
 ``(I) The 1.8-mile segment from Plummer Creek to 
 the confluence with the unnamed tributary north of 
 McClellan Place in section 6, T. 1 N., R. 7 E., as a 
 scenic river.
 ``(J) The 5.4-mile segment from the unnamed 
 tributary confluence in section 6, T. 1 N., R. 7 E. to 
 Hitchcock Creek, as a wild river.
 ``(K) The 7-mile segment from Eltapom Creek to the 
 Grouse Creek, as a scenic river.
 ``(L) The 5-mile segment from Grouse Creek to Coon 
 Creek, as a wild river.
 ``(232) East fork south fork trinity river.--The following 
 segments to be administered by the Secretary of Agriculture:
 ``(A) The 8.4-mile segment from its source in the 
 Pettijohn Basin in the Yolla Bolly-Middle Eel 
 Wilderness in section 10, T. 3 S., R. 10 W. to .25 
 miles upstream of the Wild Mad Road, as a wild river.
 ``(B) The 3.4-mile segment from .25 miles upstream 
 of the Wild Mad Road to the South Fork Trinity River, 
 as a recreational river.
 ``(233) Rattlesnake creek.--The 5.9-mile segment from the 
 confluence with the unnamed tributary in the southeast corner 
 of section 5, T. 1 S., R. 12 W. to the South Fork Trinity 
 River, to be administered by the Secretary of Agriculture as a 
 recreational river.
 ``(234) Butter creek.--The 7-mile segment from .25 miles 
 downstream of the Road 3N08 crossing to the South Fork Trinity 
 River, to be administered by the Secretary of Agriculture as a 
 scenic river.
 ``(235) Hayfork creek.--The following segments to be 
 administered by the Secretary of Agriculture:
 ``(A) The 3.2-mile segment from Little Creek to 
 Bear Creek, as a recreational river.
 ``(B) The 13.2-mile segment from Bear Creek to the 
 northern boundary of section 19, T. 3 N., R. 7 E., as a 
 scenic river.
 ``(236) Olsen creek.--The 2.8-mile segment from the 
 confluence of its source tributaries in section 5, T. 3 N., R. 
 7 E. to the northern boundary of section 24, T. 3 N., R. 6 E., 
 to be administered by the Secretary of the Interior as a scenic 
 river.
 ``(237) Rusch creek.--The 3.2-mile segment from .25 miles 
 downstream of the 32N11 Road crossing to Hayfork Creek, to be 
 administered by the Secretary of Agriculture as a recreational 
 river.
 ``(238) Eltapom creek.--The 3.4-mile segment from Buckhorn 
 Creek to the South Fork Trinity River, to be administered by 
 the Secretary of Agriculture as a wild river.
 ``(239) Grouse creek.--The following segments to be 
 administered by the Secretary of Agriculture:
 ``(A) The 3.9-mile segment from Carson Creek to Cow 
 Creek, as a scenic river.
 ``(B) The 7.4-mile segment from Cow Creek to the 
 South Fork Trinity River, as a recreational river.
 ``(240) Madden creek.--The following segments to be 
 administered by the Secretary of Agriculture:
 ``(A) The 6.8-mile segment from the confluence of 
 Madden Creek and its unnamed tributary in section 18, 
 T. 5 N., R. 5 E. to Fourmile Creek, as a wild river.
 ``(B) The 1.6-mile segment from Fourmile Creek to 
 the South Fork Trinity River, as a recreational river.
 ``(241) Canyon creek.--The following segments to be 
 administered by the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary 
 of the Interior:
 ``(A) The 6.6-mile segment from the outlet of lower 
 Canyon Creek Lake to Bear Creek upstream of Ripstein, 
 as a wild river.
 ``(B) The 11.2-mile segment from Bear Creek 
 upstream of Ripstein to the southern boundary of 
 section 25, T. 34 N., R. 11 W., as a recreational 
 river.
 ``(242) North fork trinity river.--The following segments 
 to be administered by the Secretary of Agriculture:
 ``(A) The 12-mile segment from the confluence of 
 source tributaries in section 24, T. 8 N., R. 12 W. to 
 the Trinity Alps Wilderness boundary upstream of Hobo 
 Gulch, as a wild river.
 ``(B) The .5-mile segment from where the river 
 leaves the Trinity Alps Wilderness to where it fully 
 reenters the Trinity Alps Wilderness downstream of Hobo 
 Gulch, as a scenic river.
 ``(C) The 13.9-mile segment from where the river 
 fully reenters the Trinity Alps Wilderness downstream 
 of Hobo Gulch to the Trinity Alps Wilderness boundary 
 upstream of the County Road 421 crossing, as a wild 
 river.
 ``(D) The 1.3-mile segment from the Trinity Alps 
 Wilderness boundary upstream of the County Road 421 
 crossing to the Trinity River, as a recreational river.
 ``(243) East fork north fork trinity river.--The following 
 segments to be administered by the Secretary of Agriculture:
 ``(A) The 9.5-mile segment from the river's source 
 north of Mt. Hilton in section 19, T. 36 N., R. 10 W. 
 to the end of Road 35N20 approximately .5 miles 
 downstream of the confluence with the East Branch East 
 Fork North Fork Trinity River, as a wild river.
 ``(B) The 3.25-mile segment from the end of Road 
 35N20 to .25 miles upstream of Coleridge, as a scenic 
 river.
 ``(C) The 4.6-mile segment from .25 miles upstream 
 of Coleridge to the confluence of Fox Gulch, as a 
 recreational river.
 ``(244) New river.--The following segments to be 
 administered by the Secretary of Agriculture:
 ``(A) The 12.7-mile segment of Virgin Creek from 
 its source spring in section 22, T. 9 N., R. 7 E. to 
 Slide Creek, as a wild river.
 ``(B) The 2.3-mile segment of the New River where 
 it begins at the confluence of Virgin and Slide Creeks 
 to Barron Creek, as a wild river.
 ``(245) Middle eel river.--The following segment, to be 
 administered by the Secretary of Agriculture:
 ``(A) The 37.7-mile segment from its source in 
 Frying Pan Meadow to Rose Creek, as a wild river.
 ``(B) The 1.5-mile segment from Rose Creek to the 
 Black Butte River, as a recreational river.
 ``(C) The 10.5-mile segment of Balm of Gilead Creek 
 from its source in Hopkins Hollow to the Middle Eel 
 River, as a wild river.
 ``(D) The 13-mile segment of the North Fork Middle 
 Fork Eel River from the source on Dead Puppy Ridge in 
 section 11, T. 26 N., R. 11 W. to the confluence of the 
 Middle Eel River, as a wild river.
 ``(246) North fork eel river, ca.--The 14.3-mile segment 
 from the confluence with Gilman Creek to the Six Rivers 
 National Forest boundary, to be administered by the Secretary 
 of Agriculture as a wild river.
 ``(247) Red mountain creek, ca.--The following segments to 
 be administered by the Secretary of Agriculture:
 ``(A) The 5.25-mile segment from its source west of 
 Mike's Rock in section 23, T. 26 N., R. 12 E. to the 
 confluence with Littlefield Creek, as a wild river.
 ``(B) The 1.6-mile segment from the confluence with 
 Littlefield Creek to the confluence with the unnamed 
 tributary in section 32, T. 26 N., R. 8 E., as a scenic 
 river.
 ``(C) The 1.25-mile segment from the confluence 
 with the unnamed tributary in section 32, T. 4 S., R. 8 
 E. to the confluence with the North Fork Eel River, as 
 a wild river.
 ``(248) Redwood creek.--The following segments to be 
 administered by the Secretary of the Interior:
 ``(A) The 6.2-mile segment from the confluence with 
 Lacks Creek to the confluence with Coyote Creek as a 
 scenic river on publication by the Secretary of a 
 notice in the Federal Register that sufficient 
 inholdings within the boundaries of the segments have 
 been acquired in fee title to establish a manageable 
 addition to the system.
 ``(B) The 19.1-mile segment from the confluence 
 with Coyote Creek in section 2, T. 8 N., R. 2 E. to the 
 Redwood National Park boundary upstream of Orick in 
 section 34, T. 11 N., R. 1 E. as a scenic river.
 ``(C) The 2.3-mile segment of Emerald Creek (also 
 known as Harry Weir Creek) from its source in section 
 29, T. 10 N., R. 2 E. to the confluence with Redwood 
 Creek as a scenic river.
 ``(249) Lacks creek.--The following segments to be 
 administered by the Secretary of the Interior:
 ``(A) The 5.1-mile segment from the confluence with 
 two unnamed tributaries in section 14, T. 7 N., R. 3 E. 
 to Kings Crossing in section 27, T. 8 N., R. 3 E. as a 
 wild river.
 ``(B) The 2.7-mile segment from Kings Crossing to 
 the confluence with Redwood Creek as a scenic river 
 upon publication by the Secretary of a notice in the 
 Federal Register that sufficient inholdings within the 
 segment have been acquired in fee title or as scenic 
 easements to establish a manageable addition to the 
 system.
 ``(250) Lost man creek.--The following segments to be 
 administered by the Secretary of the Interior:
 ``(A) The 6.4-mile segment of Lost Man Creek from 
 its source in section 5, T. 10 N., R. 2 E. to .25 miles 
 upstream of the Prairie Creek confluence, as a 
 recreational river.
 ``(B) The 2.3-mile segment of Larry Damm Creek from 
 its source in section 8, T. 11 N., R. 2 E. to the 
 confluence with Lost Man Creek, as a recreational 
 river.
 ``(251) Little lost man creek.--The 3.6-mile segment of 
 Little Lost Man Creek from its source in section 6, T. 10 N., 
 R. 2 E. to .25 miles upstream of the Lost Man Creek road 
 crossing, to be administered by the Secretary of the Interior 
 as a wild river.
 ``(252) South fork elk river.--The following segments to be 
 administered by the Secretary of the Interior through a 
 cooperative management agreement with the State of California:
 ``(A) The 3.6-mile segment of the Little South Fork 
 Elk River from the source in section 21, T. 3 N., R. 1 
 E. to the confluence with the South Fork Elk River, as 
 a wild river.
 ``(B) The 2.2-mile segment of the unnamed tributary 
 of the Little South Fork Elk River from its source in 
 section 15, T. 3 N., R. 1 E. to the confluence with the 
 Little South Fork Elk River, as a wild river.
 ``(C) The 3.6-mile segment of the South Fork Elk 
 River from the confluence of the Little South Fork Elk 
 River to the confluence with Tom Gulch, as a 
 recreational river.
 ``(253) Salmon creek.--The 4.6-mile segment from its source 
 in section 27, T. 3 N., R. 1 E. to the Headwaters Forest 
 Reserve boundary in section 18, T. 3 N., R. 1 E. to be 
 administered by the Secretary of the Interior as a wild river 
 through a cooperative management agreement with the State of 
 California.
 ``(254) South fork eel river.--The following segments to be 
 administered by the Secretary of the Interior:
 ``(A) The 6.2-mile segment from the confluence with 
 Jack of Hearts Creek to the southern boundary of the 
 South Fork Eel Wilderness in section 8, T. 22 N., R. 16 
 W., as a recreational river to be administered by the 
 Secretary through a cooperative management agreement 
 with the State of California.
 ``(B) The 6.1-mile segment from the southern 
 boundary of the South Fork Eel Wilderness to the 
 northern boundary of the South Fork Eel Wilderness in 
 section 29, T. 23 N., R. 16 W., as a wild river.
 ``(255) Elder creek.--The following segments to be 
 administered by the Secretary of the Interior through a 
 cooperative management agreement with the State of California:
 ``(A) The 3.6-mile segment from its source north of 
 Signal Peak in section 6, T. 21 N., R. 15 W. to the 
 confluence with the unnamed tributary near the center 
 of section 28, T. 22 N., R. 16 W., as a wild river.
 ``(B) The 1.3-mile segment from the confluence with 
 the unnamed tributary near the center of section 28, T. 
 22 N., R. 15 W. to the confluence with the South Fork 
 Eel River, as a recreational river.
 ``(C) The 2.1-mile segment of Paralyze Canyon from 
 its source south of Signal Peak in section 7, T. 21 N., 
 R. 15 W. to the confluence with Elder Creek, as a wild 
 river.
 ``(256) Cedar creek.--The following segments to be 
 administered as a wild river by the Secretary of the Interior:
 ``(A) The 7.7-mile segment from its source in 
 section 22, T. 24 N., R. 16 W. to the southern boundary 
 of the Red Mountain unit of the South Fork Eel 
 Wilderness.
 ``(B) The 1.9-mile segment of North Fork Cedar 
 Creek from its source in section 28, T. 24 N., R. 16 E. 
 to the confluence with Cedar Creek.
 ``(257) East branch south fork eel river.--The following 
 segments to be administered by the Secretary of the Interior as 
 a scenic river on publication by the Secretary of a notice in 
 the Federal Register that sufficient inholdings within the 
 boundaries of the segments have been acquired in fee title or 
 as scenic easements to establish a manageable addition to the 
 system:
 ``(A) The 2.3-mile segment of Cruso Cabin Creek 
 from the confluence of two unnamed tributaries in 
 section 18, T. 24 N., R. 15 W. to the confluence with 
 Elkhorn Creek.
 ``(B) The 1.8-mile segment of Elkhorn Creek from 
 the confluence of two unnamed tributaries in section 
 22, T. 24 N., R. 16 W. to the confluence with Cruso 
 Cabin Creek.
 ``(C) The 14.2-mile segment of the East Branch 
 South Fork Eel River from the confluence of Cruso Cabin 
 and Elkhorn Creeks to the confluence with Rays Creek.
 ``(D) The 1.7-mile segment of the unnamed tributary 
 from its source on the north flank of Red Mountain's 
 north ridge in section 2, T. 24 N., R. 17 W. to the 
 confluence with the East Branch South Fork Eel River.
 ``(E) The 1.3-mile segment of the unnamed tributary 
 from its source on the north flank of Red Mountain's 
 north ridge in section 1, T. 24 N., R. 17 W. to the 
 confluence with the East Branch South Fork Eel River.
 ``(F) The 1.8-mile segment of Tom Long Creek from 
 the confluence with the unnamed tributary in section 
 12, T. 5 S., R. 4 E. to the confluence with the East 
 Branch South Fork Eel River.
 ``(258) Mattole river estuary.--The 1.5-mile segment from 
 the confluence of Stansberry Creek to the Pacific Ocean, to be 
 administered as a recreational river by the Secretary of the 
 Interior.
 ``(259) Honeydew creek.--The following segments to be 
 administered as a wild river by the Secretary of the Interior:
 ``(A) The 5.1-mile segment of Honeydew Creek from 
 its source in the southwest corner of section 25, T. 3 
 S., R. 1 W. to the eastern boundary of the King Range 
 National Conservation Area in section 18, T. 3 S., R. 1 
 E.
 ``(B) The 2.8-mile segment of West Fork Honeydew 
 Creek from its source west of North Slide Peak to the 
 confluence with Honeydew Creek.
 ``(C) The 2.7-mile segment of Upper East Fork 
 Honeydew Creek from its source in section 23, T. 3 S., 
 R. 1 W. to the confluence with Honeydew Creek.
 ``(260) Bear creek.--The following segments to be 
 administered by the Secretary of the Interior:
 ``(A) The 1.9-mile segment of North Fork Bear Creek 
 from the confluence with the unnamed tributary 
 immediately downstream of the Horse Mountain Road 
 crossing to the confluence with the South Fork, as a 
 scenic river.
 ``(B) The 6.1-mile segment of South Fork Bear Creek 
 from the confluence in section 2, T. 5 S., R. 1 W. with 
 the unnamed tributary flowing from the southwest flank 
 of Queen Peak to the confluence with the North Fork, as 
 a scenic river.
 ``(C) The 3-mile segment of Bear Creek from the 
 confluence of the North and South Forks to the southern 
 boundary of section 11, T. 4 S., R. 1 E., as a wild 
 river.
 ``(261) Gitchell creek.--The 3-mile segment of Gitchell 
 Creek from its source near Saddle Mountain to the Pacific Ocean 
 to be administered by the Secretary of the Interior as a wild 
 river.
 ``(262) Big flat creek.--The following segments to be 
 administered by the Secretary of the Interior as a wild river:
 ``(A) The 4-mile segment of Big Flat Creek from its 
 source near King Peak in section 36, T. 3 S., R. 1 W. 
 to the Pacific Ocean.
 ``(B) The .8-mile segment of the unnamed tributary 
 from its source in section 35, T. 3 S., R. 1 W. to the 
 confluence with Big Flat Creek.
 ``(C) The 2.7-mile segment of North Fork Big Flat 
 Creek from the source in section 34, T. 3 S., R. 1 W. 
 to the confluence with Big Flat Creek.
 ``(263) Big creek.--The following segments to be 
 administered by the Secretary of the Interior as wild rivers:
 ``(A) The 2.7-mile segment of Big Creek from its 
 source in section 26, T. 3 S., R. 1 W. to the Pacific 
 Ocean.
 ``(B) The 1.9-mile unnamed southern tributary from 
 its source in section 25, T. 3 S., R. 1 W. to the 
 confluence with Big Creek.
 ``(264) Elk creek.--The 11.4-mile segment from its 
 confluence with Lookout Creek to its confluence with Deep Hole 
 Creek, to be jointly administered by the Secretaries of 
 Agriculture and the Interior, as a wild river.
 ``(265) Eden creek.--The 2.7-mile segment from the private 
 property boundary in the northwest quarter of section 27, T. 21 
 N., R. 12 W. to the eastern boundary of section 23, T. 21 N., 
 R. 12 W., to be administered by the Secretary of the Interior 
 as a wild river.
 ``(266) Deep hole creek.--The 4.3-mile segment from the 
 private property boundary in the southwest quarter of section 
 13, T. 20 N., R. 12 W. to the confluence with Elk Creek, to be 
 administered by the Secretary of the Interior as a wild river.
 ``(267) Indian creek.--The 3.3-mile segment from 300 feet 
 downstream of the jeep trail in section 13, T. 20 N., R. 13 W. 
 to the confluence with the Eel River, to be administered by the 
 Secretary of the Interior as a wild river.
 ``(268) Fish creek.--The 4.2-mile segment from the source 
 at Buckhorn Spring to the confluence with the Eel River, to be 
 administered by the Secretary of the Interior as a wild 
 river.''.

SEC. 235. SANHEDRIN SPECIAL CONSERVATION MANAGEMENT AREA.

 (a) Establishment.--Subject to valid existing rights, there is 
established the Sanhedrin Special Conservation Management Area 
(referred to in this section as the ``conservation management area''), 
comprising approximately 14,177 acres of Federal land administered by 
the Forest Service in Mendocino County, California, as generally 
depicted on the map entitled ``Sanhedrin Special Conservation 
Management Area--Proposed'' and dated April 12, 2017.
 (b) Purposes.--The purposes of the conservation management area are 
to--
 (1) conserve, protect, and enhance for the benefit and 
 enjoyment of present and future generations the ecological, 
 scenic, wildlife, recreational, roadless, cultural, historical, 
 natural, educational, and scientific resources of the 
 conservation management area;
 (2) protect and restore late-successional forest structure, 
 oak woodlands and grasslands, aquatic habitat, and anadromous 
 fisheries within the conservation management area;
 (3) protect and restore the wilderness character of the 
 conservation management area; and
 (4) allow visitors to enjoy the scenic, natural, cultural, 
 and wildlife values of the conservation management area.
 (c) Management.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall manage the 
 conservation management area--
 (A) in a manner consistent with the purposes 
 described in subsection (b); and
 (B) in accordance with--
 (i) the laws (including regulations) 
 generally applicable to the National Forest 
 System;
 (ii) this section; and
 (iii) any other applicable law (including 
 regulations).
 (2) Uses.--The Secretary shall only allow uses of the 
 conservation management area that the Secretary determines 
 would further the purposes described in subsection (b).
 (d) Motorized Vehicles.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (3), the 
 use of motorized vehicles in the conservation management area 
 shall be permitted only on existing roads, trails, and areas 
 designated for use by such vehicles as of the date of enactment 
 of this Act.
 (2) New or temporary roads.--Except as provided in 
 paragraph (3), no new or temporary roads shall be constructed 
 within the conservation management area.
 (3) Exception.--Nothing in paragraph (1) or (2) prevents 
 the Secretary from--
 (A) rerouting or closing an existing road or trail 
 to protect natural resources from degradation, or to 
 protect public safety, as determined to be appropriate 
 by the Secretary;
 (B) designating routes of travel on lands acquired 
 by the Secretary and incorporated into the conservation 
 management area if the designations are--
 (i) consistent with the purposes described 
 in subsection (b); and
 (ii) completed, to the maximum extent 
 practicable, within 3 years of the date of 
 acquisition;
 (C) constructing a temporary road on which 
 motorized vehicles are permitted as part of a 
 vegetation management project carried out in accordance 
 with subsection (e);
 (D) authorizing the use of motorized vehicles for 
 administrative purposes; or
 (E) responding to an emergency.
 (4) Decommissioning of temporary roads.--
 (A) Requirement.--The Secretary shall decommission 
 any temporary road constructed under paragraph (3)(C) 
 not later than 3 years after the date on which the 
 applicable vegetation management project is completed.
 (B) Definition.--As used in subparagraph (A), the 
 term ``decommission'' means--
 (i) to reestablish vegetation on a road; 
 and
 (ii) to restore any natural drainage, 
 watershed function, or other ecological 
 processes that are disrupted or adversely 
 impacted by the road by removing or 
 hydrologically disconnecting the road prism.
 (e) Timber Harvest.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), no 
 harvesting of timber shall be allowed within the conservation 
 management area.
 (2) Exceptions.--The Secretary may authorize harvesting of 
 timber in the conservation management area--
 (A) if the Secretary determines that the harvesting 
 is necessary to further the purposes of the 
 conservation management area;
 (B) in a manner consistent with the purposes 
 described in subsection (b); and
 (C) subject to--
 (i) such reasonable regulations, policies, 
 and practices as the Secretary determines 
 appropriate; and
 (ii) all applicable laws (including 
 regulations).
 (f) Grazing.--The grazing of livestock in the conservation 
management area, where established before the date of enactment of this 
Act, shall be permitted to continue--
 (1) subject to--
 (A) such reasonable regulations, policies, and 
 practices as the Secretary considers necessary; and
 (B) applicable law (including regulations); and
 (2) in a manner consistent with the purposes described in 
 subsection (b).
 (g) Wildfire, Insect, and Disease Management.--Consistent with this 
section, the Secretary may take any measures within the conservation 
management area that the Secretary determines to be necessary to 
control fire, insects, and diseases, including the coordination of 
those activities with a State or local agency.
 (h) Acquisition and Incorporation of Land and Interests in Land.--
 (1) Acquisition authority.--In accordance with applicable 
 laws (including regulations), the Secretary may acquire any 
 land or interest in land within or adjacent to the boundaries 
 of the conservation management area by purchase from willing 
 sellers, donation, or exchange.
 (2) Incorporation.--Any land or interest in land acquired 
 by the Secretary under paragraph (1) shall be--
 (A) incorporated into, and administered as part of, 
 the conservation management area; and
 (B) withdrawn in accordance with subsection (i).
 (i) Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, all Federal land 
located in the conservation management area is withdrawn from--
 (1) all forms of entry, appropriation, and disposal under 
 the public land laws;
 (2) location, entry, and patenting under the mining laws; 
 and
 (3) operation of the mineral leasing, mineral materials, 
 and geothermal leasing laws.

 Subtitle D--Miscellaneous

SEC. 241. MAPS AND LEGAL DESCRIPTIONS.

 (a) In General.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary shall prepare maps and legal descriptions of 
the--
 (1) wilderness areas and wilderness additions designated by 
 section 231;
 (2) potential wilderness areas designated by section 233;
 (3) South Fork Trinity-Mad River Restoration Area;
 (4) Horse Mountain Special Management Area; and
 (5) Sanhedrin Special Conservation Management Area.
 (b) Submission of Maps and Legal Descriptions.--The Secretary shall 
file the maps and legal descriptions prepared under subsection (a) 
with--
 (1) the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of 
 Representatives; and
 (2) the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the 
 Senate.
 (c) Force of Law.--The maps and legal descriptions prepared under 
subsection (a) shall have the same force and effect as if included in 
this title, except that the Secretary may correct any clerical and 
typographical errors in the maps and legal descriptions.
 (d) Public Availability.--The maps and legal descriptions prepared 
under subsection (a) shall be on file and available for public 
inspection in the appropriate offices of the Forest Service, Bureau of 
Land Management, and National Park Service.

SEC. 242. UPDATES TO LAND AND RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLANS.

 As soon as practicable, in accordance with applicable laws 
(including regulations), the Secretary shall incorporate the 
designations and studies required by this title into updated management 
plans for units covered by this title.

SEC. 243. PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY UTILITY FACILITIES AND 
 RIGHTS-OF-WAY.

 (a) Effect of Act.--Nothing in this title--
 (1) affects any validly issued right-of-way for the 
 customary operation, maintenance, upgrade, repair, relocation 
 within an existing right-of-way, replacement, or other 
 authorized activity (including the use of any mechanized 
 vehicle, helicopter, and other aerial device) in a right-of-way 
 acquired by or issued, granted, or permitted to Pacific Gas and 
 Electric Company (including any predecessor or successor in 
 interest or assign) that is located on land included in the 
 South Fork Trinity--Mad River Restoration Area, Bigfoot 
 National Recreation Trail, Sanhedrin Special Conservation 
 Management Area, and Horse Mountain Special Management Area; or
 (2) prohibits the upgrading or replacement of any--
 (A) utility facilities of the Pacific Gas and 
 Electric Company, including those utility facilities 
 known on the date of enactment of this Act within the--
 (i) South Fork Trinity--Mad River 
 Restoration Area known as--
 (I) Gas Transmission Line 177A or 
 rights-of-way;
 (II) Gas Transmission Line DFM 
 1312-02 or rights-of-way;
 (III) Electric Transmission Line 
 Bridgeville--Cottonwood 115 kV or 
 rights-of-way;
 (IV) Electric Transmission Line 
 Humboldt--Trinity 60 kV or rights-of-
 way;
 (V) Electric Transmission Line 
 Humboldt--Trinity 115 kV or rights-of-
 way;
 (VI) Electric Transmission Line 
 Maple Creek--Hoopa 60 kV or rights-of-
 way;
 (VII) Electric Distribution Line--
 Willow Creek 1101 12 kV or rights-of-
 way;
 (VIII) Electric Distribution Line--
 Willow Creek 1103 12 kV or rights-of-
 way;
 (IX) Electric Distribution Line--
 Low Gap 1101 12 kV or rights-of-way;
 (X) Electric Distribution Line--
 Fort Seward 1121 12 kV or rights-of-
 way;
 (XI) Forest Glen Border District 
 Regulator Station or rights-of-way;
 (XII) Durret District Gas Regulator 
 Station or rights-of-way;
 (XIII) Gas Distribution Line 4269C 
 or rights-of-way;
 (XIV) Gas Distribution Line 43991 
 or rights-of-way;
 (XV) Gas Distribution Line 4993D or 
 rights-of-way;
 (XVI) Sportsmans Club District Gas 
 Regulator Station or rights-of-way;
 (XVII) Highway 36 and Zenia 
 District Gas Regulator Station or 
 rights-of-way;
 (XVIII) Dinsmore Lodge 2nd Stage 
 Gas Regulator Station or rights-of-way;
 (XIX) Electric Distribution Line--
 Wildwood 1101 12kV or rights-of-way;
 (XX) Low Gap Substation;
 (XXI) Hyampom Switching Station; or
 (XXII) Wildwood Substation;
 (ii) Bigfoot National Recreation Trail 
 known as--
 (I) Gas Transmission Line 177A or 
 rights-of-way;
 (II) Electric Transmission Line 
 Humboldt--Trinity 115 kV or rights-of-
 way;
 (III) Electric Transmission Line 
 Bridgeville--Cottonwood 115 kV or 
 rights-of-way; or
 (IV) Electric Transmission Line 
 Humboldt--Trinity 60 kV or rights-of-
 way;
 (iii) Sanhedrin Special Conservation 
 Management Area known as, Electric Distribution 
 Line--Willits 1103 12 kV or rights-of-way; or
 (iv) Horse Mountain Special Management Area 
 known as, Electric Distribution Line Willow 
 Creek 1101 12 kV or rights-of-way; or
 (B) utility facilities of the Pacific Gas and 
 Electric Company in rights-of-way issued, granted, or 
 permitted by the Secretary adjacent to a utility 
 facility referred to in paragraph (1).
 (b) Plans for Access.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of this subtitle or the issuance of a new utility facility 
right-of-way within the South Fork Trinity--Mad River Restoration Area, 
Bigfoot National Recreation Trail, Sanhedrin Special Conservation 
Management Area, and Horse Mountain Special Management Area, whichever 
is later, the Secretary, in consultation with the Pacific Gas and 
Electric Company, shall publish plans for regular and emergency access 
by the Pacific Gas and Electric Company to the rights-of-way of the 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company.

 TITLE III--CENTRAL COAST HERITAGE PROTECTION

SEC. 301. SHORT TITLE.

 This title may be cited as the ``Central Coast Heritage Protection 
Act''.

SEC. 302. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Scenic areas.--The term ``scenic area'' means a scenic 
 area designated by section 308(a).
 (2) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means--
 (A) with respect to land managed by the Bureau of 
 Land Management, the Secretary of the Interior; and
 (B) with respect to land managed by the Forest 
 Service, the Secretary of Agriculture.
 (3) State.--The term ``State'' means the State of 
 California.
 (4) Wilderness area.--The term ``wilderness area'' means a 
 wilderness area or wilderness addition designated by section 
 303(a).

SEC. 303. DESIGNATION OF WILDERNESS.

 (a) In General.--In accordance with the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 
1131 et seq.), the following areas in the State are designated as 
wilderness areas and as components of the National Wilderness 
Preservation System:
 (1) Certain land in the Bakersfield Field Office of the 
 Bureau of Land Management comprising approximately 35,116 
 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Proposed 
 Caliente Mountain Wilderness'' and dated November 13, 2019, 
 which shall be known as the ``Caliente Mountain Wilderness''.
 (2) Certain land in the Bakersfield Field Office of the 
 Bureau of Land Management comprising approximately 13,332 
 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Proposed 
 Soda Lake Wilderness'' and dated June 25, 2019, which shall be 
 known as the ``Soda Lake Wilderness''.
 (3) Certain land in the Bakersfield Field Office of the 
 Bureau of Land Management comprising approximately 12,585 
 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Proposed 
 Temblor Range Wilderness'' and dated June 25, 2019, which shall 
 be known as the ``Temblor Range Wilderness''.
 (4) Certain land in the Los Padres National Forest 
 comprising approximately 23,670 acres, as generally depicted on 
 the map entitled ``Chumash Wilderness Area Additions--
 Proposed'' and dated March 29, 2019, which shall be 
 incorporated into and managed as part of the Chumash Wilderness 
 as designated by the Los Padres Condor Range and River 
 Protection Act (Public Law 102-301; 106 Stat. 242).
 (5) Certain land in the Los Padres National Forest 
 comprising approximately 54,036 acres, as generally depicted on 
 the maps entitled ``Dick Smith Wilderness Area Additions--
 Proposed Map 1 of 2 (Bear Canyon and Cuyama Peak Units)'' and 
 ``Dick Smith Wilderness Area Additions--Proposed Map 2 of 2 
 (Buckhorn and Mono Units)'' and dated November 14, 2019, which 
 shall be incorporated into and managed as part of the Dick 
 Smith Wilderness as designated by the California Wilderness Act 
 of 1984 (Public Law 98-425; 16 U.S.C. 1132 note).
 (6) Certain land in the Los Padres National Forest and the 
 Bakersfield Field Office of the Bureau of Land Management 
 comprising approximately 7,289 acres, as generally depicted on 
 the map entitled ``Garcia Wilderness Area Additions--Proposed'' 
 and dated March 29, 2019, which shall be incorporated into and 
 managed as part of the Garcia Wilderness as designated by the 
 Los Padres Condor Range and River Protection Act (Public Law 
 102-301; 106 Stat. 242).
 (7) Certain land in the Los Padres National Forest and the 
 Bakersfield Field Office of the Bureau of Land Management 
 comprising approximately 8,774 acres, as generally depicted on 
 the map entitled ``Machesna Mountain Wilderness--Proposed 
 Additions'' and dated October 30, 2019, which shall be 
 incorporated into and managed as part of the Machesna Mountain 
 Wilderness as designated by the California Wilderness Act of 
 1984 (Public Law 98-425; 16 U.S.C. 1132 note).
 (8) Certain land in the Los Padres National Forest 
 comprising approximately 30,184 acres, as generally depicted on 
 the map entitled ``Matilija Wilderness Area Additions--
 Proposed'' and dated March 29, 2019, which shall be 
 incorporated into and managed as part of the Matilija 
 Wilderness as designated by the Los Padres Condor Range and 
 River Protection Act (Public Law 102-301; 106 Stat. 242).
 (9) Certain land in the Los Padres National Forest 
 comprising approximately 23,969 acres, as generally depicted on 
 the map entitled ``San Rafael Wilderness Area Additions--
 Proposed'' and dated March 29, 2019, which shall be 
 incorporated into and managed as part of the San Rafael 
 Wilderness as designated by Public Law 90-271 (82 Stat. 51), 
 the California Wilderness Act of 1984 (Public Law 98-425; 16 
 U.S.C. 1132 note), and the Los Padres Condor Range and River 
 Protection Act (Public Law 102-301; 106 Stat. 242).
 (10) Certain land in the Los Padres National Forest 
 comprising approximately 2,921 acres, as generally depicted on 
 the map entitled ``Santa Lucia Wilderness Area Additions--
 Proposed'' and dated March 29, 2019, which shall be 
 incorporated into and managed as part of the Santa Lucia 
 Wilderness as designated by the Endangered American Wilderness 
 Act of 1978 (Public Law 95-237; 16 U.S.C. 1132 note).
 (11) Certain land in the Los Padres National Forest 
 comprising approximately 14,313 acres, as generally depicted on 
 the map entitled ``Sespe Wilderness Area Additions--Proposed'' 
 and dated March 29, 2019, which shall be incorporated into and 
 managed as part of the Sespe Wilderness as designated by the 
 Los Padres Condor Range and River Protection Act (Public Law 
 102-301; 106 Stat. 242).
 (12) Certain land in the Los Padres National Forest 
 comprising approximately 17,870 acres, as generally depicted on 
 the map entitled ``Diablo Caliente Wilderness Area--Proposed'' 
 and dated March 29, 2019, which shall be known as the ``Diablo 
 Caliente Wilderness''.
 (b) Maps and Legal Descriptions.--
 (1) In general.--As soon as practicable after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall file maps and legal 
 descriptions of the wilderness areas with--
 (A) the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources 
 of the Senate; and
 (B) the Committee on Natural Resources of the House 
 of Representatives.
 (2) Force of law.--The maps and legal descriptions filed 
 under paragraph (1) shall have the same force and effect as if 
 included in this title, except that the Secretary may correct 
 any clerical and typographical errors in the maps and legal 
 descriptions.
 (3) Public availability.--The maps and legal descriptions 
 filed under paragraph (1) shall be on file and available for 
 public inspection in the appropriate offices of the Forest 
 Service and Bureau of Land Management.

SEC. 304. DESIGNATION OF THE MACHESNA MOUNTAIN POTENTIAL WILDERNESS.

 (a) Designation.--In furtherance of the purposes of the Wilderness 
Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.), certain land in the Los Padres National 
Forest comprising approximately 2,359 acres, as generally depicted on 
the map entitled ``Machesna Mountain Potential Wilderness'' and dated 
March 29, 2019, is designated as the Machesna Mountain Potential 
Wilderness Area.
 (b) Map and Legal Description.--
 (1) In general.--As soon as practicable after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall file a map and legal 
 description of the Machesna Mountain Potential Wilderness Area 
 (referred to in this section as the ``potential wilderness 
 area'') with--
 (A) the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources 
 of the Senate; and
 (B) the Committee on Natural Resources of the House 
 of Representatives.
 (2) Force of law.--The map and legal description filed 
 under paragraph (1) shall have the same force and effect as if 
 included in this title, except that the Secretary may correct 
 any clerical and typographical errors in the map and legal 
 description.
 (3) Public availability.--The map and legal description 
 filed under paragraph (1) shall be on file and available for 
 public inspection in the appropriate offices of the Forest 
 Service.
 (c) Management.--Except as provided in subsection (d) and subject 
to valid existing rights, the Secretary shall manage the potential 
wilderness area in accordance with the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 
et seq.).
 (d) Trail Use, Construction, Reconstruction, and Realignment.--
 (1) In general.--In accordance with paragraph (2), the 
 Secretary may reconstruct, realign, or reroute the Pine 
 Mountain Trail.
 (2) Requirement.--In carrying out the reconstruction, 
 realignment, or rerouting under paragraph (1), the Secretary 
 shall--
 (A) comply with all existing laws (including 
 regulations); and
 (B) to the maximum extent practicable, use the 
 minimum tool or administrative practice necessary to 
 accomplish the reconstruction, realignment, or 
 rerouting with the least amount of adverse impact on 
 wilderness character and resources.
 (3) Motorized vehicles and machinery.--In accordance with 
 paragraph (2), the Secretary may use motorized vehicles and 
 machinery to carry out the trail reconstruction, realignment, 
 or rerouting authorized by this subsection.
 (4) Motorized and mechanized vehicles.--The Secretary may 
 permit the use of motorized and mechanized vehicles on the 
 existing Pine Mountain Trail in accordance with existing law 
 (including regulations) and this subsection until such date as 
 the potential wilderness area is designated as wilderness in 
 accordance with subsection (h).
 (e) Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, the Federal land 
in the potential wilderness area is withdrawn from all forms of--
 (1) entry, appropriation, or disposal under the public land 
 laws;
 (2) location, entry, and patent under the mining laws; and
 (3) disposition under all laws pertaining to mineral and 
 geothermal leasing or mineral materials.
 (f) Cooperative Agreements.--In carrying out this section, the 
Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with State, Tribal, and 
local governmental entities and private entities to complete the trail 
reconstruction, realignment, or rerouting authorized by subsection (d).
 (g) Boundaries.--The Secretary shall modify the boundary of the 
potential wilderness area to exclude any area within 150 feet of the 
centerline of the new location of any trail that has been 
reconstructed, realigned, or rerouted under subsection (d).
 (h) Wilderness Designation.--
 (1) In general.--The potential wilderness area, as modified 
 under subsection (g), shall be designated as wilderness and as 
 a component of the National Wilderness Preservation System on 
 the earlier of--
 (A) the date on which the Secretary publishes in 
 the Federal Register notice that the trail 
 reconstruction, realignment, or rerouting authorized by 
 subsection (d) has been completed; or
 (B) the date that is 20 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act.
 (2) Administration of wilderness.--On designation as 
 wilderness under this section, the potential wilderness area 
 shall be--
 (A) incorporated into the Machesna Mountain 
 Wilderness Area, as designated by the California 
 Wilderness Act of 1984 (Public Law 98-425; 16 U.S.C. 
 1132 note) and expanded by section 303; and
 (B) administered in accordance with section 305 and 
 the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.).

SEC. 305. ADMINISTRATION OF WILDERNESS.

 (a) In General.--Subject to valid existing rights, the wilderness 
areas shall be administered by the Secretary in accordance with this 
title and the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.), except that--
 (1) any reference in the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et 
 seq.) to the effective date of that Act shall be considered to 
 be a reference to the date of enactment of this Act; and
 (2) any reference in the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et 
 seq.) to the Secretary of Agriculture shall be considered to be 
 a reference to the Secretary that has jurisdiction over the 
 wilderness area.
 (b) Fire Management and Related Activities.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary may take any measures in a 
 wilderness area as are necessary for the control of fire, 
 insects, and diseases in accordance with section 4(d)(1) of the 
 Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1133(d)(1)) and House Report 98-40 of 
 the 98th Congress.
 (2) Funding priorities.--Nothing in this title limits 
 funding for fire and fuels management in the wilderness areas.
 (3) Revision and development of local fire management 
 plans.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment of 
 this Act, the Secretary shall amend the local information in 
 the Fire Management Reference System or individual operational 
 plans that apply to the land designated as a wilderness area.
 (4) Administration.--Consistent with paragraph (1) and 
 other applicable Federal law, to ensure a timely and efficient 
 response to fire emergencies in the wilderness areas, the 
 Secretary shall enter into agreements with appropriate State or 
 local firefighting agencies.
 (c) Grazing.--The grazing of livestock in the wilderness areas, if 
established before the date of enactment of this Act, shall be 
permitted to continue, subject to any reasonable regulations as the 
Secretary considers necessary in accordance with--
 (1) section 4(d)(4) of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 
 1133(d)(4));
 (2) the guidelines set forth in Appendix A of House Report 
 101-405, accompanying H.R. 2570 of the 101st Congress for land 
 under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of the Interior;
 (3) the guidelines set forth in House Report 96-617, 
 accompanying H.R. 5487 of the 96th Congress for land under the 
 jurisdiction of the Secretary of Agriculture; and
 (4) all other laws governing livestock grazing on Federal 
 public land.
 (d) Fish and Wildlife.--
 (1) In general.--In accordance with section 4(d)(7) of the 
 Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1133(d)(7)), nothing in this title 
 affects the jurisdiction or responsibilities of the State with 
 respect to fish and wildlife on public land in the State.
 (2) Management activities.--In furtherance of the purposes 
 and principles of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.), 
 the Secretary may conduct any management activities that are 
 necessary to maintain or restore fish and wildlife populations 
 and habitats in the wilderness areas, if the management 
 activities are--
 (A) consistent with relevant wilderness management 
 plans;
 (B) conducted in accordance with appropriate 
 policies, such as the policies established in Appendix 
 B of House Report 101-405; and
 (C) in accordance with memoranda of understanding 
 between the Federal agencies and the State Department 
 of Fish and Wildlife.
 (e) Buffer Zones.--
 (1) In general.--Congress does not intend for the 
 designation of wilderness areas by this title to lead to the 
 creation of protective perimeters or buffer zones around each 
 wilderness area.
 (2) Activities or uses up to boundaries.--The fact that 
 nonwilderness activities or uses can be seen or heard from 
 within a wilderness area shall not, of itself, preclude the 
 activities or uses up to the boundary of the wilderness area.
 (f) Military Activities.--Nothing in this title precludes--
 (1) low-level overflights of military aircraft over the 
 wilderness areas;
 (2) the designation of new units of special airspace over 
 the wilderness areas; or
 (3) the use or establishment of military flight training 
 routes over wilderness areas.
 (g) Horses.--Nothing in this title precludes horseback riding in, 
or the entry of recreational saddle or pack stock into, a wilderness 
area--
 (1) in accordance with section 4(d)(5) of the Wilderness 
 Act (16 U.S.C. 1133(d)(5)); and
 (2) subject to any terms and conditions determined to be 
 necessary by the Secretary.
 (h) Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, the wilderness 
areas are withdrawn from--
 (1) all forms of entry, appropriation, and disposal under 
 the public land laws;
 (2) location, entry, and patent under the mining laws; and
 (3) disposition under all laws pertaining to mineral and 
 geothermal leasing or mineral materials.
 (i) Incorporation of Acquired Land and Interests.--Any land within 
the boundary of a wilderness area that is acquired by the United States 
shall--
 (1) become part of the wilderness area in which the land is 
 located; and
 (2) be managed in accordance with--
 (A) this section;
 (B) the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.); 
 and
 (C) any other applicable law.
 (j) Climatological Data Collection.--In accordance with the 
Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.) and subject to terms and 
conditions as the Secretary may prescribe, the Secretary may authorize 
the installation and maintenance of hydrologic, meteorologic, or 
climatological collection devices in the wilderness areas if the 
Secretary determines that the facilities and access to the facilities 
are essential to flood warning, flood control, or water reservoir 
operation activities.

SEC. 306. DESIGNATION OF WILD AND SCENIC RIVERS.

 (a) Indian Creek, Mono Creek, and Matilija Creek, California.--
Section 3(a) of the National Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 U.S.C. 
1274(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(231) Indian creek, california.--The following segments 
 of Indian Creek in the State of California, to be administered 
 by the Secretary of Agriculture:
 ``(A) The 9.5-mile segment of Indian Creek from its 
 source in sec. 19, T. 7 N., R. 26 W., to the Dick Smith 
 Wilderness boundary, as a wild river.
 ``(B) The 1-mile segment of Indian Creek from the 
 Dick Smith Wilderness boundary to 0.25 miles downstream 
 of Road 6N24, as a scenic river.
 ``(C) The 3.9-mile segment of Indian Creek from 
 0.25 miles downstream of Road 6N24 to the southern 
 boundary of sec. 32, T. 6 N., R. 26 W., as a wild 
 river.
 ``(232) Mono creek, california.--The following segments of 
 Mono Creek in the State of California, to be administered by 
 the Secretary of Agriculture:
 ``(A) The 4.2-mile segment of Mono Creek from its 
 source in sec. 1, T. 7 N., R. 26 W., to 0.25 miles 
 upstream of Don Victor Fire Road in sec. 28, T. 7 N., 
 R. 25 W., as a wild river.
 ``(B) The 2.1-mile segment of Mono Creek from 0.25 
 miles upstream of the Don Victor Fire Road in sec. 28, 
 T. 7 N., R. 25 W., to 0.25 miles downstream of Don 
 Victor Fire Road in sec. 34, T. 7 N., R. 25 W., as a 
 recreational river.
 ``(C) The 14.7-mile segment of Mono Creek from 0.25 
 miles downstream of Don Victor Fire Road in sec. 34, T. 
 7 N., R. 25 W., to the Ogilvy Ranch private property 
 boundary in sec. 22, T. 6 N., R. 26 W., as a wild 
 river.
 ``(D) The 3.5-mile segment of Mono Creek from the 
 Ogilvy Ranch private property boundary to the southern 
 boundary of sec. 33, T. 6 N., R. 26 W., as a 
 recreational river.
 ``(233) Matilija creek, california.--The following segments 
 of Matilija Creek in the State of California, to be 
 administered by the Secretary of Agriculture:
 ``(A) The 7.2-mile segment of the Matilija Creek 
 from its source in sec. 25, T. 6 N., R. 25 W., to the 
 private property boundary in sec. 9, T. 5 N., R. 24 W., 
 as a wild river.
 ``(B) The 7.25-mile segment of the Upper North Fork 
 Matilija Creek from its source in sec. 36, T. 6 N., R. 
 24 W., to the Matilija Wilderness boundary, as a wild 
 river.''.
 (b) Sespe Creek, California.--Section 3(a) of the National Wild and 
Scenic Rivers Act (16 U.S.C. 1274(a)) is amended by striking paragraph 
(142) and inserting the following:
 ``(142) Sespe creek, california.--The following segments of 
 Sespe Creek in the State of California, to be administered by 
 the Secretary of Agriculture:
 ``(A) The 2.7-mile segment of Sespe Creek from the 
 private property boundary in sec. 10, T. 6 N., R. 24 
 W., to the Hartman Ranch private property boundary in 
 sec. 14, T. 6 N., R. 24 W., as a wild river.
 ``(B) The 15-mile segment of Sespe Creek from the 
 Hartman Ranch private property boundary in sec. 14, T. 
 6 N., R. 24 W., to the western boundary of sec. 6, T. 5 
 N., R. 22 W., as a recreational river.
 ``(C) The 6.1-mile segment of Sespe Creek from the 
 western boundary of sec. 6, T. 5 N., R. 22 W., to the 
 confluence with Trout Creek, as a scenic river.
 ``(D) The 28.6-mile segment of Sespe Creek from the 
 confluence with Trout Creek to the southern boundary of 
 sec. 35, T. 5 N., R. 20 W., as a wild river.''.
 (c) Sisquoc River, California.--Section 3(a) of the National Wild 
and Scenic Rivers Act (16 U.S.C. 1274(a)) is amended by striking 
paragraph (143) and inserting the following:
 ``(143) Sisquoc river, california.--The following segments 
 of the Sisquoc River and its tributaries in the State of 
 California, to be administered by the Secretary of Agriculture:
 ``(A) The 33-mile segment of the main stem of the 
 Sisquoc River extending from its origin downstream to 
 the Los Padres Forest boundary, as a wild river.
 ``(B) The 4.2-mile segment of the South Fork 
 Sisquoc River from its source northeast of San Rafael 
 Mountain in sec. 2, T. 7 N., R. 28 W., to its 
 confluence with the Sisquoc River, as a wild river.
 ``(C) The 10.4-mile segment of Manzana Creek from 
 its source west of San Rafael Peak in sec. 4, T. 7 N., 
 R. 28 W., to the San Rafael Wilderness boundary 
 upstream of Nira Campground, as a wild river.
 ``(D) The 0.6-mile segment of Manzana Creek from 
 the San Rafael Wilderness boundary upstream of the Nira 
 Campground to the San Rafael Wilderness boundary 
 downstream of the confluence of Davy Brown Creek, as a 
 recreational river.
 ``(E) The 5.8-mile segment of Manzana Creek from 
 the San Rafael Wilderness boundary downstream of the 
 confluence of Davy Brown Creek to the private property 
 boundary in sec. 1, T. 8 N., R. 30 W., as a wild river.
 ``(F) The 3.8-mile segment of Manzana Creek from 
 the private property boundary in sec. 1, T. 8 N., R. 30 
 W., to the confluence of the Sisquoc River, as a 
 recreational river.
 ``(G) The 3.4-mile segment of Davy Brown Creek from 
 its source west of Ranger Peak in sec. 32, T. 8 N., R. 
 29 W., to 300 feet upstream of its confluence with 
 Munch Canyon, as a wild river.
 ``(H) The 1.4-mile segment of Davy Brown Creek from 
 300 feet upstream of its confluence with Munch Canyon 
 to its confluence with Manzana Creek, as a recreational 
 river.
 ``(I) The 2-mile segment of Munch Canyon from its 
 source north of Ranger Peak in sec. 33, T. 8 N., R. 29 
 W., to 300 feet upstream of its confluence with Sunset 
 Valley Creek, as a wild river.
 ``(J) The 0.5-mile segment of Munch Canyon from 300 
 feet upstream of its confluence with Sunset Valley 
 Creek to its confluence with Davy Brown Creek, as a 
 recreational river.
 ``(K) The 2.6-mile segment of Fish Creek from 500 
 feet downstream of Sunset Valley Road to its confluence 
 with Manzana Creek, as a wild river.
 ``(L) The 1.5-mile segment of East Fork Fish Creek 
 from its source in sec. 26, T. 8 N., R. 29 W., to its 
 confluence with Fish Creek, as a wild river.''.
 (d) Piru Creek, California.--Section 3(a) of the National Wild and 
Scenic Rivers Act (16 U.S.C. 1274(a)) is amended by striking paragraph 
(199) and inserting the following:
 ``(199) Piru creek, california.--The following segments of 
 Piru Creek in the State of California, to be administered by 
 the Secretary of Agriculture:
 ``(A) The 9.1-mile segment of Piru Creek from its 
 source in sec. 3, T. 6 N., R. 22 W., to the private 
 property boundary in sec. 4, T. 6 N., R. 21 W., as a 
 wild river.
 ``(B) The 17.2-mile segment of Piru Creek from the 
 private property boundary in sec. 4, T. 6 N., R. 21 W., 
 to 0.25 miles downstream of the Gold Hill Road, as a 
 scenic river.
 ``(C) The 4.1-mile segment of Piru Creek from 0.25 
 miles downstream of Gold Hill Road to the confluence 
 with Trail Canyon, as a wild river.
 ``(D) The 7.25-mile segment of Piru Creek from the 
 confluence with Trail Canyon to the confluence with 
 Buck Creek, as a scenic river.
 ``(E) The 3-mile segment of Piru Creek from 0.5 
 miles downstream of Pyramid Dam at the first bridge 
 crossing to the boundary of the Sespe Wilderness, as a 
 recreational river.
 ``(F) The 13-mile segment of Piru Creek from the 
 boundary of the Sespe Wilderness to the boundary of the 
 Sespe Wilderness, as a wild river.
 ``(G) The 2.2-mile segment of Piru Creek from the 
 boundary of the Sespe Wilderness to the upper limit of 
 Piru Reservoir, as a recreational river.''.
 (e) Effect.--The designation of additional miles of Piru Creek 
under subsection (d) shall not affect valid water rights in existence 
on the date of enactment of this Act.
 (f) Motorized Use of Trails.--Nothing in this section (including 
the amendments made by this section) affects the motorized use of 
trails designated by the Forest Service for motorized use that are 
located adjacent to and crossing upper Piru Creek, if the use is 
consistent with the protection and enhancement of river values under 
the National Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 U.S.C. 1271 et seq.).

SEC. 307. DESIGNATION OF THE FOX MOUNTAIN POTENTIAL WILDERNESS.

 (a) Designation.--In furtherance of the purposes of the Wilderness 
Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.), certain land in the Los Padres National 
Forest comprising approximately 41,082 acres, as generally depicted on 
the map entitled ``Fox Mountain Potential Wilderness Area'' and dated 
November 14, 2019, is designated as the Fox Mountain Potential 
Wilderness Area.
 (b) Map and Legal Description.--
 (1) In general.--As soon as practicable after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall file 
 a map and a legal description of the Fox Mountain Potential 
 Wilderness Area (referred to in this section as the ``potential 
 wilderness area'') with--
 (A) the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources 
 of the Senate; and
 (B) the Committee on Natural Resources of the House 
 of Representatives.
 (2) Force of law.--The map and legal description filed 
 under paragraph (1) shall have the same force and effect as if 
 included in this title, except that the Secretary of 
 Agriculture may correct any clerical and typographical errors 
 in the map and legal description.
 (3) Public availability.--The map and legal description 
 filed under paragraph (1) shall be on file and available for 
 public inspection in the appropriate offices of the Forest 
 Service.
 (c) Management.--Except as provided in subsection (d) and subject 
to valid existing rights, the Secretary shall manage the potential 
wilderness area in accordance with the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 
et seq.).
 (d) Trail Use Construction, Reconstruction, and Realignment.--
 (1) In general.--In accordance with paragraph (2), the 
 Secretary of Agriculture may--
 (A) construct a new trail for use by hikers, 
 equestrians, and mechanized vehicles that connects the 
 Aliso Park Campground to the Bull Ridge Trail; and
 (B) reconstruct or realign--
 (i) the Bull Ridge Trail; and
 (ii) the Rocky Ridge Trail.
 (2) Requirement.--In carrying out the construction, 
 reconstruction, or alignment under paragraph (1), the Secretary 
 shall--
 (A) comply with all existing laws (including 
 regulations); and
 (B) to the maximum extent practicable, use the 
 minimum tool or administrative practice necessary to 
 accomplish the construction, reconstruction, or 
 alignment with the least amount of adverse impact on 
 wilderness character and resources.
 (3) Motorized vehicles and machinery.--In accordance with 
 paragraph (2), the Secretary may use motorized vehicles and 
 machinery to carry out the trail construction, reconstruction, 
 or realignment authorized by this subsection.
 (4) Mechanized vehicles.--The Secretary may permit the use 
 of mechanized vehicles on the existing Bull Ridge Trail and 
 Rocky Ridge Trail in accordance with existing law (including 
 regulations) and this subsection until such date as the 
 potential wilderness area is designated as wilderness in 
 accordance with subsection (h).
 (e) Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, the Federal land 
in the potential wilderness area is withdrawn from all forms of--
 (1) entry, appropriation, or disposal under the public land 
 laws;
 (2) location, entry, and patent under the mining laws; and
 (3) disposition under all laws pertaining to mineral and 
 geothermal leasing or mineral materials.
 (f) Cooperative Agreements.--In carrying out this section, the 
Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with State, Tribal, and 
local governmental entities and private entities to complete the trail 
construction, reconstruction, and realignment authorized by subsection 
(d).
 (g) Boundaries.--The Secretary shall modify the boundary of the 
potential wilderness area to exclude any area within 50 feet of the 
centerline of the new location of any trail that has been constructed, 
reconstructed, or realigned under subsection (d).
 (h) Wilderness Designation.--
 (1) In general.--The potential wilderness area, as modified 
 under subsection (g), shall be designated as wilderness and as 
 a component of the National Wilderness Preservation System on 
 the earlier of--
 (A) the date on which the Secretary publishes in 
 the Federal Register notice that the trail 
 construction, reconstruction, or alignment authorized 
 by subsection (d) has been completed; or
 (B) the date that is 20 years after the date of 
 enactment of this Act.
 (2) Administration of wilderness.--On designation as 
 wilderness under this section, the potential wilderness area 
 shall be--
 (A) incorporated into the San Rafael Wilderness, as 
 designated by Public Law 90-271 (82 Stat. 51), the 
 California Wilderness Act of 1984 (Public Law 98-425; 
 16 U.S.C. 1132 note), and the Los Padres Condor Range 
 and River Protection Act (Public Law 102-301; 106 Stat. 
 242), and section 303; and
 (B) administered in accordance with section 305 and 
 the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.).

SEC. 308. DESIGNATION OF SCENIC AREAS.

 (a) In General.--Subject to valid existing rights, there are 
established the following scenic areas:
 (1) Condor ridge scenic area.--Certain land in the Los 
 Padres National Forest comprising approximately 18,666 acres, 
 as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Condor Ridge Scenic 
 Area--Proposed'' and dated March 29, 2019, which shall be known 
 as the ``Condor Ridge Scenic Area''.
 (2) Black mountain scenic area.--Certain land in the Los 
 Padres National Forest and the Bakersfield Field Office of the 
 Bureau of Land Management comprising approximately 16,216 
 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Black 
 Mountain Scenic Area--Proposed'' and dated March 29, 2019, 
 which shall be known as the ``Black Mountain Scenic Area''.
 (b) Maps and Legal Descriptions.--
 (1) In general.--As soon as practicable after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall file 
 a map and legal description of the Condor Ridge Scenic Area and 
 Black Mountain Scenic Area with--
 (A) the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources 
 of the Senate; and
 (B) the Committee on Natural Resources of the House 
 of Representatives.
 (2) Force of law.--The maps and legal descriptions filed 
 under paragraph (1) shall have the same force and effect as if 
 included in this title, except that the Secretary of 
 Agriculture may correct any clerical and typographical errors 
 in the maps and legal descriptions.
 (3) Public availability.--The maps and legal descriptions 
 filed under paragraph (1) shall be on file and available for 
 public inspection in the appropriate offices of the Forest 
 Service and Bureau of Land Management.
 (c) Purpose.--The purpose of the scenic areas is to conserve, 
protect, and enhance for the benefit and enjoyment of present and 
future generations the ecological, scenic, wildlife, recreational, 
cultural, historical, natural, educational, and scientific resources of 
the scenic areas.
 (d) Management.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall administer the scenic 
 areas--
 (A) in a manner that conserves, protects, and 
 enhances the resources of the scenic areas, and in 
 particular the scenic character attributes of the 
 scenic areas; and
 (B) in accordance with--
 (i) this section;
 (ii) the Federal Land Policy and Management 
 Act (43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) for land under the 
 jurisdiction of the Secretary of the Interior;
 (iii) any laws (including regulations) 
 relating to the National Forest System, for 
 land under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of 
 Agriculture; and
 (iv) any other applicable law (including 
 regulations).
 (2) Uses.--The Secretary shall only allow those uses of the 
 scenic areas that the Secretary determines would further the 
 purposes described in subsection (c).
 (e) Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, the Federal land 
in the scenic areas is withdrawn from all forms of--
 (1) entry, appropriation, or disposal under the public land 
 laws;
 (2) location, entry, and patent under the mining laws; and
 (3) disposition under all laws pertaining to mineral and 
 geothermal leasing or mineral materials.
 (f) Prohibited Uses.--The following shall be prohibited on the 
Federal land within the scenic areas:
 (1) Permanent roads.
 (2) Permanent structures.
 (3) Timber harvesting except when necessary for the 
 purposes described in subsection (g).
 (4) Transmission lines.
 (5) Except as necessary to meet the minimum requirements 
 for the administration of the scenic areas and to protect 
 public health and safety--
 (A) the use of motorized vehicles; or
 (B) the establishment of temporary roads.
 (6) Commercial enterprises, except as necessary for 
 realizing the purposes of the scenic areas.
 (g) Wildfire, Insect, and Disease Management.--Consistent with this 
section, the Secretary may take any measures in the scenic areas that 
the Secretary determines to be necessary to control fire, insects, and 
diseases, including, as the Secretary determines to be appropriate, the 
coordination of those activities with the State or a local agency.
 (h) Adjacent Management.--The fact that an otherwise authorized 
activity or use can be seen or heard within a scenic area shall not 
preclude the activity or use outside the boundary of the scenic area.

SEC. 309. CONDOR NATIONAL SCENIC TRAIL.

 (a) In General.--The contiguous trail established pursuant to this 
section shall be known as the ``Condor National Scenic Trail'' named 
after the California condor, a critically endangered bird species that 
lives along the extent of the trail corridor.
 (b) Purpose.--The purposes of the Condor National Scenic Trail are 
to--
 (1) provide a continual extended hiking corridor that 
 connects the southern and northern portions of the Los Padres 
 National Forest, spanning the entire length of the forest along 
 the coastal mountains of southern and central California; and
 (2) provide for the public enjoyment of the nationally 
 significant scenic, historic, natural, and cultural qualities 
 of the Los Padres National Forest.
 (c) Amendment.--Section 5(a) of the National Trails System Act (16 
U.S.C. 1244(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(31) Condor national scenic trail.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Condor National Scenic 
 Trail, a trail extending approximately 400 miles from 
 Lake Piru in the southern portion of the Los Padres 
 National Forest to the Bottchers Gap Campground in 
 northern portion of the Los Padres National Forest.
 ``(B) Administration.--The trail shall be 
 administered by the Secretary of Agriculture, in 
 consultation with--
 ``(i) other Federal, State, Tribal, 
 regional, and local agencies;
 ``(ii) private landowners; and
 ``(iii) other interested organizations.
 ``(C) Recreational uses.--Notwithstanding section 
 7(c), the use of motorized vehicles on roads or trails 
 included in the Condor National Scenic Trail on which 
 motorized vehicles are permitted as of the date of 
 enactment of this paragraph may be permitted.
 ``(D) Private property rights.--
 ``(i) Prohibition.--The Secretary shall not 
 acquire for the trail any land or interest in 
 land outside the exterior boundary of any 
 federally managed area without the consent of 
 the owner of land or interest in land.
 ``(ii) Effect.--Nothing in this paragraph--
 ``(I) requires any private property 
 owner to allow public access (including 
 Federal, State, or local government 
 access) to private property; or
 ``(II) modifies any provision of 
 Federal, State, or local law with 
 respect to public access to or use of 
 private land.
 ``(E) Realignment.--The Secretary of Agriculture 
 may realign segments of the Condor National Scenic 
 Trail as necessary to fulfill the purposes of the 
 trail.
 ``(F) Map.--A map generally depicting the trail 
 described in subparagraph (A) shall be on file and 
 available for public inspection in the appropriate 
 offices of the Forest Service.''.
 (d) Study.--
 (1) Study required.--Not later than 3 years after the date 
 of enactment of this Act, in accordance with this section, the 
 Secretary of Agriculture shall conduct a study that--
 (A) addresses the feasibility of, and alternatives 
 for, connecting the northern and southern portions of 
 the Los Padres National Forest by establishing a trail 
 across the applicable portions of the northern and 
 southern Santa Lucia Mountains of the southern 
 California Coastal Range; and
 (B) considers realignment of the trail or 
 construction of new trail segments to avoid existing 
 trail segments that currently allow motorized vehicles.
 (2) Contents.--In carrying out the study required by 
 paragraph (1), the Secretary of Agriculture shall--
 (A) conform to the requirements for national scenic 
 trail studies described in section 5(b) of the National 
 Trails System Act (16 U.S.C. 1244(b));
 (B) provide for a continual hiking route through 
 and connecting the southern and northern sections of 
 the Los Padres National Forest;
 (C) promote recreational, scenic, wilderness and 
 cultural values;
 (D) enhance connectivity with the overall National 
 Forest trail system;
 (E) consider new connectors and realignment of 
 existing trails;
 (F) emphasize safe and continuous public access, 
 dispersal from high-use areas, and suitable water 
 sources; and
 (G) to the extent practicable, provide all-year 
 use.
 (3) Additional requirement.--In completing the study 
 required by paragraph (1), the Secretary of Agriculture shall 
 consult with--
 (A) appropriate Federal, State, Tribal, regional, 
 and local agencies;
 (B) private landowners;
 (C) nongovernmental organizations; and
 (D) members of the public.
 (4) Submission.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall submit 
 the study required by paragraph (1) to--
 (A) the Committee on Natural Resources of the House 
 of Representatives; and
 (B) the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources 
 of the Senate.
 (5) Additions and alterations to the condor national scenic 
 trail.--
 (A) In general.--Upon completion of the study 
 required by paragraph (1), if the Secretary of 
 Agriculture determines that additional or alternative 
 trail segments are feasible for inclusion in the Condor 
 National Scenic Trail, the Secretary of Agriculture 
 shall include those segments in the Condor National 
 Scenic Trail.
 (B) Effective date.--Additions or alternations to 
 the Condor National Scenic Trail shall be effective on 
 the date the Secretary of Agriculture publishes in the 
 Federal Register notice that the additional or 
 alternative segments are included in the Condor 
 National Scenic Trail.
 (e) Cooperative Agreements.--In carrying out this section 
(including the amendments made by this section), the Secretary of 
Agriculture may enter into cooperative agreements with State, Tribal, 
and local government entities and private entities to complete needed 
trail construction, reconstruction, and realignment projects authorized 
by this section (including the amendments made by this section).

SEC. 310. FOREST SERVICE STUDY.

 Not later than 6 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
Secretary of Agriculture (acting through the Chief of the Forest 
Service) shall study the feasibility of opening a new trail, for 
vehicles measuring 50 inches or less, connecting Forest Service Highway 
95 to the existing off-highway vehicle trail system in the Ballinger 
Canyon off-highway vehicle area.

SEC. 311. NONMOTORIZED RECREATION OPPORTUNITIES.

 Not later than 6 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
Secretary of Agriculture, in consultation with interested parties, 
shall conduct a study to improve nonmotorized recreation trail 
opportunities (including mountain bicycling) on land not designated as 
wilderness within the Santa Barbara, Ojai, and Mt. Pinos ranger 
districts.

SEC. 312. USE BY MEMBERS OF TRIBES.

 (a) Access.--The Secretary shall ensure that Tribes have access, in 
accordance with the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.), to the 
wilderness areas, scenic areas, and potential wilderness areas 
designated by this title for traditional cultural and religious 
purposes.
 (b) Temporary Closures.--
 (1) In general.--In carrying out this section, the 
 Secretary, on request of a Tribe, may temporarily close to the 
 general public one or more specific portions of a wilderness 
 area, scenic area, or potential wilderness area designated by 
 this title to protect the privacy of the members of the Tribe 
 in the conduct of traditional cultural and religious 
 activities.
 (2) Requirement.--Any closure under paragraph (1) shall 
 be--
 (A) made in such a manner as to affect the smallest 
 practicable area for the minimum period of time 
 necessary for the activity to be carried out; and
 (B) be consistent with the purpose and intent of 
 Public Law 95-341 (commonly known as the American 
 Indian Religious Freedom Act) (42 U.S.C. 1996) and the 
 Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.).

 TITLE IV--SAN GABRIEL MOUNTAINS FOOTHILLS AND RIVERS PROTECTION

SEC. 401. SHORT TITLE.

 This title may be cited as the ``San Gabriel Mountains Foothills 
and Rivers Protection Act''.

SEC. 402. DEFINITION OF STATE.

 In this title, the term ``State'' means the State of California.

 Subtitle A--San Gabriel National Recreation Area

SEC. 411. PURPOSES.

 The purposes of this subtitle are--
 (1) to conserve, protect, and enhance for the benefit and 
 enjoyment of present and future generations the ecological, 
 scenic, wildlife, recreational, cultural, historical, natural, 
 educational, and scientific resources of the Recreation Area;
 (2) to provide environmentally responsible, well-managed 
 recreational opportunities within the Recreation Area;
 (3) to improve access to and from the Recreation Area;
 (4) to provide expanded educational and interpretive 
 services to increase public understanding of, and appreciation 
 for, the natural and cultural resources of the Recreation Area;
 (5) to facilitate the cooperative management of the land 
 and resources within the Recreation Area, in collaboration with 
 the State and political subdivisions of the State, historical, 
 business, cultural, civic, recreational, tourism and other 
 nongovernmental organizations, and the public; and
 (6) to allow the continued use of the Recreation Area by 
 all individuals, entities, and local government agencies in 
 activities relating to integrated water management, flood 
 protection, water conservation, water quality, water rights, 
 water supply, groundwater recharge and monitoring, wastewater 
 treatment, public roads and bridges, and utilities within or 
 adjacent to the Recreation Area.

SEC. 412. DEFINITIONS.

 In this subtitle:
 (1) Adjudication.--The term ``adjudication'' means any 
 final judgment, order, ruling, or decree entered in any 
 judicial proceeding adjudicating or affecting water rights, 
 surface water management, or groundwater management.
 (2) Advisory council.--The term ``Advisory Council'' means 
 the San Gabriel National Recreation Area Public Advisory 
 Council established under section 417(a).
 (3) Federal lands.--The term ``Federal lands'' means--
 (A) public lands under the jurisdiction of the 
 Secretary of the Interior; and
 (B) lands under the jurisdiction of the Secretary 
 of Defense, acting through the Chief of Engineers.
 (4) Management plan.--The term ``management plan'' means 
 the management plan for the Recreation Area required under 
 section 414(d).
 (5) Partnership.--The term ``Partnership'' means the San 
 Gabriel National Recreation Area Partnership established by 
 section 418(a).
 (6) Public water system.--The term ``public water system'' 
 has the meaning given the term in 42 U.S.C. 300(f)(4) or in 
 section 116275 of the California Health and Safety Code.
 (7) Recreation area.--The term ``Recreation Area'' means 
 the San Gabriel National Recreation Area established by section 
 413(a).
 (8) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of the Interior.
 (9) Utility facility.--The term ``utility facility'' 
 means--
 (A) any electric substations, communication 
 facilities, towers, poles, and lines, ground wires, 
 communication circuits, and other structures, and 
 related infrastructure; and
 (B) any such facilities associated with a public 
 water system.
 (10) Water resource facility.--The term ``water resource 
 facility'' means irrigation and pumping facilities, dams and 
 reservoirs, flood control facilities, water conservation works, 
 including debris protection facilities, sediment placement 
 sites, rain gauges and stream gauges, water quality facilities, 
 recycled water facilities, water pumping, conveyance and 
 distribution systems, water storage tanks and reservoirs, and 
 water treatment facilities, aqueducts, canals, ditches, 
 pipelines, wells, hydropower projects, and transmission and 
 other ancillary facilities, groundwater recharge facilities, 
 water conservation, water filtration plants, and other water 
 diversion, conservation, groundwater recharge, storage, and 
 carriage structures.

SEC. 413. SAN GABRIEL NATIONAL RECREATION AREA.

 (a) Establishment; Boundaries.--Subject to valid existing rights, 
there is established as a unit of the National Park System in the State 
the San Gabriel National Recreation Area depicted as the ``Proposed San 
Gabriel National Recreation Area'' on the map entitled ``San Gabriel 
National Recreation Area Proposed Boundary,'' numbered 503/152,737, and 
dated July 2019.
 (b) Map and Legal Description.--
 (1) In general.--As soon as practicable after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall file a map and a 
 legal description of the Recreation Area with--
 (A) the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources 
 of the Senate; and
 (B) the Committee on Natural Resources of the House 
 of Representatives.
 (2) Force of law.--The map and legal description filed 
 under paragraph (1) shall have the same force and effect as if 
 included in this title, except that the Secretary may correct 
 any clerical or typographical error in the map or legal 
 description.
 (3) Public availability.--The map and legal description 
 filed under paragraph (1) shall be on file and available for 
 public inspection in the appropriate offices of the National 
 Park Service.
 (c) Administration and Jurisdiction.--
 (1) Public lands.--The public lands included in the 
 Recreation Area shall be administered by the Secretary, acting 
 through the Director of the National Park Service.
 (2) Department of defense land.--Although certain Federal 
 lands under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of Defense are 
 included in the recreation area, nothing in this subtitle 
 transfers administration jurisdiction of such Federal lands 
 from the Secretary of Defense or otherwise affects Federal 
 lands under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of Defense.
 (3) State and local jurisdiction.--Nothing in this subtitle 
 alters, modifies, or diminishes any right, responsibility, 
 power, authority, jurisdiction, or entitlement of the State, a 
 political subdivision of the State, including, but not limited 
 to courts of competent jurisdiction, regulatory commissions, 
 boards, and departments, or any State or local agency under any 
 applicable Federal, State, or local law (including 
 regulations).

SEC. 414. MANAGEMENT.

 (a) National Park System.--Subject to valid existing rights, the 
Secretary shall manage the public lands included in the Recreation Area 
in a manner that protects and enhances the natural resources and values 
of the public lands, in accordance with--
 (1) this subtitle;
 (2) section 100101(a), chapter 1003, and sections 
 100751(a), 100752, 100753 and 102101 of title 54, United States 
 Code (formerly known as the ``National Park Service Organic 
 Act'');
 (3) the laws generally applicable to units of the National 
 Park System; and
 (4) other applicable law, regulations, adjudications, and 
 orders.
 (b) Cooperation With Secretary of Defense.--The Secretary shall 
cooperate with the Secretary of Defense to develop opportunities for 
the management of the Federal land under the jurisdiction of the 
Secretary of Defense included in the Recreation Area in accordance with 
the purposes described in section 411, to the maximum extent 
practicable.
 (c) Treatment of Non-Federal Land.--
 (1) In general.--Nothing in this subtitle--
 (A) authorizes the Secretary to take any action 
 that would affect the use of any land not owned by the 
 United States within the Recreation Area;
 (B) affects the use of, or access to, any non-
 Federal land within the Recreation Area;
 (C) modifies any provision of Federal, State, or 
 local law with respect to public access to, or use of, 
 non-Federal land;
 (D) requires any owner of non-Federal land to allow 
 public access (including Federal, State, or local 
 government access) to private property or any other 
 non-Federal land;
 (E) alters any duly adopted land use regulation, 
 approved land use plan, or any other regulatory 
 authority of any State or local agency or unit of 
 Tribal government;
 (F) creates any liability, or affects any liability 
 under any other law, of any private property owner or 
 other owner of non-Federal land with respect to any 
 person injured on the private property or other non-
 Federal land;
 (G) conveys to the Partnership any land use or 
 other regulatory authority;
 (H) shall be construed to cause any Federal, State, 
 or local regulation or permit requirement intended to 
 apply to units of the National Park System to affect 
 the Federal lands under the jurisdiction of the 
 Secretary of Defense or non-Federal lands within the 
 boundaries of the recreation area; or
 (I) requires any local government to participate in 
 any program administered by the Secretary.
 (2) Cooperation.--The Secretary is encouraged to work with 
 owners of non-Federal land who have agreed to cooperate with 
 the Secretary to advance the purposes of this subtitle.
 (3) Buffer zones.--
 (A) In general.--Nothing in this subtitle 
 establishes any protective perimeter or buffer zone 
 around the Recreation Area.
 (B) Activities or uses up to boundaries.--The fact 
 that an activity or use of land can be seen or heard 
 from within the Recreation Area shall not preclude the 
 activity or land use up to the boundary of the 
 Recreation Area.
 (4) Facilities.--Nothing in this subtitle affects the 
 operation, maintenance, modification, construction, 
 destruction, removal, relocation, improvement or expansion of 
 any water resource facility or public water system, or any 
 solid waste, sanitary sewer, water or waste-water treatment, 
 groundwater recharge or conservation, hydroelectric, conveyance 
 distribution system, recycled water facility, or utility 
 facility located within or adjacent to the Recreation Area.
 (5) Exemption.--Section 100903 of title 54, United States 
 Code, shall not apply to the Puente Hills landfill, materials 
 recovery facility, or intermodal facility.
 (d) Management Plan.--
 (1) Deadline.--Not later than 3 years after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary and the Advisory Council 
 shall establish a comprehensive management plan for the 
 Recreation Area that supports the purposes described in section 
 411.
 (2) Use of existing plans.--In developing the management 
 plan, to the extent consistent with this section, the Secretary 
 may incorporate any provision of a land use or other plan 
 applicable to the public lands included in the Recreation Area.
 (3) Incorporation of visitor services plan.--To the maximum 
 extent practicable, the Secretary shall incorporate into the 
 management plan the visitor services plan under section 
 419(a)(2).
 (4) Partnership.--In developing the management plan, the 
 Secretary shall consider recommendations of the Partnership. To 
 the maximum extent practicable, the Secretary shall incorporate 
 recommendations of the Partnership into the management plan if 
 the Secretary determines that the recommendations are feasible 
 and consistent with the purposes in section 411, this subtitle, 
 and applicable laws (including regulations).
 (e) Fish and Wildlife.--Nothing in this subtitle affects the 
jurisdiction of the State with respect to fish or wildlife located on 
public lands in the State.

SEC. 415. ACQUISITION OF NON-FEDERAL LAND WITHIN RECREATION AREA.

 (a) Limited Acquisition Authority.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary 
 may acquire non-Federal land within the boundaries of the 
 Recreation Area only through exchange, donation, or purchase 
 from a willing seller.
 (2) Additional requirement.--As a further condition on the 
 acquisition of land, the Secretary shall make a determination 
 that the land contains important biological, cultural, 
 historic, or recreational values.
 (b) Prohibition on Use of Eminent Domain.--Nothing in this subtitle 
authorizes the use of eminent domain to acquire land or an interest in 
land.
 (c) Treatment of Acquired Land.--Any land or interest in land 
acquired by the United States within the boundaries of the Recreation 
Area shall be--
 (1) included in the Recreation Area; and
 (2) administered by the Secretary in accordance with--
 (A) this subtitle; and
 (B) other applicable laws (including regulations).

SEC. 416. WATER RIGHTS; WATER RESOURCE FACILITIES; PUBLIC ROADS; 
 UTILITY FACILITIES.

 (a) No Effect on Water Rights.--Nothing in this subtitle or section 
422--
 (1) shall affect the use or allocation, as in existence on 
 the date of the enactment of this Act, of any water, water 
 right, or interest in water (including potable, recycled, 
 reclaimed, waste, imported, exported, banked, or stored water, 
 surface water, groundwater, and public trust interest);
 (2) shall affect any public or private contract in 
 existence on the date of the enactment of this Act for the 
 sale, lease, loan, or transfer of any water (including potable, 
 recycled, reclaimed, waste, imported, exported, banked, or 
 stored water, surface water, and groundwater);
 (3) shall be considered to be a relinquishment or reduction 
 of any water rights reserved or appropriated by the United 
 States in the State on or before the date of the enactment of 
 this Act;
 (4) authorizes or imposes any new reserved Federal water 
 right or expands water usage pursuant to any existing Federal 
 reserved, riparian or appropriative right;
 (5) shall be considered a relinquishment or reduction of 
 any water rights (including potable, recycled, reclaimed, 
 waste, imported, exported, banked, or stored water, surface 
 water, and groundwater) held, reserved, or appropriated by any 
 public entity or other persons or entities, on or before the 
 date of the enactment of this Act;
 (6) shall be construed to, or shall interfere or conflict 
 with the exercise of the powers or duties of any watermaster, 
 public agency, public water system, court of competent 
 jurisdiction, or other body or entity responsible for 
 groundwater or surface water management or groundwater 
 replenishment as designated or established pursuant to any 
 adjudication or Federal or State law, including the management 
 of the San Gabriel River watershed and basin, to provide water 
 supply or other environmental benefits;
 (7) shall be construed to impede or adversely impact any 
 previously adopted Los Angeles County Drainage Area project, as 
 described in the report of the Chief of Engineers dated June 
 30, 1992, including any supplement or addendum to that report, 
 or any maintenance agreement to operate that project;
 (8) shall interfere or conflict with any action by a 
 watermaster, water agency, public water system, court of 
 competent jurisdiction, or public agency pursuant to any 
 Federal or State law, water right, or adjudication, including 
 any action relating to water conservation, water quality, 
 surface water diversion or impoundment, groundwater recharge, 
 water treatment, conservation or storage of water, pollution, 
 waste discharge, the pumping of groundwater; the spreading, 
 injection, pumping, storage, or the use of water from local 
 sources, storm water flows, and runoff, or from imported or 
 recycled water, that is undertaken in connection with the 
 management or regulation of the San Gabriel River;
 (9) shall interfere with, obstruct, hinder, or delay the 
 exercise of, or access to, any water right by the owner of a 
 public water system or any other individual or entity, 
 including the construction, operation, maintenance, 
 replacement, removal, repair, location, or relocation of any 
 well; pipeline; or water pumping, treatment, diversion, 
 impoundment, or storage facility; or other facility or property 
 necessary or useful to access any water right or operate an 
 public water system;
 (10) shall require the initiation or reinitiation of 
 consultation with the United States Fish and Wildlife Service 
 under, or the application of any provision of, the Endangered 
 Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.) relating to any 
 action affecting any water, water right, or water management or 
 water resource facility in the San Gabriel River watershed and 
 basin; or
 (11) authorizes any agency or employee of the United 
 States, or any other person, to take any action inconsistent 
 with any of paragraphs (1) through (10).
 (b) Water Resource Facilities.--
 (1) No effect on existing water resource facilities.--
 Nothing in this subtitle or section 422 shall affect--
 (A) the use, operation, maintenance, repair, 
 construction, destruction, removal, reconfiguration, 
 expansion, improvement or replacement of a water 
 resource facility or public water system within or 
 adjacent to the Recreation Area or San Gabriel 
 Mountains National Monument; or
 (B) access to a water resource facility within or 
 adjacent to the Recreation Area or San Gabriel 
 Mountains National Monument.
 (2) No effect on new water resource facilities.--Nothing in 
 this subtitle or section 422 shall preclude the establishment 
 of a new water resource facility (including instream sites, 
 routes, and areas) within the Recreation Area or San Gabriel 
 Mountains National Monument if the water resource facility or 
 public water system is necessary to preserve or enhance the 
 health, safety, reliability, quality or accessibility of water 
 supply, or utility services to residents of Los Angeles County.
 (3) Flood control.--Nothing in this subtitle or section 422 
 shall be construed to--
 (A) impose any new restriction or requirement on 
 flood protection, water conservation, water supply, 
 groundwater recharge, water transfers, or water quality 
 operations and maintenance; or
 (B) increase the liability of an agency or public 
 water system carrying out flood protection, water 
 conservation, water supply, groundwater recharge, water 
 transfers, or water quality operations.
 (4) Diversion or use of water.--Nothing in this subtitle or 
 section 422 shall authorize or require the use of water or 
 water rights in, or the diversion of water to, the Recreation 
 Area or San Gabriel Mountains National Monument.
 (c) Utility Facilities and Rights of Way.--Nothing in this subtitle 
or section 422 shall--
 (1) affect the use, operation, maintenance, repair, 
 construction, destruction, reconfiguration, expansion, 
 inspection, renewal, reconstruction, alteration, addition, 
 relocation, improvement, removal, or replacement of a utility 
 facility or appurtenant right-of-way within or adjacent to the 
 Recreation Area or San Gabriel Mountains National Monument;
 (2) affect access to a utility facility or right-of-way 
 within or adjacent to the Recreation Area or San Gabriel 
 Mountains National Monument; or
 (3) preclude the establishment of a new utility facility or 
 right-of-way (including instream sites, routes, and areas) 
 within the Recreation Area or San Gabriel Mountains National 
 Monument if such a facility or right-of-way is necessary for 
 public health and safety, electricity supply, or other utility 
 services.
 (d) Roads; Public Transit.--
 (1) Definitions.--In this subsection:
 (A) Public road.--The term ``public road'' means 
 any paved road or bridge (including any appurtenant 
 structure and right-of-way) that is--
 (i) operated or maintained by a non-Federal 
 entity; and
 (ii)(I) open to vehicular use by the 
 public; or
 (II) used by a public agency or utility for 
 the operation, maintenance, improvement, 
 repair, removal, relocation, construction, 
 destruction or rehabilitation of 
 infrastructure, a utility facility, or a right-
 of-way.
 (B) Public transit.--The term ``public transit'' 
 means any transit service (including operations and 
 rights-of-way) that is--
 (i) operated or maintained by a non-Federal 
 entity; and
 (ii)(I) open to the public; or
 (II) used by a public agency or contractor 
 for the operation, maintenance, repair, 
 construction, or rehabilitation of 
 infrastructure, a utility facility, or a right-
 of-way.
 (2) No effect on public roads or public transit.--Nothing 
 in this subtitle or section 422--
 (A) authorizes the Secretary to take any action 
 that would affect the operation, maintenance, repair, 
 or rehabilitation of public roads or public transit 
 (including activities necessary to comply with Federal 
 or State safety or public transit standards); or
 (B) creates any new liability, or increases any 
 existing liability, of an owner or operator of a public 
 road.

SEC. 417. SAN GABRIEL NATIONAL RECREATION AREA PUBLIC ADVISORY COUNCIL.

 (a) Establishment.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall establish an advisory 
council, to be known as the ``San Gabriel National Recreation Area 
Public Advisory Council''.
 (b) Duties.--The Advisory Council shall advise the Secretary 
regarding the development and implementation of the management plan and 
the visitor services plan.
 (c) Applicable Law.--The Advisory Council shall be subject to--
 (1) the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App.); and
 (2) all other applicable laws (including regulations).
 (d) Membership.--The Advisory Council shall consist of 22 members, 
to be appointed by the Secretary after taking into consideration 
recommendations of the Partnership, of whom--
 (1) 2 shall represent local, regional, or national 
 environmental organizations;
 (2) 2 shall represent the interests of outdoor recreation, 
 including off-highway vehicle recreation, within the Recreation 
 Area;
 (3) 2 shall represent the interests of community-based 
 organizations, the missions of which include expanding access 
 to the outdoors;
 (4) 2 shall represent business interests;
 (5) 1 shall represent Indian Tribes within or adjacent to 
 the Recreation Area;
 (6) 1 shall represent the interests of homeowners' 
 associations within the Recreation Area;
 (7) 3 shall represent the interests of holders of 
 adjudicated water rights, public water systems, water agencies, 
 wastewater and sewer agencies, recycled water facilities, and 
 water management and replenishment entities;
 (8) 1 shall represent energy and mineral development 
 interests;
 (9) 1 shall represent owners of Federal grazing permits or 
 other land use permits within the Recreation Area;
 (10) 1 shall represent archaeological and historical 
 interests;
 (11) 1 shall represent the interests of environmental 
 educators;
 (12) 1 shall represent cultural history interests;
 (13) 1 shall represent environmental justice interests;
 (14) 1 shall represent electrical utility interests; and
 (15) 2 shall represent the affected public at large.
 (e) Terms.--
 (1) Staggered terms.--A member of the Advisory Council 
 shall be appointed for a term of 3 years, except that, of the 
 members first appointed, 7 of the members shall be appointed 
 for a term of 1 year and 7 of the members shall be appointed 
 for a term of 2 years.
 (2) Reappointment.--A member may be reappointed to serve on 
 the Advisory Council on the expiration of the term of service 
 of the member.
 (3) Vacancy.--A vacancy on the Advisory Council shall be 
 filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was 
 made.
 (f) Quorum.--A quorum shall be ten members of the advisory council. 
The operations of the advisory council shall not be impaired by the 
fact that a member has not yet been appointed as long as a quorum has 
been attained.
 (g) Chairperson; Procedures.--The Advisory Council shall elect a 
chairperson and establish such rules and procedures as the advisory 
council considers necessary or desirable.
 (h) Service Without Compensation.--Members of the Advisory Council 
shall serve without pay.
 (i) Termination.--The Advisory Council shall cease to exist--
 (1) on the date that is 5 years after the date on which the 
 management plan is adopted by the Secretary; or
 (2) on such later date as the Secretary considers to be 
 appropriate.

SEC. 418. SAN GABRIEL NATIONAL RECREATION AREA PARTNERSHIP.

 (a) Establishment.--There is established a Partnership, to be known 
as the ``San Gabriel National Recreation Area Partnership''.
 (b) Purposes.--The purposes of the Partnership are to--
 (1) coordinate the activities of Federal, State, Tribal, 
 and local authorities and the private sector in advancing the 
 purposes of this subtitle; and
 (2) use the resources and expertise of each agency in 
 improving management and recreational opportunities within the 
 Recreation Area.
 (c) Membership.--The Partnership shall include the following:
 (1) The Secretary (or a designee) to represent the National 
 Park Service.
 (2) The Secretary of Defense (or a designee) to represent 
 the Corps of Engineers.
 (3) The Secretary of Agriculture (or a designee) to 
 represent the Forest Service.
 (4) The Secretary of the Natural Resources Agency of the 
 State (or a designee) to represent--
 (A) the California Department of Parks and 
 Recreation; and
 (B) the Rivers and Mountains Conservancy.
 (5) One designee of the Los Angeles County Board of 
 Supervisors.
 (6) One designee of the Puente Hills Habitat Preservation 
 Authority.
 (7) Four designees of the San Gabriel Council of 
 Governments, of whom one shall be selected from a local land 
 conservancy.
 (8) One designee of the San Gabriel Valley Economic 
 Partnership.
 (9) One designee of the Los Angeles County Flood Control 
 District.
 (10) One designee of the San Gabriel Valley Water 
 Association.
 (11) One designee of the Central Basin Water Association.
 (12) One designee of the Main San Gabriel Basin 
 Watermaster.
 (13) One designee of a public utility company, to be 
 appointed by the Secretary.
 (14) One designee of the Watershed Conservation Authority.
 (15) One designee of the Advisory Council for the period 
 during which the Advisory Council remains in effect.
 (16) One designee of San Gabriel Mountains National 
 Monument Community Collaborative.
 (d) Duties.--To advance the purposes described in section 411, the 
Partnership shall--
 (1) make recommendations to the Secretary regarding the 
 development and implementation of the management plan;
 (2) review and comment on the visitor services plan under 
 section 419(a)(2), and facilitate the implementation of that 
 plan;
 (3) assist units of local government, regional planning 
 organizations, and nonprofit organizations in advancing the 
 purposes of the Recreation Area by--
 (A) carrying out programs and projects that 
 recognize, protect, and enhance important resource 
 values within the Recreation Area;
 (B) establishing and maintaining interpretive 
 exhibits and programs within the Recreation Area;
 (C) developing recreational and educational 
 opportunities in the Recreation Area in accordance with 
 the purposes of this subtitle;
 (D) increasing public awareness of, and 
 appreciation for, natural, historic, scenic, and 
 cultural resources of the Recreation Area;
 (E) ensuring that signs identifying points of 
 public access and sites of interest are posted 
 throughout the Recreation Area;
 (F) promoting a wide range of partnerships among 
 governments, organizations, and individuals to advance 
 the purposes of the Recreation Area; and
 (G) ensuring that management of the Recreation Area 
 takes into consideration--
 (i) local ordinances and land-use plans; 
 and
 (ii) adjacent residents and property 
 owners;
 (4) make recommendations to the Secretary regarding the 
 appointment of members to the Advisory Council; and
 (5) carry out any other actions necessary to achieve the 
 purposes of this subtitle.
 (e) Authorities.--Subject to approval by the Secretary, for the 
purposes of preparing and implementing the management plan, the 
Partnership may use Federal funds made available under this section--
 (1) to make grants to the State, political subdivisions of 
 the State, nonprofit organizations, and other persons;
 (2) to enter into cooperative agreements with, or provide 
 grants or technical assistance to, the State, political 
 subdivisions of the State, nonprofit organizations, Federal 
 agencies, and other interested parties;
 (3) to hire and compensate staff;
 (4) to obtain funds or services from any source, including 
 funds and services provided under any other Federal law or 
 program;
 (5) to contract for goods or services; and
 (6) to support activities of partners and any other 
 activities that--
 (A) advance the purposes of the Recreation Area; 
 and
 (B) are in accordance with the management plan.
 (f) Terms of Office; Reappointment; Vacancies.--
 (1) Terms.--A member of the Partnership shall be appointed 
 for a term of 3 years.
 (2) Reappointment.--A member may be reappointed to serve on 
 the Partnership on the expiration of the term of service of the 
 member.
 (3) Vacancy.--A vacancy on the Partnership shall be filled 
 in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
 (g) Quorum.--A quorum shall be 11 members of the Partnership. The 
operations of the Partnership shall not be impaired by the fact that a 
member has not yet been appointed as long as a quorum has been 
attained.
 (h) Chairperson; Procedures.--The Partnership shall elect a 
chairperson and establish such rules and procedures as it deems 
necessary or desirable.
 (i) Service Without Compensation.--A member of the Partnership 
shall serve without compensation.
 (j) Duties and Authorities of Secretary.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall convene the 
 Partnership on a regular basis to carry out this subtitle.
 (2) Technical and financial assistance.--The Secretary may 
 provide to the Partnership or any member of the Partnership, on 
 a reimbursable or nonreimbursable basis, such technical and 
 financial assistance as the Secretary determines to be 
 appropriate to carry out this subtitle.
 (3) Cooperative agreements.--The Secretary may enter into a 
 cooperative agreement with the Partnership, a member of the 
 Partnership, or any other public or private entity to provide 
 technical, financial, or other assistance to carry out this 
 subtitle.
 (4) Construction of facilities on non-federal land.--
 (A) In general.--In order to facilitate the 
 administration of the Recreation Area, the Secretary is 
 authorized, subject to valid existing rights, to 
 construct administrative or visitor use facilities on 
 land owned by a non-profit organization, local agency, 
 or other public entity in accordance with this title 
 and applicable law (including regulations).
 (B) Additional requirements.--A facility under this 
 paragraph may only be developed--
 (i) with the consent of the owner of the 
 non-Federal land; and
 (ii) in accordance with applicable Federal, 
 State, and local laws (including regulations) 
 and plans.
 (5) Priority.--The Secretary shall give priority to actions 
 that--
 (A) conserve the significant natural, historic, 
 cultural, and scenic resources of the Recreation Area; 
 and
 (B) provide educational, interpretive, and 
 recreational opportunities consistent with the purposes 
 of the Recreation Area.
 (k) Committees.--The Partnership shall establish--
 (1) a Water Technical Advisory Committee to advise the 
 Secretary regarding water-related issues relating to the 
 Recreation Area; and
 (2) a Public Safety Advisory Committee to advise the 
 Secretary regarding public safety issues relating to the 
 Recreation Area.

SEC. 419. VISITOR SERVICES AND FACILITIES.

 (a) Visitor Services.--
 (1) Purpose.--The purpose of this subsection is to 
 facilitate the development of an integrated visitor services 
 plan to improve visitor experiences in the Recreation Area 
 through expanded recreational opportunities and increased 
 interpretation, education, resource protection, and 
 enforcement.
 (2) Visitor services plan.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 3 years after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall 
 develop and carry out an integrated visitor services 
 plan for the Recreation Area in accordance with this 
 paragraph.
 (B) Contents.--The visitor services plan shall--
 (i) assess current and anticipated future 
 visitation to the Recreation Area, including 
 recreation destinations;
 (ii) consider the demand for various types 
 of recreation (including hiking, picnicking, 
 horseback riding, and the use of motorized and 
 mechanized vehicles), as permissible and 
 appropriate;
 (iii) evaluate the impacts of recreation on 
 natural and cultural resources, water rights 
 and water resource facilities, public roads, 
 adjacent residents and property owners, and 
 utilities within the Recreation Area, as well 
 as the effectiveness of current enforcement and 
 efforts;
 (iv) assess the current level of 
 interpretive and educational services and 
 facilities;
 (v) include recommendations to--
 (I) expand opportunities for high-
 demand recreational activities, in 
 accordance with the purposes described 
 in section 411;
 (II) better manage Recreation Area 
 resources and improve the experience of 
 Recreation Area visitors through 
 expanded interpretive and educational 
 services and facilities, and improved 
 enforcement; and
 (III) better manage Recreation Area 
 resources to reduce negative impacts on 
 the environment, ecology, and 
 integrated water management activities 
 in the Recreation Area;
 (vi) in coordination and consultation with 
 affected owners of non-Federal land, assess 
 options to incorporate recreational 
 opportunities on non-Federal land into the 
 Recreation Area--
 (I) in manner consistent with the 
 purposes and uses of the non-Federal 
 land; and
 (II) with the consent of the non-
 Federal landowner;
 (vii) assess opportunities to provide 
 recreational opportunities that connect with 
 adjacent National Forest System land; and
 (viii) be developed and carried out in 
 accordance with applicable Federal, State, and 
 local laws and ordinances.
 (C) Consultation.--In developing the visitor 
 services plan, the Secretary shall--
 (i) consult with--
 (I) the Partnership;
 (II) the Advisory Council;
 (III) appropriate State and local 
 agencies; and
 (IV) interested nongovernmental 
 organizations; and
 (ii) involve members of the public.
 (b) Visitor Use Facilities.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary may construct visitor use 
 facilities in the Recreation Area.
 (2) Requirements.--Each facility under paragraph (1) shall 
 be developed in accordance with applicable Federal, State, and 
 local--
 (A) laws (including regulations); and
 (B) plans.
 (c) Donations.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary may accept and use donated 
 funds (subject to appropriations), property, in-kind 
 contributions, and services to carry out this subtitle.
 (2) Prohibition.--The Secretary may not use the authority 
 provided by paragraph (1) to accept non-Federal land that has 
 been acquired after the date of the enactment of this Act 
 through the use of eminent domain.
 (d) Cooperative Agreements.--In carrying out this subtitle, the 
Secretary may make grants to, or enter into cooperative agreements 
with, units of State, Tribal, and local governments and private 
entities to conduct research, develop scientific analyses, and carry 
out any other initiative relating to the management of, and visitation 
to, the Recreation Area.

 Subtitle B--San Gabriel Mountains

SEC. 421. DEFINITIONS.

 In this subtitle:
 (1) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Agriculture.
 (2) Wilderness area or addition.--The term ``wilderness 
 area or addition'' means any wilderness area or wilderness 
 addition designated by section 423(a).

SEC. 422. NATIONAL MONUMENT BOUNDARY MODIFICATION.

 (a) In General.--The San Gabriel Mountains National Monument 
established by Presidential Proclamation 9194 (54 U.S.C. 320301 note) 
(referred to in this section as the ``Monument'') is modified to 
include the approximately 109,167 acres of additional National Forest 
System land depicted as the ``Proposed San Gabriel Mountains National 
Monument Expansion'' on the map entitled ``Proposed San Gabriel 
Mountains National Monument Expansion'' and dated June 26, 2019.
 (b) Administration.--The Secretary shall administer the San Gabriel 
Mountains National Monument, including the lands added by subsection 
(a), in accordance with--
 (1) Presidential Proclamation 9194, as issued on October 
 10, 2014 (54 U.S.C. 320301 note);
 (2) the laws generally applicable to the Monument; and
 (3) this title.
 (c) Management Plan.--Within 3 years after the date of enactment of 
this Act, the Secretary shall consult with State and local governments 
and the interested public to update the existing San Gabriel Mountains 
National Monument Plan to provide management direction and protection 
for the lands added to the Monument by subsection (a).

SEC. 423. DESIGNATION OF WILDERNESS AREAS AND ADDITIONS.

 (a) Designation.--In accordance with the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 
1131 et seq.), the following parcels of National Forest System land in 
the State are designated as wilderness and as components of the 
National Wilderness Preservation System:
 (1) Condor peak wilderness.--Certain Federal land in the 
 Angeles National Forest, comprising approximately 8,207 acres, 
 as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Condor Peak 
 Wilderness--Proposed'' and dated June 6, 2019, which shall be 
 known as the ``Condor Peak Wilderness''.
 (2) San gabriel wilderness additions.--Certain Federal land 
 in the Angeles National Forest, comprising approximately 2,032 
 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``San Gabriel 
 Wilderness Additions'' and dated June 6, 2019, which is 
 incorporated in, and considered to be a part of, the San 
 Gabriel Wilderness designated by Public Law 90-318 (16 U.S.C. 
 1132 note; 82 Stat. 131).
 (3) Sheep mountain wilderness additions.--Certain Federal 
 land in the Angeles National Forest, comprising approximately 
 13,726 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Sheep 
 Mountain Wilderness Additions'' and dated June 6, 2019, which 
 is incorporated in, and considered to be a part of, the Sheep 
 Mountain Wilderness designated by section 101(a)(29) of the 
 California Wilderness Act of 1984 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; 98 
 Stat. 1623; Public Law 98-425).
 (4) Yerba buena wilderness.--Certain Federal land in the 
 Angeles National Forest, comprising approximately 6,694 acres, 
 as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Yerba Buena 
 Wilderness--Proposed'' and dated June 6, 2019, which shall be 
 known as the ``Yerba Buena Wilderness''.
 (b) Map and Legal Description.--
 (1) In general.--As soon as practicable after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall file a map and a 
 legal description of the wilderness areas and additions with--
 (A) the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources 
 of the Senate; and
 (B) the Committee on Natural Resources of the House 
 of Representatives.
 (2) Force of law.--The map and legal description filed 
 under paragraph (1) shall have the same force and effect as if 
 included in this subtitle, except that the Secretary may 
 correct any clerical or typographical error in the map or legal 
 description.
 (3) Public availability.--The map and legal description 
 filed under paragraph (1) shall be on file and available for 
 public inspection in the appropriate offices of the Forest 
 Service.

SEC. 424. ADMINISTRATION OF WILDERNESS AREAS AND ADDITIONS.

 (a) In General.--Subject to valid existing rights, the wilderness 
areas and additions shall be administered by the Secretary in 
accordance with this section and the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et 
seq.), except that any reference in that Act to the effective date of 
that Act shall be considered to be a reference to the date of the 
enactment of this Act.
 (b) Fire Management and Related Activities.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary may take such measures in a 
 wilderness area or addition designated in section 423 as are 
 necessary for the control of fire, insects, or diseases in 
 accordance with--
 (A) section 4(d)(1) of the Wilderness Act (16 
 U.S.C. 1133(d)(1)); and
 (B) House Report 98-40 of the 98th Congress.
 (2) Funding priorities.--Nothing in this subtitle limits 
 funding for fire or fuels management in a wilderness area or 
 addition.
 (3) Revision and development of local fire management 
 plans.--As soon as practicable after the date of the enactment 
 of this Act, the Secretary shall amend, as applicable, any 
 local fire management plan that applies to a wilderness area or 
 addition designated in section 423.
 (4) Administration.--In accordance with paragraph (1) and 
 any other applicable Federal law, to ensure a timely and 
 efficient response to a fire emergency in a wilderness area or 
 addition, the Secretary shall--
 (A) not later than 1 year after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, establish agency approval 
 procedures (including appropriate delegations of 
 authority to the Forest Supervisor, District Manager, 
 or other agency officials) for responding to fire 
 emergencies; and
 (B) enter into agreements with appropriate State or 
 local firefighting agencies.
 (c) Grazing.--The grazing of livestock in a wilderness area or 
addition, if established before the date of the enactment of this Act, 
shall be administered in accordance with--
 (1) section 4(d)(4) of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 
 1133(d)(4)); and
 (2) the guidelines contained in Appendix A of the report of 
 the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs of the House of 
 Representatives accompanying H.R. 2570 of the 101st Congress 
 (H. Rept. 101-405).
 (d) Fish and Wildlife.--
 (1) In general.--In accordance with section 4(d)(7) of the 
 Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1133(d)(7)), nothing in this subtitle 
 affects the jurisdiction or responsibility of the State with 
 respect to fish or wildlife on public land in the State.
 (2) Management activities.--
 (A) In general.--In furtherance of the purposes and 
 principles of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et 
 seq.), the Secretary may conduct any management 
 activity that are necessary to maintain or restore fish 
 or wildlife populations or habitats in the wilderness 
 areas and wilderness additions designated in section 
 423, if the management activities are--
 (i) consistent with relevant wilderness 
 management plans; and
 (ii) conducted in accordance with 
 appropriate policies, such as the policies 
 established in Appendix B of the report of the 
 Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs of 
 the House of Representatives accompanying H.R. 
 2570 of the 101st Congress (H. Rept. 101-405).
 (B) Inclusions.--A management activity under 
 subparagraph (A) may include the occasional and 
 temporary use of motorized vehicles, if the use, as 
 determined by the Secretary, would promote healthy, 
 viable, and more naturally distributed wildlife 
 populations that would enhance wilderness values while 
 causing the minimum impact necessary to accomplish 
 those tasks.
 (C) Existing activities.--In accordance with 
 section 4(d)(1) of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 
 1133(d)(1)) and appropriate policies (such as the 
 policies established in Appendix B of House Report 101-
 405), the State may use aircraft (including 
 helicopters) in a wilderness area or addition to 
 survey, capture, transplant, monitor, or provide water 
 for a wildlife population, including bighorn sheep.
 (e) Buffer Zones.--
 (1) In general.--Congress does not intend for the 
 designation of wilderness areas or wilderness additions by 
 section 423 to lead to the creation of protective perimeters or 
 buffer zones around each wilderness area or wilderness 
 addition.
 (2) Activities or uses up to boundaries.--The fact that a 
 nonwilderness activities or uses can be seen or heard from 
 within a wilderness area or wilderness addition designated by 
 section 423 shall not, of itself, preclude the activities or 
 uses up to the boundary of the wilderness area or addition.
 (f) Military Activities.--Nothing in this title precludes--
 (1) low-level overflights of military aircraft over the 
 wilderness areas or wilderness additions designated by section 
 423;
 (2) the designation of new units of special airspace over 
 the wilderness areas or wilderness additions designated by 
 section 423; or
 (3) the use or establishment of military flight training 
 routes over wilderness areas or wilderness additions designated 
 by section 423.
 (g) Horses.--Nothing in this subtitle precludes horseback riding 
in, or the entry of recreational or commercial saddle or pack stock 
into, an area designated as a wilderness area or wilderness addition by 
section 423--
 (1) in accordance with section 4(d)(5) of the Wilderness 
 Act (16 U.S.C. 1133(d)(5)); and
 (2) subject to such terms and conditions as the Secretary 
 determines to be necessary.
 (h) Law Enforcement.--Nothing in this subtitle precludes any law 
enforcement or drug interdiction effort within the wilderness areas or 
wilderness additions designated by section 423 in accordance with the 
Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.).
 (i) Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, the wilderness 
areas and additions designated by section 423 are withdrawn from--
 (1) all forms of entry, appropriation, and disposal under 
 the public land laws;
 (2) location, entry, and patent under the mining laws; and
 (3) operation of the mineral materials and geothermal 
 leasing laws.
 (j) Incorporation of Acquired Land and Interests.--Any land within 
the boundary of a wilderness area or addition that is acquired by the 
United States shall--
 (1) become part of the wilderness area or addition in which 
 the land is located; and
 (2) be managed in accordance with this section, the 
 Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.), and any other 
 applicable laws (including regulations).
 (k) Climatological Data Collection.--In accordance with the 
Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.) and subject to such terms and 
conditions as the Secretary may prescribe, the Secretary may authorize 
the installation and maintenance of hydrologic, meteorologic, or 
climatological collection devices in a wilderness area or addition if 
the Secretary determines that the facilities and access to the 
facilities is essential to a flood warning, flood control, or water 
reservoir operation activity.
 (l) Authorized Events.--The Secretary of Agriculture may authorize 
the Angeles Crest 100 competitive running event to continue in 
substantially the same manner and degree in which this event was 
operated and permitted in 2015 within additions to the Sheep Mountain 
Wilderness in section 423 of this title and the Pleasant View Ridge 
Wilderness Area designated by section 1802 of the Omnibus Public Land 
Management Act of 2009, provided that the event is authorized and 
conducted in a manner compatible with the preservation of the areas as 
wilderness.

SEC. 425. DESIGNATION OF WILD AND SCENIC RIVERS.

 (a) Designation.--Section 3(a) of the National Wild and Scenic 
Rivers Act (16 U.S.C. 1274(a)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:
 ``(__) East fork san gabriel river, california.--The 
 following segments of the East Fork San Gabriel River, to be 
 administered by the Secretary of Agriculture in the following 
 classes:
 ``(A) The 10-mile segment from the confluence of 
 the Prairie Fork and Vincent Gulch to 100 yards 
 upstream of the Heaton Flats trailhead and day use 
 area, as a wild river.
 ``(B) The 2.7-mile segment from 100 yards upstream 
 of the Heaton Flats trailhead and day use area to 100 
 yards upstream of the confluence with Williams Canyon, 
 as a recreational river.
 ``(__) North fork san gabriel river, california.--The 4.3-
 mile segment of the North Fork San Gabriel River from the 
 confluence with Cloudburst Canyon to 0.25 miles upstream of the 
 confluence with the West Fork San Gabriel River, to be 
 administered by the Secretary of Agriculture as a recreational 
 river.
 ``(__) West fork san gabriel river, california.--The 
 following segments of the West Fork San Gabriel River, to be 
 administered by the Secretary of Agriculture in the following 
 classes:
 ``(A) The 6.7-mile segment from 0.25 miles 
 downstream of its source near Red Box Gap in sec. 14, 
 T. 2 N., R. 12 W., to the confluence with the unnamed 
 tributary 0.25 miles downstream of the power lines in 
 sec. 22, T. 2 N., R. 11 W., as a recreational river.
 ``(B) The 1.6-mile segment of the West Fork from 
 0.25 miles downstream of the powerlines in sec. 22, T. 
 2 N., R. 11 W., to the confluence with Bobcat Canyon, 
 as a wild river.
 ``(__) Little rock creek, california.--The following 
 segments of Little Rock Creek and tributaries, to be 
 administered by the Secretary of Agriculture in the following 
 classes:
 ``(A) The 10.3-mile segment from its source on Mt. 
 Williamson in sec. 6, T. 3 N., R. 9 W., to 100 yards 
 upstream of the confluence with the South Fork Little 
 Rock Creek, as a wild river.
 ``(B) The 6.6-mile segment from 100 yards upstream 
 of the confluence with the South Fork Little Rock Creek 
 to the confluence with Santiago Canyon, as a 
 recreational river.
 ``(C) The 1-mile segment of Cooper Canyon Creek 
 from 0.25 miles downstream of Highway 2 to 100 yards 
 downstream of Cooper Canyon Campground, as a scenic 
 river.
 ``(D) The 1.3-mile segment of Cooper Canyon Creek 
 from 100 yards downstream of Cooper Canyon Campground 
 to the confluence with Little Rock Creek, as a wild 
 river.
 ``(E) The 1-mile segment of Buckhorn Creek from 100 
 yards downstream of the Buckhorn Campground to its 
 confluence with Cooper Canyon Creek, as a wild 
 river.''.
 (b) Water Resource Facilities; and Water Use.--
 (1) Water resource facilities.--
 (A) Definition.--In this section, the term ``water 
 resource facility'' means irrigation and pumping 
 facilities, dams and reservoirs, flood control 
 facilities, water conservation works and facilities, 
 including debris protection facilities, sediment 
 placement sites, rain gauges and stream gauges, water 
 quality facilities, recycled water facilities and water 
 pumping, conveyance distribution systems, water storage 
 tanks and reservoirs, and water treatment facilities, 
 aqueducts, canals, ditches, pipelines, wells, 
 hydropower projects, and transmission and other 
 ancillary facilities, groundwater recharge facilities, 
 water conservation, water filtration plants, and other 
 water diversion, conservation, groundwater recharge, 
 storage, and carriage structures.
 (B) No effect on existing water resource 
 facilities.--Nothing in this section shall alter, 
 modify, or affect--
 (i) the use, operation, maintenance, 
 repair, construction, destruction, 
 reconfiguration, expansion, relocation or 
 replacement of a water resource facility 
 downstream of a wild and scenic river segment 
 designated by this section, provided that the 
 physical structures of such facilities or 
 reservoirs shall not be located within the 
 river areas designated in this section; or
 (ii) access to a water resource facility 
 downstream of a wild and scenic river segment 
 designated by this section.
 (C) No effect on new water resource facilities.--
 Nothing in this section shall preclude the 
 establishment of a new water resource facilities 
 (including instream sites, routes, and areas) 
 downstream of a wild and scenic river segment.
 (2) Limitation.--Any new reservation of water or new use of 
 water pursuant to existing water rights held by the United 
 States to advance the purposes of the National Wild and Scenic 
 Rivers Act (16 U.S.C. 1271 et seq.) shall be for nonconsumptive 
 instream use only within the segments designated by this 
 section.
 (3) Existing law.--Nothing in this section affects the 
 implementation of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 
 1531 et seq.).

SEC. 426. WATER RIGHTS.

 (a) Statutory Construction.--Nothing in this title, and no action 
to implement this title--
 (1) shall constitute an express or implied reservation of 
 any water or water right, or authorizing an expansion of water 
 use pursuant to existing water rights held by the United 
 States, with respect to the San Gabriel Mountains National 
 Monument, the land designated as a wilderness area or 
 wilderness addition by section 423 or land adjacent to the wild 
 and scenic river segments designated by the amendment made by 
 section 425;
 (2) shall affect, alter, modify, or condition any water 
 rights in the State in existence on the date of the enactment 
 of this Act, including any water rights held by the United 
 States;
 (3) shall be construed as establishing a precedent with 
 regard to any future wilderness or wild and scenic river 
 designations;
 (4) shall affect, alter, or modify the interpretation of, 
 or any designation, decision, adjudication or action made 
 pursuant to, any other Act; or
 (5) shall be construed as limiting, altering, modifying, or 
 amending any of the interstate compacts or equitable 
 apportionment decrees that apportions water among or between 
 the State and any other State.
 (b) State Water Law.--The Secretary shall comply with applicable 
procedural and substantive requirements of the law of the State in 
order to obtain and hold any water rights not in existence on the date 
of the enactment of this Act with respect to the San Gabriel Mountains 
National Monument, wilderness areas and wilderness additions designated 
by section 423, and the wild and scenic rivers designated by amendment 
made by section 425.

 TITLE V--RIM OF THE VALLEY CORRIDOR PRESERVATION

SEC. 501. SHORT TITLE.

 This title may be cited as the ``Rim of the Valley Corridor 
Preservation Act''.

SEC. 502. BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENT; LAND ACQUISITION; ADMINISTRATION.

 (a) Boundary Adjustment.--Section 507(c)(1) of the National Parks 
and Recreation Act of 1978 (16 U.S.C. 460kk(c)(1)) is amended in the 
first sentence by striking ``, which shall'' and inserting `` and 
generally depicted as `Rim of the Valley Unit Proposed Addition' on the 
map entitled `Rim of the Valley Unit--Santa Monica Mountains National 
Recreation Area', numbered 638/147,723, and dated September 2018. Both 
maps shall''.
 (b) Rim of the Valley Unit.--Section 507 of the National Parks and 
Recreation Act of 1978 (16 U.S.C. 460kk) is amended by adding at the 
end the following:
 ``(u) Rim of the Valley Unit.--(1) Not later than 3 years after the 
date of the enactment of this subsection, the Secretary shall update 
the general management plan for the recreation area to reflect the 
boundaries designated on the map referred to in subsection (c)(1) as 
the `Rim of the Valley Unit' (hereafter in the subsection referred to 
as the `Rim of the Valley Unit'). Subject to valid existing rights, the 
Secretary shall administer the Rim of the Valley Unit, and any land or 
interest in land acquired by the United States and located within the 
boundaries of the Rim of the Valley Unit, as part of the recreation 
area in accordance with the provisions of this section and applicable 
laws and regulations.
 ``(2) The Secretary may acquire non-Federal land within the 
boundaries of the Rim of the Valley Unit only through exchange, 
donation, or purchase from a willing seller. Nothing in this subsection 
authorizes the use of eminent domain to acquire land or interests in 
land.
 ``(3) Nothing in this subsection or the application of the 
management plan for the Rim of the Valley Unit shall be construed to--
 ``(A) modify any provision of Federal, State, or local law 
 with respect to public access to or use of non-Federal land;
 ``(B) create any liability, or affect any liability under 
 any other law, of any private property owner or other owner of 
 non-Federal land with respect to any person injured on private 
 property or other non-Federal land;
 ``(C) affect the ownership, management, or other rights 
 relating to any non-Federal land (including any interest in any 
 non-Federal land);
 ``(D) require any local government to participate in any 
 program administered by the Secretary;
 ``(E) alter, modify, or diminish any right, responsibility, 
 power, authority, jurisdiction, or entitlement of the State, 
 any political subdivision of the State, or any State or local 
 agency under existing Federal, State, and local law (including 
 regulations);
 ``(F) require the creation of protective perimeters or 
 buffer zones, and the fact that certain activities or land can 
 be seen or heard from within the Rim of the Valley Unit shall 
 not, of itself, preclude the activities or land uses up to the 
 boundary of the Rim of the Valley Unit;
 ``(G) require or promote use of, or encourage trespass on, 
 lands, facilities, and rights-of-way owned by non-Federal 
 entities, including water resource facilities and public 
 utilities, without the written consent of the owner;
 ``(H) affect the operation, maintenance, modification, 
 construction, or expansion of any water resource facility or 
 utility facility located within or adjacent to the Rim of the 
 Valley Unit;
 ``(I) terminate the fee title to lands or customary 
 operation, maintenance, repair, and replacement activities on 
 or under such lands granted to public agencies that are 
 authorized pursuant to Federal or State statute;
 ``(J) interfere with, obstruct, hinder, or delay the 
 exercise of any right to, or access to any water resource 
 facility or other facility or property necessary or useful to 
 access any water right to operate any public water or utility 
 system;
 ``(K) require initiation or reinitiation of consultation 
 with the United States Fish and Wildlife Service under, or the 
 application of provisions of, the Endangered Species Act of 
 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.), the National Environmental 
 Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.), or division A of 
 subtitle III of title 54, United States Code, concerning any 
 action or activity affecting water, water rights or water 
 management or water resource facilities within the Rim of the 
 Valley Unit; or
 ``(L) limit the Secretary's ability to update applicable 
 fire management plans, which may consider fuels management 
 strategies including managed natural fire, prescribed fires, 
 non-fire mechanical hazardous fuel reduction activities, or 
 post-fire remediation of damage to natural and cultural 
 resources.
 ``(4) The activities of a utility facility or water resource 
facility shall take into consideration ways to reasonably avoid or 
reduce the impact on the resources of the Rim of the Valley Unit.
 ``(5) For the purpose of paragraph (4)--
 ``(A) the term `utility facility' means electric 
 substations, communication facilities, towers, poles, and 
 lines, ground wires, communications circuits, and other 
 structures, and related infrastructure; and
 ``(B) the term `water resource facility' means irrigation 
 and pumping facilities; dams and reservoirs; flood control 
 facilities; water conservation works, including debris 
 protection facilities, sediment placement sites, rain gauges, 
 and stream gauges; water quality, recycled water, and pumping 
 facilities; conveyance distribution systems; water treatment 
 facilities; aqueducts; canals; ditches; pipelines; wells; 
 hydropower projects; transmission facilities; and other 
 ancillary facilities, groundwater recharge facilities, water 
 conservation, water filtration plants, and other water 
 diversion, conservation, groundwater recharge, storage, and 
 carriage structures.''.

 TITLE VI--WILD OLYMPICS WILDERNESS AND WILD AND SCENIC RIVERS

SEC. 601. SHORT TITLE.

 This title may be cited as the ``Wild Olympics Wilderness and Wild 
and Scenic Rivers Act''.

SEC. 602. DESIGNATION OF OLYMPIC NATIONAL FOREST WILDERNESS AREAS.

 (a) In General.--In furtherance of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 
1131 et seq.), the following Federal land in the Olympic National 
Forest in the State of Washington comprising approximately 126,554 
acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Proposed Wild 
Olympics Wilderness and Wild and Scenic Rivers Act'' and dated April 8, 
2019 (referred to in this section as the ``map''), is designated as 
wilderness and as components of the National Wilderness Preservation 
System:
 (1) Lost creek wilderness.--Certain Federal land managed by 
 the Forest Service, comprising approximately 7,159 acres, as 
 generally depicted on the map, which shall be known as the 
 ``Lost Creek Wilderness''.
 (2) Rugged ridge wilderness.--Certain Federal land managed 
 by the Forest Service, comprising approximately 5,956 acres, as 
 generally depicted on the map, which shall be known as the 
 ``Rugged Ridge Wilderness''.
 (3) Alckee creek wilderness.--Certain Federal land managed 
 by the Forest Service, comprising approximately 1,787 acres, as 
 generally depicted on the map, which shall be known as the 
 ``Alckee Creek Wilderness''.
 (4) Gates of the elwha wilderness.--Certain Federal land 
 managed by the Forest Service, comprising approximately 5,669 
 acres, as generally depicted on the map, which shall be known 
 as the ``Gates of the Elwha Wilderness''.
 (5) Buckhorn wilderness additions.--Certain Federal land 
 managed by the Forest Service, comprising approximately 21,965 
 acres, as generally depicted on the map, is incorporated in, 
 and shall be managed as part of, the ``Buckhorn Wilderness'', 
 as designated by section 3 of the Washington State Wilderness 
 Act of 1984 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; Public Law 98-339).
 (6) Green mountain wilderness.--Certain Federal land 
 managed by the Forest Service, comprising approximately 4,790 
 acres, as generally depicted on the map, which shall be known 
 as the ``Green Mountain Wilderness''.
 (7) The brothers wilderness additions.--Certain land 
 managed by the Forest Service, comprising approximately 8,625 
 acres, as generally depicted on the map, is incorporated in, 
 and shall be managed as part of, the ``The Brothers 
 Wilderness'', as designated by section 3 of the Washington 
 State Wilderness Act of 1984 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; Public Law 
 98-339).
 (8) Mount skokomish wilderness additions.--Certain land 
 managed by the Forest Service, comprising approximately 8,933 
 acres, as generally depicted on the map, is incorporated in, 
 and shall be managed as part of, the ``Mount Skokomish 
 Wilderness'', as designated by section 3 of the Washington 
 State Wilderness Act of 1984 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; Public Law 
 98-339).
 (9) Wonder mountain wilderness additions.--Certain land 
 managed by the Forest Service, comprising approximately 26,517 
 acres, as generally depicted on the map, is incorporated in, 
 and shall be managed as part of, the ``Wonder Mountain 
 Wilderness'', as designated by section 3 of the Washington 
 State Wilderness Act of 1984 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; Public Law 
 98-339).
 (10) Moonlight dome wilderness.--Certain Federal land 
 managed by the Forest Service, comprising approximately 9,117 
 acres, as generally depicted on the map, which shall be known 
 as the ``Moonlight Dome Wilderness''.
 (11) South quinault ridge wilderness.--Certain Federal land 
 managed by the Forest Service, comprising approximately 10,887 
 acres, as generally depicted on the map, which shall be known 
 as the ``South Quinault Ridge Wilderness''.
 (12) Colonel bob wilderness additions.--Certain Federal 
 land managed by the Forest Service, comprising approximately 
 353 acres, as generally depicted on the map, is incorporated 
 in, and shall be managed as part of, the ``Colonel Bob 
 Wilderness'', as designated by section 3 of the Washington 
 State Wilderness Act of 1984 (16 U.S.C. 1132 note; Public Law 
 98-339).
 (13) Sam's river wilderness.--Certain Federal land managed 
 by the Forest Service, comprising approximately 13,418 acres, 
 as generally depicted on the map, which shall be known as the 
 ``Sam's River Wilderness''.
 (14) Canoe creek wilderness.--Certain Federal land managed 
 by the Forest Service, comprising approximately 1,378 acres, as 
 generally depicted on the map, which shall be known as the 
 ``Canoe Creek Wilderness''.
 (b) Administration.--
 (1) Management.--Subject to valid existing rights, the land 
 designated as wilderness by subsection (a) shall be 
 administered by the Secretary of Agriculture (referred to in 
 this section as the ``Secretary''), in accordance with the 
 Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.), except that any 
 reference in that Act to the effective date of that Act shall 
 be considered to be a reference to the date of enactment of 
 this Act.
 (2) Map and description.--
 (A) In general.--As soon as practicable after the 
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall file 
 a map and a legal description of the land designated as 
 wilderness by subsection (a) with--
 (i) the Committee on Natural Resources of 
 the House of Representatives; and
 (ii) the Committee on Energy and Natural 
 Resources of the Senate.
 (B) Effect.--Each map and legal description filed 
 under subparagraph (A) shall have the same force and 
 effect as if included in this title, except that the 
 Secretary may correct minor errors in the map and legal 
 description.
 (C) Public availability.--Each map and legal 
 description filed under subparagraph (A) shall be filed 
 and made available for public inspection in the 
 appropriate office of the Forest Service.
 (c) Potential Wilderness.--
 (1) In general.--In furtherance of the purposes of the 
 Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1131 et seq.), certain Federal land 
 managed by the Forest Service, comprising approximately 5,346 
 acres as identified as ``Potential Wilderness'' on the map, is 
 designated as potential wilderness.
 (2) Designation as wilderness.--On the date on which the 
 Secretary publishes in the Federal Register notice that any 
 nonconforming uses in the potential wilderness designated by 
 paragraph (1) have terminated, the potential wilderness shall 
 be--
 (A) designated as wilderness and as a component of 
 the National Wilderness Preservation System; and
 (B) incorporated into the adjacent wilderness area.
 (d) Adjacent Management.--
 (1) No protective perimeters or buffer zones.--The 
 designations in this section shall not create a protective 
 perimeter or buffer zone around any wilderness area.
 (2) Nonconforming uses permitted outside of boundaries of 
 wilderness areas.--Any activity or use outside of the boundary 
 of any wilderness area designated under this section shall be 
 permitted even if the activity or use would be seen or heard 
 within the boundary of the wilderness area.
 (e) Fire, Insects, and Diseases.--The Secretary may take such 
measures as are necessary to control fire, insects, and diseases, in 
the wilderness areas designated by this section, in accordance with 
section 4(d)(1) of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1133(d)(1)) and 
subject to such terms and conditions as the Secretary determines to be 
appropriate.

SEC. 603. WILD AND SCENIC RIVER DESIGNATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Section 3(a) of the National Wild and Scenic 
Rivers Act (16 U.S.C. 1274(a)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following:
 ``(231) Elwha river, washington.--The approximately 29.0-
 mile segment of the Elwha River and tributaries from the source 
 to Cat Creek, to be administered by the Secretary of the 
 Interior as a wild river.
 ``(232) Dungeness river, washington.--The segment of the 
 Dungeness River from the headwaters to the State of Washington 
 Department of Natural Resources land in T. 29 N., R. 4 W., sec. 
 12, to be administered by the Secretary of Agriculture, except 
 that portions of the river within the boundaries of Olympic 
 National Park shall be administered by the Secretary of the 
 Interior, including the following segments of the mainstem and 
 major tributary the Gray Wolf River, in the following classes:
 ``(A) The approximately 5.8-mile segment of the 
 Dungeness River from the headwaters to the 2870 Bridge, 
 as a wild river.
 ``(B) The approximately 2.1-mile segment of the 
 Dungeness River from the 2870 Bridge to Silver Creek, 
 as a scenic river.
 ``(C) The approximately 2.7-mile segment of the 
 Dungeness River from Silver Creek to Sleepy Hollow 
 Creek, as a wild river.
 ``(D) The approximately 6.3-mile segment of the 
 Dungeness River from Sleepy Hollow Creek to the Olympic 
 National Forest boundary, as a scenic river.
 ``(E) The approximately 1.9-mile segment of the 
 Dungeness River from the National Forest boundary to 
 the State of Washington Department of Natural Resources 
 land in T. 29 N., R. 4 W., sec. 12, to be administered 
 as a recreational river through a cooperative 
 management agreement between the State of Washington 
 and the Secretary of Agriculture as provided in section 
 10(e) of the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 U.S.C. 
 1281(e)).
 ``(F) The approximately 16.1-mile segment of the 
 Gray Wolf River from the headwaters to the 2870 Bridge, 
 as a wild river.
 ``(G) The approximately 1.1-mile segment of the 
 Gray Wolf River from the 2870 Bridge to the confluence 
 with the Dungeness River, as a scenic river.
 ``(233) Big quilcene river, washington.--The segment of the 
 Big Quilcene River from the headwaters to the City of Port 
 Townsend water intake facility, to be administered by the 
 Secretary of Agriculture, in the following classes:
 ``(A) The approximately 4.4-mile segment from the 
 headwaters to the Buckhorn Wilderness boundary, as a 
 wild river.
 ``(B) The approximately 5.3-mile segment from the 
 Buckhorn Wilderness boundary to the City of Port 
 Townsend water intake facility, as a scenic river.
 ``(C) Section 7(a), with respect to the licensing 
 of dams, water conduits, reservoirs, powerhouses, 
 transmission lines, or other project works, shall apply 
 to the approximately 5-mile segment from the City of 
 Port Townsend water intake facility to the Olympic 
 National Forest boundary.
 ``(234) Dosewallips river, washington.--The segment of the 
 Dosewallips River from the headwaters to the private land in T. 
 26 N., R. 3 W., sec. 15, to be administered by the Secretary of 
 Agriculture, except that portions of the river within the 
 boundaries of Olympic National Park shall be administered by 
 the Secretary of the Interior, in the following classes:
 ``(A) The approximately 12.9-mile segment from the 
 headwaters to Station Creek, as a wild river.
 ``(B) The approximately 6.8-mile segment from 
 Station Creek to the private land in T. 26 N., R. 3 W., 
 sec. 15, as a scenic river.
 ``(235) Duckabush river, washington.--The segment of the 
 Duckabush River from the headwaters to the private land in T. 
 25 N., R. 3 W., sec. 1, to be administered by the Secretary of 
 Agriculture, except that portions of the river within the 
 boundaries of Olympic National Park shall be administered by 
 the Secretary of the Interior, in the following classes:
 ``(A) The approximately 19.0-mile segment from the 
 headwaters to the Brothers Wilderness boundary, as a 
 wild river.
 ``(B) The approximately 1.9-mile segment from the 
 Brothers Wilderness boundary to the private land in T. 
 25 N., R. 3 W., sec. 1, as a scenic river.
 ``(236) Hamma hamma river, washington.--The segment of the 
 Hamma Hamma River from the headwaters to the eastern edge of 
 the NW1/4 sec. 21, T. 24 N., R. 3 W., to be administered by the 
 Secretary of Agriculture, in the following classes:
 ``(A) The approximately 3.1-mile segment from the 
 headwaters to the Mt. Skokomish Wilderness boundary, as 
 a wild river.
 ``(B) The approximately 5.8-mile segment from the 
 Mt. Skokomish Wilderness boundary to Lena Creek, as a 
 scenic river.
 ``(C) The approximately 6.8-mile segment from Lena 
 Creek to the eastern edge of the NW1/4 sec. 21, T. 24 
 N., R. 3 W., to be administered as a recreational river 
 through a cooperative management agreement between the 
 State of Washington and the Secretary of Agriculture as 
 provided in section 10(e) of the Wild and Scenic Rivers 
 Act (16 U.S.C. 1281(e)).
 ``(237) South fork skokomish river, washington.--The 
 segment of the South Fork Skokomish River from the headwaters 
 to the Olympic National Forest boundary to be administered by 
 the Secretary of Agriculture, in the following classes:
 ``(A) The approximately 6.7-mile segment from the 
 headwaters to Church Creek, as a wild river.
 ``(B) The approximately 8.3-mile segment from 
 Church Creek to LeBar Creek, as a scenic river.
 ``(C) The approximately 4.0-mile segment from LeBar 
 Creek to upper end of gorge in the NW1/4 sec. 22, T. 22 
 N., R. 5 W., as a recreational river.
 ``(D) The approximately 6.0-mile segment from the 
 upper end of the gorge to the Olympic National Forest 
 boundary, as a scenic river.
 ``(238) Middle fork satsop river, washington.--The 
 approximately 7.9-mile segment of the Middle Fork Satsop River 
 from the headwaters to the Olympic National Forest boundary, to 
 be administered by the Secretary of Agriculture, as a scenic 
 river.
 ``(239) West fork satsop river, washington.--The 
 approximately 8.2-mile segment of the West Fork Satsop River 
 from the headwaters to the Olympic National Forest boundary, to 
 be administered by the Secretary of Agriculture, as a scenic 
 river.
 ``(240) Wynoochee river, washington.--The segment of the 
 Wynoochee River from the headwaters to the head of Wynoochee 
 Reservoir to be administered by the Secretary of Agriculture, 
 except that portions of the river within the boundaries of 
 Olympic National Park shall be administered by the Secretary of 
 the Interior, in the following classes:
 ``(A) The approximately 2.5-mile segment from the 
 headwaters to the boundary of the Wonder Mountain 
 Wilderness, as a wild river.
 ``(B) The approximately 7.4-mile segment from the 
 boundary of the Wonder Mountain Wilderness to the head 
 of Wynoochee Reservoir, as a recreational river.
 ``(241) East fork humptulips river, washington.--The 
 segment of the East Fork Humptulips River from the headwaters 
 to the Olympic National Forest boundary to be administered by 
 the Secretary of Agriculture, in the following classes:
 ``(A) The approximately 7.4-mile segment from the 
 headwaters to the Moonlight Dome Wilderness boundary, 
 as a wild river.
 ``(B) The approximately 10.3-mile segment from the 
 Moonlight Dome Wilderness boundary to the Olympic 
 National Forest boundary, as a scenic river.
 ``(242) West fork humptulips river, washington.--The 
 approximately 21.4-mile segment of the West Fork Humptulips 
 River from the headwaters to the Olympic National Forest 
 Boundary, to be administered by the Secretary of Agriculture, 
 as a scenic river.
 ``(243) Quinault river, washington.--The segment of the 
 Quinault River from the headwaters to private land in T. 24 N., 
 R. 8 W., sec. 33, to be administered by the Secretary of the 
 Interior, in the following classes:
 ``(A) The approximately 16.5-mile segment from the 
 headwaters to Graves Creek, as a wild river.
 ``(B) The approximately 6.7-mile segment from 
 Graves Creek to Cannings Creek, as a scenic river.
 ``(C) The approximately 1.0-mile segment from 
 Cannings Creek to private land in T. 24 N., R. 8 W., 
 sec. 33, as a recreational river.
 ``(244) Queets river, washington.--The segment of the 
 Queets River from the headwaters to the Olympic National Park 
 boundary to be administered by the Secretary of the Interior, 
 except that portions of the river outside the boundaries of 
 Olympic National Park shall be administered by the Secretary of 
 Agriculture, including the following segments of the mainstem 
 and certain tributaries in the following classes:
 ``(A) The approximately 28.6-mile segment of the 
 Queets River from the headwaters to the confluence with 
 Sams River, as a wild river.
 ``(B) The approximately 16.0-mile segment of the 
 Queets River from the confluence with Sams River to the 
 Olympic National Park boundary, as a scenic river.
 ``(C) The approximately 15.7-mile segment of the 
 Sams River from the headwaters to the confluence with 
 the Queets River, as a scenic river.
 ``(D) The approximately 17.7-mile segment of 
 Matheny Creek from the headwaters to the confluence 
 with the Queets River, to be administered as a scenic 
 river through a cooperative management agreement 
 between the State of Washington and the Secretary of 
 Agriculture as provided in section 10(e) of the Wild 
 and Scenic Rivers Act (16 U.S.C. 1281(e)).
 ``(245) Hoh river, washington.--The segment of the Hoh 
 River and the major tributary South Fork Hoh from the 
 headwaters to Olympic National Park boundary, to be 
 administered by the Secretary of the Interior, in the following 
 classes:
 ``(A) The approximately 20.7-mile segment of the 
 Hoh River from the headwaters to Jackson Creek, as a 
 wild river.
 ``(B) The approximately 6.0-mile segment of the Hoh 
 River from Jackson Creek to the Olympic National Park 
 boundary, as a scenic river.
 ``(C) The approximately 13.8-mile segment of the 
 South Fork Hoh River from the headwaters to the Olympic 
 National Park boundary, as a wild river.
 ``(D) The approximately 4.6-mile segment of the 
 South Fork Hoh River from the Olympic National Park 
 boundary to the Washington State Department of Natural 
 Resources boundary in T. 27 N., R. 10 W., sec. 29, to 
 be administered as a recreational river through a 
 cooperative management agreement between the State of 
 Washington and the Secretary of Agriculture as provided 
 in section 10(e) of the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 
 U.S.C. 1281(e)).
 ``(246) Bogachiel river, washington.--The approximately 
 25.6-mile segment of the Bogachiel River from the source to the 
 Olympic National Park boundary, to be administered by the 
 Secretary of the Interior, as a wild river.
 ``(247) South fork calawah river, washington.--The segment 
 of the South Fork Calawah River and the major tributary Sitkum 
 River from the headwaters to Hyas Creek to be administered by 
 the Secretary of Agriculture, except those portions of the 
 river within the boundaries of Olympic National Park shall be 
 administered by the Secretary of the Interior, including the 
 following segments in the following classes:
 ``(A) The approximately 15.7-mile segment of the 
 South Fork Calawah River from the headwaters to the 
 Sitkum River, as a wild river.
 ``(B) The approximately 0.9-mile segment of the 
 South Fork Calawah River from the Sitkum River to Hyas 
 Creek, as a scenic river.
 ``(C) The approximately 1.6-mile segment of the 
 Sitkum River from the headwaters to the Rugged Ridge 
 Wilderness boundary, as a wild river.
 ``(D) The approximately 11.9-mile segment of the 
 Sitkum River from the Rugged Ridge Wilderness boundary 
 to the confluence with the South Fork Calawah, as a 
 scenic river.
 ``(248) Sol duc river, washington.--The segment of the Sol 
 Duc River from the headwaters to the Olympic National Park 
 boundary to be administered by the Secretary of the Interior, 
 including the following segments of the mainstem and certain 
 tributaries in the following classes:
 ``(A) The approximately 7.0-mile segment of the Sol 
 Duc River from the headwaters to the end of Sol Duc Hot 
 Springs Road, as a wild river.
 ``(B) The approximately 10.8-mile segment of the 
 Sol Duc River from the end of Sol Duc Hot Springs Road 
 to the Olympic National Park boundary, as a scenic 
 river.
 ``(C) The approximately 14.2-mile segment of the 
 North Fork Sol Duc River from the headwaters to the 
 Olympic Hot Springs Road bridge, as a wild river.
 ``(D) The approximately 0.2-mile segment of the 
 North Fork Sol Duc River from the Olympic Hot Springs 
 Road bridge to the confluence with the Sol Duc River, 
 as a scenic river.
 ``(E) The approximately 8.0-mile segment of the 
 South Fork Sol Duc River from the headwaters to the 
 confluence with the Sol Duc River, as a scenic river.
 ``(249) Lyre river, washington.--The approximately 0.2-mile 
 segment of the Lyre River from Lake Crescent to the Olympic 
 National Park boundary, to be administered by the Secretary of 
 the Interior as a scenic river.''.
 (b) Restoration Activities.--Consistent with the Wild and Scenic 
Rivers Act (16 U.S.C. 1271 et seq.) (including any regulations issued 
under that Act), the Secretary of Agriculture or the Secretary of the 
Interior, as applicable, may authorize an activity or project for a 
component of the Wild and Scenic Rivers System designated under the 
amendments made by subsection (a), the primary purpose of which is--
 (1) river restoration;
 (2) the recovery of a species listed as endangered or 
 threatened under the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 
 1531 et seq.); or
 (3) restoring ecological and hydrological function.
 (c) Updates to Land and Resource Management Plans.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), not 
 later than 3 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, 
 the Secretary of Agriculture shall, with respect to the 
 designations made under subsection (a) on lands under the 
 jurisdiction of the Secretary, incorporate such designations 
 into updated management plans for units of the National Forest 
 System in accordance with applicable laws (including 
 regulations).
 (2) Exception.--The date specified in paragraph (1) shall 
 be 5 years after the date of the enactment of this Act if the 
 Secretary of Agriculture--
 (A) is unable to meet the requirement under such 
 paragraph by the date specified in such paragraph; and
 (B) not later than 3 years after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, includes in the Department of 
 Agriculture annual budget submission to Congress a 
 request for additional sums as may be necessary to meet 
 the requirement of such paragraph.
 (3) Comprehensive management plan requirements.--Updated 
 management plans under paragraph (1) or (2) satisfy the 
 requirements under section 3(d) of the Wild and Scenic Rivers 
 Act (16 U.S.C. 1274(d)).

SEC. 604. EXISTING RIGHTS AND WITHDRAWAL.

 (a) Effect on Existing Rights.--
 (1) Private parties.--In accordance with section 12(b) of 
 the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 U.S.C. 1283(b)), nothing in 
 this division or an amendment made by this division affects or 
 abrogates any existing rights, privileges, or contracts held by 
 a private party.
 (2) State land.--Nothing in this division or an amendment 
 made by this division modifies or directs the management, 
 acquisition, or disposition of land managed by the Washington 
 Department of Natural Resources.
 (b) Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, the Federal land 
within the boundaries of the river segments designated by this title 
and the amendment made by section 603(a) is withdrawn from all forms 
of--
 (1) entry, appropriation, or disposal under the public land 
 laws;
 (2) location, entry, and patent under the mining laws; and
 (3) disposition under all laws relating to mineral and 
 geothermal leasing or mineral materials.

SEC. 605. TREATY RIGHTS.

 Nothing in this title alters, modifies, diminishes, or extinguishes 
the reserved treaty rights of any Indian tribe with hunting, fishing, 
gathering, and cultural or religious rights in the Olympic National 
Forest as protected by a treaty.

 TITLE VII--CERRO DE LA OLLA WILDERNESS ESTABLISHMENT

SEC. 701. DESIGNATION OF CERRO DE LA OLLA WILDERNESS.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) In general.--Section 1202 of the John D. Dingell, Jr. 
 Conservation, Management, and Recreation Act (16 U.S.C. 1132 
 note; Public Law 116-9; 133 Stat. 651) is amended--
 (A) in the section heading, by striking ``cerro del 
 yuta and rio san antonio'' and inserting ``rio grande 
 del norte national monument'';
 (B) in subsection (a), by striking paragraph (1) 
 and inserting the following:
 ``(1) Map.--The term `map' means--
 ``(A) for purposes of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of 
 subsection (b)(1), the map entitled `Rio Grande del 
 Norte National Monument Proposed Wilderness Areas' and 
 dated July 28, 2015; and
 ``(B) for purposes of subsection (b)(1)(C), the map 
 entitled `Proposed Cerro de la Olla Wilderness and Rio 
 Grande del Norte National Monument Boundary' and dated 
 June 30th, 2022.''; and
 (C) in subsection (b)--
 (i) in paragraph (1), by adding at the end 
 the following:
 ``(C) Cerro de la olla wilderness.--Certain Federal 
 land administered by the Bureau of Land Management in 
 Taos County, New Mexico, comprising approximately 
 12,898 acres as generally depicted on the map, which 
 shall be known as the `Cerro de la Olla Wilderness'.'';
 (ii) in paragraph (4), in the matter 
 preceding subparagraph (A), by striking ``this 
 Act'' and inserting ``this Act (including a 
 reserve common grazing allotment)'';
 (iii) in paragraph (7)--
 (I) by striking ``map and'' each 
 place it appears and inserting ``maps 
 and''; and
 (II) in subparagraph (B), by 
 striking ``the legal description and 
 map'' and inserting ``the maps or legal 
 descriptions''; and
 (iv) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(12) Wildlife water development projects in cerro de la 
 olla wilderness.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B) and 
 in accordance with section 4(c) of the Wilderness Act 
 (16 U.S.C. 1133(c)), the Secretary may authorize the 
 maintenance of any structure or facility in existence 
 on the date of enactment of this paragraph for wildlife 
 water development projects (including guzzlers) in the 
 Cerro de la Olla Wilderness if, as determined by the 
 Secretary--
 ``(i) the structure or facility would 
 enhance wilderness values by promoting healthy, 
 viable, and more naturally distributed wildlife 
 populations; and
 ``(ii) the visual impacts of the structure 
 or facility on the Cerro de la Olla Wilderness 
 can reasonably be minimized.
 ``(B) Cooperative agreement.--Not later than 1 year 
 after the date of enactment of this paragraph, the 
 Secretary shall enter into a cooperative agreement with 
 the State of New Mexico that specifies, subject to 
 section 4(c) of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1133(c)), 
 the terms and conditions under which wildlife 
 management activities in the Cerro de la Olla 
 Wilderness may be carried out.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of contents for the John 
 D. Dingell, Jr. Conservation, Management, and Recreation Act 
 (Public Law 116-9; 133 Stat. 581) is amended by striking the 
 item relating to section 1202 and inserting the following:

``Sec. 1202. Rio Grande del Norte National Monument Wilderness 
 Areas.''.
 (b) Rio Grande Del Norte National Monument Boundary Modification.--
The boundary of the Rio Grande del Norte National Monument in the State 
of New Mexico is modified, as depicted on the map entitled ``Proposed 
Cerro de la Olla Wilderness and Rio Grande del Norte National Monument 
Boundary'' and dated June 30th, 2022.

 TITLE VIII--STUDY ON FLOOD RISK MITIGATION

SEC. 801. STUDY ON FLOOD RISK MITIGATION.

 The Comptroller General shall conduct a study to determine the 
contributions of wilderness designations under this division to 
protections to flood risk mitigation in residential areas.

 TITLE IX--MISCELLANEOUS

SEC. 901. PROMOTING HEALTH AND WELLNESS FOR VETERANS AND 
 SERVICEMEMBERS.

 The Secretary of Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture are 
encouraged to ensure servicemember and veteran access to public lands 
designed by this division for the purposes of outdoor recreation and to 
participate in outdoor-related volunteer and wellness programs.

SEC. 902. FIRE, INSECTS, AND DISEASES.

 Nothing in this division may be construed to limit the authority of 
the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Agriculture under 
section 4(d)(1) of the Wilderness Act (16 U.S.C. 1133(d)(1)), in 
accordance with existing laws (including regulations).

SEC. 903. MILITARY ACTIVITIES.

 Nothing in this division precludes--
 (1) low-level overflights of military aircraft over 
 wilderness areas;
 (2) the designation of new units of special airspace over 
 wilderness areas; or
 (3) the establishment of military flight training routes 
 over wilderness areas.

 Passed the House of Representatives July 14, 2022.

 Attest:

 CHERYL L. JOHNSON,

 Clerk.
 Calendar No. 467

117th CONGRESS

 2d Session

 H. R. 7900

_______________________________________________________________________

 AN ACT

 To authorize appropriations for fiscal year 2023 for military 
activities of the Department of Defense and for military construction, 
 and for defense activities of the Department of Energy, to prescribe 
 military personnel strengths for such fiscal year, and for other 
 purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 August 3, 2022

 Read twice and placed on the calendar