S 1527 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1527
To provide incentive grants for States that enact legislation aimed at
limiting youth access to cigarettes, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
August 3 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. LAUTENBERG (for himself and Mr. HATCH) introduced the following bill;
which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To provide incentive grants for States that enact legislation aimed at
limiting youth access to cigarettes, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Adolescent Tobacco Prevention Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS.
 Congress finds that--
 (1) cigarette smoking and the use of smokeless tobacco products continue to
 represent a major health hazard to the American public causing approximately
 390,000 premature deaths per year;
 (2) cigarette smoking continues to be the single most preventable cause
 of death and disability in the United States;
 (3) tobacco products contain hazardous tobacco additives, gases, and other
 chemical constituents dangerous to health;
 (4) the use of tobacco products cost the United States in excess of
 $60,000,000,000 in lost productivity and health care costs;
 (5) tobacco products contain nicotine, a poisonous drug that the Surgeon
 General has determined is highly addictive;
 (6) 80 percent of smokers start smoking before they are 21 years of age;
 (7) the tobacco industry spends over $2,000,000,000 annually to promote
 and sell its products; and
 (8) the Congress of the United States has a major policy-setting role in
 ensuring that the use of tobacco products among minors is discouraged to
 the maximum extent possible.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act:
 (1) MINOR- The term `minor' means an individual under the age of 18.
 (2) SCHOOL- The term `school' means an elementary or secondary school.
 (3) TOBACCO PRODUCT- The term `tobacco product' means cigarettes, cigars,
 little cigars, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, snuff, and chewing tobacco.
SEC. 4. INCENTIVE GRANTS TO LIMIT YOUTH ACCESS TO TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
 (a) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATION- There is authorized to be appropriated
 $100,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1990 through 1994 to enable the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services to make incentive grants to States,
 to be distributed in accordance with Part A of Title XIX of the Public
 Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300w et seq.) as such part exists on the
 date of enactment of this Act.
 (b) LEGISLATIVE REQUIREMENT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- To receive a grant under this section, a State shall enact
 legislation that prohibits--
 (A) the sale of a tobacco product to a minor;
 (B) the sale of a tobacco product in a vending machine, in accordance with
 regulations promulgated under paragraph (2), unless the presence of minors
 is not allowed on the premises where such machine is located; and
 (C) the distribution of a free sample of a tobacco product.
 (2) REGULATIONS- The Assistant Secretary for Health of the Department of
 Health and Human Services, or the designee of such Assistant Secretary,
 shall promulgate regulations that prescribe where tobacco product vending
 machines may be placed under paragraph (1)(B).
 (c) ENFORCEMENT AND COMPLIANCE-
 (1) BY STATE- A State receiving a grant under subsection (a) shall ensure
 that the legislation referred to in subsection (b) is effectively enforced
 to achieve substantial compliance, as determined by the Assistant Secretary
 for Health of the Department of Health and Human Services, or the designee
 of such Assistant Secretary.
 (2) REGULATIONS- The Assistant Secretary or designee referred to in paragraph
 (1) shall promulgate regulations necessary to implement this section.
 (d) ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS- A State receiving a grant under subsection
 (a) may place restrictions on the sale or distribution of tobacco products
 to minors in addition to the requirements referred to in subsection (b).
SEC. 5. SMOKING EDUCATION AND INFORMATION.
 (a) COMPREHENSIVE OUTREACH PROGRAM- Section 3 of the Comprehensive Smoking
 Education Act (15 U.S.C. 1341) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (5) by striking out `and' after the semicolon;
 (2) in paragraph (6) by striking out the period and inserting in lieu
 thereof `; and'; and
 (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph:
 `(7) establish a comprehensive outreach program to inform individuals
 under the age of 18 about the health consequences of smoking.'.
 (b) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There is authorized to be appropriated
 $6,000,000 to be used by the Office on Smoking and Health, as established
 by section 3 of the Comprehensive Smoking Education Act (15 U.S.C. 1341),
 for activities including the comprehensive outreach program established
 under section 3(7) of the Comprehensive Smoking Education Act.
SEC. 6. INCENTIVE GRANTS TO PROHIBIT STUDENT SMOKING IN SCHOOLS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- There is authorized to be appropriated $100,000,000 for each
 of the fiscal years 1990 through 1994 to enable the Secretary of Education
 to make incentive grants, to be distributed in accordance with part A of
 chapter 2 of title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965
 (20 U.S.C. 2921 et seq.) as such part existed on the date of enactment of
 this Act.
 (b) LEGISLATIVE REQUIREMENT- To receive a grant under this section,
 a State shall enact legislation that--
 (1) prohibits smoking by minors on elementary and secondary school buildings
 and grounds;
 (2) prohibits smoking by minors on school buses; and
 (3) requiring schools to establish smoking areas for adults that are separate
 from students, and to ensure adequate safeguards exist to protect students
 from exposure to smoke.
 (c) ENFORCEMENT AND COMPLIANCE-
 (1) BY STATE- A State receiving a grant under subsection (a) shall ensure
 that the legislation referred to in subsection (b) is effectively enforced to
 achieve substantial compliance, as determined by the Secretary of Education
 in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
 (2) REGULATIONS- The Secretary of Education, in consultation with the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services shall promulgate regulations
 necessary to implement this section.
 (d) ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS- A State receiving a grant under subsection (a)
 may place restrictions on the use of tobacco products in schools in addition
 to the requirements referred to in subsection (a). A State receiving funds
 under this section shall provide assistance under this section only to
 schools that are subject to State laws of the type described in subsection
 (b).
SEC. 7. INCREASE IN TAX ON CIGARETTES.
 (a) RATE OF TAX- Effective for each of the fiscal years 1990 through 1994,
 to provide funds for the Adolescent Tobacco Prevention Trust Fund established
 under section 8, subsection (b) of section 5701 of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 (relating to rate of tax on cigarettes) is amended--
 (1) by striking `$8' in paragraph (1) and inserting in lieu thereof
 `$8.50'; and
 (2) by striking `$16.80' in paragraph (2) and inserting in lieu thereof
 `$17.85'.
 (b) Floor Stocks-
 (1) IMPOSITION OF TAX- On cigarettes manufactured in or imported into the
 United States which are removed before October 1, 1989, and held on such
 date for sale by any person, there shall be imposed the following taxes:
 (A) SMALL CIGARETTES- On cigarettes, weighing not more than 3 pounds per
 thousand, $.50 per thousand;
 (B) LARGE CIGARETTES- On cigarettes, weighing more than 3 pounds per
 thousand, $1.05 per thousand; except that, if more than 6 1/2 inches
 in length, they shall be taxable at the rate prescribed for cigarettes
 weighing not more than 3 pounds per thousand, counting each 2 3/4 inches,
 or fraction thereon, of the length of each as one cigarette.
 (2) Liability for tax and method of payment-
 (A) LIABILITY FOR TAX- A person holding cigarettes on October 1, 1989 to
 which any tax imposed by paragraph (1) applies shall be liable for such tax.
 (B) METHOD OF PAYMENT- The tax imposed by paragraph (1) shall be treated
 as a tax imposed under section 5701 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
 and shall be due and payable on October 16, 1989, in the same manner as
 the tax imposed under such section is payable with respect to cigarettes
 removed on October 1, 1989.
 (3) CIGARETTE- For purposes of this subsection, the term `cigarette'
 shall have the meaning given to such term by subsection (b) of section
 5702 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (4) EXCEPTION FOR RETAIL STOCKS- The taxes imposed by paragraph (1) shall
 not apply to cigarettes in retail stocks held on October 1, 1989, at the
 place where intended to be sold at retail.
 (5) FOREIGN TRADE ZONES- Notwithstanding the Act of June 18, 1934 (19
 U.S.C. 81a et seq.) or any other provision of law--
 (A) cigarettes--
 (i) on which taxes imposed by Federal law are determined, or customs duties
 are liquidated, by a customs officer pursuant to a request made under the
 first proviso of section 3(a) of the Act of June 18, 1934 (19 U.S.C. 81c(a))
 before October 1, 1989, and
 (ii) which are entered into the customs territory of the United States on
 or after October 1, 1989, from a foreign trade zone, and
 (B) cigarettes which--
 (i) are placed under the supervision of a customs officer pursuant to the
 provisions of the second proviso of section 3(a) of the Act of June 18,
 1934 (19 U.S.C. 81c(a)) before October 1, 1989, and
 (ii) are entered into the customs territory of the United States on or
 after October 1, 1989, from a foreign trade zone,
shall be subject to the tax imposed by paragraph (1) and such cigarettes
shall, for purposes of paragraph (1), be treated as being held on October 1,
1989, for sale.
 (c) USE OF REVENUE- The revenue collected under this section, and the
 amendments made by this section, shall be deposited in the Adolescent
 Tobacco Prevention Trust Fund established under section 8.
SEC. 8. ADOLESCENT TOBACCO PREVENTION TRUST FUND.
 There shall be established in the Treasury of the United States an Adolescent
 Tobacco Prevention Trust Fund to be used by the Secretary of Health and
 Human Services and the Secretary of Education, subject to appropriations
 Acts, to provide funds for incentive grants covered under this Act and
 the amendments made by this Act.