HR 5409 IH
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 5409
To extend the statute of limitations applicable to civil actions brought by
the Federal conservator or receiver of a failed depository institution.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
June 16 1992
Mr. VENTO introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs
A BILL
To extend the statute of limitations applicable to civil actions brought by
the Federal conservator or receiver of a failed depository institution.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds (i) that the failures of depository
 institutions during the past decade has vastly exceeded the numbers
 experienced in previous decades; (ii) that one of the principal causes
 of such failures in large measure resulted from negligence, and fraud,
 of officers, directors, and professionals retained by these depository
 institutions; (iii) that the sheer numbers of failures has prevented the
 Federal receivers and conservators of these failed depository institutions
 from filing lawsuits against those who engaged in these practices within
 the time allowed under Federal and State statutes of limitations; (iv)
 that the expiration of statutes of limitations prior to the appointment of
 Federal receivers and conservators has blocked efforts to recover funds from
 wrongdoers; and (v) that the American taxpayers and the deposit insurance
 funds may be unable to recover billions of dollars on account of the short
 statute of limitations.
 (b) PURPOSE- The Congress intends to apply a uniform statute of limitations
 to proceedings involving the failure of depository institutions under the
 control of Federal conservators and receivers, even if the appointment
 of the Federal conservator or receiver occurs after the expiration of an
 applicable statute of limitation, so as to assure the maximum recovery
 on behalf of the depository insurance funds and the general revenue from
 those engaged in negligent or fraudulent activities which contributed to
 the failure of any depository institution.
SEC. 2 EXTENSION OF STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
 (a) DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS OTHER THAN CREDIT UNIONS- Section
 11(d)(14)(A)(ii)(I) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12
 U.S.C. 1821(d)(14(A)(ii)(I)) is amended by striking `3-year period' and
 inserting `6-year period'.
 (b) CREDIT UNIONS- Section 207(b)(14)(A)(ii)(I) of the Federal Credit Union
 Act (12 U.S.C. 1787(b)(14)(A)(ii)(I)) is amended by striking `3-year period'
 and inserting `6-year period'.
SEC. 3. PRESERVATION OF CLAIMS.
 Notwithstanding any provision of Federal or State law that would set an
 earlier deadline for filing suit, for purposes of this section, an action
 may be brought by a Federal conservator or receiver on any claim if the
 institution, or such institution's predecessors, could have brought an action
 on the claim at any time within the six-year period prior to the appointment
 of the Federal conservator or receiver, even if the action could not have
 been brought by the institution or its predecessors immediately prior to
 the time of the appointment of the Federal conservator or receiver. This
 section shall apply to all such actions despite the fact that the Federal
 conservator or receiver may have been appointed prior to the date of
 enactment of this provision.
SEC. 4. EFFECTIVE DATES.
 (a) DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS OTHER THAN CREDIT UNIONS- The amendment made
 by section 2(a) shall take effect as if such amendment had been included
 in the amendment made by section 212(a) of the Financial Institutions
 Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 as of the effective date of
 such section.
 (b) CREDIT UNIONS- The amendment made by section 2(b) shall take effect
 as if such amendment had been included in the amendment made by section
 1217(a)(4) of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement
 Act of 1989 as of the effective date of such section.