HR 3369 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3369
To develop a comprehensive safety program in order to protect public health
and to ensure the wholesomeness of all fish products intended for human
consumption in the United States.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
September 28, 1989
Mr. GLICKMAN (for himself, Mr. BROWN of California, and Mr. JONTZ) introduced
the following bill; which was referred jointly to the Committees on Energy
and Commerce, Merchant Marine and Fisheries, and Agriculture
A BILL
To develop a comprehensive safety program in order to protect public health
and to ensure the wholesomeness of all fish products intended for human
consumption in the United States.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Consumer Seafood Safety Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds and declares the following:
 (1) Fish and fishery products are an important component of the Nation's
 food supply and are harvested, processed, and marketed by a large and
 diverse industry.
 (2) The wholesomeness and safety of fish and fishery products is important
 to the health and well-being of the people of the United States.
 (3) Heightened public awareness of the health benefits associated with
 eating fish and fishery products, and greater diversity of products,
 have raised consumption rates and the demand for wholesome products.
 (4) Current Federal health inspection and monitoring programs are
 insufficient to ensure public confidence in the wholesomeness and safety
 of fish and fishery products.
 (5) More and better information on the safety, wholesomeness, and health
 risks of fish and fishery products, and inspection thereof, would improve
 the health and well-being of American consumers and public confidence in
 fish and fishery products.
 (6) The sale of unwholesome, adulterated, mislabeled, or deceptively
 packaged products is hazardous to the consumer and detrimental to the
 commercial fishing industry and interstate and foreign commerce.
 (7) Existing Federal standards are inadequate to maintain good fish and
 fishery products handling and manufacturing practices, to ensure consistent
 fish and fishery products packaging and labeling procedures, or to detect
 hazardous levels of contaminants in fish and fish products.
 (8) The Federal Government has the responsibility of ensuring the
 wholesomeness and safety of all fish and fishery products sold in interstate
 commerce for consumption in the United States.
 (9) A public health-based inspection program is particularly important for
 fish and fishery products because of several unique factors: their habitat
 is often an uncontrolled and polluted environment, certain species tend
 to concentrate contaminants, deterioration tends to occur more rapidly,
 and substantial amounts are consumed raw.
 (10) In the past decade, various State and local agencies have been forced to
 issue warnings to children and pregnant women about the documented dangers
 of consuming certain types of fish, but the absence of Federal standards
 has made it difficult to assure that the highest State and local standards
 are being applied nationwide.
 (b) PURPOSES- It is declared to be the purposes of the Congress in this Act--
 (1) to ensure the wholesomeness and safety of all fish and fishery products
 in the United States; and
 (2) to maximize the health benefits of consuming fish and fishery products,
 enhance public confidence in the wholesomeness and safety of fish and
 fishery products, and protect the fish and fishery products market by
 requiring the development of a comprehensive safety program, including--
 (A) a mandatory program for the inspection of fish and fishery products;
 (B) the establishment and enforcement of safety standards for fish and
 fishery products;
 (C) the evaluation and monitoring of fish and fishery product safety and
 consumer health risks;
 (D) the design of consumer education programs; and
 (E) the proper labeling and packaging of fish and fishery products.
SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
 In this Act, the following terms shall have the meanings stated below:
 (1) The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Agriculture of the United
 States or his delegate.
 (2) The term `State' means any State of the United States and the
 Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
 (3) The term `Territory' means Guam, the Virgin Islands of the United States,
 American Samoa, and any other territory or possession of the United States.
 (4) The term `commerce' means commerce between any State, any Territory,
 or the District of Columbia, and any place outside thereof; or within any
 Territory not organized with a legislative body, or the District of Columbia.
 (5) The term `United States' means the States, the District of Columbia,
 and the Territories of the United States.
 (6) The term `fish' means any aquatic plant life or animal life, including
 amphibians, or part thereof, whether from wild or cultured sources,
 capable of use as human food.
 (7) The term `shellfish' means any species of oyster, clam, mussel, mollusk,
 or crustacean, either shucked or in the shell, and either fresh or frozen,
 or otherwise processed, or any part thereof.
 (8) The term `fishery products' means any product capable of use as human
 food which is made wholly or in part from any fish or portion thereof,
 including unprocessed fish.
 (9) The term `capable of use as human food' applies to any fish or part of
 product thereof, unless it is denatured or otherwise identified as required
 by regulations prescribed by the Secretary to deter its use as human food,
 or unless it is naturally inedible by humans.
 (10) The terms `process,' `processed,' and `processing,' with respect to
 fish or fishery products, mean to harvest, handle, store, prepare, produce,
 manufacture, preserve, pack, transport, or hold such products.
 (11) The term `official stamp' means any symbol prescribed by regulations
 of the Secretary to identify any fish or fishery product processed
 for interstate commerce in an establishment(s) or vessel(s) holding an
 unsuspended official certificate and placed or packed in any container
 or wrapper.
 (12) The term `official certificate' means a certificate prescribed by
 regulations of the Secretary for issuance by an inspector for the purpose of
 regulating the processing of fish or fishery products on any establishment
 or vessel.
 (13) The term `owner or operator' means any person who owns, operates,
 leases, charters, or otherwise control in whole or in part any establishment
 or vessel.
 (14) The term `vessel' means a vessel which is engaged in the harvesting or
 processing, or both, of fish for landing and human consumption in any State.
 (15) The term `inspector' means an individual appointed or commissioned
 as an officer or employee of the Department of Agriculture and authorized
 by the Secretary to make inspections under the authority of this Act.
 (16) The term `establishment' means the premises, buildings, structures,
 facilities, and equipment (including vehicles) used in the processing of
 fish or fishery products.
SEC. 4. PROHIBITED ACTS.
 The following Acts are strictly prohibited:
 (1) The processing or sale of any fish or fishery product that is adulterated
 within the meaning of section 6 of this Act.
 (2) The refusal to permit entry or inspection to or on any vessel or
 establishment, or to otherwise interfere with any person in carrying out
 the duties required under this Act.
 (3) The reproduction, alteration, or destruction of any official stamp or
 certificate without authorization by the Secretary.
 (4) The creation or maintenance of records that are false either by content
 or omission, or destruction of records containing information required
 under this Act.
 (5) The processing in or for interstate commerce fish or fishery products in
 any establishment or vessel unless there is in effect for such establishment
 or vessel an official certificate issued by the Secretary.
 (6) The importation into the United States of fish or fishery products which
 are capable of use as human food if such articles are adulterated, labeled
 or packaged in a false or misleading way, or misbranded or otherwise fail
 to comply with all the inspection, good processing practice, and other
 provisions of this Act and regulations issued thereunder applicable to
 such articles in interstate commerce within the United States.
SEC. 5. PENALTIES.
 (a) For the commission of any act prohibited by section 4--
 (1) a fine of $10,000 shall be imposed by the Secretary; except that the
 fine shall increase by 5 percent with the commission of each subsequent
 prohibited act, and
 (2) the identity of the establishment or vessel involved in the commission
 of a prohibited act shall be published in the Federal Register on the last
 business day of the quarter in which the act was committed along with the
 aggregate amount of the fines and the basis for each fine.
 (b) The Secretary may refuse to provide inspection services for any period
 deemed necessary in order to protect the public health, curb persistent
 violations or enforce the other provisions of this Act.
 (c) Any individual who engages in the intentional adulteration of fish
 or fishery products within the meaning of section 6 shall be guilty of a
 felony and imprisoned for not more than two years.
SEC. 6. ADULTERATION.
 (a) Fish or fishery products shall be deemed adulterated if--
 (1) the Secretary determines that (a) such fish or fishery products contain
 any substance which is hazardous to human health including, but not limited
 to chemicals, parasitic organisms such as bacteria or viruses, and natural
 microbiological toxins such as ciguatoxin and scombrotoxin, or (b) such fish
 or fishery products have not been processed in accordance with section 7,
 (2) made or derived in whole or in part from shellfish harvested in a
 growing area that is determined to contain substances that will cause each
 shellfish to be injurious to health, or
 (3) imported from a country that does not utilize a fish and fish products
 safety program that is approved by the Secretary.
 (b)(1) For purposes of subparagraph (1) of paragraph (A), within 30 days of
 the date of the enactment of this Act the Secretary shall contract with the
 National Academy of Sciences to identify the chemical and microbiological
 contaminants, parasites, and toxins which are most likely to be found in
 fish and fish products and which are most likely to cause fish or fish
 products to be unsafe for human consumption.
 (2) The National Academy of Sciences shall prepare the report described
 in subparagraph (1) within six months of the date of the execution of the
 contract with the Secretary under subparagraph (1).
 (3) The Secretary shall issue proposed regulations within six months of the
 date of receiving the report of the National Academy of Sciences. Not later
 than six months after the date the Secretary issues proposed regulations
 the Secretary shall issue final regulations to implement the requirements
 of such sections. In promulgating such regulations, the Secretary shall
 establish standards for those chemical and microbiological contaminants,
 parasites, and toxins which are most likely to be found in fish and fish
 products and which are most likely to cause fish and fish products to be
 unsafe for human consumption.
 (c) For purposes of subparagraph (2) of paragraph (A), the Secretary of
 Commerce shall identify within one year from the date of enactment of this
 Act the growing areas that contain substances that will cause shellfish
 harvested in such areas to be injurious to health.
SEC. 7. REGULATIONS OF PRODUCTS, ESTABLISHMENT AND VESSELS.
 (a) PROCESSING- The Secretary shall by regulation prescribe standards of
 sanitation and other good processing, storage, and handling for each stage
 of the processing of fish and fishery products.
 (b) CERTIFICATION- The Secretary shall issue an official certificate upon
 application on a form prescribed by the Secretary which shall require,
 but not be limited to, proof of sanitation and storage facilities on an
 establishment or vessel and implementation of a quality assurance program
 approved by the Secretary.
 (c) STAMP- The Secretary shall by regulation prescribe standards for
 identifying and marking fish or fishery products with an official stamp
 which regulation shall ensure that the official stamp is available only
 for fish and fishery products that are processed at all stages by and at
 establishments or vessels for which an official certificate was in effect
 at the time such fish and fishery product was processed.
 (d) Suspension of Certificates-
 (1) The official certificate of any establishment or vessel may be suspended
 for failure to comply with the requirements of this section.
 (2) The official certificate shall be suspended summarily by the Secretary
 (i) for failure to permit access for inspection, or (ii) where an inspection
 or investigation discloses a violation of any provision of this chapter
 or any regulation issued thereunder which the Secretary determines would
 involve an undue risk of imminent harm to consumers, except that suspension
 pursuant to such determination shall not prevent the continued processing
 by the establishment or vessel of any fish or fishery product if such fish
 or fishery product is not distributed, sold, or consumed by humans.
 (3) The holder of a suspended certificate may submit a new application
 for certification at any time.
 (e) INSPECTION- For the purpose of preventing the processing in interstate
 commerce of adulterated or mislabeled fish or fishery products, the
 Secretary shall appoint inspectors to inspect each establishment or vessel
 where fish or fishery products are processed for interstate commerce. Such
 inspection shall be pursuant to a program established by the Secretary to
 detect adulterated fish and fishery products, to ensure that standards for
 sanitation and other good processing, storage, and handling practices are met
 by all establishments and vessels, and to identify the stage of processing
 in which the adulterated fish and fishery products became adulterated or
 were not removed from the human food process. The program shall include
 intensive sampling for microbiological and chemical contaminants consistent
 with professional methodology:
 (1) Such inspection shall be conducted with such frequency and manner as
 provided in rules and regulations issued by the Secretary, taking into
 account such factors as the Secretary considers to be appropriate including--
 (A) the degree of probability of fishery products being susceptible to
 contamination or otherwise having potential to impact on public health;
 (B) the history of compliance with inspection requirements under this
 Act; and
 (C) the production volume and complexity of the operations of the
 establishment or vessel.
 (2) The Secretary shall review the standards on a regular and continuous
 basis and shall submit to Congress every three years a report describing
 the standards and criteria for inspection and its operation.
 (3) For the purpose of inspection, inspectors shall have access to every
 part of an establishment or vessel as well as fishery and fish products
 contained within at all times, by day or night, without regard to whether
 such establishment is operated. Inspectors shall be able to make inspections
 unannounced and at random.
 (4) The Secretary, whenever processing operations are being conducted, may,
 at his discretion, provide for the sampling, detention, or reinspection
 of fish or fishery products at each such establishment or vessel. Any
 fish or fishery products found to be adulterated by the Secretary shall
 be immediately segregated and, if objection is not made within 24 hours,
 condemned. If objection is made, such fish or fishery products that are
 in perishable form may be processed to the extent necessary to prevent
 spoilage, but after such processing such fish or fishery products shall
 be segregated pending hearing and judicial review. Any fish or fishery
 products condemned under this subsection by the inspector without objection
 or after hearing and judicial review under section 8 shall be destroyed
 for human food purposes under the supervision of an inspector.
 (f) LABELING AND PACKAGING- If the Secretary has reason to believe that
 any labeling or packaging in use or proposed for use with respect to any
 article subject to this section is false or misleading, he may direct that
 such use be withheld, and that any otherwise authorized official mark not
 be used, unless the labeling and packaging is modified in such manner as
 he may prescribe to comply fully with this Act. Any such determination by
 the Secretary shall be subject to the opportunity for hearing and judicial
 review provided by section 8, but the use of such labeling or packaging
 shall, if the Secretary so directs, be withheld pending such hearing and
 judicial review if necessary to protect the public health. If the use of such
 labeling or packaging is withheld pending hearing and judicial review, the
 person using or proposing to use such labeling or packaging may at any time
 seek injunctive relief in the United States district court of the district
 in which such labeling or packaging takes place. In the event an injunctive
 relief proceeding is initiated, the court shall have jurisdiction only to
 determine if the Secretary's determination to withhold such labeling or
 packaging was warranted by all of the circumstances of the case.
 (g) STORAGE OR HANDLING REGULATIONS- Regulations issued pursuant to
 subsection (A) shall include standards prescribing conditions under which
 fish or fishery products capable of use as human food shall be stored
 or otherwise handled by any person engaged in the business of buying,
 selling, freezing, storing, or transporting, in or for interstate commerce,
 or importing, such articles.
 (h) RECORDKEEPING- The Secretary shall publish regulations providing for
 the preparation and maintenance of records specifically describing all
 activities relevant to food safety and sanitation, which records shall be
 available for public inspection as provided under section 552 of title
 5 of the United States Code. Any duly authorized representative of the
 Secretary shall, at all reasonable times, upon notice, be given opportunity
 to examine and to copy all such records.
 (i) IMPORTATION OF FISH AND FISHERY PRODUCTS--Whenever, in the case of any
 foreign country, it shall be determined by the Secretary, after inspection
 pursuant to regulations promulgated by the Secretary of the establishments
 or vessels in which fish or fishery products thereof are prepared for
 importation into the United States, such other investigation and evaluation,
 conducted at least annually, as he considers necessary or appropriate,
 that its system of establishment and vessel inspection of fish and fishery
 products is at least equal to all the inspection, good processing practice,
 and other provisions of this Act and regulations issued thereunder, and
 that reliance can be placed on certificates required by regulation of the
 Secretary as to compliance with that country's inspection, food processing
 practice, and other requirements, the Secretary may accept such certificates
 as compliance with the comparable requirements of this Act for such period
 and on such terms and conditions as he may prescribe. Any fish or fishery
 products covered by such certificates shall be labeled and packaged as
 may be required by regulations for such imported products.
SEC. 8. OPPORTUNITY FOR HEARING.
 (a) Any person (i) denied an official certificate, (ii) whose certificate
 is proposed to be suspended or has been summarily suspended, (iii) whose
 fish or fishery products are segregated, (iv) from whom the use of any
 labeling or packaging has been withheld or is proposed to be withheld,
 or (v) any other person adversely affected by the Secretary's action or
 inaction on such matters, may file objections thereto with the Secretary
 specifying with particularity reasonable grounds for his objection,
 and request a hearing upon such objections. The Secretary shall afford
 an opportunity for a hearing on such objections, and shall expedite
 such hearing upon request. As soon as possible after the hearing, the
 Secretary shall act upon the objections. The Secretary shall issue an
 order based upon a fair evaluation of the entire record at such hearing,
 and shall include in such findings of fact and conclusions on which the
 Secretary's action is based. The Secretary shall grant interim relief from
 any order denying or withdrawing a certificate as he finds justified upon
 considering the interests of the person holding the certificate and the
 necessary protection of the public health.
 (b) Any person adversely affected by the Secretary's action on such person's
 objections may obtain judicial review by filing in the United States court
 of appeals for the circuit in which he resides or in his principal place
 of business, within sixty days after the entry of the Secretary's order,
 a petition for judicial review. A copy of the petition shall be transmitted
 by the clerk of the office of the Secretary, and the Secretary shall file
 in the court the record of the proceeding. The finding of the Secretary with
 respect to questions of fact shall be sustained if supported by substantial
 evidence when considered on the record as a whole. The judgment of the
 court affiming or setting aside, in whole or in part, any order under
 this section shall be final subject to review by the Supreme Court of the
 United States upon certiorari or certification as provided in section 1254
 of title 28 of the United States Code.
SEC. 9. EMPLOYEE PROTECTION.
 (a) No employer may discharge any employee or otherwise discriminate
 against any employee with respect to the employee's compensation, terms,
 conditions, or privileges of employment because the employee has assisted
 or in any way participated in the carrying out of the provisions of this
 Act or who is about to carry out any activity protected by this provision.
 (b) The process and procedures with respect to discharge or discrimination
 under paragraph (A) are described in subsections (b) through (e) of section
 2622 of title 15, United States Code.
SEC. 10. RESEARCH AND EDUCATION.
 (a) RESEARCH- The Secretary shall, in consultation with other Federal
 agencies and with the States, establish priorities for fish and fish products
 safety research, such as test methodology for microbiological and chemical
 contaminants, and the appropriate Federal agencies shall conduct research
 regarding those priorities.
 (b) EDUCATION- The Secretary shall, in consultation with other Federal
 agencies and with the States, design and implement a national program for
 fish and fish products safety education, including designation of regional
 and national fish and fish products safety centers which shall conduct,
 support, and foster research, investigation, experimentation, education,
 and training in fish and fish products safety-related areas.
SEC. 11. AUTHORIZATION AND APPROPRIATION.
 There are authorized to be appropriated $75,000,000 to carry out this Act
 for each of the fiscal years 1990, 1991, 1992, and 1993.