[Congressional Bills 111th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]
[H.R. 1431 Introduced in House (IH)]

111th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 H. R. 1431

 To stimulate the economy and create jobs at no cost to the taxpayers, 
 and without borrowing money from foreign governments for which our 
children and grandchildren will be responsible, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 March 11, 2009

 Mr. Bishop of Utah (for himself, Mr. Shadegg, Mr. Sullivan, Mr. 
 Boozman, Mr. Jordan of Ohio, Mr. Gohmert, Mr. Burgess, Mr. Franks of 
Arizona, Mr. Akin, Mr. McHenry, Mr. Lewis of California, Ms. Foxx, Mr. 
Herger, Mr. Boustany, Mr. Pitts, Mrs. Myrick, Mr. Broun of Georgia, Mr. 
 Radanovich, Mrs. McMorris Rodgers, Mr. McCarthy of California, Mr. 
 Fleming, Mr. Latta, Mr. Young of Alaska, Mr. Lamborn, Mr. Bachus, Mr. 
Neugebauer, and Mr. McCotter) introduced the following bill; which was 
referred to the Committee on Natural Resources, and in addition to the 
 Committees on the Judiciary, Energy and Commerce, and Science and 
Technology, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, 
 in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the 
 jurisdiction of the committee concerned

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To stimulate the economy and create jobs at no cost to the taxpayers, 
 and without borrowing money from foreign governments for which our 
children and grandchildren will be responsible, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``No Cost Stimulus 
Act of 2009''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
 TITLE I--OUTER CONTINENTAL SHELF LEASING

Sec. 101. Leasing program considered approved.
Sec. 102. Lease sales.
Sec. 103. Coastal Impact assistance program amendments.
Sec. 104. Seaward boundaries of States.
 TITLE II--LEASING PROGRAM FOR LAND WITHIN COASTAL PLAIN

Sec. 201. Definitions.
Sec. 202. Leasing program for land within the Coastal Plain.
Sec. 203. Lease sales.
Sec. 204. Grant of leases by the Secretary.
Sec. 205. Lease terms and conditions.
Sec. 206. Coastal plain environmental protection.
Sec. 207. Expedited judicial review.
Sec. 208. Federal and State distribution of revenues.
Sec. 209. Rights-of-way across the Coastal plain.
Sec. 210. Conveyance.
Sec. 211. Local government impact aid and community service assistance.
Sec. 212. ANWR Alternative Energy Trust Fund.
 TITLE III--REGULATORY STREAMLINING

Sec. 301. Commercial leasing program for oil shale resources on public 
 land.
Sec. 302. Licensing of new nuclear power plants.
Sec. 303. Jurisdiction over covered energy projects.
Sec. 304. Environmental impact statements.
Sec. 305. Clean air regulation.
Sec. 306. Endangered species.

 TITLE I--OUTER CONTINENTAL SHELF LEASING

SEC. 101. LEASING PROGRAM CONSIDERED APPROVED.

 (a) In General.--The Draft Proposed Outer Continental Shelf Oil and 
Gas Leasing Program 2010-2015 issued by the Secretary of the Interior 
(referred to in this section as the ``Secretary'') under section 18 of 
the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1344) is considered to 
have been approved by the Secretary as a final oil and gas leasing 
program under that section.
 (b) Final Environmental Impact Statement.--The Secretary is 
considered to have issued a final environmental impact statement for 
the program described in subsection (a) in accordance with all 
requirements under section 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental 
Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4332(2)(C)).

SEC. 102. LEASE SALES.

 (a) Outer Continental Shelf.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), not 
 later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act and 
 every 270 days thereafter, the Secretary of the Interior 
 (referred to in this section as the ``Secretary'') shall 
 conduct a lease sale in each outer Continental Shelf planning 
 area for which the Secretary determines that there is a 
 commercial interest in purchasing Federal oil and gas leases 
 for production on the outer Continental Shelf.
 (2) Subsequent determinations and sales.--If the Secretary 
 determines that there is not a commercial interest in 
 purchasing Federal oil and gas leases for production on the 
 outer Continental Shelf in a planning area under this 
 subsection, not later than 2 years after the date of enactment 
 of the determination and every 2 years thereafter, the 
 Secretary shall--
 (A) determine whether there is a commercial 
 interest in purchasing Federal oil and gas leases for 
 production on the outer Continental Shelf in the 
 planning area; and
 (B) if the Secretary determines that there is a 
 commercial interest described in subparagraph (A), 
 conduct a lease sale in the planning area.
 (b) Renewable Energy and Mariculture.--The Secretary may conduct 
commercial lease sales of resources owned by United States--
 (1) to produce renewable energy (as defined in section 
 203(b) of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (42 U.S.C. 15852(b))); 
 or
 (2) to cultivate marine organisms in the natural habitat of 
 the organisms.

SEC. 103. COASTAL IMPACT ASSISTANCE PROGRAM AMENDMENTS.

 Section 31 of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 
1356a) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (c), by adding at the end the following:
 ``(5) Application requirements; availability of funding.--
 On approval of a plan by the Secretary under this section, the 
 producing State shall--
 ``(A) not be subject to any additional application 
 or other requirements (other than notifying the 
 Secretary of which projects are being carried out under 
 the plan) to receive the payments; and
 ``(B) be immediately eligible to receive payments 
 under this section.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(e) Funding.--
 ``(1) Streamlining.--
 ``(A) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the 
 date of enactment of this subsection, the Secretary of 
 the Interior (acting through the Director of the 
 Minerals Management Service) (referred to in this 
 subsection as the `Secretary') shall develop a plan 
 that addresses streamlining the process by which 
 payments are made under this section, including 
 recommendations for--
 ``(i) decreasing the time required to 
 approve plans submitted under subsection 
 (c)(1);
 ``(ii) ensuring that allocations to 
 producing States under subsection (b) are 
 adequately funded; and
 ``(iii) any modifications to the authorized 
 uses for payments under subsection (d).
 ``(B) Clean water.--Not later than 180 days after 
 the date of enactment of this subsection, the Secretary 
 and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection 
 Agency shall jointly develop procedures for 
 streamlining the permit process required under the 
 Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et 
 seq.) and State laws for restoration projects that are 
 included in an approved plan under subsection (c).
 ``(C) Environmental requirements.--A project funded 
 under this section that does not involve wetlands shall 
 not be subject to environmental review requirements 
 under Federal law.
 ``(2) Cost-sharing requirements.--Any amounts made 
 available to producing States under this section may be used to 
 meet the cost-sharing requirements of other Federal grant 
 programs, including grant programs that support coastal wetland 
 protection and restoration.
 ``(3) Expedited funding.--Not later than 180 days after the 
 date of enactment of this subsection, the Secretary shall 
 develop a procedure to provide expedited funding to projects 
 under this section based on estimated revenues to ensure that 
 the projects may--
 ``(A) secure additional funds from other sources; 
 and
 ``(B) use the amounts made available under this 
 section on receipt.''.

SEC. 104. SEAWARD BOUNDARIES OF STATES.

 (a) Seaward Boundaries.--Section 4 of the Submerged Lands Act (43 
U.S.C. 1312) is amended by striking ``three geographical miles'' each 
place it appears and inserting ``12 nautical miles''.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--Section 2 of the Submerged Lands Act 
(43 U.S.C. 1301) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(2), by striking ``three geographical 
 miles'' and inserting ``12 nautical miles''; and
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) by striking ``three geographical miles'' and 
 inserting ``12 nautical miles''; and
 (B) by striking ``three marine leagues'' and 
 inserting ``12 nautical miles''.
 (c) Effect of Amendments.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraphs (2) through (4), the 
 amendments made by this section shall not effect Federal oil 
 and gas mineral rights.
 (2) Submerged land.--Submerged land within the seaward 
 boundaries of States shall be--
 (A) subject to Federal oil and gas mineral rights 
 to the extent provided by law;
 (B) considered to be part of the Federal outer 
 Continental Shelf for purposes of the Outer Continental 
 Shelf Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1331 et seq.); and
 (C) subject to leasing under the authority of that 
 Act and to laws applicable to the leasing of the oil 
 and gas resources of the Federal outer Continental 
 Shelf.
 (3) Existing leases.--The amendments made by this section 
 shall not affect any Federal oil and gas lease in effect on the 
 date of enactment of this Act.
 (4) Taxation.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), a 
 State may exercise all of the sovereign powers of 
 taxation of the State within the entire extent of the 
 seaward boundaries of the State (as extended by the 
 amendments made by this section).
 (B) Limitation.--Nothing in this paragraph affects 
 the authority of a State to tax any Federal oil and gas 
 lease in effect on the date of enactment of this Act.

 TITLE II--LEASING PROGRAM FOR LAND WITHIN COASTAL PLAIN

SEC. 201. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Coastal plain.--The term ``Coastal Plain'' means that 
 area identified as the ``1002 Coastal Plain Area'' on the map.
 (2) Federal agreement.--The term ``Federal Agreement'' 
 means the Federal Agreement and Grant Right-of-Way for the 
 Trans-Alaska Pipeline issued on January 23, 1974, in accordance 
 with section 28 of the Mineral Leasing Act (30 U.S.C. 185) and 
 the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act (43 U.S.C. 1651 et 
 seq.).
 (3) Final statement.--The term ``Final Statement'' means 
 the final legislative environmental impact statement on the 
 Coastal Plain, dated April 1987, and prepared pursuant to 
 section 1002 of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation 
 Act (16 U.S.C. 3142) and section 102(2)(C) of the National 
 Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4332(2)(C)).
 (4) Map.--The term ``map'' means the map entitled ``Arctic 
 National Wildlife Refuge'', dated September 2005, and prepared 
 by the United States Geological Survey.
 (5) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of the Interior (or the designee of the Secretary), acting 
 through the Director of the Bureau of Land Management, in 
 consultation with the Director of the United States Fish and 
 Wildlife Service.

SEC. 202. LEASING PROGRAM FOR LAND WITHIN THE COASTAL PLAIN.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall take such actions as are 
necessary--
 (1) to establish and implement, in accordance with this 
 title, a competitive oil and gas leasing program that will 
 result in an environmentally sound program for the exploration, 
 development, and production of the oil and gas resources of the 
 Coastal Plain; and
 (2) to administer this title through regulations, lease 
 terms, conditions, restrictions, prohibitions, stipulations, 
 and other provisions that--
 (A) ensure the oil and gas exploration, 
 development, and production activities on the Coastal 
 Plain will result in no significant adverse effect on 
 fish and wildlife, their habitat, subsistence 
 resources, and the environment; and
 (B) require the application of the best 
 commercially available technology for oil and gas 
 exploration, development, and production to all 
 exploration, development, and production operations 
 under this title in a manner that ensures the receipt 
 of fair market value by the public for the mineral 
 resources to be leased.
 (b) Repeal.--
 (1) Repeal.--Section 1003 of the Alaska National Interest 
 Lands Conservation Act of 1980 (16 U.S.C. 3143) is repealed.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--The table of contents contained 
 in section 1 of that Act (16 U.S.C. 3101 note) is amended by 
 striking the item relating to section 1003.
 (3) Compliance with nepa for other actions.--
 (A) In general.--Before conducting the first lease 
 sale under this title, the Secretary shall prepare an 
 environmental impact statement in accordance with the 
 National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 
 4321 et seq.) with respect to the actions authorized by 
 this title that are not referred to in paragraph (2).
 (B) Identification and analysis.--Notwithstanding 
 any other provision of law, in carrying out this 
 paragraph, the Secretary shall not be required--
 (i) to identify nonleasing alternative 
 courses of action; or
 (ii) to analyze the environmental effects 
 of those courses of action.
 (C) Identification of preferred action.--Not later 
 than 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, 
 the Secretary shall--
 (i) identify only a preferred action and a 
 single leasing alternative for the first lease 
 sale authorized under this title; and
 (ii) analyze the environmental effects and 
 potential mitigation measures for those 2 
 alternatives.
 (D) Public comments.--In carrying out this 
 paragraph, the Secretary shall consider only public 
 comments that are filed not later than 20 days after 
 the date of publication of a draft environmental impact 
 statement.
 (E) Effect of compliance.--Notwithstanding any 
 other provision of law, compliance with this paragraph 
 shall be considered to satisfy all requirements for the 
 analysis and consideration of the environmental effects 
 of proposed leasing under this title.
 (c) Relationship to State and Local Authority.--Nothing in this 
title expands or limits any State or local regulatory authority.
 (d) Special Areas.--
 (1) Designation.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary, after consultation 
 with the State of Alaska, the North Slope Borough, 
 Alaska, and the City of Kaktovik, Alaska, may designate 
 not more than 45,000 acres of the Coastal Plain as a 
 special area if the Secretary determines that the 
 special area would be of such unique character and 
 interest as to require special management and 
 regulatory protection.
 (B) Sadlerochit spring area.--The Secretary shall 
 designate as a special area in accordance with 
 subparagraph (A) the Sadlerochit Spring area, 
 comprising approximately 4,000 acres as depicted on the 
 map.
 (2) Management.--The Secretary shall manage each special 
 area designated under this subsection in a manner that 
 preserves the unique and diverse character of the area, 
 including fish, wildlife, subsistence resources, and cultural 
 values of the area.
 (3) Exclusion from leasing or surface occupancy.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary may exclude any 
 special area designated under this subsection from 
 leasing.
 (B) No surface occupancy.--If the Secretary leases 
 all or a portion of a special area for the purposes of 
 oil and gas exploration, development, production, and 
 related activities, there shall be no surface occupancy 
 of the land comprising the special area.
 (4) Directional drilling.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of this subsection, the Secretary may lease all or a 
 portion of a special area under terms that permit the use of 
 horizontal drilling technology from sites on leases located 
 outside the special area.
 (e) Limitation on Closed Areas.--The Secretary may not close land 
within the Coastal Plain to oil and gas leasing or to exploration, 
development, or production except in accordance with this title.
 (f) Regulations.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 15 months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate such 
 regulations as are necessary to carry out this title, including 
 rules and regulations relating to protection of the fish and 
 wildlife, fish and wildlife habitat, subsistence resources, and 
 environment of the Coastal Plain.
 (2) Revision of regulations.--The Secretary shall 
 periodically review and, as appropriate, revise the rules and 
 regulations issued under paragraph (1) to reflect any 
 significant biological, environmental, scientific or 
 engineering data that come to the attention of the Secretary.

SEC. 203. LEASE SALES.

 (a) In General.--Land may be leased pursuant to this title to any 
person qualified to obtain a lease for deposits of oil and gas under 
the Mineral Leasing Act (30 U.S.C. 181 et seq.).
 (b) Procedures.--The Secretary shall, by regulation, establish 
procedures for--
 (1) receipt and consideration of sealed nominations for any 
 area in the Coastal Plain for inclusion in, or exclusion (as 
 provided in subsection (c)) from, a lease sale;
 (2) the holding of lease sales after that nomination 
 process; and
 (3) public notice of and comment on designation of areas to 
 be included in, or excluded from, a lease sale.
 (c) Lease Sale Bids.--Bidding for leases under this title shall be 
by sealed competitive cash bonus bids.
 (d) Acreage Minimum in First Sale.--For the first lease sale under 
this title, the Secretary shall offer for lease those tracts the 
Secretary considers to have the greatest potential for the discovery of 
hydrocarbons, taking into consideration nominations received pursuant 
to subsection (b)(1), but in no case less than 200,000 acres.
 (e) Timing of Lease Sales.--The Secretary shall--
 (1) not later than 22 months after the date of enactment of 
 this Act, conduct the first lease sale under this title;
 (2) not later than 90 days after the date of the completion 
 of the sale, evaluate the bids in the sale and issue leases 
 resulting from the sale; and
 (3) conduct additional sales at appropriate intervals if 
 sufficient interest in exploration or development exists to 
 warrant the conduct of the additional sales.

SEC. 204. GRANT OF LEASES BY THE SECRETARY.

 (a) In General.--On payment by a lessee of such bonus as may be 
accepted by the Secretary, the Secretary may grant to the highest 
responsible qualified bidder in a lease sale conducted pursuant to 
section 203 a lease for any land on the Coastal Plain.
 (b) Subsequent Transfers.--
 (1) In general.--No lease issued under this title may be 
 sold, exchanged, assigned, sublet, or otherwise transferred 
 except with the approval of the Secretary.
 (2) Condition for approval.--Before granting any approval 
 described in paragraph (1), the Secretary shall consult with 
 and give due consideration to the opinion of the Attorney 
 General.

SEC. 205. LEASE TERMS AND CONDITIONS.

 An oil or gas lease issued pursuant to this title shall--
 (1) provide for the payment of a royalty of not less than 
 12\1/2\ percent of the amount or value of the production 
 removed or sold from the lease, as determined by the Secretary 
 in accordance with regulations applicable to other Federal oil 
 and gas leases;
 (2) provide that the Secretary may close, on a seasonal 
 basis, such portions of the Coastal Plain to exploratory 
 drilling activities as are necessary to protect caribou calving 
 areas and other species of fish and wildlife;
 (3) require that each lessee of land within the Coastal 
 Plain shall be fully responsible and liable for the reclamation 
 of land within the Coastal Plain and any other Federal land 
 that is adversely affected in connection with exploration, 
 development, production, or transportation activities within 
 the Coastal Plain conducted by the lessee or by any of the 
 subcontractors or agents of the lessee;
 (4) provide that the lessee may not delegate or convey, by 
 contract or otherwise, that reclamation responsibility and 
 liability to another person without the express written 
 approval of the Secretary;
 (5) provide that the standard of reclamation for land 
 required to be reclaimed under this title shall be, to the 
 maximum extent practicable--
 (A) a condition capable of supporting the uses that 
 the land was capable of supporting prior to any 
 exploration, development, or production activities; or
 (B) on application by the lessee, to a higher or 
 better standard, as approved by the Secretary;
 (6) contain terms and conditions relating to protection of 
 fish and wildlife, fish and wildlife habitat, subsistence 
 resources, and the environment as required under section 
 202(a)(2);
 (7) provide that each lessee, and each agent and contractor 
 of a lessee, use their best efforts to provide a fair share of 
 employment and contracting for Alaska Natives and Alaska Native 
 Corporations from throughout the State of Alaska, as determined 
 by the level of obligation previously agreed to in the Federal 
 Agreement; and
 (8) contain such other provisions as the Secretary 
 determines to be necessary to ensure compliance with this title 
 and the regulations promulgated under this title.

SEC. 206. COASTAL PLAIN ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION.

 (a) No Significant Adverse Effect Standard To Govern Authorized 
Coastal Plain Activities.--In accordance with section 202, the 
Secretary shall administer this title through regulations, lease terms, 
conditions, restrictions, prohibitions, stipulations, or other 
provisions that--
 (1) ensure, to the maximum extent practicable, that oil and 
 gas exploration, development, and production activities on the 
 Coastal Plain will result in no significant adverse effect on 
 fish and wildlife, fish and wildlife habitat, and the 
 environment;
 (2) require the application of the best commercially 
 available technology for oil and gas exploration, development, 
 and production on all new exploration, development, and 
 production operations; and
 (3) ensure that the maximum surface acreage covered in 
 connection with the leasing program by production and support 
 facilities, including airstrips and any areas covered by gravel 
 berms or piers for support of pipelines, does not exceed 2,000 
 acres on the Coastal Plain.
 (b) Site-Specific Assessment and Mitigation.--The Secretary shall 
require, with respect to any proposed drilling and related activities 
on the Coastal Plain, that--
 (1) a site-specific analysis be made of the probable 
 effects, if any, that the drilling or related activities will 
 have on fish and wildlife, fish and wildlife habitat, 
 subsistence resources, subsistence uses, and the environment;
 (2) a plan be implemented to avoid, minimize, and mitigate 
 (in that order and to the maximum extent practicable) any 
 significant adverse effect identified under paragraph (1); and
 (3) the development of the plan shall occur after 
 consultation with the 1 or more agencies having jurisdiction 
 over matters mitigated by the plan.
 (c) Regulations To Protect Coastal Plain Fish and Wildlife 
Resources, Subsistence Users, and the Environment.--Before implementing 
the leasing program authorized by this title, the Secretary shall 
prepare and issue regulations, lease terms, conditions, restrictions, 
prohibitions, stipulations, or other measures designed to ensure, to 
the maximum extent practicable, that the activities carried out on the 
Coastal Plain under this title are conducted in a manner consistent 
with the purposes and environmental requirements of this title.
 (d) Compliance With Federal and State Environmental Laws and Other 
Requirements.--The proposed regulations, lease terms, conditions, 
restrictions, prohibitions, and stipulations for the leasing program 
under this title shall require--
 (1) compliance with all applicable provisions of Federal 
 and State environmental law (including regulations);
 (2) implementation of and compliance with--
 (A) standards that are at least as effective as the 
 safety and environmental mitigation measures, as 
 described in items 1 through 29 on pages 167 through 
 169 of the Final Statement, on the Coastal Plain;
 (B) seasonal limitations on exploration, 
 development, and related activities, as necessary, to 
 avoid significant adverse effects during periods of 
 concentrated fish and wildlife breeding, denning, 
 nesting, spawning, and migration;
 (C) design safety and construction standards for 
 all pipelines and any access and service roads that 
 minimize, to the maximum extent practicable, adverse 
 effects on--
 (i) the passage of migratory species (such 
 as caribou); and
 (ii) the flow of surface water by requiring 
 the use of culverts, bridges, or other 
 structural devices;
 (D) prohibitions on general public access to, and 
 use of, all pipeline access and service roads;
 (E) stringent reclamation and rehabilitation 
 requirements in accordance with this title for the 
 removal from the Coastal Plain of all oil and gas 
 development and production facilities, structures, and 
 equipment on completion of oil and gas production 
 operations, except in a case in which the Secretary 
 determines that those facilities, structures, or 
 equipment--
 (i) would assist in the management of the 
 Arctic National Wildlife Refuge; and
 (ii) are donated to the United States for 
 that purpose;
 (F) appropriate prohibitions or restrictions on--
 (i) access by all modes of transportation;
 (ii) sand and gravel extraction; and
 (iii) use of explosives;
 (G) reasonable stipulations for protection of 
 cultural and archaeological resources;
 (H) measures to protect groundwater and surface 
 water, including--
 (i) avoidance, to the maximum extent 
 practicable, of springs, streams, and river 
 systems;
 (ii) the protection of natural surface 
 drainage patterns and wetland and riparian 
 habitats; and
 (iii) the regulation of methods or 
 techniques for developing or transporting 
 adequate supplies of water for exploratory 
 drilling; and
 (I) research, monitoring, and reporting 
 requirements;
 (3) that exploration activities (except surface geological 
 studies) be limited to the period between approximately 
 November 1 and May 1 of each year and be supported, if 
 necessary, by ice roads, winter trails with adequate snow 
 cover, ice pads, ice airstrips, and air transport methods 
 (except that those exploration activities may be permitted at 
 other times if the Secretary determines that the exploration 
 will have no significant adverse effect on fish and wildlife, 
 fish and wildlife habitat, and the environment of the Coastal 
 Plain);
 (4) consolidation of facility siting;
 (5) avoidance or reduction of air traffic-related 
 disturbance to fish and wildlife;
 (6) treatment and disposal of hazardous and toxic wastes, 
 solid wastes, reserve pit fluids, drilling muds and cuttings, 
 and domestic wastewater, including, in accordance with 
 applicable Federal and State environmental laws (including 
 regulations)--
 (A) preparation of an annual waste management 
 report;
 (B) development and implementation of a hazardous 
 materials tracking system; and
 (C) prohibition on the use of chlorinated solvents;
 (7) fuel storage and oil spill contingency planning;
 (8) conduct of periodic field crew environmental briefings;
 (9) avoidance of significant adverse effects on subsistence 
 hunting, fishing, and trapping;
 (10) compliance with applicable air and water quality 
 standards;
 (11) appropriate seasonal and safety zone designations 
 around well sites, within which subsistence hunting and 
 trapping shall be limited; and
 (12) development and implementation of such other 
 protective environmental requirements, restrictions, terms, or 
 conditions as the Secretary determines to be necessary.
 (e) Considerations.--In preparing and issuing regulations, lease 
terms, conditions, restrictions, prohibitions, or stipulations under 
this section, the Secretary shall take into consideration--
 (1) the stipulations and conditions that govern the 
 National Petroleum Reserve-Alaska leasing program, as set forth 
 in the 1999 Northeast National Petroleum Reserve-Alaska Final 
 Integrated Activity Plan/Environmental Impact Statement;
 (2) the environmental protection standards that governed 
 the initial Coastal Plain seismic exploration program under 
 parts 37.31 through 37.33 of title 50, Code of Federal 
 Regulations (or successor regulations); and
 (3) the land use stipulations for exploratory drilling on 
 the KIC-ASRC private land described in appendix 2 of the 
 agreement between Arctic Slope Regional Corporation and the 
 United States dated August 9, 1983.
 (f) Facility Consolidation Planning.--
 (1) In general.--After providing for public notice and 
 comment, the Secretary shall prepare and periodically update a 
 plan to govern, guide, and direct the siting and construction 
 of facilities for the exploration, development, production, and 
 transportation of oil and gas resources from the Coastal Plain.
 (2) Objectives.--The objectives of the plan shall be--
 (A) the avoidance of unnecessary duplication of 
 facilities and activities;
 (B) the encouragement of consolidation of common 
 facilities and activities;
 (C) the location or confinement of facilities and 
 activities to areas that will minimize impact on fish 
 and wildlife, fish and wildlife habitat, subsistence 
 resources, and the environment;
 (D) the use of existing facilities, to the maximum 
 extent practicable; and
 (E) the enhancement of compatibility between 
 wildlife values and development activities.
 (g) Access to Public Land.--The Secretary shall--
 (1) manage public land in the Coastal Plain in accordance 
 with subsections (a) and (b) of section 811 of the Alaska 
 National Interest Lands Conservation Act (16 U.S.C. 3121); and
 (2) ensure that local residents shall have reasonable 
 access to public land in the Coastal Plain for traditional 
 uses.

SEC. 207. EXPEDITED JUDICIAL REVIEW.

 (a) Filing of Complaints.--
 (1) Deadline.--A complaint seeking judicial review of a 
 provision of this title or an action of the Secretary under 
 this title shall be filed--
 (A) except as provided in subparagraph (B), during 
 the 90-day period beginning on the date on which the 
 action being challenged was carried out; or
 (B) in the case of a complaint based solely on 
 grounds arising after the 90-day period described in 
 subparagraph (A), by not later than 90 days after the 
 date on which the complainant knew or reasonably should 
 have known about the grounds for the complaint.
 (2) Venue.--A complaint seeking judicial review of a 
 provision of this title or an action of the Secretary under 
 this title shall be filed in the United States Court of Appeals 
 for the District of Columbia Circuit.
 (3) Scope.--
 (A) In general.--Judicial review of a decision of 
 the Secretary relating to a lease sale under this title 
 (including an environmental analysis of such a lease 
 sale) shall be--
 (i) limited to a review of whether the 
 decision is in accordance with this title; and
 (ii) based on the administrative record of 
 the decision.
 (B) Presumptions.--Any identification by the 
 Secretary of a preferred course of action relating to a 
 lease sale, and any analysis by the Secretary of 
 environmental effects, under this title shall be 
 presumed to be correct unless proven otherwise by clear 
 and convincing evidence.
 (b) Limitation on Other Review.--Any action of the Secretary that 
is subject to judicial review under this section shall not be subject 
to judicial review in any civil or criminal proceeding for enforcement.

SEC. 208. FEDERAL AND STATE DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES.

 (a) In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, of the 
amount of adjusted bonus, rental, and royalty revenues from Federal oil 
and gas leasing and operations authorized under this title for each 
fiscal year--
 (1) 50 percent shall be paid to the State of Alaska; and
 (2) except as provided in section 211(d), the balance shall 
 be--
 (A) used to offset the provisions of this Act; and
 (B) after making the offsets under subparagraph 
 (A), transferred to the ANWR Alternative Energy Trust 
 Fund established by section 212.
 (b) Payments to Alaska.--Payments to the State of Alaska under this 
section shall be made semiannually.

SEC. 209. RIGHTS-OF-WAY ACROSS THE COASTAL PLAIN.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall issue rights-of-way and 
easements across the Coastal Plain for the transportation of oil and 
gas--
 (1) except as provided in paragraph (2), under section 28 
 of the Mineral Leasing Act (30 U.S.C. 185), without regard to 
 title XI of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act 
 (16 U.S.C. 3161 et seq.); and
 (2) under title XI of the Alaska National Interest Lands 
 Conservation Act (16 U.S.C. 3161 et seq.), for access 
 authorized by sections 1110 and 1111 of that Act (16 U.S.C. 
 3170, 3171).
 (b) Terms and Conditions.--The Secretary shall include in any 
right-of-way or easement issued under subsection (a) such terms and 
conditions as may be necessary to ensure that transportation of oil and 
gas does not result in a significant adverse effect on the fish and 
wildlife, subsistence resources, their habitat, and the environment of 
the Coastal Plain, including requirements that facilities be sited or 
designed so as to avoid unnecessary duplication of roads and pipelines.
 (c) Regulations.--The Secretary shall include in regulations under 
section 202(f) provisions granting rights-of-way and easements 
described in subsection (a).

SEC. 210. CONVEYANCE.

 Notwithstanding section 1302(h)(2) of the Alaska National Interest 
Lands Conservation Act (16 U.S.C. 3192(h)(2)), to remove any cloud on 
title to land, and to clarify land ownership patterns in the Coastal 
Plain, the Secretary shall--
 (1) to the extent necessary to fulfill the entitlement of 
 the Kaktovik Inupiat Corporation under sections 12 and 14 of 
 the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 U.S.C. 1611, 1613), 
 as determined by the Secretary, convey to that Corporation the 
 surface estate of the land described in paragraph (1) of Public 
 Land Order 6959, in accordance with the terms and conditions of 
 the agreement between the Secretary, the United States Fish and 
 Wildlife Service, the Bureau of Land Management, and the 
 Kaktovik Inupiat Corporation, dated January 22, 1993; and
 (2) convey to the Arctic Slope Regional Corporation the 
 remaining subsurface estate to which that Corporation is 
 entitled under the agreement between that corporation and the 
 United States, dated August 9, 1983.

SEC. 211. LOCAL GOVERNMENT IMPACT AID AND COMMUNITY SERVICE ASSISTANCE.

 (a) Financial Assistance Authorized.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary may use amounts available 
 from the Coastal Plain Local Government Impact Aid Assistance 
 Fund established by subsection (d) to provide timely financial 
 assistance to entities that are eligible under paragraph (2).
 (2) Eligible entities.--The North Slope Borough, the City 
 of Kaktovik, and any other borough, municipal subdivision, 
 village, or other community in the State of Alaska that is 
 directly impacted by exploration for, or the production of, oil 
 or gas on the Coastal Plain under this title, as determined by 
 the Secretary, shall be eligible for financial assistance under 
 this section.
 (b) Use of Assistance.--Financial assistance under this section may 
be used only--
 (1) to plan for mitigation, implement a mitigation plan, or 
 maintain a mitigation project to address the potential effects 
 of oil and gas exploration and development on environmental, 
 social, cultural, recreational, and subsistence resources of 
 the community;
 (2) to develop, carry out, and maintain--
 (A) a project to provide new or expanded public 
 facilities; or
 (B) services to address the needs and problems 
 associated with the effects described in paragraph (1), 
 including firefighting, police, water and waste 
 treatment, first responder, and other medical services; 
 and
 (3) to establish a local coordination office, to be managed 
 by the Mayor of the North Slope Borough, in coordination with 
 the City of Kaktovik, Alaska--
 (A) to coordinate with and advise developers on 
 local conditions and the history of areas affected by 
 development; and
 (B) to provide to the Committee on Resources of the 
 House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy 
 and Natural Resources of the Senate annual reports on 
 the status of the coordination between developers and 
 communities affected by development.
 (c) Application.--
 (1) In general.--Any community that is eligible for 
 assistance under this section may submit an application for 
 such assistance to the Secretary, in such form and under such 
 procedures as the Secretary may prescribe by regulation.
 (2) North slope borough communities.--A community located 
 in the North Slope Borough may apply for assistance under this 
 section either directly to the Secretary or through the North 
 Slope Borough.
 (3) Application assistance.--The Secretary shall work 
 closely with and assist the North Slope Borough and other 
 communities eligible for assistance under this section in 
 developing and submitting applications for assistance under 
 this section.
 (d) Establishment of Fund.--
 (1) In general.--There is established in the Treasury the 
 ``Coastal Plain Local Government Impact Aid Assistance Fund'' 
 (referred to in this section as the ``Fund'').
 (2) Use.--Amounts in the Fund may be used only for 
 providing financial assistance under this section.
 (3) Deposits.--Subject to paragraph (4), there shall be 
 deposited into the Fund amounts received by the United States 
 as revenues derived from rents, bonuses, and royalties from 
 Federal leases and lease sales authorized under this title.
 (4) Limitation on deposits.--The total amount in the Fund 
 may not exceed $11,000,000.
 (5) Investment of balances.--The Secretary of the Treasury 
 shall invest amounts in the Fund in interest bearing government 
 securities.
 (e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be 
appropriated to the Secretary from the Fund to provide financial 
assistance under this section $5,000,000 for each fiscal year.

SEC. 212. ANWR ALTERNATIVE ENERGY TRUST FUND.

 (a) Establishment of Trust Fund.--There is established in the 
Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the ``ANWR 
Alternative Energy Trust Fund'', consisting of such amounts as may be 
transferred to the ANWR Alternative Energy Trust Fund as provided in 
section 208(a)(2).
 (b) Expenditures From ANWR Alternative Energy Trust Fund.--
 (1) In general.--Amounts in the ANWR Alternative Energy 
 Trust Fund shall be available without further appropriation to 
 carry out specified provisions of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 
 (Public Law 109-58; referred to in this section as 
 ``EPAct2005'') and the Energy Independence and Security Act of 
 2007 (Public Law 110-140; referred to in this section as 
 ``EISAct2007'') as follows:

 The following
 percentage of annual
 receipts to the ANWR
 Alternative Energy
 To carry out the provisions of: Trust Fund, but not to
 exceed the limit on
 amount authorized, if
 any:

EPAct2005:
 Section 210.................................. 1.5 percent
 Section 242.................................. 1.0 percent
 Section 369.................................. 2.0 percent
 Section 401.................................. 6.0 percent
 Section 812.................................. 6.0 percent
 Section 931.................................. 19.0 percent
 Section 942.................................. 1.5 percent
 Section 962.................................. 3.0 percent
 Section 968.................................. 1.5 percent
 Section 1704................................. 6.0 percent
EISAct2007:
 Section 207.................................. 15.0 percent
 Section 607.................................. 1.5 percent
 Title VI, Subtitle B......................... 3.0 percent
 Title VI, Subtitle C......................... 1.5 percent
 Section 641.................................. 9.0 percent
 Title VII, Subtitle A........................ 10.0 percent
 Section 1112................................. 1.5 percent
 Section 1304................................. 11.0 percent.

 (2) Apportionment of excess amount.--Notwithstanding 
 paragraph (1), any amounts allocated under paragraph (1) that 
 are in excess of the amounts authorized in the applicable cited 
 section or subtitle of EPAct2005 and EISAct2007 shall be 
 reallocated to the remaining sections and subtitles cited in 
 paragraph (1), up to the amounts otherwise authorized by law to 
 carry out those sections and subtitles, in proportion to the 
 amounts authorized by law to be appropriated for those other 
 sections and subtitles.

 TITLE III--REGULATORY STREAMLINING

SEC. 301. COMMERCIAL LEASING PROGRAM FOR OIL SHALE RESOURCES ON PUBLIC 
 LAND.

 Subsection (e) of the Oil Shale, Tar Sands, and Other Strategic 
Unconventional Fuels Act of 2005 (42 U.S.C. 15927(e)) is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence, by striking ``Not later'' and 
 inserting the following:
 ``(1) In general.--Not later'';
 (2) in the second sentence--
 (A) by striking ``If the Secretary'' and inserting 
 the following:
 ``(2) Lease sales.--
 ``(A) In general.--If the Secretary''; and
 (B) by striking ``may'' and inserting ``shall'';
 (3) in the last sentence, by striking ``Evidence of 
 interest'' and inserting the following:
 ``(B) Evidence of interest.--Evidence of 
 interest''; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C) Subsequent lease sales.--During any period 
 for which the Secretary determines that there is 
 sufficient support and interest in a State in the 
 development of tar sands and oil shale resources, the 
 Secretary shall--
 ``(i) at least annually, consult with the 
 persons described in paragraph (1) to expedite 
 the commercial leasing program for oil shale 
 resources on public land in the State; and
 ``(ii) at least once every 270 days, 
 conduct a lease sale in the State under the 
 commercial leasing program regulations.''.

SEC. 302. LICENSING OF NEW NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS.

 (a) Construction Permits and Operating Licenses.--Section 185 b. of 
the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2235(b)) is amended in the 
first sentence by striking ``holding a public hearing'' and inserting 
``any public hearing held''.
 (b) Hearings and Judicial Review.--Section 189 a.(1)(A) of the 
Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2239(a)(1)(A)) is amended--
 (1) by striking the second sentence; and
 (2) in the third sentence--
 (A) by striking ``In cases'' and all that follows 
 through ``hearing, The'' and inserting ``The''; and
 (B) by striking ``an operating license'' and 
 inserting ``a construction permit, an operating 
 license,''.

SEC. 303. JURISDICTION OVER COVERED ENERGY PROJECTS.

 (a) Definition of Covered Energy Project.--In this section, the 
term ``covered energy project'' means any action or decision by a 
Federal official regarding--
 (1) the leasing of Federal land (including submerged land) 
 for the exploration, development, production, processing, or 
 transmission of oil, natural gas, or any other source or form 
 of energy, including actions and decisions regarding the 
 selection or offering of Federal land for such leasing; or
 (2) any action under such a lease, except that this section 
 and Act shall not apply to a dispute between the parties to a 
 lease entered into a provision of law authorizing the lease 
 regarding obligations under the lease or the alleged breach of 
 the lease.
 (b) Exclusive Jurisdiction Over Causes and Claims Relating to 
Covered Energy Projects.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 
the United States District Court for the District of Columbia shall 
have exclusive jurisdiction to hear all causes and claims under this 
section or any other Act that arise from any covered energy project.
 (c) Time for Filing Complaint.--
 (1) In general.--Each case or claim described in subsection 
 (b) shall be filed not later than the end of the 60-day period 
 beginning on the date of the action or decision by a Federal 
 official that constitutes the covered energy project concerned.
 (2) Prohibition.--Any cause or claim described in 
 subsection (b) that is not filed within the time period 
 described in paragraph (1) shall be barred.
 (d) District Court for the District of Columbia Deadline.--
 (1) In general.--Each proceeding that is subject to 
 subsection (b) shall--
 (A) be resolved as expeditiously as practicable and 
 in any event not more than 180 days after the cause or 
 claim is filed; and
 (B) take precedence over all other pending matters 
 before the district court.
 (2) Failure to comply with deadline.--If an interlocutory 
 or final judgment, decree, or order has not been issued by the 
 district court by the deadline required under this section, the 
 cause or claim shall be dismissed with prejudice and all rights 
 relating to the cause or claim shall be terminated.
 (e) Ability To Seek Appellate Review.--An interlocutory or final 
judgment, decree, or order of the district court under this section may 
be reviewed by no other court except the Supreme Court.
 (f) Deadline for Appeal to the Supreme Court.--If a writ of 
certiorari has been granted by the Supreme Court pursuant to subsection 
(e), the interlocutory or final judgment, decree, or order of the 
district court shall be resolved as expeditiously as practicable and in 
any event not more than 180 days after the interlocutory or final 
judgment, decree, order of the district court is issued.

SEC. 304. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS.

 Title I of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 
4331 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 106. COMPLETION AND REVIEW OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENTS.

 ``(a) Completion.--
 ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 law, each review carried out under section 102(2)(C) with 
 respect to any action taken under any provision of law, or for 
 which funds are made available under any provision of law, 
 shall be completed not later than the date that is 270 days 
 after the commencement of the review.
 ``(2) Failure to complete review.--If a review described in 
 paragraph (1) has not been completed for an action subject to 
 section 102(2)(C) by the date specified in paragraph (1)--
 ``(A) the action shall be considered to have no 
 significant impact described in section 102(2)(C); and
 ``(B) that classification shall be considered to be 
 a final agency action.
 ``(b) Lead Agency.--The lead agency for a review of an action under 
this section shall be the Federal agency to which funds are made 
available for the action.
 ``(c) Review.--
 ``(1) Administrative appeals.--There shall be a single 
 administrative appeal for each review carried out pursuant to 
 section 102(2)(C).
 ``(2) Judicial review.--
 ``(A) In general.--On resolution of the 
 administrative appeal, judicial review of the final 
 agency decision after exhaustion of administrative 
 remedies shall lie with the United States Court of 
 Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.
 ``(B) Administrative record.--An appeal to the 
 court described in subparagraph (A) shall be based only 
 on the administrative record.
 ``(C) Pendency of judicial review.--After an agency 
 has made a final decision with respect to a review 
 carried out under this subsection, the decision shall 
 be effective during the course of any subsequent appeal 
 to a court described in subparagraph (A).
 ``(3) Civil action.--Each civil action covered by this 
 section shall be considered to arise under the laws of the 
 United States.''.

SEC. 305. CLEAN AIR REGULATION.

 (a) Regulation of Greenhouse Gases.--Section 302(g) of the Clean 
Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7602(g)) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``(g) The term'' and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(g) Air Pollutant.--
 ``(1) In general.--The term'';
 (2) by striking ``Such term'' and inserting the following:
 ``(2) Inclusions.--The term `air pollutant'''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(3) Exclusions.--The term `air pollutant' does not 
 include carbon dioxide, methane from agriculture or livestock, 
 or water vapor.''.
 (b) Emission Waivers.--The Administrator of the Environmental 
Protection Agency shall not grant to any State any waiver of Federal 
preemption of motor vehicle standards under section 209(b) of the Clean 
Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7543(b)) for preemption under that Act for any 
regulation of the State to control greenhouse gas emissions from motor 
vehicles.

SEC. 306. ENDANGERED SPECIES.

 (a) Emergencies.--Section 10 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 
(16 U.S.C. 1539) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(k) Emergencies.--On the declaration of an emergency by the 
Governor of a State, the Secretary shall, for the duration of the 
emergency, temporarily exempt from the prohibition against taking, and 
the prohibition against the adverse modification of critical habitat, 
under this Act any action that is reasonably necessary to avoid or 
ameliorate the impact of the emergency, including the operation of any 
water supply or flood control project by a Federal agency.''.
 (b) Prohibition of Consideration of Impact of Greenhouse Gas.--
 (1) In general.--The Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 
 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following:

``SEC. 19. PROHIBITION OF CONSIDERATION OF IMPACT OF GREENHOUSE GAS.

 ``(a) Definition of Greenhouse.--In this section, the term 
`greenhouse gas' means any of--
 ``(1) carbon dioxide;
 ``(2) methane;
 ``(3) nitrous oxide;
 ``(4) sulfur hexafluoride;
 ``(5) a hydrofluorocarbon;
 ``(6) a perfluorocarbon; or
 ``(7) any other anthropogenic gas designated by the 
 Secretary for purposes of this section.
 ``(b) Impact of Greenhouse Gas.--The impact of greenhouse gas on 
any species of fish or wildlife or plant shall not be considered for 
any purpose in the implementation of this Act.''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--The table of contents in the 
 first section of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 
 prec. 1531) is amended by adding at the end the following:

``Sec. 18. Annual cost analysis by the Fish and Wildlife Service.
``Sec. 19. Prohibition of consideration of impact of greenhouse gas.''.
 <all>