HR 3143 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3143
To establish a national energy policy to reduce global warming, and for
other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
August 4, 1989
Mr. AUCOIN (for himself, Mr. FAZIO, Mr. SCHEUER, Mr. RICHARDSON, Mr. COOPER,
Mrs. COLLINS, Mr. BRYANT, Mr. KOSTMAYER, Mr. OWENS of Utah, Mr. LANCASTER,
Mr. MCDERMOTT, Mr. OWENS of New York, Mr. ACKERMAN, Mr. MARTINEZ, Mr. SIKORSKI,
Mr. LANTOS, Mrs. SAIKI, Mr. LEWIS of Georgia, Mr. FALEOMAVAEGA, Mr. DYMALLY,
Mr. GARCIA, Mr. PALLONE, Mr. STUDDS, Mr. FUSTER, Mr. WOLPE, Mr. LEHMAN of
Florida, Mr. BEILENSON, Mr. GEJDENSON, Mr. RANGEL, Mr. BATES, Mr. AKAKA,
Mr. SABO, Ms. PELOSI, Mr. DWYER of New Jersey, Mr. JONTZ, Mr. FROST, and
Ms. KAPTUR) introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the
Committees on Energy and Commerce, Science, Space, and Technology, Banking,
Finance and Urban Affairs, Foreign Affairs, Small Business, Armed Services,
Public Works and Transportation, Interior and Insular Affairs, Agriculture,
and Ways and Means
A BILL
To establish a national energy policy to reduce global warming, and for
other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS
 SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE- (a) This Act may be cited as the `National Energy
 Policy Act of 1989'.
 (b) Table of Contents-
TITLE I--NATIONAL ENERGY PLAN
TITLE II--OFFICE OF CLIMATE PROTECTION
TITLE III--ENERGY EFFICIENCY
TITLE IV--ENERGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES
TITLE V--STATE ENERGY CONSERVATION PROGRAMS
TITLE VI--RENEWABLE ENERGY
TITLE VII--ADVANCED CIVILIAN REACTOR PROGRAMS
TITLE VIII--FUSION
TITLE IX--COAL
TITLE X--NATURAL GAS
TITLE XI--NATURAL RESOURCE POLICY
TITLE XII--BASIC SCIENCE INITIATIVES
TITLE XIII--DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE
TITLE XIV--INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES
TITLE XV--MODERATING WORLD POPULATION GROWTH
FINDINGS AND PURPOSES
 SEC. 2. (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) The Earth's atmosphere is being altered by the generation of
 carbon dioxide and other trace gases (methane, tropospheric ozone,
 chlorofluorocarbons, and nitrous oxide);
 (2) These gases are, in large part, the result of human activities including
 the widespread use of fossil fuels, population growth, deforestation,
 agricultural practices, and use of chlorofluorocarbons;
 (3) Current scientific understanding predicts that continued alteration of
 the global atmosphere will cause widespread temperature extremes and sea
 level rise which will, in turn, have serious implications for the Earth's
 ecosystems, agricultural production, water supply, human health, wetlands,
 and climate;
 (4) Shifts in regional precipitation, growing seasons, sea level, and
 possible increases in the severity and frequency of storms and hurricanes
 will cause major disruptions in the economic, political, social, and
 ecological systems of all nations;
 (5) Energy and natural resources policies must be designed to reduce carbon
 dioxide and trace gas generation including reduction in the combustion of
 fossil fuels through energy efficiency, fuel switching, and conservation;
 use of safe nuclear, innovative clean coal and renewable energy technologies;
 and reforestation policies;
 (6) In the near-term, increasing the Nation's energy efficiency can make
 the largest and least costly contribution to reducing carbon dioxide and
 trace gas production and reliance on imported oil;
 (7) Development of affordable solar energy technologies, particularly solar
 photovoltaics, promises to provide major new means of energy production
 and use that can reduce dependence on fossil fuels;
 (8) Policies are urgently needed for reducing deforestation and increasing
 reforestation; and for promoting economic growth and development through
 sustainable development at the national and international levels;
 (9) In so far as some degree of further atmospheric change is inevitable,
 the Federal Government must take immediate steps to devise and implement
 adaptive strategies for coping with the environmental and economic impacts
 of climate change; and
 (10) Adoption and implementation of these energy and natural resources
 policies will help promote national and international economic growth and
 development, achieve a secure energy supply, and protect the national and
 global environment.
 (b) PURPOSES- The overall purpose of this Act is to establish a national
 energy policy that will reduce generation of carbon dioxide and trace
 gases as quickly as is feasible in order to reduce to the maximum extent
 practicable, risks associated with an atmospheric warming and global
 climate change. The specific purposes are--
 (1) to require the Secretary of Energy, hereinafter referred to as the
 `Secretary', to prepare a least-cost National Energy Plan;
 (2) to establish an Office of Climate Protection in the Department of Energy;
 (3) to provide for the establishment and financing of energy efficiency
 research and development projects;
 (4) to establish criteria to be used by the Secretary to determine priorities
 in energy research and development and, to consider global climate change
 in all research and development policies;
 (5) to require states to update their energy conservation plans and
 establish new targets for conservation;
 (6) to commercially develop solar, fuel cell, hydrogen, and other renewable
 energy technologies;
 (7) to provide for the establishment and financing of an advanced passively
 safe nuclear reactor research program;
 (8) to provide for the preparation of a comprehensive report on research,
 development and demonstration technology for the production of electricity
 from thermonuclear fusion;
 (9) to provide for the preparation of a comprehensive report on the clean
 coal program's implications for global climate change;
 (10) to provide financial assistance for demonstration projects for natural
 gas-powered vehicles;
 (11) to study the natural resources that would be affected by global
 climate change;
 (12) to expand financial support for ongoing and new research initiatives
 at NOAA, NASA, NSF, USGS, and NIST;
 (13) to require an interagency study of the contribution international
 deforestation and reforestation play in global climate change;
 (14) to call for the convening of international conferences on nuclear
 power, a strengthening of the Montreal Protocol, and a special office at
 UNEP and WMO to monitor global carbon dioxide production; and
 (15) to address world population growth by establishing a policy and
 providing financial assistance for international family planning and
 information services.
 SEC. 3. NATIONAL GOAL- The Congress hereby establishes as national goals--
 (a) that the introduction into the atmosphere of CO2 from the United States
 of America shall be reduced from 1988 levels by at least 20 per centum by
 the year 2000 through a mix of Federal and State energy policies that are
 designed to mitigate the costs and risks, both economic and environmental,
 associated with meeting national energy needs while reducing the generation
 of carbon dioxide and trace gases and sustaining economic growth and
 development; and
 (b) the establishment of an international global agreement on the atmosphere
 by 1992.
TITLE I--NATIONAL ENERGY PLAN
 (a) Not later than eighteen months after the enactment of this Act, the
 Secretary, and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency,
 in consultation with the Secretary of the Interior, the National Academy
 of Sciences and other agencies, shall prepare and after public review
 and comment, transmit to Congress a `Least-Cost National Energy Plan'
 for meeting the national goal set out in section 3 of this Act.
 For purposes of the plan--
 (1) `energy resources' shall be defined as those sources of additional
 energy supply involving either the production of additional energy or
 additional improvements in the efficiency of energy processing and end use;
 (2) `cost-effective' shall be defined as those resources projected to be
 reliable and available within a needed time frame, and that could be used
 to meet anticipated energy needs at an estimated incremental system cost
 no greater than that of the least-cost similarly reliable and available
 alternative measure or resource, or any combination thereof;
 (3) `system costs' shall be defined as all direct costs of a resource over
 its effective life, including, if applicable, the cost of distribution
 and transmission to the consumer and, also including among other factors,
 waste disposal costs and fuel costs (including projected increases), and
 such quantifiable environmental and national security costs and benefits
 as the Secretary and the Administrator determine are directly attributable
 to such resources; and
 (4) `estimated incremental system cost' of any conservation resource
 shall not be treated as greater than that of any other resource unless the
 incremental system cost of such conservation resources is in excess of at
 least 110 per centum of the incremental system cost of the other resource.
 (b) The plan shall include--
 (1) an assignment of the priorities among energy resources that the
 Secretary determines to be costeffective, according to their impact on
 the global climate;
 (2) a range of national energy demand forecasts for the short-, medium-,
 and long-term (at least fifty years), reflecting plausible high and low
 economic growth scenarios, and assuming no improvements in current average
 efficiencies of energy use in new buildings, machines, and vehicles;
 (3) a comprehensive inventory of resource availability and system cost,
 taking into account all sectors of energy use and production which shall
 include but not be limited to--
 (i) coal, including clean coal technologies and underground coal
 gasification;
 (ii) energy efficiency, including existing technologies for increased
 efficiency and end use, as well as the potential of further research
 and development;
 (iii) efficiency improvements and technological gains in electrical energy
 generation and transmission and energy extraction;
 (iv) other alternative energy sources such as renewable resources, solar,
 nuclear fission, nuclear fusion, geothermal, fuel cells, and hydroelectric
 power; and
 (v) improvements in the fuel efficiency of automobiles and light trucks.
 (4) targets for the cost-effective resource acquisitions that will be needed
 to ensure that the Nation can meet short-, medium-, and long-term energy
 needs without exceeding the national goal for carbon dioxide generation;
 (5) a Two-Year Action Plan for meeting the plan's resource acquisition
 targets, including, but not limited to, all practicable actions within
 the Secretary's and other Federal agencies' current legislative authority;
 (6) a research and development plan for investigating promising but unproven
 technologies identified in the planning process as potentially significant
 future contributors to meeting the plan's goals;
 (7) recommendations for any new Federal legislation that may be needed to
 meet the plan's goals, including estimates of accompanying carbon dioxide
 and trace gases generation; and
 (8) recommendations for any new State agency or legislative actions that
 are needed to meet the plan's goals, and for any new Federal policies that
 are needed to encourage such actions, including estimates of accompanying
 carbon dioxide and costs impacts of such actions.
 (c) Immediately following submission to Congress of the least-cost national
 energy plan, the Department of Energy shall implement the provisions of
 its action plan to the maximum extent practicable; and
 (d) The plan, its action plan, and its research and development plan shall
 be revised and resubmitted to the Congress every two years.
TITLE II--OFFICE OF CLIMATE PROTECTION
 SEC. 201. In order to elevate the priority attached to climate change
 considerations within the Department of Energy, there is hereby established
 the Office of Climate Protection. The Director of the Office shall
 be appointed by the President, by and with the consent of the Senate,
 and shall report directly to the Deputy Secretary. This Office shall be
 responsible for--
 (a) the Department of Energy's participation in studies, environmental
 assessments and other work being conducted by the various domestic and
 international agencies involved in global climate change analysis; and
 (b) monitoring United States' energy policies for atmospheric and global
 warming effects and providing an annual report on these effects to Congress.
TITLE III--ENERGY EFFICIENCY
Subtitle A
 SEC. 301. The Secretary in conjunction with appropriate Federal agencies
 shall--
 (a) give a high priority to improvements in energy efficiency in departmental
 planning, research and development programs, private assistance programs,
 and to improvements in buildings and equipment of the Department;
 (b) submit to Congress within one year after the enactment of this title,
 and every three years thereafter, a report evaluating the policy options
 that would be necessary to produce a decrease of 2 through 4 per centum
 per year in the energy use per unit of GNP in the United States through
 the year 2005. These policy options and programs shall be ranked according
 to their cost effectiveness.
 SEC. 302. (a) The President's budget request for fiscal years 1991 through
 1993 shall include the Secretary's recommendations of amounts to be set
 aside for new initiatives in energy efficiency research, development, and
 demonstration. Funds made available for new initiatives shall supplement
 and not supplant funds available to complete on-going energy efficiency
 research and development projects supported in whole or in part by the
 Secretary during the fiscal year 1990. Funds made available for new
 initiatives shall be used by the Secretary to support the most promising
 and deserving new ideas in energy efficiency research and development
 brought to the attention of the Secretary during the previous fiscal year.
 (b)(1) There is hereby authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary for
 the energy efficiency research, development, and demonstration programs of
 the Secretary, an amount not to exceed $209,181,000 in fiscal year 1991, of
 which $6,000,000 shall be available for new initiatives, as set forth below--
 (A) for transportation energy efficiency research, development, and
 demonstration there is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary
 an amount not to exceed $65,460,000, of which $2,000,000 shall be made
 available for new initiatives;
 (B) for industrial energy efficiency research, development, and demonstration
 there is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary an amount not
 to exceed $46,740,000, of which $1,000,000 shall be available for new
 initiatives;
 (C) for buildings and community systems energy efficiency research,
 development, and demonstration there is authorized to be appropriated to
 the Secretary an amount not to exceed $58,100,000, of which $2,000,000
 shall be available for new initiatives;
 (D) for multisector energy efficiency research, development, and
 demonstration there is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary an
 amount not to exceed $37,050,000, of which $1,000,000 shall be available
 for new initiatives; and
 (E) for energy efficiency research, development, and demonstration policy
 and management, there is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary
 an amount not to exceed $1,797,000.
 (2) There is hereby authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary for the
 energy efficiency research, development, and demonstration programs of the
 Secretary, an amount not to exceed $253,000,000 in fiscal year 1992, of
 which $7,000,000 shall be available for new initiatives as set forth below--
 (A) for transportation energy efficiency research, development, and
 demonstration there is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary
 an amount not to exceed $84,000,000, of which $3,000,000 shall be made
 available for new initiatives;
 (B) for industrial energy efficiency research, development, and demonstration
 there is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary an amount not
 to exceed $45,000,000, of which $1,000,000 shall be available for new
 initiatives;
 (C) for buildings and community systems energy efficiency research,
 development, and demonstration there is authorized to be appropriated to
 the Secretary an amount not to exceed $55,000,000, of which $2,000,000
 shall be available for new initiatives;
 (D) for multisector energy efficiency research, development, and
 demonstration there is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary an
 amount not to exceed $64,000,000, of which $1,000,000 shall be available
 for new initiatives; and
 (E) for energy efficiency research, development, and demonstration policy
 and management, there is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary
 an amount not to exceed $5,000,000.
 (3) There is hereby authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary for the
 energy efficiency research, development, and demonstration programs of the
 Secretary, an amount not to exceed $301,000,000 in fiscal year 1993, of
 which $8,000,000 shall be available for new initiatives, as set forth below--
 (A) for transportation energy efficiency research, development, and
 demonstration there is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary
 an amount not to exceed $98,000,000, of which $3,000,000 shall be made
 available for new initiatives;
 (B) for industrial energy efficiency research, development, and demonstration
 there is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary an amount not
 to exceed $50,000,000, of which $2,000,000 shall be available for new
 initiatives;
 (C) for buildings and community systems energy efficiency research,
 development, and demonstration there is authorized to be appropriated to
 the Secretary an amount not to exceed $65,000,000, of which $2,000,000
 shall be available for new initiatives;
 (D) for multisector energy efficiency research, development, and
 demonstration there is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary an
 amount not to exceed $83,000,000, of which $1,000,000 shall be available
 for new initiatives; and
 (E) for energy efficiency research, development, and demonstration policy
 and management, there is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary
 an amount not to exceed $5,000,000.
 SEC. 303. (a) As used in this section and in section 304 the term `joint
 research and development venture' has the meaning given such term in the
 National Cooperative Research Act of 1984 (98 Stat. 1815).
 (b)(1) The Secretary shall solicit proposals in accordance with the
 provisions of this section for joint research and development ventures for
 the commercial demonstration of energy efficiency technologies that show
 significant promise for cost-effective commercial application and that
 can contribute significantly to reducing the rate and scope of carbon
 dioxide and trace gas generation. Each joint research and development
 venture under this section shall include manufacturing firms, investors,
 and such other participation as the Secretary deems appropriate to achieve
 the purposes of this section.
 (2) Not later than one hundred and twenty days after the date of the
 enactment of this section the Secretary shall publish plans to implement
 this section, provide opportunity for public comment on such plans, and
 report to Congress on the plans.
 (3)(A) Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this
 subsection the Secretary shall issue a general request for proposals under
 this subsection. Such general request shall contain a description of the
 criteria the Secretary will use in awarding financial assistance under
 this subsection. The primary such criterion shall be the probability
 of significant near-term impact of the proposal on the rate of carbon
 dioxide and trace gas generation. The secondary criterion shall be the
 probability of significant near-term impact of the proposal on reduction of
 oil imports. The Secretary may include such other criteria as the Secretary
 finds appropriate, including the net cost under the proposal in Federal
 financial assistance and the likelihood of early commercial application
 of technology demonstrated under the proposal.
 (B) Proposals shall be submitted to the Secretary within one hundred and
 twenty days after such general solicitation is published in the Federal
 Register.
 (C) The Secretary shall not provide Federal financial assistance for more
 than 50 percent of the costs of any proposal under this subsection as
 estimated by the Secretary at the time of acceptance of such proposal. For
 purposes of this subsection, other Federal funds, existing facilities,
 equipment and supplies, and previously expended research and development
 funds are not cost sharing.
 (4) The Secretary shall issue general requests for proposals under this
 subsection on the first and second anniversaries of the issuance under
 paragraph (3).
 (5)(A) The Secretary may provide technical assistance to persons developing
 proposals under this subsection.
 (B) The Secretary may provide technical and financial assistance in
 accordance with this subsection to proposals that have been accepted by
 the Secretary under this subsection.
 (C) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary for purposes
 of this subsection not more than $50,000,000 for each of the fiscal years
 1991, 1992, and 1993, such amounts to remain available until expended.
 SEC. 304. (a) The Secretary shall establish and provide financial assistance
 to joint research and development ventures with such specialized private
 firms and investors as the Secretary deems appropriate in order to establish
 at least five regional centers for energy-intensive industries. The
 centers shall conduct basic and applied research and development on common
 industrial processes. The centers shall focus their efforts on changes to
 industrial processes that may result in improved energy efficiency. The
 centers may also conduct research on other improvements of benefit to
 industry so long as energy efficiency improvements are an integral part
 of that research. In locating the regional centers under this section,
 the Secretary shall consider the regional distribution of energy-intensive
 industries. The research centers shall be established in the region in
 which the Secretary determines each energy-intensive industry is located.
 (b) The regional centers under this paragraph shall carry out research
 and development efforts to reduce the production of CO2 and trace gases
 into the atmosphere by improving the quality and energy efficiency of
 industrial processes.
 (c) The research and development strategy under this paragraph shall be
 guided by--
 (1) a detailed characterization of the needs of domestic manufacturing
 industries;
 (2) a close working relationship with all sectors of the domestic
 manufacturing industry; and
 (3) coordination among the centers to pool and conserve resources.
 (d) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary $5,000,000
 for fiscal year 1991, $15,000,000 for fiscal year 1992, and $25,000,000
 for fiscal year 1993. Industries for which the centers are established
 shall contribute matching funds starting in 1992.
 SEC. 305. (a) As used in this section, the term `Federal building' has the
 meaning given such term in section 521 of the National Energy Conservation
 Policy Act and includes facilities used in connection with such Federal
 building.
 (b)(1) The Secretary shall establish a Federal energy analysis team to
 analyze, and make recommendations with respect to energy efficiency and
 the use of renewable energy in, specific Federal buildings selected by
 the Secretary under this section. The team shall be made up of individuals--
 (A) engaged in research on energy efficiency or the use of renewable energy
 in buildings at the National Laboratories of the Department of Energy; and
 (B) nominated by the Secretary of Defense, the Administrator of
 the General Services Administration and the Director of the National
 Institute of Standards and Technology, respectively, on the basis of their
 expertise in energy efficiency and the use of renewable forms of energy
 in buildings. Persons who serve on the team shall be transferred to the
 team for purposes of this section without loss of salary or benefits.
 (2) The team shall conduct an analysis of energy use in Federal buildings
 designated by the Secretary under paragraph (3) to determine the potential
 for the use of renewable forms of energy and for improved energy efficiency
 in such buildings and make recommendations for cost-effective renewable
 energy and energy efficiency improvements in such buildings. For purposes
 of this section an improvement shall be considered cost effective if the
 cost of the energy saved or displaced by the improvement exceeds the cost
 of the improvement over the life or remaining term of lease of the building.
 (3) The Secretary shall designate buildings to be analyzed by the team
 so as to obtain a sample of buildings of the types and in the climates
 that is representative of the Federal buildings owned or leased by Federal
 agencies in the United States that consume the major fraction of the energy
 consumed in Federal buildings.
 (4) The Secretary shall submit a plan for implementing this subsection to
 Congress within six months after the date of the enactment of this section.
 (5) The team shall report its findings and recommendations based on the
 analyses carried out under paragraph (2) to the Secretary and to the head
 of the agency owning or leasing each building analyzed within 18 months
 after the date of the enactment of this section.
 (b)(1) The Secretary shall use the results of the analyses under subsection
 (a) to develop goals for 1995 for energy efficiency and the use of renewable
 energy in Federal buildings generally and in the categories identified by
 the Secretary under subsection (a)(3). Goals developed under this subsection
 shall be submitted to Congress within twenty-four months after the date
 of the enactment of this section.
 (2) Any agency that chooses not to implement promptly the recommendations
 of the team with respect to a Federal building analyzed under subsection
 (a)(2) shall provide Congress with a written explanation of the reasons
 for such choice.
 (3) Any agency that implements the recommendations of the team with respect
 to a Federal building analyzed under subsection (a)(2) may retain for
 purposes of furthering the objectives of the agency one-half of the dollar
 savings realized as a result of such recommendations. The Secretary shall
 consult with the heads of the appropriate Federal agencies to insure that
 the maximum dollar savings under this section are realized.
 (c) There is hereby authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary for
 purposes of carrying out this section $2,500,000.
 SEC. 306. REPEAL OF PROHIBITIONS ON SUPPLY AND INSTALLATION OF RESIDENTIAL
 ENERGY CONSERVATION MEASURES BY UTILITIES- Section 216 of the National
 Energy Conservation Policy Act (42 U.S.C. 8217) is repealed and subsequent
 sections are renumbered accordingly.
 SEC. 307. HOME ENERGY EFFICIENCY RATINGS- Title II of the National Energy
 Conservation Policy Act is amended by adding a new part 6 as follows:
`PART 6--RESIDENTIAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY RATINGS
 `SEC. 271. (a) Within twelve months after the date of the enactment of
 this section the Secretary in consultation with the Secretary of Housing
 and Urban Development and State governments shall by rule promulgate
 guidelines for regulations to be formulated and implemented by State
 governments that would require the assignment of an energy efficiency
 rating to residential buildings.
 `(b) The rule under subsection (a) shall--
 `(1) provide for a numerical rating of the efficiency with which any
 residential building may be supplied with heating and cooling energy on
 an annual basis, and evaluate the practicality of including major energy
 consuming appliances in such rating;
 `(2) provide that all residential buildings receive a rating at time of sale;
 `(3) ensure that the rating is prominently communicated to potential buyers
 and renters; and
 `(4) ensure that the rating system is designed to facilitate its use by
 the secondary mortgate markets to promote energy efficiency.
 `(c) Within twelve months of the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary
 shall establish a program to provide technical and managerial support for
 State and local governments adopting energy efficiency rating systems
 or building codes. The program shall utilize the Federal Government's
 experience in developing Federal building energy performance standards
 and shall provide compliance methods, educational materials for builders
 and code officials, and other technical support.
 `(d) For purposes of the rule under subsection (a) supply of energy to
 any residential building from the level of the contribution of renewable
 sources shall not result in a reduction in the energy efficiency rating
 of such building.'.
 SEC. 308. ENERGY EFFICIENCY LABELS FOR MAJOR APPLICATIONS OF INCANDESCENT AND
 FLUORESCENT LAMPS- Part B of title III of the Energy Policy and Conservation
 Act, as amended, is further amended--
 (a) in section 322(a) by striking paragraph (14) and inserting in lieu
 thereof new paragraphs (14), (15) and (16) as follows:
 `(14) Incandescent lamps which are the predominant consumers of energy
 used for lighting in the commercial, industrial, and residential sectors.
 `(15) Fluorescent lamps which are the predominant consumers of energy used
 for lighting in the commercial, industrial, and residential sectors.
 `(16) Any other type of consumer product that the Secretary classifies as
 a covered product under subsection (b).'
 (b)(1) in section 324(a)(1) by inserting after the phrase `through (12)',
 `(14) and (15)'; and
 (2) in the remaining provisions of section 324 by striking the phrase
 `paragraph (14)' everywhere it appears and inserting in lieu thereof the
 phrase `paragraph (16)'.
 (c)(1) in section 325(i) by striking the phrase `paragraph (14)' everywhere
 it appears and inserting in lieu thereof the phrase `paragraph (16)'.
 (2) by adding at the end of subsection 325(i) a new paragraph (4) as follows:
 `(4) The Secretary, before January 1, 1990, shall prescribe an energy
 conservation standard for each of the covered products specified in
 paragraphs (13) and (14) of section 322(a). Concurrent with the Secretary's
 prescription of such standards the Secretary shall also prescribe test
 procedures.'
 SEC. 309. ENERGY EFFICIENCY LABELS FOR WINDOWS- Within eighteen months
 of the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, after consultation
 with the National Institute of Standards and Technology, shall establish
 labels for thermal and optical properties and performance for windows and
 window systems.
 SEC. 310. REVIEW- The Secretary shall periodically review standards and
 labels established under sections 308 and 309 at least every 3 years and
 strengthen the standards for the products or any other energy-consuming
 device that the Secretary deems justified.
Subtitle B--Amendments to Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978
 SEC. 311. ENCOURAGEMENT OF LEAST COST INVESTMENT- The Public Utility
 Regulatory Policies Act of 1978, Public Law 95-617 (November 9, 1978),
 as amended, is further amended by inserting the following new section
 after section 113 and renumbering the sections accordingly:
`SEC 114. LEAST COST INVESTMENT.
 `(a) ADOPTION OF STANDARDS- Not later than 2 years after the date of
 enactment of this section, each State regulatory authority (with respect to
 each gas utility and electric utility for which it has ratemaking authority)
 shall provide public notice and conduct a hearing respecting the standard
 established by subsection (b) and, on the basis of such hearing, shall adopt
 and implement the standard established by subsection (b) if, and to the
 extent, such authority determines that such adoption and implementation
 is appropriate and consistent with otherwise applicable State law. For
 purposes of any determination made on the basis of such hearing and any
 review of such determination in any court in accordance with section 125,
 the purposes of this title supplement otherwise applicable State law.
 `(b) ESTABLISHMENT- The following Federal standard is hereby established:
 `The rates permitted to be charged by a gas utility or electric utility
 shall be such that the implementation of least cost supply measures permits
 the utility to realize higher earnings than would be realized from the
 implementation of other supply measures. For purposes of this standard,
 the term `implementation of least cost supply measures' shall mean actions
 (including, but not limited to, conservation and other means of demand
 reduction) taken to provide adequate and reliable service to consumers
 with the incurrence of lowest total costs to society, such costs to include
 costs incurred by the utility and its customers, and environmental costs.
 `(c) PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS- Each State regulatory authority (with respect
 to each gas utility and electric utility for which it has ratemaking
 authority) within the 2-year period specified in subsection (a), shall (1)
 adopt and implement, pursuant to subsection (a), the standard established
 by subsection (b) or, (2) if the standard is not adopted and implemented,
 such authority shall state in writing that it has determined not to
 adopt and implement such standard, together with the reasons for such
 determination. Such statement of reasons shall be available to the public.
 `(d) DEFINITIONS- (1) For purposes of this section, the term `gas utility'
 means any person who is engaged in the local distribution and sale of
 natural gas to any ultimate consumer and over whom a State regulatory
 authority has ratemaking authority.
 `(2) for purposes of this section, the term `electric utility' means any
 person who is engaged in the local distribution and sale of electricity
 to any ultimate consumer and over whom a State regulatory authority has
 ratemaking authority.
`SEC. 115. LEAST COST INVESTMENT FOR NONREGULATED UTILITIES.
 `(a) ADOPTION OF STANDARDS- Not later than two years after the date
 of enactment of this section, each nonregulated electric utility and
 nonregulated gas utility shall provide public notice and conduct a hearing
 respecting the standard established by subsection (b) and, on the basis
 of such hearing, shall adopt and implement the standard established by
 subsection (b) if, and to the extent, such utility determines that such
 adoption and implementation is appropriate and consistent with otherwise
 applicable State law. For purposes of any determination made on the
 basis of such hearing and any review of such determination in any court
 in accordance with section 125, the purposes of this title supplement
 otherwise applicable State law.
 `(b) ESTABLISHMENT- The following Federal standard is hereby established:
 `Each nonregulated gas utility and nonregulated electric utility shall
 implement least cost supply measures. For purposes of this standard, the
 phrase `implement least cost supply measures' shall mean actions (including,
 but not limited to, conservation and other means of demand reduction) taken
 to provide adequate and reliable service to consumers with the incurrence
 of lowest total costs to society, such costs to include costs incurred by
 the utility and its customers, and environmental costs.
 `(c) PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS- Each nonregulated electric utility and
 nonregulated gas utility shall, within the 2-year period specified in
 subsection (a), (1) adopt and implement, pursuant to subsection (a), the
 standard established by subsection (b) or, (2) if the standard is not adopted
 and implemented, such utility shall state in writing that it has determined
 not to adopt and implement such standard, together with the reasons for such
 determination. Such statement of reasons shall be available to the public.
 `(d) DEFINITIONS- (1) For purposes of this section, the term `nonregulated
 gas utility' means any person who is engaged in the local distribution
 and sale of natural gas to any ultimate consumer and over whom a State
 regulatory authority does not have ratemaking authority.
 `(2) For purposes of this section the term `nonregulated electric utility'
 means any person who is engaged in the local distribution and sale of
 electricity to any ultimate consumer and over whom a State regulatory
 authority does not have ratemaking authority.'.
 SEC. 312. DEFINITIONS- Section 3 of the Federal Power Act, as amended
 (16 U.S.C. 796 et seq.), is further amended by inserting the following
 definitions after the definition of `qualifying cogenerator' and renumbering
 the defintions accordingly:
 `(19)(A) `qualifying conservation' means any reduction at any time in the
 demand for electric energy by the customers of a utility, which reduction--
 `(i) would not occur but for payments received by a qualifying conservation
 entity; and
 `(ii) the Commission determines, by rule, meets such requirements as the
 Commission may, by rule, prescribe;
 `(B) `qualifying conservation entity' means a person who--
 `(i) the Commission determines, by rule, meets such requirements as the
 Commission may, by rule, prescribe;
 `(ii) is not primarily engaged in the generation or sale of electric power
 (other than electric power from cogeneration facilities or small power
 production facilities);'.
 SEC. 313. PURCHASES OF QUALIFYING CONSERVATION BY UTILITIES- Section 210
 of the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 (16 U.S.C. 824a-3),
 as amended, is further amended by--
 (a) inserting the following new subsection after subsection (a) and
 relettering the remaining subsections accordingly:
 `(b) CONSERVATION RULES- Not later than one year after the date of enactment
 of this subsection, the Commission shall prescribe, and from time to time
 thereafter revise, such rules as it determines necessary to encourage the
 achievement of qualifying conservation. Such rules shall require electric
 utilities to offer to purchase qualifying conservation from qualifying
 conservation entities under such terms as the Commission may prescribe
 and shall include provisions concerning verification of the achievement of
 qualifying conservation. Such rules shall be prescribed, after consultation
 with representatives of Federal and State regulatory agencies having
 ratemaking authority for electric utilities, and after public notice and a
 reasonable opportunity for interested persons (including State and Federal
 agencies) to submit oral as well as written data, views, and arguments.';
 (b) striking subsection (b) and inserting the following in lieu thereof:
 `(c) RATES FOR PURCHASES BY ELECTRIC UTILITIES- The rules prescribed under
 subsections (a) and (b) shall insure that, in requiring any electric utility
 to offer to purchase electric energy from any qualifying cogeneration
 facility or qualifying small power production facility, or to purchase
 qualifying conservation from a qualifying conservation entity, the rates
 for such purchase--
 `(1) shall, in the case of purchases from qualifying cogeneration facilities
 and qualifying small power production facilities, be just and reasonable
 to the electric consumers of the electric utility;
 `(2) shall be in the public interest;
 `(3) shall not discriminate against qualifying cogenerators, qualifying
 small power producers, or qualifying conservation entities. No such rule
 prescribed under subsection (a) shall provide for a rate which exceeds
 the incremental cost to the electric utility of alternative electric
 energy. Rules prescribed under subsection (b) shall give State regulatory
 authorities and nonregulated electric utilities the option of restricting
 the rate paid for qualifying conservation to an amount no greater than--
 `(A) the incremental cost of alternative electric energy; or
 `(B) the amount by which the incremental cost of alternative electric
 energy exceeds the price for the generation of electric energy paid by
 the customers whose demand for electric energy is reduced as a result of
 qualifying conservation.'; and
 (c) adding the following at the end of subsection (d):
`The term `incremental cost of alternative electric energy' means, with respect
to purchases of qualifying conservation from qualifying conservation entities,
the cost to the purchasing electric utility of the electric energy which,
but for the purchase from such conservation entity, such utility would
generate or purchase from another source.'.
 SEC. 314. CONFORMING CHANGES- Section 210 of the Public Utility Regulatory
 Policies Act of 1978 (16 U.S.C. 824a-3), as amended, is further amended--
 (a) in subsection (f) by striking `subsection (a) of this section or
 revised under such subsection' in each place it appears and substituting
 `subsections (a) or (b) of this section or revised under such subsections'
 in lieu thereof;
 (b) in subsection (g) by striking `subsection (a)' and substituting
 `subsections (a) or (b)' in lieu thereof;
 (c) in subsection (g) by striking `or qualifying cogenerator' and inserting
 `qualifying cogenerator, or qualifying conservation entity' in lieu thereof;
 (d) in paragraph (2) of subsection (h) by striking `or qualifying small
 power producer' and substituting `qualifying small power producer, or
 qualifying conservation entity' in lieu thereof;
 (e) in subsection (j) by striking `and `qualifying cogenerator' and
 substituting `qualifying cogenerator', `qualifying conservation', and
 `qualifying conservation entity' in lieu thereof; and
 (f) in subsection (j) by striking `3(17) and 3(18)' and substituting
 `3(17), 3(18) and 3(19)' in lieu thereof.
TITLE IV--ENERGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES
 SEC. 401- The Secretary of Energy shall establish priorities, using the
 following criteria in order of importance, for research and development
 programs:
 (1) potential to reduce generation of carbon dioxide and trace gases sooner
 than alternative projects;
 (2) the projected cost effectiveness of the energy ultimately to be
 produced or saved, including an evaluation of the likelihood of success
 of the research;
 (3) the environmental and public health impacts of the energy ultimately
 to be produced or saved by the specific research;
 (4) the national security impact of the energy produced or saved, including
 its projected reduction of oil imports and contribution to the diversity
 of the fuel mix;
 (5) the obstacles inherent in private industry's development of new energy
 technologies and steps necessary for establishing or restoring technical
 leadership in the area of renewable energy technologies, including, but
 not limited to, solar, fuel cells, and hydrogen;
 (6) the impact of given research in the area of fundamental scientific
 inquiry; and
 (7) the impact of the research on special or targeted populations, including
 low-income or aged persons.
TITLE V--STATE ENERGY CONSERVATION PROGRAM
STATE ENERGY CONSERVATION GOALS
 SEC. 501. Section 364 of the Energy Policy and Conservation Act (42
 U.S.C. 6324) is amended to read as follows:
`ENERGY CONSERVATION GOALS
 `SEC. 364. Each State energy conservation plan with respect to which
 assistance is made available under this part on or after October 1,
 1990, shall contain a goal consisting of a reduction, as a result of
 the implementation of such plan, of 10 percent or more in the amount of
 energy consumed in such State in the year 2000 from the projected energy
 consumption, as of October 1, 1990, for such State in the year 2000.'.
REQUIRED STATE ENERGY CONSERVATION PLAN ELEMENTS AND CONSOLIDATION OF ENERGY
EXTENSION SERVICE
 SEC. 502. (a) IN GENERAL- Section 362(c) of the Energy Policy and
 Conservation Act (42 U.S.C. 6322(c)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (4);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting in
 lieu thereof a semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraphs:
 `(6) an energy emergency planning program for an energy supply disruption
 which shall include a specific implementation strategy regional coordination
 and may include planning for petroleum, electricity, natural gas, coal,
 and nuclear power supply and delivery disruptions;
 `(7) procedures for ensuring that effective coordination exists among
 various local, State, and Federal energy conservation programs within the
 State, including any program administered within the Office of State and
 Local Assistance Programs of the Department of Energy as of December 31,
 1987, and the Low Income Energy Assistance Program administered by the
 Department of Health and Human Services; and
 `(8) programs to implement all the functions of the Energy Extension
 Service, as provided by law on the day before the date of enactment of
 the State Energy Conservation Programs Improvement Act of 1989, which shall--
 `(A) include programs for identification, development, and demonstration
 of energy efficiency opportunities, techniques, methods, materials,
 and equipment (including those that are responsive to local needs or
 resources) and alternative energy technologies such as solar heating
 and cooling for agricultural, commercial, and small business operations,
 individual energy consumers, and new existing residential, commercial,
 and agricultural buildings or structures;
 `(B) provide for technical assistance, instructions, information
 dissemination, and practical demonstrations with respect to energy
 efficiency opportunities;
 `(C) provide, to the maximum extent practicable within personnel and
 funding limitations, active outreach energy extension assistance (including
 information on end-user technoloy requirements) at the local level through
 appropriate offices (including metropolitan offices) and through county
 agents and technical staff assistants;
 `(D) make maximum use of existing outreach or delivery mechanisms or programs
 and include, to the maximum extent practicable, any State, local, university,
 college, or other organization's programs for energy information, education,
 or technology transfer which have activities or purposes similar to those
 of this part; and
 `(E) establish and implement policies and procedures designed to assure
 that assistance provided under this part does not replace or supplant the
 expenditure of other Federal or State or local funds for the same purposes,
 but instead supplements such funds and increases the expenditure of such
 State or local funds to the maximum extent practicable.'.
 (b) ELIMINATION OF EES- The National Energy Extension Services Act (title
 V of Public Law 95-39) is repealed.
OPTIONAL STATE ENERGY CONSERVATION PLAN ELEMENTS AND CONSOLIDATION OF
SUPPLEMENTAL STATE ENERGY CONSERVATION PLAN
 SEC. 503. (a) IN GENERAL- Section 362(d) of the Energy Policy and
 Conservation Act (42 U.S.C. 6322(d)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (4);
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting in
 lieu thereof a semicolon; and
 (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraphs:
 `(6) programs for financing energy efficiency and renewable energy capital
 investments, projects, and programs--
 `(A) which may include loan programs and performance contracting programs
 for leveraging of additional public and private sector funds, and programs
 which allow rebates, grants, or other incentives for the purchase and
 installation of energy efficiency and renewable energy measures; or
 `(B) in addition to or in lieu of programs described in subparagraph (A),
 which may be used in connection with public or nonprofit buildings owned
 and operated by a State, a political subdivision of a State or an agency
 or instrumentality of a State, or an organization exempt from taxation
 under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986;
 `(7) programs to increase transportation energy efficiency, including
 programs to accelerate the use of alternative transportation fuels for
 State government vehicles, fleet vehicles, taxis, mass transit and privately
 owned vehicles;
 `(8) programs for encouraging and for carrying out energy audits with
 respect to buildings and industrial plants within the State;
 `(9) programs to promote the adoption of integrated energy plans which
 provide for--
 `(A) periodic evaluation of a State's energy needs, available energy
 resources (including greater energy efficiency), and energy costs; and
 `(B) utilization for reliable energy supplies, including greater energy
 efficiency, that meet applicable safety, environmental, and policy
 requirements at the lowest cost;
 `(10) programs to promote energy efficiency in residential housing, such as--
 `(A) programs for development and promotion of energy efficiency rating
 systems for newly constructed housing and existing housing so that consumers
 can compare the energy efficiency of different housing; and
 `(B) programs for the adoption of incentives for builders, utilities, and
 mortgage lenders to build, service, or finance energy efficient housing; and
 `(11) programs to protect consumers from any unfair or deceptive acts or
 practices which relate to the implementation of energy efficiency measures
 and renewable resources energy measures.'.
 (b) ELIMINATION OF SSECP- Section 367 of the Energy Policy and Conservation
 Act (42 U.S.C. 6327) is repealed.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS
 SEC. 504. (a) STATE PLAN PROGRAM- Section 365(f) of the Energy Policy and
 Conservation Act (42 U.S.C. 6325(f)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(f) For the purpose of carrying out this part, there are authorized to
 be appropriated $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, $35,000,000 for fiscal
 year 1992, and $45,000,000 for fiscal year 1993.'.
 (b) ENERGY CONSERVATION PROGRAM FOR SCHOOLS AND HOSPITALS- Section 397 of
 the Energy Policy and Conservation Act (42 U.S.C. 6371f(a)) is amended to
 read as follows:
`AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS
 SEC. 397. For the purpose of carrying out this part, there are authorized
 to be appropriated $40,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, $50,000,000 for fiscal
 year 1992, and $60,000,000 for fiscal year 1993.'.
 (c) WEATHERIZATION ASSISTANCE- Section 422 of the Energy Conservation
 Production Act (42 U.S.C. 6872) is amended to read as follows):
`AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS
 `SEC. 422. There are authorized to be appropriated for purposes of carrying
 out the weatherization program under this part $200,000,000 for fiscal
 year 1991 and such sums as may be necessary for 1992 and 1993.'.
 SEC. 505. STATE ENERGY ADVISORY BOARD- Section 365 of the Energy Policy
 and Conservation Act (42 U.S.C. 6325) is amended by adding at the end
 the following:
 `(g)(1) There is hereby established within the Department of Energy a
 State Energy Advisory Board (hereafter in this subsection referred to
 as the `Board') which shall consist of not less than ten nor more than
 fifteen members appointed by the Secretary. Not less than one-half of the
 members of the Board shall be persons who serve as directors for the State
 agency, or a division of such agency, responsible for developing State
 energy conservation plans pursuant to section 362. At least one member
 of the Board shall be a director of a State weatherization assistance
 program. Other members shall be appointed from other persons, including
 those who have experience in energy efficiency or renewable energy programs
 for the private sector, consumer interest groups, utilities, public utility
 commissions, educational institutions, or research institutions.
 `(2) The Board shall--
 `(A) make recommendations with respect to the energy efficiency objectives
 of the programs carried out under this part, part G of this title, and
 under part A of title IV of the Energy Conservation and Production Act to
 the Assistant Secretary for Conservation and Renewable Energy, the Director
 of the Office of State and Local Assistance Programs, and the Director of
 the Building and Community Systems Office within the Department of Energy;
 `(B) serve as a liaison between the States and such Department on energy
 efficiency and renewable energy resource programs;
 `(C) recommend changes to State and Federal energy policies; and
 `(D) encourage technology transfer of the results of research and development
 activities carried out by the Federal Government with respect to energy
 efficiency and renewable energy resources.
 `(3) The Secretary shall designate one of the members of the Board to
 serve as its chairman and one to serve as its vice-chairman. The chairman
 and vice-chairman shall serve in those offices no longer than two years.
 `(4) The Secretary shall provide the Board with such services and facilities
 as may be necessary for the performance of its functions.
 `(5) The Board shall be nonpartisan.
 `(6) The Board may adopt administrative rules and procedures and may elect
 one of its members Secretary of the Board.
 `(7) The Secretary shall reimburse members of the Board for expenses
 (including travel expenses) necessarily incurred by them in the performance
 of their duties.
 `(8) The Board shall meet at least annually and shall submit an annual
 report to the Secretary and the Congress on the activities carried out by
 the Board in the previous fiscal year, including any recommendations it
 may have for administrative or legislative changes.'.
UPDATE OF ENERGY CONSERVATION PROGRAM FOR SCHOOLS AND HOSPITALS
 SEC. 506. (a) NON-FEDERAL SHARE OF A PROJECT- Section 396(b)(1) of the
 Energy Policy and Conservation Act (42 U.S.C. 6371e(b)(1)) is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following: `The non-Federal share of
 the costs of any such energy conservation project may be provided by
 using programs of innovative financing for energy conservation projects,
 including loan programs and performance contracting.'.
 (b) DEFINITION- Section 391(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 6371(1)) is amended by
 striking `April 20, 1977' and inserting in lieu thereof `December 31, 1984'.
WEATHERIZATION ASSISTANCE FOR LOW-INCOME PERSONS
 SEC. 507. (a) WAIVER OF 40-PERCENT REQUIREMENT- Section 415(a) of the
 Energy Conservation and Production Act (42 U.S.C. 6865(a)) is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence, by striking `An average' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), and average'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following:
 `(2)(A) The Secretary may approve a State application to waive the
 40-percent requirement established in paragraph (1) if the State includes
 in the State's plan--
 `(i) an energy evaluation which establishes priorities for selection of
 weatherization measures based on their contribution to energy efficiency; and
 `(ii) a standard for determining whether to invest in individual measures
 based on a rate of return that will ensure that investment in each measure
 is an appropriate use of funds.
 `(B) For States applying for a waiver under this paragraph, the Secretary
 shall establish standards for determining whether the energy audit techniques
 of each such State measure--
 `(i) the energy requirement of individual dwellings;
 `(ii) the rate of return of each conservation investment; and
 `(iii) the interaction between conservation measures. State applications
 for waivers shall be judged on these standards.
 `(c) The Secretary shall make information on energy evaluation instruments
 available to States applying for a waiver under this paragraph and shall
 provide training for State and local agencies in the implementation for
 such instruments.'.
 (b) DWELLING UNIT LIMITATION- Section 415(c) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 6865(c))
 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking `The expenditure' and inserting in lieu
 thereof `except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (4), the expenditure'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraphs:
 `(3) Beginning with fiscal year 1991, the $1,600 per dwelling unit limitation
 provided in paragraph (1) shall be adjusted annually by increasing the
 limitation amount by an amount equal to the percentage increase in the
 Consumer Price Index for the previous fiscal year multiplied by the
 limitation amount for such previous fiscal year. The increase under the
 preceding sentence for any fiscal year shall not exceed 3 per centum.
 `(4)(A) In addition to the average per dwelling unit limitation applicable
 in a State under paragraphs (1) and (3), the Secretary may, upon application
 by a State, establish an average per dwelling unit limitation for dwelling
 units in such State--
 `(i) which conform to program requirements;
 `(ii) which, in addition to any other weatherization modifications, have
 furnace efficiency modifications made under this part; and
 `(iii) for which a determination is made pursuant to regulations
 prescribed by the Secretary that such furnace efficiency modifications
 are a cost-effective use of funds.
 `(B) The average per dwelling unit limitation applicable in a State to
 units described in subparagraph (A) shall not exceed an amount equal to--
 `(i) the amount permitted for the expenditure of financial assistance for
 labor, weatherization materials, and related matters for dwelling units
 in such State under paragraphs (1) and (3), plus
 `(ii) an amount determined by the Secretary to be the average amount that
 is appropriate for furnace efficiency modifications of dwelling units of
 the type assisted under this part in such State.'.
TITLE VI--RENEWABLE ENERGY
Subtitle A
 SEC. 601. SHORT TITLE- This subtitle may be cited as the Solar Development
 Initiative Act of 1989.
 SEC. 602. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE- (a) The Congress finds that--
 (1) a diversified and balanced energy resource base is important for the
 Nation's economic growth;
 (2) renewable energy sources, including solar energy, can make a significant
 contribution toward minimizing the potential for undue dependence on any
 single energy source;
 (3) recent energy trends, including increased imports of foreign oil,
 increased consumption of petroleum and declining domestic production of
 petroleum, have reaffirmed the importance of continued Federal support for,
 and encouragement of, solar energy technologies; and
 (4) the international competitiveness of domestic solar thermal and
 photovoltaics industries depends upon maintaining our technological lead
 and providing development and marketing assistance to exporters of solar
 technologies.
 (b) PURPOSE- The purpose of this subtitle is to--
 (1) establish multi-year funding levels for a Federal solar research and
 development program that will maintain current efforts and provide funding
 stability; and
 (2) reaffirm existing Federal policies and establish new policies which
 promote and encourage investments in solar energy technologies by the
 private and public sectors.
 SEC. 603. SOLAR AND RENEWABLE ENERGY RESEARCH PROGRAM- (a) The Secretary
 of Energy is directed to consult with the solar energy industry to develop
 a complimentary program of solar and renewable research, development,
 and demonstration project which--
 (1) have near-term commercial applications; and
 (2) will enhance the international competitiveness of the solar and
 renewable energy industries.
 (b) The Secretary shall include the funding necessary to implement this
 program in the fiscal year 1991 budget.
FEDERAL SOLAR BUILDINGS DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM
 SEC. 604. (a) PROGRAM SUCCESSFULLY IMPLEMENTED- Congress finds that
 the Secretary of Energy, in consultation with the Administrator of the
 General Services Administration, has successfully implemented a program
 to demonstrate in Federal buildings the application of solar heating and
 solar heating and cooling technology pursuant to part 2 of title V of the
 National Energy Conservation Policy Act (Public Law 95-619).
 (b) INFORMATION ABOUT FEDERAL SOLAR BUILDINGS PROGRAM- In order to more
 widely disseminate information about the Federal solar buildings program
 and the benefits of solar heating and solar heating and cooling technology,
 the Secretary of Energy shall establish a program to disseminate such
 information for Federal procurement officers and Federal loan officers
 which shall include site visits and technical briefings. The Secretary
 shall utilize existing funds for this program.
INTERNATIONAL MARKET ENHANCEMENT
 SEC. 605. (a) CONTINUATION OF ACTIVITIES BY THE COMMITTEE ON RENEWABLE
 ENERGY, COMMERCE, AND TRADE- The Committee on Renewable Energy, Commerce,
 and Trade established by section 256(d) of the Energy Policy and Conservation
 Act (42 U.S.C. 6271 et seq.) shall continue its activities to coordinate
 the actions and programs of the Federal Government affecting commerce in
 renewable energy products and services.
 (b) COMMERCE PROGRAMS- It is the sense of the Congress that the programs
 established by the Secretary of Commerce under section 256(c)(1) of the
 Energy Policy and Conservation Act should be funded through the Department
 of Energy at a minimum of $1,500,000 in fiscal years 1991, 1992, and 1993.
 (c) AMENDMENT TO CARIBBEAN BASIN ECONOMIC RECOVERY ACT- Section
 212(c)(7) of the Caribbean Basin Economic Recovery Act (97 Stat. 387;
 19 U.S.C. 2703(c)(7)) is amended to read as follows--
 `(7) the degree to which such country is under-taking self-help measures
 to promote its own economic development and energy self-sufficiency using
 locally available renewable resources;'.
FEDERAL PROCUREMENT
 SEC. 606. (a) SECRETARY OF DEFENSE- Section 2857(b)(1) of title 10,
 United States Code, is amended by inserting after `has the potential for'
 the following: `reduced energy costs'.
 (b) UTILIZATION OF SOLAR ENERGY BY OTHER FEDERAL AGENCIES- The Secretary
 of State, the Secretary of Energy, the Secretary of Housing and Urban
 Development, the Director of the General Services Administration, and
 the Commissioner of the United States Postal Service shall require that
 the design of all new Federal facilities built under their respective
 jurisdictions shall include consideration of energy systems using solar
 energy or other renewable forms of energy in those cases in which use
 of such form of energy has the potential for significant savings of
 fossil-fuel-derived energy.
 SEC. 607. AMENDMENT TO THE EXPORT-IMPORT BANK ACT OF 1945- Section 7 of
 the Export-Import Bank Act of 1945 (12 U.S.C. 635e) is amended by adding
 at the end thereof the following--
 `(c) Not less than .025 per centum of the loan authority of the Bank shall
 be available only for solar and renewable energy loans.'.
 SEC. 608. SPECIAL ACTIVITIES OF THE OVERSEAS PRIVATE INVESTMENT CORPORATION-
 Section 234(e) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence, by inserting after `cooperatives' the following:
 `and including the initiation of incentives, grants, and studies for
 renewable energy and other small business activities'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new sentence: `Administrative
 funds may not be made available for incentives, grants, and studies for
 renewable energy and other small business activities.'.
 SEC. 609. AMENDMENT TO THE SMALL BUSINESS ACT- (a) Section 7(1) of the
 Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 636(1)) is repealed.
 (b) Section 7(a)(12) of such Act (15 U.S.C. 636(a)(12)) is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(12) The Administrator may provide loans under this subsection to assist
 any small business concern, including startup, to enable such concern to
 design architecturally or engineer, manufacture, distribute, market, install,
 or service energy measures. Proceeds of loans under this paragraph shall
 not be used for research and development. Not less than .025 percent of
 the loan authority provided under this subsection shall be available only
 for loans under this paragraph. The Administrator shall include a list of
 solar and renewable energy loans in an annual report to the Congress.'.
 (c) Section 7(a)(14) of such Act (15 U.S.C. 636(a)(14)) is amended to read
 as follows:
 `(14) The Administrator under this subsection may provide extentions and
 revolving lines of credit for export purposes to enable small business
 concerns to develop foreign markets and for preexport financing. No such
 extention or revolving line of credit may be made for a period or periods
 exceeding eighteen months. A bank or participating lending institution
 may establish the rate of interest in extensions and revolving lines
 of credit as may be legal and reasonable. The Administrator shall give
 due consideration to the export potential of solar and renewable energy
 products in implementing his authorities under this subsection and shall
 include a list of solar and renewable energy loan guarantees in an annual
 report to the Congress.'.
Subtitle B
 This subtitle may be cited as the `Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency
 Technology Competitiveness Act of 1989'.
 SEC. 610. PURPOSE- It is the purpose of this title to direct the Secretary
 of Energy, acting in accordance with authority contained in the Federal
 Non-Nuclear Energy Research and Development Policy Act of 1974 (42
 U.S.C. 5901-5920) and other law applicable to the Secretary, to pursue an
 aggressive national program of research, development, and demonstration
 of renewable energy technologies in order to ensure a stable and secure
 future energy supply by--
 (1) providing a long-term stable environment for renewable energy technology
 research and development activities through the establishment of long-term
 goals and multiyear funding levels;
 (2) directing the Secretary to undertake initiatives to hasten the
 commercialization in the near term of renewable energy technologies; and
 (3) fostering collaborative research and development efforts involving
 the private sector through government support of a vigorous program of
 innovative joint research and development venture projects.
 SEC. 611. DEFINITIONS- As used in this title the term--
 (a) `Secretary' means the Secretary of Energy; and
 (b) `joint research and development venture' means a joint research and
 development venture under the National Cooperative Research Act of 1984
 (98 Stat. 1815).
NATIONAL GOALS AND MULTIYEAR FUNDING FOR FEDERAL WIND, PHOTOVOLTAICS AND
SOLAR THERMAL PROGRAMS
 SEC. 612. (a) NATIONAL GOALS- The following are declared to be the national
 goals for the wind, photovoltaics and solar thermal energy programs
 currently being carried out by the Secretary under existing law:
 (1) WIND- (A) In general, the goals for the Wind Energy Research Program
 include improving design methodologies and developing more reliable and
 efficient wind turbines to increase the cost competitiveness of wind
 energy. Research efforts shall emphasize--
 (i) activities that address near-term technical problems and permit
 exploitation of current market opportunities of the wind energy industry;
 (ii) developing advanced airfoils and variable speed generators to increase
 wind and turbine output and reduce maintenance costs by decreasing structural
 stress and fatigue;
 (iii) increasing the basic knowledge of aerodynamics, structural dynamics,
 fatigue and electrical systems interactions as applied to current wind
 energy technology; and
 (iv) improving the compatibility of electricity produced from windfarms
 with conventional utility needs.
 (B) Specific goals for the Wind Energy Research Program shall be to--
 (i) reduce average wind energy costs to 3 to 5 cents per kilowatt hour
 by 1995;
 (ii) reduce capital costs of new wind energy systems to $500 to $750 per
 kilowatt of installed capacity by 1995;
 (iii) increase installed wind generating capacity to four thousand to
 eight thousand megawatts by 1995;
 (iv) reduce operation and maintenance costs for wind energy systems to
 less than 1 cent per kilowatt hour by 2000; and
 (v) increase capacity factors for new wind energy systems to 25 to 30 per
 centum by 1995.
 (2) PHOTOVOLTAICS- (A) In general, the goals of the Photovoltaic Energy
 Systems Program shall include improving the reliability and conversion
 efficiencies and lowering the costs of photovoltaic conversion. Research
 efforts shall emphasize advancements in the performance, stability and
 durability of photovoltaic materials.
 (B) Specific goals of the Photovoltaic Energy Systems Program shall be to--
 (i) improve operational reliability of photovoltaic modules to 30 years
 by 1995;
 (ii) increase photovoltaic conversion efficiency of new photovoltaic
 amorphous silicon modules to 15 percent by 1995;
 (iii) decrease new photovoltaic module direct manufacturing costs to $800
 per kilowatt by 1995; and
 (iv) increase installed capacity of photovoltaic electric power production
 capacity to one hundred to two hundred megawatts by 1991.
 (3) SOLAR THERMAL- (A) In general, the goal of the Solar Thermal Energy
 Systems Program shall be to advance research and development to a point where
 solar thermal technology is cost-competitive with conventional energy sources
 and to promote the integration of this technology into the production of
 industrial process heat and the conventional utility network. Research and
 development shall emphasize development of a thermal storage technology
 to provide capacity for shifting power to periods of demand when full
 insolation is not available; improvement in receivers, energy conversion
 devices, and innovative concentrators using stretch membranes, lenses,
 and other materials; and exploration of advanced manufacturing techniques.
 (B) Specific goals of the Solar Thermal Energy Systems Program shall be to--
 (i) reduce solar thermal costs for industrial process heat to $9 per
 million British thermal units; and
 (ii) reduce average solar thermal costs for electricity to 4 to 5 cents
 per kilowatt hour.
 (C) The President's budget request for fiscal year 1991 shall contain
 the Secretary's recommendations for specific cost, installed capacity,
 and other pertinent goals for 1995 for Department of Energy research,
 development, and demonstration programs in Biofuels Energy Systems, Solar
 Buildings Energy Systems, Ocean Energy Systems, and Geothermal Energy.
 (b) AMENDED GOALS- Whenever the Secretary determines that any of the goals
 established under this section are no longer appropriate, he shall notify
 Congress of the reason for the determination and provide an amended goal
 that is consistent with the purposes of this title.
 (c) AUTHORIZATIONS- There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary--
 (1) for the Wind Energy Research Program, an amount not to exceed $19,000,000
 in fiscal year 1991; $22,000,000 in fiscal year 1992; and $26,000,000 in
 fiscal year 1993;
 (2) for the Photovoltaic Energy Systems Program, an amount not to exceed
 $43,100,000 in fiscal year 1991; $45,000,000 in fiscal year 1992; and
 $50,000,000 in fiscal year 1993;
 (3) for the Solar Thermal Energy Systems Program, an amount not to exceed
 $28,700,000 in fiscal year 1991; $32,000,000 in fiscal year 1992; and
 $35,000,000 in fiscal year 1993;
 (4) for the Biofuels Energy Systems Program, an amount not to exceed
 $32,100,000 in fiscal year 1991; $35,100,000 in fiscal year 1992; and
 $40,000,000 in fiscal year 1993;
 (5) for the Solar Buildings Energy Systems Program, an amount not to
 exceed $8,000,000 in fiscal year 1991; $9,000,000 in fiscal year 1992;
 and $10,000,000 in fiscal year 1993;
 (6) for the Ocean Energy Systems Program, an amount not to exceed $5,000,000
 in fiscal year 1991; $5,000,000 in fiscal year 1992; and $5,000,000 in
 fiscal year 1993; and
 (7) for the Geothermal Program, an amount not to exceed $34,900,000 in
 fiscal year 1991; $35,700,000 in fiscal year 1992; and $38,700,000 in
 fiscal year 1993.
 (d) REPORT ON OPTIONS- On or before May 1, 1991, the Secretary shall
 submit to Congress a report analyzing options available to the Secretary
 under existing law to accelerate the timely commercialization of wind,
 photovoltaic, solar thermal, biofuels, biomass, solar buildings, ocean and
 goethermal renewable energy technologies through emphasis on development
 and demonstration assistance to specific technologies in the research,
 development, and demonstration programs of the Department of Energy that
 are near commercial application.
JOINT RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT VENTURES
 SEC. 614. (a) FINDINGS- For purposes of this section, Congress finds that
 joint research and development ventures can--
 (1) improve coordination in technology development among firms in industries
 attempting to commercialize renewable energy technologies;
 (2) assist in setting national standards to improve the operation of
 markets for these technologies; and
 (3) enhance the ability of domestic firms to compete with foreign enterprises
 in sales of renewable energy technologies.
 (b) PURPOSE- The purpose of this section is to direct the Secretary of
 Energy to make use of joint research and development ventures to further
 commercialization of renewable energy technologies.
 (c) ESTABLISHMENT- (1) The Secretary shall establish seven joint research and
 development ventures in accordance with the provisions of this section. Each
 joint research and development venture under this section shall include
 manufacturing firms, investors, an advisory committee appointed in accordance
 with this section, and such other participation as the Secretary deems
 appropriate to achieve the purposes of this section. Any facilities
 constructed under this section shall be located in the United States,
 Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, or the territories and possessions of
 the United States.
 (2) The Secretary shall require that at least 30 percent of all costs of
 any joint research and development venture under this section be provided
 from non-Federal sources.
 (3) Before establishing the joint research and development ventures under
 paragraph (1), the Secretary shall consult with, and take into consideration
 the recommendations of, the Advisory Committee on Renewable Energy and
 Energy Efficiency Technology under paragraph (4).
 (4)(A) The Secretary shall appoint members to an Advisory Committee on
 Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Technology (hereafter referred to
 as the `Advisory Committee') to assist the Secretary in carrying out his
 responsibilities under this section. The Advisory Committee shall include
 at least one member representing each of the following--
 (i) the Secretary of Commerce;
 (ii) the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development;
 (iii) the Solar Energy Research Institute;
 (iv) the Electric Power Research Institute;
 (v) the National Institute of Building Sciences;
 (vi) associations of firms in each of the major renewable energy
 manufacturing industries; and
 (vii) associations of firms in each of the major energy efficiency
 manufacturing industries.
 (B) The Advisory Committee, within one hundred and twenty days after its
 formation, provide the Secretary with recommendations for the establishment
 of joint ventures under paragraph (1) and shall advise the Secretary from
 time to time about the implementation of such ventures. Recommendations
 of the Advisory Committee shall be available to the public.
 (5) The Secretary shall establish at least one joint research and development
 venture in accordance with subsection (d) to develop technology and
 expertise in each of the following areas--
 (A) photovoltaics technology;
 (B) wind energy technology;
 (C) solar thermal technology;
 (D) factory-made housing;
 (E) advanced district cooling technology;
 (F) renewable energy and energy efficiency technology exports; and
 (G) fuel cell energy systems.
 (6) Not later than one hundred and eighty days after the date of the
 enactment of this section the Secretary shall publish plans to implement
 this section and report to Congress on such plans.
 (d) VENTURE- (1) Photovoltaics Technology-
 (A) The Secretary shall establish and provide financial assistance
 to a joint research and development venture for the demonstration of
 photovoltaic conversion of solar energy in accordance with the provisions
 of this paragraph.
 (B) The purpose of the venture under subparagraph (A) shall be to design,
 test and demonstrate systems employing critical enabling technologies
 for photovoltaic conversion of solar energy so as to achieve, to the
 maximum extent practicable, the goals of the Photovoltaic Energy Systems
 Program set forth in section 613(a)(2), as those goals may be amended under
 section 613(b). The venture under this paragraph may emphasize production,
 distribution, storage, or end use of electricity from photovoltaic conversion
 of solar energy or any combination thereof.
 (C) In soliciting proposals for the joint research and development venture
 under this paragraph, the Secretary shall consider the recommendations of the
 Advisory Subcommittee on Photovoltaic Energy Technology under subparagraph
 (D).
 (D) The Secretary shall appoint members to an Advisory Subcommittee
 on Photovoltaic Energy Technology to assist the Secretary in carrying
 out his responsibilities with respect to the joint venture under this
 paragraph. Such subcommittee shall include such members of the Advisory
 Committee as the Secretary deems appropriate and, in addition, at least
 one member representing each of the following--
 (i) firms in the photovoltaic manufacturing industry;
 (ii) the Director of the Agency for International Development; and
 (iii) the Director of the Export-Import Bank.
 (E) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary a total of not
 more than $1,200,000 for each of the fiscal years 1991, 1992, and 1993 to
 carry out the purposes of this paragraph.
 (2) WIND ENERGY TECHNOLOGY- (A) The Secretary shall establish and provide
 financial assistance to a joint research and development venture for the
 demonstration of the conversion of wind energy in accordance with the
 provisions of this paragraph.
 (B) The purpose of the venture under subparagraph (A) shall be to design,
 test and demonstrate systems employing critical enabling technologies
 for the conversion of wind energy so as to achieve, to the maximum extent
 practicable, the goals of the Wind Energy Research Program set forth in
 section 613(a)(1), as those goals may be amended under section 613(e). The
 venture under this paragraph may emphasize production, distribution,
 storage, or end use of wind energy or any combination thereof and may
 include systems employing other sources of energy in addition to wind energy.
 (C) In soliciting proposals for the joint research and development venture
 under this paragraph, the Secretary shall consider the recommendations of
 the Advisory Subcommittee on Wind Energy Technology under subparagraph (D).
 (D) The Secretary shall appoint members to an Advisory Subcommittee
 on Wind Energy Technology to assist the Secretary in carrying out
 his responsibilities with respect to the joint venture under this
 paragraph. Such subcommittee shall include such members of the Advisory
 Committee as the Secretary deems appropriate and, in addition, at least
 one member representing each of the following--
 (i) firms in the wind energy equipment manufacturing industry;
 (ii) the Director of the Agency for International Development; and
 (iii) the Director of the Export-Import Bank.
 (E) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary a total of not
 more than $1,200,000 for each of the fiscal years 1991, 1992, and 1993 to
 carry out the purposes of this paragraph.
 (3) SOLAR THERMAL TECHNOLOGY- (A) The Secretary shall establish and provide
 financial assistance to a joint research and development venture for the
 demonstration of the use of solar thermal energy in accordance with the
 provisions of this paragraph.
 (B) The purpose of the venture under subparagraph (A) shall be to design,
 test and demonstrate critical enabling technologies for the use of solar
 thermal energy so as to achieve, to the maximum extent practicable, the goals
 of the Solar Thermal Energy Systems Program set forth in section 613(a)(3),
 as those goals may be amended under section 613(b). The venture under this
 paragraph may emphasize production, distribution, storage, or end use of
 solar thermal energy or any combination thereof and may include systems
 employing other sources of energy in addition to solar thermal energy.
 (C) In soliciting proposals for the joint research and development venture
 under this paragraph, the Secretary shall consider the recommendations
 of the Advisory Subcommittee on Solar Thermal Energy Technology under
 subparagraph (D).
 (D) The Secretary shall appoint members to an Advisory Subcommittee
 on Wind Energy Technology to assist the Secretary in carrying out
 his responsibilities with respect to the joint venture under this
 paragraph. Such subcommittee shall include such members of the Advisory
 Committee as the Secretary deems appropriate and, in addition, at least
 one member representing each of the following--
 (i) firms in the solar thermal manufacturing industry;
 (ii) the Director of the Agency for International Development;
 (iii) the Director of the Export-Import Bank; and
 (iv) the Gas Research Institute.
 (E) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary a total of
 not more than $900,000 for each of the fiscal years 1991 through 1993 to
 carry out the purposes of this paragraph.
 (4) FACTORY MADE HOUSING- (A) The Secretary shall establish and provide
 financial assistance to a joint research and development venture with such
 specialized private firms and investors as the Secretary deems appropriate in
 order to establish at least three regional projects to demonstrate techniques
 to improve the energy performance of factory-made housing offered by United
 States firms. In locating the projects under this paragraph, the Secretary
 shall consider regional differences in housing needs, housing design,
 construction technique, marketing practices, and construction materials.
 (B) The projects under this paragraph shall be designed to demonstrate
 state-of-the-art product quality, energy efficiency, and adaptability to
 renewable forms of energy of factory-made housing offered for sale in the
 United States. The projects shall be structured to demonstrate improvements
 in housing design, fabrication, delivery systems, construction processes,
 marketing, and product export techniques.
 (C) The demonstration strategy under this paragraph shall be guided by--
 (i) a detailed characterization of the needs of the home building industry;
 (ii) a close working relationship with all sectors of the home building
 industry; and
 (iii) coordination among the projects to pool and conserve resources.
 (D) In selecting projects under this section, the Secretary shall consider
 the recommendations of the Advisory Subcommittee on Energy Performance in
 Factory-Made Housing established under subparagraph (E).
 (E) The Secretary shall appoint members to an Advisory Subcommittee on Energy
 Performance in Factory-Made Housing to assist the Secretary in carrying
 out his responsibilities with respect to the joint research and development
 venture established under this paragraph. Such subcommittee shall include
 such members of the Advisory Committee as the Secretary deems appropriate
 and, in addition, at least one member representing each of the following--
 (i) the National Association of Home Builders;
 (ii) the National Laboratories of the Department of Energy; and
 (iii) the National Institute of Standards and Technology.
 (F) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary a total of
 not more than than $5,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1991 through
 1993 to carry out the purposes of this paragraph.
 (5) ADVANCED DISTRICT COOLING TECHNOLOGY- (A)(i) The Secretary shall
 establish and provide financial assistance to a joint research and
 development venture with such specialized private firms and investors
 as the Secretary deems appropriate in order to develop advanced district
 cooling technologies that are applicable in cities with high cooling loads.
 (ii) The purpose of the joint venture under this paragraph is to develop
 technical strategies for decreasing the capital cost and increasing the
 energy efficiency of major district heating and cooling system components
 and to assist in making district heating and cooling available to local
 governments.
 (B) The Secretary shall select three cities for application of advanced
 district cooling technologies developed by the joint venture under this
 paragraph. The activities to be carried out in such application shall include
 district cooling assessment, feasibility, and engineering design studies.
 (C) In selecting the cities under subparagraph (B), the Secretary shall
 consider the recommendations of the Advisory Subcommittee on Advanced
 District Cooling Technology established under subparagraph (D).
 (D) The Secretary shall appoint members to an Advisory Subcommittee on
 Advanced District Cooling Technology to assist the Secretary in carrying
 out his responsibilities with respect to the joint research and development
 venture under this paragraph. Such subcommittee shall include such members of
 the Advisory Committee as the Secretary deems appropriate and, in addition,
 at least one member representing each of the following--
 (i) firms manufacturing district cooling equipment; and
 (ii) the National League of Cities.
 (E) There is authorized to be appropriated for each of the fiscal years
 1991 through 1993 not more than $1,000,000 per year to carry out the
 purposes of this paragraph.
 (6) EXPORT TECHNOLOGY PROJECTS- (A) For purposes of this paragraph Congress
 finds that--
 (i) the United States has several advanced energy efficiency and renewable
 energy technologies that lack only sufficient coordination, support, and
 emphasis to become important export items capable of reducing the United
 States' trade deficit;
 (ii) a major barrier to export of energy efficiency and renewable energy
 technology is the lack of information on overseas markets and technology
 development by foreign competitors;
 (iii) the industry that markets energy efficiency technology is highly
 fragmented, and the renewable energy industry is comprised of small
 firms that lack the necessary resources to identify and target overseas
 markets; and
 (iv) a joint research and development venture is needed to bring together
 a broad array of manufacturing firms, financial institutions, and Federal
 agencies to identify and develop promising technologies and export markets
 for energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies.
 (B) The Secretary shall establish and provide financial assistance to a
 joint research and development venture with such specialized private firms
 and investors as the Secretary determines appropriate for the purpose of
 commercializing and marketing domestically-developed energy efficiency
 and renewable energy technologies in order to enhance sales of products
 developed from such technologies relative to foreign-made products.
 (C) In designing the joint venture under subparagraph (B), the Secretary
 shall consider the recommendations of the Advisory Subcommittee on
 Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Technology Exports established
 under subparagraph (D).
 (D) The Secretary shall appoint members to an Advisory Subcommittee on
 Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Technology Exports to assist the
 Secretary in carrying out his responsibilities with respect to the joint
 research and development venture under this paragraph. Such subcommittee
 shall include such members of the Advisory Committee as the Secretary
 deems appropriate and, in addition, at least one member representing each
 of the following--
 (i) the Director of the Agency for International Development;
 (ii) the Director of the Export-Import Bank;
 (iii) the United States Export Council for Renewable Energy;
 (iv) the National Laboratories of the Department of Energy.
 (E) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out
 the purposes of this paragraph a total amount for each of the fiscal years
 1991 through 1993 not to exceed $5,000,000 with respect to renewable
 energy activities under this paragraph and $5,000,000 with respect to
 energy efficiency activities under this paragraph.
 (e) SECRETARIAL DISCRETION- (1) If the Secretary, based on the
 recommendations of the Advisory Committee under subsection (c)(4)(B)
 with respect to a joint research and development venture described under
 subsection (d), determines, in consultation with the Advisory Committee,
 that--
 (A) there is insufficient private sector interest in such venture to
 satisfy the requirement of subsection (c)(2);
 (B) carrying out the venture will not further the purposes of this title; or
 (C) timely commercialization of the technology to be demonstrated will
 not be advanced by the venture, then the Secretary shall not be subject
 to the requirements of subsection (d) with respect to the technology to
 be demonstrated by the joint research and development venture.
 (2) The Secretary shall notify Congress of any determination under
 paragraph (1) and provide a written explanation of the reasons for the
 determination. Immediately thereafter, the Secretary shall consult with the
 Advisory Committee, and, based on the recommendations of such Committee,
 shall promptly transmit to Congress a plan for the establishment of a
 substitute joint research and development venture to demonstrate, consistent
 with this section, an alternative renewable energy or energy efficiency
 technology so as to accomplish the purposes of this title. Any unexpended
 funds authorized to be appropriated under subsection (d) for the joint
 research and development venture with respect to which a determination is
 made under paragraph (1) may be used for a substitute joint research and
 development venture established under this subsection.
 (3) When thirty calendar days have elapsed after transmittal of the plan
 under paragraph (2), the Secretary shall proceed with the joint research
 and development venture described in his plan as if such venture were
 required under subsection (d).
 (f) ADDITIONAL COMMERCIALIZATION PROJECTS- (1) The President's budget
 request for fiscal year 1992 shall include the Secretary's recommendations
 for at least one proposed proof-of-concept or near-commercial demonstration
 project in each of the categories represented by section 3(a) (1), (2)
 and (3). Each proposed project shall be described in sufficient detail
 to support congressional authorization and solicitation of bids for
 construction of necessary facilities.
 (2) A list and description of alternative project plans under this subsection
 shall be submitted in President's fiscal year 1991 budget request. Such
 plans shall require funding or in-kind contributions from private sources
 in support of at least 30 percent of total project costs.
 (3) In selecting proposed projects under this subsection, the Secretary
 shall take into account the extent to which such projects will contribute to
 earlier commercialization of key technologies within such categories that
 might occur without Federal support under this subsection and the extent
 to which such projects will contribute to the competitiveness of United
 States firms engaged in international trade in renewable energy technologies.
RENEWABLE ENERGY EXPORTS
 SEC. 615. (a) FINDINGS AND PURPOSES- (1) For purposes of this section,
 Congress finds that--
 (A) among the major problems in promoting exports of renewable energy
 technology are the lack of available information on overseas markets and
 the absence of financing for the purchase of the technologies; and
 (B) the Committee on Renewable Energy, Commerce, and Trade (`CORECT')
 established under the Renewable Energy Industry Development Act (Public
 Law 98-370) currently coordinates Federal Government activities to promote
 renewable energy exports.
 (2) The purpose of this section is to evaluate current efforts to
 promote exports of renewable energy technology, to establish a joint
 government-industry plan to identify promising technologies and increase
 the financing available for exports of renewable energy technologies, to
 target potential markets for these technologies, and to authorize funding
 of these activities.
 (b) ANNUAL REPORT- The Committee on Renewable Energy, Commerce, and Trade
 shall annually report to Congress.
 (c) AGENCY ACTIONS- Each report submitted under subsection (b) shall describe
 the actions of each agency represented by a member of the Committee on
 Renewable Energy, Commerce, and Trade taken during the previous fiscal
 year to achieve the purposes of such committee and of this section. Such
 report shall describe the exports of renewable energy technology that have
 occurred as a result of such agency actions.
 (d) PLAN- The Committee on Renewable Energy, Commerce, and Trade shall--
 (1) establish a joint government-industry plan to maintain or increase
 the market share of the United States in international trade in renewable
 energy technologies, including technologies for production of alcohol fuels,
 biomass energy, geothermal energy, wood energy and in technologies for fuel
 cell energy conversion, passive solar energy conversion, photovoltaics,
 solar thermal energy conversion and wind energy conversion. Such plan shall
 include guidelines for agencies that are members of the committee with
 respect to the financing of exports of such renewable energy technologies;
 (2) develop, in consultation with representatives of affected industries,
 administrative guidelines for Federal export loan programs to simplify
 application by firms seeking export assistance for renewable energy
 technologies from agencies implementing such programs; and
 (3) target renewable energy technology markets for primary emphasis by
 Federal export loan programs, development programs, and private sector
 assistance programs.
 (e) The Committee on Renewable Energy, Commerce, and Trade shall include
 a description of the plan under paragraph (1) in no later than the second
 report submitted under subsection (b), and shall include in subsequent
 reports a description of any modifications to such plan and of the progress
 in implementing the plan.
 (f) AUTHORIZATIONS- There is hereby authorized to be appropriated to the
 Secretary for activities of the Committee on Renewable Energy, Commerce,
 and Trade an amount not to exceed--
 (1) $1,200,000 in fiscal year 1991;
 (2) $1,500,000 in fiscal year 1992; and
 (3) $1,800,000 in fiscal year 1993.
RENEWABLE ENERGY
 SEC. 616. (a) DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION- Section 523 of the National
 Energy Conservation Policy Act (42 U.S.C. 8243) is amended by adding a
 new subsection (d) as follows:
 `(d) In order to more widely disseminate information about the program
 under this part and under part 3 and the benefits of solar heating and
 solar heating and cooling technology, the Secretary shall establish a
 program to disseminate such information for Federal procurement officers
 and Federal loan officers that shall include site visits and technical
 briefings. The Secretary shall utilize available funds for the program
 under this subsection.'.
 (b) DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE HOUSING- Section 2857(b)(1) of title 10, United
 States Code, is amended by inserting after `has the potential for' the
 following: `reduced energy costs'.
 (c) OVERSEAS PRIVATE INVESTMENT CORPORATION LOANS- Section 234(e) of the
 Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 is amended--
 (1) in the first sentence, by inserting after `cooperatives' the following:
 `and including the initiation of incentives, grants, and studies for
 renewable energy and other small business activities'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new sentence: `Administrative
 funds may not be made available for incentives, grants, and studies for
 renewable energy and other small business activities.'.
REPORTS
 SEC. 617. (a) REPORT BY THE SECRETARY- One year after the date of the
 enactment of this title and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall report
 to Congress on the programs, projects, and joint research and development
 ventures conducted under this title and the progress being made towards
 accomplishing the goals and purposes set forth in this title, including
 the national goals set forth in section 613(a).
 (b) NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY PLAN REPORT- Each annual submission of the
 National Energy Policy Plan under title VIII of Public Law 95-91 shall be
 accompanied by a three-year strategic plan for energy technology research,
 development, and demonstration. Such plan shall address the role of
 federally assisted research, development, and demonstration projects
 in the achievement of the national policy goals of the National Energy
 Policy Plan and shall assess both the level of support for energy research,
 development, and demonstration reasonably necessary to achieve these goals
 and the basis for allocating the support recommended by the President
 among the available alternatives. At a minimum, these alternatives shall
 include energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies.
Subtitle C
RENEWABLE ENERGY/FUEL CELL SYSTEMS INTEGRATION AND UTILIZATION
 SEC. 618. FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--(a) while the Federal
 Government has invested substantially in fuel cell technology through
 research and development during the past ten years, additional research
 on technologies that enable fuel cells to use alternative fuel sources
 needs to be undertaken in order to fulfill the conservation promise of
 fuel cells as an energy source;
 (b) there is no national policy for acting upon the findings of this
 research and development; and
 (c) if such a national policy were developed, the public investment in fuel
 cell technology would be realized through reduced dependency on imported
 oil and the subsequent improvement in the international trade accounts of
 the United States.
RESEARCH PROGRAMS
 SEC. 619. (a) PROGRAM AUTHORIZATION- The Secretary shall implement and
 carry out a research program for the purposes of--
 (1) exploring the operation of fuel cells employing methane gas generated
 from various forms of biomass;
 (2) developing technologies to use renewable energy sources, including
 wind and solar energy, to produce hydrogen for use in fuel cells; and
 (3) determining the technical requirements for employing fuel cells for
 electric power production as backup spinning reserve components to renewable
 power systems in rural and isolated areas.
 (b) GRANTS- In carrying out the research program authorized in subsection
 (a), the Secretary may make grants to, or enter into contracts with,
 private research laboratories.
 (c) REPORT TO CONGRESS- The Secretary shall transmit to the Congress on
 or before September 30, 1991, a comprehensive report on research carried
 out pursuant to this Act.
 (d) AUTHORIZATION- There are hereby authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000
 for fiscal year 1991 to the Secretary to be used to conduct research as
 provided in this Act.
 SEC. 620. INCLUSION OF FUEL CELLS AS A FUEL CONSERVATION TECHNOLOGY UNDER
 REIDA- Section 256 of the Energy Policy and Conservation Act is amended
 by inserting at the end thereof the following:
 `(e) For purposes of this section, the term `domestic renewable energy
 industry' shall include industries using fuel cell technology.'.
 SEC. 621. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY GUIDELINES FOR THE USE OF FUEL
 CELL TECHNOLOGIES- Within one hundred and eighty days of the date of
 enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
 Agency shall prepare Federal guidelines for cities and municipalities
 specifying environmental and safety standards for the use of fuel cell
 technology. In the preparation of the guidelines, the Administrator shall
 utilize the successful experience of the New York City Fire Department in
 the use of fuel cell technologies.
 SEC. 622. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE INVESTIGATION OF EXPORT MARKET POTENTIAL
 FOR INTEGRATED FUEL CELL SYSTEMS- Within one hundred and eighty days of the
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Commerce shall assess and
 report to Congress concerning the export market potential for integrated
 systems of fuel cells with renewable power technologies.
Subtitle D
HYDROGEN RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ACT
 SEC. 623. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE- (a) The Congress finds that--
 (1) due to the limited quantities of naturally occurring petroleum-based
 fuels, viable alternative fuels and feedstocks must be developed;
 (2) priority should be given to the development of alternative fuels with
 universal availability;
 (3) hydrogen is one of the most abundant elements in the universe, with
 water, a primary source of hydrogen, covering three-fourths of the Earth;
 (4) hydrogen appears promising as an alternative to environmentally damaging
 fossil fuels;
 (5) hydrogen can be transported more efficiently and at less cost than
 electricity over long distances;
 (6) renewable energy resources are potential energy sources that can
 convert hydrogen from its naturally occurring states into high quality fuel,
 feedstock, and energy storage media; and
 (7) it is in the national interest to accelerate efforts to develop a
 domestic capability to economically produce hydrogen in quantities which
 will make a significant contribution toward reducing the Nation's dependence
 on conventional fuels.
 (b) The purpose of this title is to--
 (1) direct the Secretary of Energy to prepare and implement a comprehensive
 five-year plan and program to accelerate research and development activities
 leading to the realization of a domestic capability to produce, distribute,
 and use hydrogen economically within the shortest time practicable; and
 (2) develop renewable energy resources as primary energy sources to be
 used in the production of hydrogen.
COMPREHENSIVE MANAGEMENT PLAN
 SEC. 624. (a) The Secretary shall prepare a comprehensive five-year program
 management plan for research and development activities which shall be
 conducted over a period of no less than five years and shall be consistent
 with the provisions of sections 625 and 626. In the preparation of such
 plan, the Secretary shall consult with the Administrator of the National
 Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Secretary of Transportation,
 the Hydrogen Technical Advisory Panel established under section 628,
 and the heads of such other Federal agencies and such public and private
 organizations as he deems appropriate. Such plan shall be structured to
 permit the realization of a domestic hydrogen production capability within
 the shortest time practicable.
 (b) The Secretary shall transmit the comprehensive program management
 plan to the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology of the House of
 Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the
 Senate within six months after the date of the enactment of this Act--
 (1) the research and development priorities and goals to be achieved by
 the program;
 (2) the program elements, management structure, and activities, including
 program responsibilities of individual agencies and individual institutional
 elements;
 (3) the program strategies including technical milestones to be achieved
 toward specific goals during each fiscal year for all major activities
 and projects;
 (4) the estimated costs of individual program items, including current
 as well as proposed funding levels for each of the five years of the plan
 for each of the participating agencies;
 (5) a description of the methodology of coordination and technology
 transfer; and
 (6) the proposed participation by industry and academia in the planning
 and implementation of the program.
 (c) Concurrently with the submission of the President's annual budget
 to the Congress for each year after the year in which the comprehensive
 five-year plan is initially transmitted under subsection (b), the Secretary
 shall transmit to the Congress a detailed description of the current
 comprehensive plan, setting forth appropriate modifications which may be
 necessary to revise the plan as well as comments on, and recommendations
 for, improvements in the comprehensive program management plan made by
 the Hydrogen Technical Advisory Panel established under section 628.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
 SEC. 625. (a) The Secretary shall establish, within the Department of Energy,
 a research and development program, consistent with the comprehensive
 five-year management plan under section 624, to ensure the development
 of a domestic hydrogen fuel production capability within the shortest
 time practicable.
 (b)(1) The Secretary shall initiate research or accelerate existing research
 in areas which may contribute to the development of hydrogen production
 and use.
 (2) Areas researched shall include production, liquefaction transmission,
 distribution, storage, and use. Particular attention shall be given to
 developing an understanding and resolution of all potential problems of
 introducing hydrogen production and use into the marketplace.
 (c) The Secretary shall give priority to those production techniques that
 use renewable energy resources as their primary energy source.
 (d) The Secretary shall, for the purpose of performing his responsibilities
 pursuant to this title, solicit proposals for and evaluate any reasonable
 new or improved technology, a description of which is submitted to the
 Secretary in writing, which could lead or contribute to the development
 of hydrogen production technology.
 (e) The Secretary shall conduct evaluations, arrange for tests and
 demonstrations, and disseminate to developers information, data, and
 materials necessary to support efforts undertaken pursuant to this section.
DEMONSTRATIONS AND PLAN
 SEC. 626. (a)(1) The Secretary shall conduct demonstrations of hydrogen
 technology, preferably in self-contained locations, so that technical
 and nontechnical parameters can be evaluated to best determine commercial
 applicability of the technology.
 (2) Concurrently with activities conducted pursuant to section 624, the
 Secretary shall conduct small-scale demonstrations of hydrogen technology
 at self-contained sites.
 (b) The Secretary shall, in consultation with the Secretary of
 Transportation, the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space
 Administration, and Hydrogen Technical Advisory Panel established under
 section 628, prepare a comprehensive large-scale hydrogen demonstration
 plan with respect to demonstrations carried out pursuant to subsection
 (a)(1). Such plan shall include--
 (1) a description of the necessary research and development activities that
 must be completed before initiation of a large-scale hydrogen production
 demonstration program;
 (2) an assessment of the appropriateness of a large-scale demonstration
 immediately upon completion of the necessary research and development
 activities; and
 (3) an implementation schedule with associated budget and program management
 resource requirements.
COORDINATION AND CONSULTATION
 SEC. 627. (a) The Secretary shall have overall management responsibility
 for carrying out the program under this title. In carrying out such program,
 the Secretary, consistent with such overall management responsibility--
 (1) shall use the expertise of the National Aeronautics and Space
 Administration and the Department of Transportation; and
 (2) may use the expertise of any other Federal agency in accordance with
 subsection (b) in carrying out any activities under this title, to the
 extent that the Secretary determines that any such agency has capabilities
 which would allow such agency to contribute to the purpose of this title.
 (b) The Secretary may, in accordance with subsection (a), obtain the
 assistance of any department, agency or instrumentality of the executive
 branch of the Federal Government upon written request, on a reimbursable
 basis or otherwise and with the consent of such department, agency,
 or instrumentality. Each such request shall identify the assistance the
 Secretary deems necessary to carry out any duty under this title.
 (c) The Secretary shall consult with the Administrator of the National
 Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency, the Secretary of Transportation, and the Hydrogen
 Technical Advisory Panel established under section 628 in carrying out
 his authorities pursuant to this title.
 TECHNICAL PANEL
 SEC. 628. (a) There is hereby established a technical panel of the Energy
 Research Advisory Board, to be known as the Hydrogen Technical Advisory
 Panel, to advise the Secretary on the program under this title.
 (b)(1) The technical panel shall be appointed by the Secretary and
 shall be comprised of such representatives from domestic industry,
 universities, professional societies, Government laboratories,
 financial, environmental, and other organizations as the Secretary, in
 consultation with the Chairman of the Energy Research Advisory Board,
 deems appropriate based on his assessment of the technical qualifications
 of such representatives. Appointments to the technical panel shall be made
 within 90 days after the enactment of this Act. The technical panel shall
 have a chairman, who shall be elected by the members from among their number.
 (2) Members of the technical panel need not be members of the full Energy
 Research Advisory Board.
 (c) The activities of the technical panel shall be in compliance with any
 laws and regulations guiding the activities of technical and factfinding
 groups reporting to the Energy Research Advisory Board.
 (d) The heads of the departments, agencies, and instrumentalities of
 the executive branch of the Federal Government shall cooperate with the
 technical panel in carrying out the requirements of this section and shall
 furnish to the technical panel such information as the technical panel
 deems necessary to carry out this section.
 (e) The technical panel shall review and make any necessary recommendations
 to the following items, among others--
 (1) the implementation and conduct of the program under this title; and
 (2) the economic, technological, and environmental consequences of the
 deployment of hydrogen production and use systems.
 (f) The technical panel shall prepare and submit annually to the Energy
 Research Advisory Board a written report of its findings and recommendations
 with regard to the program under this title. The report shall include--
 (1) a summary of the technical panel's activities for the preceding year;
 (2) an assessment and evaluation of the status of the program; and
 (3) comments on and recommendations for improvements in the comprehensive
 5-year program management plan required under section 624.
 (g) After consideration of the technical panel report and within 30 days
 after its receipt, the Energy Research Advisory Board shall submit the
 report, together with any comments which the Board deems appropriate,
 to the Secretary.
 (h) The Secretary shall provide such staff, funds, and other support as
 may be necessary to enable the technical panel to carry out the functions
 described in this section.
DEFINITIONS
 SEC. 629. As used in this title--
 (a) the term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Energy; and
 (b) the term `capability' means proven technical ability.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS
 SEC. 630. There is hereby authorized to be appropriated to carry out the
 purpose of this title (in addition to any amounts made available for such
 purpose pursuant to other Acts)--
 (a) $10,000,000 for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 1991;
 (b) $15,000,000 for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 1992;
 (c) $20,000,000 for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 1993;
 (d) $25,000,000 for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 1994; and
 (e) $30,000,000 for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 1995;
HYDROGEN-FUELED AIRCRAFT RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
 SEC. 631. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE- (a) The Congress finds that--
 (1) long-term future decreases in petroleum-based fuel availability will
 seriously impair the operation of the world's air transport fleets;
 (2) hydrogen appears to be an attractive alternative to petroleum in the
 long-term to fuel commercial aircraft;
 (3) it is therefore in the national interest to accelerate efforts to develop
 a domestic hydrogen-fueled supersonic and subsonic aircraft capability; and
 (4) the use of liquid hydrogen as a commercial air transport fuel has
 sufficient long-term promise to justify a substantial research, development
 demonstration program.
 (b) The purpose of this title is to--
 (1) direct the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space
 Administration to prepare and implement a comprehensive five-year plan
 and program for the conduct of research, development, and demonstration
 activities leading to the realization of a domestic hydrogen-fueled aircraft
 capability within the shortest time practicable.
 (2) establish as a goal broad multinational participation in the program; and
 (3) provide a basis for public, industry, and certifying agency acceptance
 of hydrogen-fueled aircraft as a mode of commercial air transport.
COMPREHENSIVE MANAGEMENT PLAN
 SEC. 632. (a) The Administrator shall prepare a comprehensive five-year
 program management plan for research, development, and demonstration
 activities consistent with the provisions of sections 633, 634, and 635. In
 the preparation of such plan, the Administrator shall consult with the
 Secretary of Energy, the Secretary of Transportation, and the heads of
 such other Federal agencies and such public and private organizations
 as he deems appropriate. Such plan shall be structured to permit the
 realization of a domestic hydrogen-fueled aircraft capability within the
 shortest time practicable.
 (b) The Administrator shall transmit the comprehensive five-year program
 management plan to the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology of
 the House of Representatives and the Committees on Commerce, Science, and
 Transportation and Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate within six
 months after the date of the enactment of this Act. The plan shall include,
 but not necessarily be limited to--
 (1) the research and development priorities and goals to be achieved by
 the program;
 (2) the program elements, management structure, and activities, including
 program responsibilities of individual agencies and individual institutional
 elements;
 (3) the program strategies including detailed technical milestones to
 be achieved toward specific goals during each fiscal year for all major
 activities and projects;
 (4) the estimated costs of individual program items, including current
 as well as proposed funding levels for each of the five years of the plan
 for each of the participating agencies;
 (5) a description of the methodology of coordination and technology
 transfer; and
 (6) the proposed participation by industry and academia in the planning
 and implementation for the program.
 (c) Concurrently the submission of the President's annual budget to the
 Congress for each year after the year in which the comprehensive five-year
 plan is initially transmitted under subsection (b), the Administrator
 shall transmit to the Congress a detailed description of the current
 comprehensive plan, setting forth appropriate modifications which may be
 necessary to revise the plan as well as comments on and recommendations
 for improvements in the comprehensive program management plan made by the
 Hydrogen-Fueled Aircraft Advisory Committee established under section 637.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
 SEC. 633. (a) The Administrator shall establish, within the National
 Aeronautics and Space Administration, a research and development program
 consistent with the comprehensive five-year program management plan under
 section 632 to ensure the development of a domestic hydrogen-fueled aircraft
 capability within the shortest time practicable.
 (b) The Administrator shall initiate research or accelerate existing research
 in areas which may contribute to the development of a hydrogen-fueled
 aircraft capability.
 (c) In conducting the program pursuant to this section, the Administrator
 shall encourage the establishment of domestic industrial capabilities to
 supply hydrogen-fueled aircraft systems or subsystems to the commercial
 marketplace.
 (d) The Administrator shall, for the purpose of performing his
 responsibilities pursuant to this Act, solicit proposals for and evaluate
 any reasonable new or improved technology, a description of which could
 lead or contribute to the development of hydrogen-fueled aircraft technology.
 (e) The Administrator shall conduct evaluations, arrange for tests and
 demonstrations and disseminate to developers information, data, and
 materials necessary to support efforts undertaken pursuant to this section.
FLIGHT DEMONSTRATION
 SEC. 634. (a) Concurrent with the activities carried out pursuant to
 section 633, the Administrator shall, in consultation with the Secretary
 of Transportation, the Secretary of Energy, and the Hydrogen-Fueled
 Aircraft Advisory Committee established under section 637, prepare a
 comprehensive flight demonstration plan, the implementation of which shall
 provide confirmation of the technical feasibility, economic viability, and
 safety of liquid hydrogen as a fuel for commercial transport aircraft. The
 comprehensive flight plan shall include--
 (1) a description of the necessary research and development activities
 that must be completed before initiation of a flight demonstration program;
 (2) the selection of a domestic site where demonstration activities can
 lead to early commercialization of the concept;
 (3) an assessment of a preliminary flight demonstration to occur concurrently
 with the later states of research and development activities; and
 (4) an implementation schedule with associated budget and program management
 resource requirements.
 (b) The Administration shall transmit such comprehensive flight demonstration
 plan to the Congress within two years after the date of the enactment of
 this Act.
HYDROGEN PRODUCTION AND GROUND FACILITIES
 SEC. 635. (a) The Administrator, in consultation with the Secretary of
 Transportation and the Secretary of Energy, shall define the systems,
 subsystems, or components associated with the production, transportation,
 storage, and handling of liquid hydrogen that are specifically required
 for and unique to the use of such fuel for commercial aircraft application.
 (b) The Administrator shall structure the research and development program
 pursuant to section 633 to allow the development of the systems, subsystems,
 or components defined pursuant to subsection (a) of this section.
 (c) The research and development program for hydrogen production,
 transportation, and storage systems, subsystems, and components which
 are suitable for inclusion as part of fully integrated hydrogen-fueled
 aircraft system, but which are not being specifically developed for such
 application shall be the responsibility of the Secretary of Energy. Such
 activities shall be included as part of the program established pursuant
 to title I of this Act, and shall be so conducted as to ensure compliance
 with hydrogen-fueled aircraft system constraints.
COORDINATION AND CONSULTATION
 SEC. 636. (a) The Administrator shall have overall management responsibility
 for carrying out the program under this title. In carrying out such program,
 the Administrator, consistent with such overall management responsibility--
 (1) shall utilize the expertise of the Departments of Transportation and
 Energy to the extent deemed appropriate by the Administrator, and
 (2) may utilize the expertise of any other Federal agency in accordance with
 subsection (b) in carrying out any activities under this title, to the extent
 that the Administrator determines that any such agency has capabilities
 which would allow such agency to contribute to the purpose of this title.
 (b) The Administrator may, in accordance with subsection (a), obtain the
 assistance of any department, agency, or instrumentality of the executive
 branch of the Federal Government upon written request, on a reimbursable
 basis or otherwise and with the consent of such department, agency,
 or instrumentality. Each such request shall identify the assistance the
 Administrator deems necessary to carry out any duty under this title.
 (c) The Administrator shall consult with the Secretary of Energy, the
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Secretary
 of Transportation, and the Hydrogen-Fueled Aircraft Advisory Committee
 established under section 207 in carrying out his authorities pursuant to
 this title.
ADVISORY COMMITTEE
 SEC. 637. (a) There is hereby established a Hydrogen Fueled Aircraft
 Advisory Committee, which shall advise the Administrator on the program
 under this title.
 (b) The committee shall be appointed by the Administrator and shall be
 composed of at least seven members from industrial, academic, financial,
 environmental, and legal organizations and such other entities as the
 Administrator deems appropriate. Appointments to the committee shall be
 made within ninety days after the enactment of this Act. The committee shall
 have a chairman, who shall be elected by the members from among their number.
 (c) The heads of the departments, agencies, and instrumentalities of the
 executive branch of the Federal Government shall cooperate with the committee
 in carrying out the requirements of this section and shall furnish to the
 committee such information as the committee deems necessary to carry out
 this section.
 (d) The committee shall meet at least four times annually, notwithstanding
 subsections (e) and (f) of section 10 of Public Law 92-463.
 (e) The committee shall review and make any necessary recommendations on
 the following items, among others--
 (1) the implementation and conduct of the program under this title; and
 (2) the economic, technological, and environmental consequences of developing
 a hydrogen-fueled aircraft capability.
 (f) The committee shall prepare and submit annually to the Administrator
 a written report of its findings and recommendations with regard to the
 program under this title. The report shall include--
 (1) a summary of the committee's activities for the preceding year;
 (2) an assessment and evaluation of the status of the program; and
 (3) comments on and recommendations for improvements in the comprehensive
 five-year program management plan required under section 632.
 (g) The Administrator shall provide such staff, funds, and other support
 as may be necessary to enable the committee to carry out the functions
 described in this section.
DEFINITIONS
 SEC. 638. As used in this title--
 (a) the term `Administrator' means the Administrator of the National
 Aeronautics and Space Administration;
 (b) the term `capability' means proven technical ability; and
 (c) the term `certifying agency' means any government entity with direct
 responsibility for assuring public safety in the operation of the air
 transport system.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS
 SEC. 639. AUTHORIZATIONS- There is hereby authorized to be appropriated
 to carry out the purpose of this title--
 (1) $10,000,000 for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 1991;
 (2) $15,000,000 for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 1992;
 (3) $20,000,000 for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 1993;
 (4) $25,000,000 for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 1994; and
 (5) $30,000,000 for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 1995.
TITLE VII--ADVANCED CIVILIAN REACTOR PROGRAMS
 SEC. 701. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES- Congress finds that--
 (a) the use of energy generated from nuclear fission could potentially
 supplant economically the burning of fossil fuels and thereby contribute
 substantially to reducing the rate and scope of global climate change;
 (b) the purpose of this title is to redirect programs in existence on
 the date of the enactment of this title for research, development, and
 demonstration of technologies for the generation of commercial electric
 power from nuclear fission. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
 this title shall be the exclusive source of authority for appropriations
 for such programs; and
 (c) for purposes of this section, programs for research, development, and
 demonstration of technologies for the generation of commercial electric
 power from nuclear fission include programs of the Secretary designated
 in appropriations acts for the fiscal year beginning on October 1, 1988,
 as Advanced Reactor Research and Development, Advanced Nuclear Systems,
 Facilities, and Program Direction.
 SEC. 702. RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM- (a) The Secretary
 shall carry out a comprehensive program of research and development of
 technologies for the generation of commercial electric power from nuclear
 fission that to the maximum extent practicable--
 (1) permit modular design;
 (2) exhibit passive safety;
 (3) are adaptable to standardized construction and licensing;
 (4) are cost-effective in comparison to alternative sources of electricity
 of comparable availability, reliability, and impact on the rate and scope
 of global climate change;
 (5) minimize the volume of nuclear waste produced and the cost of nuclear
 waste disposal;
 (6) prevent diversions of radioactive material for use in nuclear weapons;
 and
 (7) minimize the cost of power plant decommissioning.
 SEC. 703. APPROPRIATIONS- (a) There is authorized to be appropriated to carry
 out the purposes of this title for the fiscal year beginning on October 1,
 1991, not more than $100,000,000; for the fiscal year beginning October 1,
 1992, not more than $200,000,000, and for the fiscal year beginning October
 1, 1993, not more than $200,000,000.
 SEC. 704. REPORTS- The Secretary shall submit to the Congress by October 1,
 1991, and every year thereafter, a comprehensive report on progress made
 toward the development of reactor designs which meet the criteria set out in
 section 702(a) of this Act. The report shall rank each design or technology
 in terms of its ability to meet these criteria, and shall show how the
 Secretary will focus his research efforts to most expeditiously achieve the
 development of a reactor design which meets these criteria. In addition,
 the report shall include the Secretary's recommendations for whatever
 steps he deems are needed to successfully achieve the purposes of this title.
TITLE VIII--FUSION
 SEC. 801- (a) Within 1 year after the date of the enactment of this
 section, the Secretary shall report to Congress on the status of research,
 development, and demonstration in technology for the production of
 electricity from both magnetic and inertial confinement fusion, including
 international collaboration;
 (b) The report under subsection (a) shall present a program of research,
 development, and demonstration of magnetic confinement and inertial
 confinement fusion for energy that would insure by 2010--
 (1) a demonstration of the achievement of ignition conditions in both
 magnetic and inertial fusion test facilities;
 (2) a demonstration of the technological feasibility of magnetic and
 inertial fusion as a source of electric power; and
 (3) in the event that such feasibility is determined, the development of
 a design of a prototype commercial fusion reactor, accompanied by cost
 estimates and specifications sufficient to permit bids for construction
 of the reactor;
 (c) The report shall include--
 (1) an assessment of the actions needed and the funds that would be
 necessary to achieve the goals of the program under subsection (b);
 (2) an assessment of funds that would be provided by the United States under
 appropriate scenarios for international collaboration in a program of fusion
 research, development, and demonstration that would achieve such goals;
 (3) a review and analysis of the major obstacles to international
 collaboration in such a program; and
 (4) the Secretary's recommendations for additional legal and budgetary
 authority required to implement the preferred scenario among those considered
 under paragraph (2).
TITLE IX--COAL
 SEC. 901. REPORT- (a) Within nine months after the date of the enactment
 of this title the Secretary shall provide Congress with a comprehensive
 report reviewing the clean coal technologies to be developed in projects
 that have received Federal funds under the Department of Energy's Clean
 Coal Technology Program. This report shall analyze each such project to
 determine the change in the production of CO2 that is likely to result from
 the project specifically and in total were the technology being developed
 widely implemented relative to alternative coal use technologies;
 (b) Before submitting the report under subsection (a), the Secretary shall
 make a draft report available to the public and provide an opportunity
 for comment on such draft report. The Secretary shall provide appropriate
 responses to comments received in the final report; and
 (c) The Secretary shall include in the report his recommendations as to
 the most promising clean coal technologies that also would reduce the
 production of CO2 per unit of energy delivered relative to alternative
 coal use technologies.
 SEC. 902. PROGRAM- (a) The Secretary shall establish and carry out a program
 of research, development and demonstration of techniques for recovery and
 disposal of CO2 from automobiles, trucks and buses, electric utility power
 operations, and industrial manufacturing processes; and
 (b) Within six months after the date of the enactment of this section
 the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress on his plans to implement
 subsection (a). Such report shall include the Secretary's recommendations of
 priority in research, development, and demonstration opportunities under
 this section. The report shall also include the Secretary's five-year
 budget for the program under this section.
 SEC. 903. COAL STUDY- (a) The Secretary, through one or more of the
 Department's National Laboratories, shall establish and carry out a
 comprehensive program in the fundamental physics and chemistry of coal
 combustion. The program under this section shall examine the breakup of
 representative types of coal under combustion into final products at the
 molecular level;
 (b) In designing the program under this section, the Secretary shall give
 priority to research that will clarify the fundamental mechanisms for the
 production of oxides of sulphur and nitrogen during the combustion process,
 with the ultimate goal of using information gained thereby to limit or
 control the introduction of these gases into the atmosphere; and
 (c) Within six months after the date of the enactment of this section
 the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress on his plans to implement
 subsection (a), including a five-year budget for the program under this
 section.
 SEC. 904. IMPROVED EFFICIENCY- The Secretary shall support research that
 will improve the efficiency of coal generated electricity and industrial
 processes with priority given to those projects which have the greatest
 potential for reducing the generation of carbon dioxide.
 SEC. 905. AUTHORIZATION- There is authorized to be appropriated to the
 Secretary for purposes of this title not more than $5,000,000 for fiscal
 year 1991 and not more than $15,000,000 for fiscal year 1992, and not more
 than $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1993.
TITLE X--NATURAL GAS
 SEC. 1001. NATURAL GAS FOR MASS TRANSIT PROGRAM- (a) The Secretary shall,
 consistent with the Alternative Motor Fuels Act of 1988, Public Law 100-494,
 enter into cooperative agreements with, and provide financial assistance
 under this section to any municipal, county, or regional transit authority
 (hereinafter `authority') to demonstrate the feasibility of using natural
 gas as a fuel for mass transit in urban areas.
 (b) The program of the Secretary to implement the agreements under subsection
 (a) may include interested or affected private firms willing to provide
 assistance in cash or in kind for any such demonstration.
 (c) The Secretary shall not enter into any agreement under subsection
 (a) with any municipal, county or regional transit authority unless such
 government body agrees to provide at least twenty-five per centum percent
 of the costs of such demonstration.
 (d) An authority may petition the Secretary for priority in allocating
 financial assistance under this section.
 (e) The Secretary, at his discretion, may grant such priority under this
 section to any authority that demonstrates that the use of natural gas as a
 transportation fuel would have a significant effect on the ability of an air
 quality region to comply with applicable regulations governing air quality.
 (f) Within six months after the date of the enactment of this section the
 Secretary shall report to Congress on his plans to implement this section.
 (g) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary not more than
 $30,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1991, 1992, and 1993 for purposes of
 this section.
 SEC. 1002. REPORT- Within eighteen months after the date of the enactment
 of this title the Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator of
 the Environmental Protection Agency and the President of the Gas Research
 Institute, shall submit to Congress a report on the feasibility of using
 natural gas in gasoline and diesel-powered vehicles to facilitate compliance
 by such vehicles with applicable emissions requirements for such vehicles.
 SEC. 1003. NATURAL GAS USE IN FLEETS- (a) The Secretary, consistent with
 the Alternative Motor Fuels Act of 1988, and after consultation with the
 president of the Gas Research Institute, shall establish and carry out a
 program, and provide financial assistance, to encourage the development and
 commercialization of natural gas use in passenger fleets, light duty trucks,
 and heavy duty trucks by providing for the purchase and construction of
 alternative fuel vehicles and associated refueling equipment.
 (b) Both Federal and private fleets may be eligible for private assistance
 under this section. A public or private operator of a fleet may petition the
 Secretary for priority in allocating financial assistance under this section.
 (c) The Secretary, at his discretion, may grant such priority to those
 fleets where the use of natural gas as a transportation fuel would have a
 significant effect on the ability of an air quality region to comply with
 applicable regulations governing air quality.
 (d) To facilitate the use of natural gas fueled vehicles, the existing
 Federal vehicle anti-tampering regulations shall be amended by adding
 the following:
 `The conversion of a vehicle from gasoline only to natural gas or natural
 gas and gasoline shall not be considered a violation of any anti-tampering
 provisions of the Federal law and implementing regulations provided that
 the conversion complies with emissions standards which shall be issued by
 the EPA administrator not later than October 31, 1989.'.
 (e) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary not more than
 $30,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1991, 1992, and 1993, for purposes
 of this section.
 SEC. 1004. TRAINING PROGRAM- (a) The Secretary shall establish and carry
 out a training program for technicians who are responsible for vehicle
 installations of equipment that converts gasoline or diesel-fueled vehicles
 to the capability to run on natural gas alone, or on natural gas and either
 diesel or gasoline. Such training program shall provide these technicians
 with instruction on the correct installation procedures and techniques,
 adherence to specifications, vehicle operating procedures, and other
 appropriate mechanical concerns applicable to these vehicle conversions.
 (b) The Secretary, at his discretion, shall enter into cooperative
 agreements with, and provide financial assistance, under this section,
 to appropriate parties to provide training programs that will ensure the
 proper operation and performance of conversion equipment.
 (c) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary, consistent
 with the Alternative Motor Fuels Act of 1988, and after consultation with
 the president of the Gas Research Institute, not more than $5,000,000 for
 each of the fiscal years 1991, 1992, and 1993 for purposes of this section.
 SEC. 1005. VEHICLE RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM-
 (a) The Secretary, in consultation with the president of the Gas Research
 Institute, shall establish and carry out a program of research, development,
 and demonstration on techniques related to improving natural gas vehicle
 technology including, but not limited to, the following areas--
 (1) gaseous fuel injection;
 (2) carburetion;
 (3) manifolding;
 (4) combustion;
 (5) power optimization;
 (6) emissions control;
 (7) novel gas compression concepts;
 (8) advanced storage systems; and
 (9) advanced gaseous fueling technologies.
 (b) The Secretary, consistent with the Alternative Motor Fuels Act of 1988,
 after consultation with the president of the Gas Research Institute, shall
 enter into cooperative agreements with, and provide financial assistance,
 under this section, to the Gas Research Institute to perform the research
 and development to improve natural gas vehicle technology.
 (c) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary not more than
 $10,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1991, 1992, and 1993 for purposes
 of this section.
 SEC. 1006. NATURAL GAS RECOVERY, RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEMONSTRATION
 PROGRAM- (a) The Secretary, in consultation with the president of the
 Gas Research Institute, shall expand and continue a program of research,
 development, and demonstration on techniques to increase the availability
 of natural gas from--
 (1) intensive recovery of natural gas in place in discovered reservoirs
 or formations; and
 (2) more economic recovery of unconventional natural gas, including gas
 from tight sands, Eastern shales gas from less permeable formations,
 coal-bed methane, and geopressured reservoirs.
 (b) The Secretary shall seek to enter into joint research and development
 ventures with persons engaged in the production, transportation or major use
 of natural gas to implement the program under subsection (a). For purposes
 of this section a `joint research and development venture' means a joint
 research and development venture under the National Cooperative Research
 Act of 1984.
 (c) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary not more than
 $25,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1991, 1992, and 1993 for purposes
 of this section.
 SEC. 1007. ENGINE RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, AND DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM- (a) The
 Secretary, in consultation with the President of the Gas Research Institute,
 shall establish and carry out a program of research, development, and
 demonstration on high efficiency heat engines including, but not limited to,
 advanced gas turbine cycles for high efficiency electric power generation,
 such as--
 (1) advanced combined cycle turbines;
 (2) steam-injected gas turbines (STIG); and
 (3) intercooled steam-injected gas turbines (ISTIG);
 (b) The Secretary, after consultation with the president of the Gas
 Research Institute, shall enter into cooperative agreements with, and
 provide financial assistance, under this section, to appropriate parties,
 including, but not limited to the Gas Research Institute, to construct
 and demonstrate the high efficiency heat engines.
 (c) There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary not more than
 $25,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1991, 1992, and 1993 for purposes
 of this section.
 SEC. 1008. The Secretary, after consultation with the president of the Gas
 Research Institute, shall establish priorities for research, development,
 and demonstration programs, and transmit a list of priorities to the
 Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources and the House Committee on
 Energy and Commerce for guidance in its use of research, development, and
 demonstration funds. The Secretary shall update the list every 2 years and
 submit the updated version to the aforementioned Congressional Committees.
TITLE XI--NATURAL RESOURCE POLICY
Subtitle A--General
 SEC. 1101. ECOLOGICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE STUDY- (a) The Secretary
 of the Interior shall conduct a study of the ecological and environmental
 resources that would be affected by a global climate change. The study
 should include effects in wildlife habitat preservation, coastal protection,
 inland rivers and lakes, irrigation and reclamation, groundwater protection,
 and national wildlife refuges and parks, national forests, and other
 Federal lands.
 (b) The study should--
 (1) include specific regional climatic and resource base information useful
 in anticipatory and mitigatory planning;
 (2) identify actions that, if taken, could help mitigate the effects of
 global climate change; and
 (3) evaluate the cost-effectiveness, including environmental externalities
 of possible action.
 (c) The Secretary of the Interior shall consider the relative impact on
 global warming of all mineral leasing programs.
 (d) The Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture shall
 consider the relative impact on global warming of all Federal forest land
 management programs, including timber sales and reforestation.
 SEC. 1102. NATIONAL FORESTATION INITIATIVE- The Secretary of Agriculture, in
 cooperation with the Secretary of Interior, shall report to the President and
 the Congress on the feasibility of a national forestation initiative. Such
 report shall include--
 (a) an inventory of public, State, and private forested lands;
 (b) an evaluation of the status of timber harvesting on those lands,
 including the extent to which those lands are being reforestated;
 (c) an assessment of the extent to which Federal, State, and private lands
 can be reforested and afforested, including lands not necessarily suitable
 for timber harvesting such as urban areas;
 (d) an evaluation of (1) the potential of a national forestation initiative
 reducing, mitigating, or preventing climate change, and (2) the measures
 needed to achieve that potential; and
 (e) an assessment of the potential economic and environmental benefits and
 costs of such an initiative, the measures available to mitigate such costs,
 and an evaluation of the effectiveness of such measures.
 SEC. 1103. URBAN FORESTRY AND ENERGY SAVINGS- The Secretary of Energy,
 in consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture, and other relevant
 Government agencies, shall conduct a study of the potential for reducing
 carbon dioxide emissions by undertaking targeted urban tree plantings
 designed to reduce the air-conditioning needs of buildings. The study shall
 provide estimates of the cost-effectiveness of such a program and shall
 outline a range of Federal, State, and local public policies and incentives
 that would encourage public and private efforts to undertake such plantings.
 The Secretary shall complete the study and submit it to the Congress within
 eighteen months after the date of enactment of this Act.
Subtitle B--Tongass Timber Reform Act
TONGASS TIMBER REFORM ACT
 SEC. 1104. DEFINITIONS- As used in this title--
 (a) The term `The Secretary' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
 (b) Unless otherwise specified, any other term has the same meaning as
 used in the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act as amended
 (Public Law 96-487), hereinafter referred to as ANILCA.
AMENDMENTS TO THE ALASKA NATIONAL INTEREST LANDS CONSERVATION ACT
 SEC. 1105. ANNUAL APPROPRIATIONS FOR TIMBER MANAGEMENT AND RESOURCE
 CONSERVATION ON THE TONGASS NATIONAL FOREST- Section 705(a) of ANILCA
 (16 U.S.C. 539d(a)) is hereby repealed effective September 30, 1989, and
 subsections (b) and (c) of section 705 are redesignated as subsections
 (a) and (b), respectively.
 SEC. 1106. IDENTIFICATION OF LANDS UNSUITABLE FOR TIMBER PRODUCTION-
 Section 705(d) of ANILCA (916 U.S.C. 539d(d)) is hereby repealed.
REPORTS ON THE TONGASS NATIONAL FOREST
 SEC. 1107. (a) MONITORING- Section 706(a) of ANILCA (16 U.S.C. 539e(a))
 is hereby repealed.
 (b) STATUS- Section 706(b) of ANILCA (16 U.S.C. 539e(b)) is amended
 as follows:
 (1) Strike out `(b)' and insert in lieu thereof `(a)';
 (2) Strike out `and (4)' and insert in lieu thereof `(4)';
 (3) Strike out the period at the end of the section and insert in lieu
 thereof `; (5) the impact of timber harvest on subsistence resources,
 wildlife and fisheries resources, commercial fisheries, recreation resources
 and tourism; (6) effects of timber harvest on biological diversity;
 (7) effects of timber harvest on the old growth rain forest ecosystem,
 especially in areas of high volume, and measures to conserve the old growth
 ecosystem, especially in areas of high volume, and measures to conserve the
 old growth ecosystem; (8) timber supply and demand in southeastern Alaska;
 and (9) costs and revenues of the timber sale program.'.
 (c) CONSULTATION- Section 706(c) of ANILCA (916 U.S.C. 539e(e)) is amended
 as follows:
 (1) strike out `(c)' and insert in lieu thereof `(b)'.
 (2) strike out `and the Alaska Land Use Council' and insert in lieu thereof
 `the southeast Alaska commercial fishing industry, and the Alaska Land
 Use Council'.
 SEC. 1108. TERMINATION OF LONG-TERM TIMBER SALE CONTRACTS IN ALASKA- Title V
 of ANILCA is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
`SEC. 508. TERMINATION OF LONG-TERM TIMBER SALE CONTRACTS IN ALASKA.
 `Not later than ninety days after the date of enactment of this section,
 the Secretary shall terminate the long-term timber sale contracts numbered
 12-11-010-1545 and A10fs-1042 between the United States and Alaska Pulp
 Corporation, and between the United States and Ketchikan Pulp Company,
 respectively.'.
MANAGEMENT OF THE TONGASS NATIONAL FOREST
 SEC. 1109. (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) natural resources of the Tongass National Forest possess outstanding
 national characteristics of high value and benefit to the American people,
 and these resources are essential for subsistence activities and for the
 commercial fishing, recreation, and tourism industries which contribute
 significantly to the economy of southeast Alaska;
 (2) the Tongass National Forest contains one of the last largely intact rain
 forest in the world's temperate latitudes, and must serve as an example of
 the type of protection, preservation and management that will be required
 to stop the destruction of rain forest resources in other nations;
 (3) current Forest Service management of the Tongass National Forest,
 in particular the amount of high volume old growth timber offered for
 sale and harvested, gives priority to timber harvest over other uses
 of the forest and thus is not consistent with the principle of multiple
 use or with requirements of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources
 Planning Act of 1974 and the National Forest Management Act of 1976, and
 cannot be sustained without jeopardizing natural resources that are of
 national significance and upon which the commercial fishing, recreation,
 and tourism industries and subsistence users of southeast Alaska depend;
 (4) current Forest Service management practices are based on the Tongass
 National Forest Land Management Plan of 1979, as amended, which should
 be revised consistent with the provisions of this Act and with other
 laws applicable to the National Forest System, to significantly increase
 protection and enhancement of fish, wildlife, watershed, recreation,
 cultural, biological diversity, and old growth forest ecosystem resources,
 and to support the long-term best interest of all natural resource dependent
 industries and subsistence communities in southeast Alaska.
 (b) PURPOSE- The purpose of this title is to require revision of the Tongass
 National Forest Land Management Plan of 1979, as amended, in conformance
 with this Act and other laws applicable to the National Forest System,
 to significantly increase protection of resources that are critical to the
 long-term best interests of the commercial fishing, recreation, and tourism
 industries, and the subsistence users in southeast Alaska, and which are of
 high value and benefit to the people of the United States. These include
 the fish, wildlife, watershed, recreation, cultural, biological diversity
 and old growth ecosystem resources and subsistence values of the Tongass
 National Forest.
 SEC. 1110. DIRECTIVE AND REPORTS- (a) In furtherance of the purpose of this
 title, the Secretary is hereby authorized and directed to fully revise
 the Tongass National Forest Land Management Plan of 1979, as amended,
 to conform with provisions of this Act and other laws applicable to the
 National Forest System. This revision shall replace any efforts to revise
 the Forest Plan that are predicated on sections of ANILCA that are repealed
 or amended by this Act.
 (b) In revising the Forest Plan, the Secretary shall significantly increase
 the protection of fish, wildlife, watershed, recreation, cultural, biological
 diversity and old growth ecosystem resources and subsistence values of the
 Tongass National Forest. Planning and management of old growth resources
 shall give specific attention to areas of high volume old growth ecosystem
 as a whole.
 (c) In revising the Forest Plan, the Secretary shall ensure that priority is
 given to the protection of fish, wildlife, watershed, recreation, cultural,
 biological diversity, and old growth ecosystem resources and subsistence
 values of the areas listed in section 302(b) of this Act.
 (d) Within thirty days after this Act takes effect, the Secretary shall
 provide the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the
 Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs of the House of Representatives
 with a report on the schedule for revision of the Tongass Land Management
 Plan, including the expected dates of publication of the draft and final
 plans.
 (e) Within one year after this Act takes effect, and each year thereafter
 until the revised Tongass National Forest Land Management Plan is complete
 and ready for implementation, the Secretary shall provide the Senate
 Committee on Energy and Natural Resources and the Committee on Interior and
 Insular Affairs of the House of Representatives with a report describing
 the steps taken in furtherance of section 201(b) of this Act.
MORATORIUM ON TIMBER SALES AND HARVEST
 SEC. 1111. (a) PURPOSE- The purpose of this title is to impose a moratorium
 on the sale or commercial harvest of timber in certain areas having special
 values for fish and wildlife, subsistence, recreation, old growth, and other
 resources, pending revision of the Tongass National Forest Land Management
 Plan to conform with the new management directives provided in this Act.
 (b) MORATORIUM- Until such time as the Tongass National Forest Land
 Management Plan is completely revised and ready for implementation, there
 shall be no sale or harvest of timber, nor any associated development
 (including timber sale preparation or road construction) within any area
 specified in subsection (b) of this section. The moratorium shall apply
 to lands administered by the Forest Service, as generally depicted on
 appropriately referenced maps, as follows:
--Approximate
Area:
--acreage
Anan Creek
--37,331
Berners Bay
--35,379
Calder-Holbrook
--62,335
Chichagof
--353,540
Chuck River
--125,574
Kadashan
--33,641
Karta River
--38,671
Kegan Lake
--23,858
Naha River
--31,926
Nutkwa
--53,635
Outside Islands
--95,524
Pleasant Island-Lemesurier Islands
--15,527
Pt. Adolphus-Mud Bay
--72,091
Port Houghton-Sanborn Canal
--59,712
Rocky Pass
--74,423
Sarkar Lakes
--23,500
South Etolin Island
--81,939
South Kuiu
--190,301
Sullivan Island
--3,985
Trap Bay
--6,446
West Duncan Canal
--118,812
Yakutat Forelands
--232,962
Young Lake
--18,173
 Copies of maps depicting these areas shall be on file and available for
 public inspection in the offices of the Chief of the Forest Service in
 Washington, District of Columbia, and the Regional Forester in Juneau,
 Alaska.
TITLE XII--BASIC SCIENCE INITIATIVES
 SEC. 1201. (a) PURPOSES- The overall purpose of this title is to expand
 support for ongoing and new scientific research initiatives regarding
 the causes, mechanisms, and implications of the greenhouse effect and
 global climate change, on the part of the National Aeronautics and Space
 Administration (NASA), the National Science Foundation (NSF), the National
 Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the United States Geological
 Survey (USGS) (`the Agencies'), and the National Institute of Standards
 and Technology (NIST) for research on the development of safe, non-ozone
 depleting substitutes for chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). The specific purposes
 of this title shall include--
 (1) support for NASA, NSF, NOAA, and USGS in their research in such
 major climate-related processes as interactive atmospheric dynamics and
 chemistry; natural emissions of greenhouse gases; ocean-atmosphere-ice
 interactions; carbon cycle links to ocean and terrestrial nutrients; cloud
 formation, dynamics, and radiative properties; precipitation processes;
 tropical global-ocean atmosphere interaction; global ocean circulation
 and heat capacity; sea-ice dynamics; global tropospheric chemistry; and
 stratospheric ozone chemistry; solar irradiance variations; paleoclimate;
 biosystem-climate interactions; and sea level-climate interactions;
 monitoring of river and coastal levels;
 (2) support for the Agencies in providing research to address scientific
 issues such as: detection of the greenhouse warming signal through land and
 ocean measurements of temperature and other climate-sensitive variables;
 research in past climate change; improvement of models to assess the
 rate and scope of climate change; understanding the role of clouds in
 reflecting solar radiation and in trapping terrestrial radiation; identifying
 sources and sinks of carbon dioxide and trace gases, especially methane;
 understanding the relationship between stratospheric ozone depletion and
 global climate change; the role of oceans in the global carbon cycle;
 modeling regional climate changes and hydrology; understanding the effects
 of climate change on ecosystems and climate biota feedbacks; understanding
 the role of changes in the polar ice packs on climate (e.g., reflection
 of solar radiation, influence on the heat budget, and contribution to sea
 level rise); assessing the validity of climate models by testing them
 against the past climate record; and predicting the possible range of
 future climatic conditions that could arise from natural processes and
 selected scenarios of human perturbations;
 (3) support for the completion or continuation of the Agencies' space
 missions and experiments to study the composition and dynamics of the
 atmosphere; measure the Earth's energy balance; observe ocean and ice
 surfaces; collect data on the Earth's radiation budget; measure sea surface
 temperature and monitor ocean biological activity and land vegetation;
 measure volcanic activity; and
 (4) support for the National Institute of Standards and Technology's
 efforts to find alternative refrigerants or other technologies that meet
 stringent requirements with respect to health, stability, thermophysical
 properties, and cost, and do not result in decreased energy efficiency;
 develop effective replacements for harmful CFCs in time to be of value to
 CFC dependent industries in meeting their product line changes for the
 Montreal Protocol schedule; develop models to correlate and extend the
 available measured property data; and assist industry in evaluating the
 full potential of alternative fluids.
 (b) There is hereby authorized to be appropriated $275,000,000 in additional
 funding to the following agencies over the fiscal years 1991, 1992, and 1993,
 to support each agency's efforts in carrying out the purposes of this title:
 (1) $100,000,000 to NASA;
 (2) $60,000,000 to NOAA;
 (3) $75,000,000 to NSF;
 (4) $30,000,000 to USGS; and
 (5) $10,000,000 to NIST.
TITLE XIII--DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE
 SEC. 1301. BILATERAL TROPICAL FORESTRY PROGRAM- (a) Not later than
 one year after the enactment of this title, the Secretary of State,
 in conjunction with the Secretary of the Treasury, Administrator of the
 Agency for International Development, the Secretary of the Interior, and
 the Secretary of Agriculture shall transmit to Congress a report containing--
 (1) a description and inventory of the existing forest resources in all
 tropical countries of the world;
 (2) an evaluation of the potential in each tropical nation for reforestation,
 afforestation, and conservation of existing forest resources;
 (3) a description of appropriate mechanisms in each country for preserving
 forest resources and creating new forested area, including, but not limited
 to, choice of mixed species to encourage a diverse forest and discourage
 monoculture estates, and involvement of local groups in the design,
 implementation, and monitoring of projects; and
 (4) the potential for reducing, mitigating, or preventing climate disruption
 by providing bilateral development assistance and other forms of assistance
 and incentives to tropical countries for reforestation, afforest- ation,
 and conservation of existing forest resources. The report referred to in
 this subsection shall be prepared in consultation with the government and
 the public in each tropical country and shall be updated and transmitted
 to Congress every three years.
 (b) Within one year after the completion of the report required under
 subsection (a) and every three years thereafter, the same agencies, in
 consultation with the government and public in each tropical country and
 interested members of the public in the United States, shall establish
 and transmit to Congress a forest plan with goals for each tropical
 country. These goals shall include maximum feasible conservation of
 existing forest areas and reforestation and afforestation in areas not
 covered by forests.
 (c) The Administrator of the Agency for International Development shall
 make development assistance moneys, export credits, and other forms of
 financial support available for projects and programs to implement the
 plan required by subsection (b). The Administrator shall ensure that all
 activities supported by the United States bilateral foreign assistance are
 consistent with the plan. Beginning two years after the approval of the
 first plan, the Administrator, in allocating development assistance moneys
 to countries identified in the plan, shall take account of the success or
 lack of success of each country in meeting the goals established in the plan.
 (d) The Administrator shall promote support by other bilateral donors for
 activities necessary to implement the plan.
 (e) Not later than one year after the date of enactment of this title,
 and annually thereafter, the Department of State, in cooperation with
 the Department of the Interior, and the Department of the Treasury, the
 Department of Agriculture, and the Agency for International Development
 shall submit to Congress a report describing actions taken pursuant to this
 section, the extent to which other donors have supported actions necessary
 to implement the forest plan, the extent to which each tropical country has
 succeeded in achieving the goals set out in the plan, and how the success
 or lack of success of each country in meeting the goals established in
 the plan have been taken into account in allocating development assistance
 moneys to each country.
 SEC. 1302. MULTILATERAL TROPICAL FORESTRY PROGRAM- (a) The Secretary of
 the Treasury shall instruct the United States Executive Director of the
 multilateral development banks to promote the adoption by each such bank
 of a forestry program substantially equivalent to the program set out in
 section 1301 and containing the following components:
 (1) identification of each borrowing country's potential for afforestation;
 (2) establishment of goals for afforestation for each borrowing country,
 in consultation with the government and the public in that country;
 (3) creation of incentives to encourage afforestation and disincentives
 to discourage deforestation; and
 (4) allocation of the resources of each such bank to each borrowing country
 in proportion to the degree with which such country has created new forested
 areas and protected existing forested areas.
 (b) Beginning two years after the enactment of this title, the Secretary
 of the Treasury shall instruct the United States' Executive Director
 to each of the multilateral development banks to oppose loans and other
 financial or technical assistance to any borrowing country that has not
 successfully established and successfully implemented a program setting
 reasonable goals for that country for preserving existing forest resources
 and creating new forested areas, except where the Secretary determines
 that such goals are advanced more effectively by actions other than voting
 against such assistance.
 (c) The Secretary of State shall instruct the United States representative to
 the United Nations Food and Agriculture Program to promote the establishment
 and coordinate the implementation of forestry plans for tropical countries
 substantially equivalent to those set out in section 1301 and subsection
 (a) of this section that contains incentives to encourage afforestation
 and disincentives to discourage deforestation.
 (d) The Secretary of State shall instruct the United States Ambassador to
 the United Nations Development Program to adopt and implement forestry
 programs for recipient countries substantially equivalent to those set
 out in section 1301 and subsection (a) of this section that contain
 incentives to encourage afforestation and disincentives to encourage
 deforestation. Beginning two years after the enactment of this title,
 the Secretary of State shall instruct the United States Ambassador to
 the United Nations to oppose the adoption of any country programs for any
 recipient country that has not established and successfully implemented a
 program setting reasonable goals for that country for preserving existing
 forest resources and creating new forested areas, except where the Secretary
 determines that such goals are advanced more effectively by actions other
 than opposing the adoption of such a plan.
 (e) The Secretary of State shall instruct the United States representative
 to the International Tropical Timber Organization to promote--
 (1) a major emphasis by the Organization on conservation activities and
 financing of forest conservation projects; and
 (2) the adoption of codes of conduct for commercial logging and private
 sector timber operations.
 (f) Not later than one year after the date of enactment of this title,
 and annually thereafter, the Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of
 State shall submit to Congress a report describing progress by each of the
 multilateral development banks, the United Nations Food and Agriculture
 Program, the United Nations Development Program, and the International
 Tropical Timber Organization in adopting and implementing programs meeting
 the standards set out in this section, including in particular--
 (1) efforts by the Department of the Treasury, the Department of State, and
 other Federal agencies to assure implementation of multilateral development
 programs substantially equivalent to that set forth in section 1302 and
 subsection (a) of this section, and the result of such efforts;
 (2) progress by the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization
 in promoting the establishment and coordinating the implementation of
 forestry plans for tropical countries meeting the criteria set forth in
 section 1301 and subsection (a) of this section;
 (3) progress in the identification of each multilateral development bank, the
 United Nations Food and Agriculture Program, the United Nations Development
 Program of the potential for afforestation by recipient countries;
 (4) progress in the establishment of goals by each multilateral development
 bank, the United States Food and Agriculture Program, and the United States
 Development Program for afforestation by each recipient country;
 (5) the nature of incentives and disincentives created by each multilateral
 development bank and the United Nations Development Program to encourage
 afforestation and to discourage deforestation, respectively;
 (6) the extent to which the allocation of the resources of each multilateral
 development bank and the United Nations Development Program to recipient
 countries is proportional to the success or lack of success of such country
 in creating new forest areas and protecting existing forest areas; and
 (7) a description of proposed loans, country programs, and other financial
 and technical assistance to which subsections (b) and (d) apply, and votes
 and other actions on proposal by United States Executive Director to the
 relevant multilateral development bank and the United States Ambassador
 to the United Nations.
 SEC. 1303. TRADE IN WOOD AND WOOD PRODUCTS- (a) Not later than one year after
 the enactment of this title, the Secretary of Commerce, in consultation with
 interested members of the public, shall promulgate regulations requiring
 wood and products containing wood imported into the United States to bear
 a label containing the following information:
 (1) the country or countries in which wood or woods were harvested; and
 (2) the scientific and common names of such wood or woods.
 (b) Not later than four years after the enactment of this title, the
 Secretary of Commerce, in consultation with the Secretary of State, the
 Administrator of the Agency for International Development, the Secretary of
 the Treasury, and interested members of the public, shall by regulation
 prohibit the importation into the United States of wood and products
 containing wood from--
 (1) those tropical countries that have not successfully achieved the goals
 established under sections 1301 and 1302 of this title;
 (2) those countries that import wood or products containing wood harvested
 in the countries identified in paragraph (1); and
 (3) those countries that permit transit of wood or products containing
 wood harvested in those countries identified in paragraph (1).
 (c) Not later than 2 years after the publication of the regulation referred
 to in subsection (a) and no less frequently than biennially thereafter,
 the Secretary of Commerce, in consultation with the Administrator of the
 Agency for International Development, the Secretary of the Treasury,
 and interested members of the public, shall review and, as necessary,
 revise the regulation referred to in subsection (a).
 (d) The President shall encourage those countries which import or consume
 wood or wood products from countries identified in sections 1301 and 1302
 to adopt laws and regulations substantially equivalent to the regulation
 referred to in subsection (a).
 (e) The Secretary of Commerce, not later than one year after the initial
 publication of the regulation referred to in subsection (a) and annually
 thereafter, shall submit a report to the Congress describing--
 (1) progress in controlling imports into the United States of wood and
 wood products from countries that have not successfully achieved the goals
 established under sections 1301 and 1302; and
 (2) progress by those countries which import or consume wood or wood products
 from countries identified in paragraph (1) in controlling imports of such
 wood and wood products.
 SEC. 1304. BILATERAL ENERGY PROGRAM- Section 106 of the Foreign Assistance
 Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2151d) is amended by--
 (a) changing the title of the section to read: `Sustainable Energy
 Development, Private Voluntary Organizations, and Selected Development
 Activities.';
 (b) striking out all of subsection (a)(1) except the first two sentences
 and striking out all of subsection (a)(2);
 (c) inserting the following new subsection (a)(2):
 `(2) The Congress finds that energy conservation, improvements in end
 use energy efficiency, and energy production from renewable, decentralized
 sources have great potential for meeting energy needs in developing nations,
 especially the needs of the rural poor. These techniques can enable
 developing countries to make efficient use of scarce resources; minimize
 environmental harm (including warming of the earth's atmosphere due to the
 `greenhouse effect'); lessen the danger of nuclear weapons proliferation;
 and reduce dependence on dwindling oil reserves and expensive imported
 energy. Often, energy needs can be met more cheaply and more employment
 can be generated by these methods than by production of energy from
 conventional sources.'.
 (d) striking out the last sentence of subsection (b)(2), redesignating
 that subsection as subsection (a)(3), and inserting at the end of that
 subsection the following:
`Such programs also may include any type of assistance aimed at energy
efficiency, improvements in end use energy efficiency, and assistance for
transmission facilities to increase the availability of energy in rural
areas. No assistance shall be furnished under this Act for large-scale
production of energy from fossil fuels.'.
 (e) inserting the following new subsection (a)(4):
 `(4) In providing assistance to developing countries as authorized in
 subsection (3), the President shall--
 `(A) prepare for each aid-receiving country, in cooperation with the
 government and the public in each country and interested members of the
 public in the United States, an analysis--
 `(i) describing feasible actions that can reduce emissions of `greenhouse
 gases,' while at the same time meeting development needs, through actions
 which improve end use energy efficiency, promote reliance on renewable
 energy sources, or encourage energy efficiency or use of alternative fuels;
 `(ii) comparing the economic and environmental costs of the actions
 described in subparagraph (i) with the economic and environmental costs of
 the actions described in subparagraph (i) with the economic and environmental
 costs of investments to provide additional supplies of energy; and
 `(iii) analyzing the need for foreign assistance, and especially United
 States bilateral assistance, to make possible the actions described in
 subparagraph (i).
 `(B) provide technical assistance and support projects to improve energy
 efficiency, with emphasis on training, information and institution-building
 in all sectors; improvement of indigenous capabilities to develop
 and implement least cost planning strategies and programs of energy
 efficiency; developing indigenous capabilities to adapt technologies of
 energy conservation and end use energy efficiency; and, in transportation,
 energy-saving methods of mass transit (such as light rail, buses, and van
 pools), energy-efficient motor vehicles and railroads, traffic management
 techniques (such as computerization of traffic signals and fuel savings
 at airports), and transfer of appropriate United States technologies;
 `(C) support projects to develop and demonstrate energy conservation,
 improvements in end use energy efficiency, and small-scale, decentralized,
 renewable energy sources for rural areas. Such projects shall use appropriate
 technologies and methods suited to the local environment, shall feature
 close consultation with and involvement of local people at all stages
 of project design and implementation, and shall be directed toward the
 earliest possible widespread application. Appropriate technologies include
 but are not limited to biomass, biogas, wind energy, passive solar, solar
 electricity, fuel cells, and low-head hydroelectric generation;
 `(D) whenever appropriate, accomplish the objectives of this subsection
 through projects managed by private and voluntary organizations or
 international or regional or national nongovernmental organizations;
 `(E) direct the Administrator of the Agency for International Development, in
 consultation with the President of the Export-Import Bank and the President
 of the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, to encourage private sector
 investment in energy efficient technologies in developing countries;
 `(F) make the analyses referred to in subsection (A) available to the
 public and transmit them to the Congress at least annually;
 `(G) beginning one year after the enactment of this title, refuse to
 approve any project or program authorized by this subsection involving the
 obligation of more than $100,000 unless such an analysis has been prepared,
 transmitted to the Congress, and made available to the public;
 `(H) promote vigorously the adoption by other bilateral donors of energy
 efficient programs for countries that receive development assistance that
 emphasize least-cost energy planning, energy conservation, and end use
 energy efficiency; and
 `(I) not later than one year after the date of enactment of this title, and
 annually thereafter, submit to the Congress a report describing progress
 under the program established by this section, including in particular,
 the nature of all projects supported; their costs and results; progress in
 reducing emissions of greenhouse gases; and progress by other bilateral
 donors in implementing programs of least cost energy planning, energy
 conservation, and end use energy efficiency for aid-receiving countries'.
 (f) striking out subsection (b), redesignating subsection (c) as subsection
 (a)(5), and redesignating subsections (d) and (e) as subsections (b) and
 (c), respectively.
 SEC. 1305. MULTILATERAL ENERGY CONSERVATION AND EFFICIENCY PROGRAM- (a)
 The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States Executive
 Director to each of the multilateral development banks vigorously to promote
 the adoption by each such bank of an energy conservation and efficiency
 and containing the following components:
 (1) least cost energy planning for each borrowing country that--
 (A) gives priority to projects and programs to support energy conservation,
 end use energy efficiency, and renewable energy sources in major economic
 sectors; and
 (B) compares the economic and environmental costs of the actions described
 in subparagraphs (A) with the economic and environmental costs of investments
 to provide additional supplies of energy;
 (2) analysis for each proposed loan to support additional power generating
 capacity comparing the economic and environmental costs of investments in
 reduction of demand for energy, including energy conservation and end use
 energy efficiency, with the economic and environmental costs of the proposal;
 (3) an implementation strategy, including technical assistance grants as
 appropriate, for implementing the plan referred to in paragraph (1);
 (4) strict standards requiring consistency of each proposed loan with the
 relevant least cost energy plan for each borrowing country; and
 (5) measures to encourage reform of macroeconomic policies, such as energy
 prices, to facilitate energy conservation and end use energy efficiency.
 (b) Beginning two years after the enactment of this title, the Secretary of
 the Treasury shall instruct the United States Executive Director to each of
 the multilateral development banks to oppose loans and other financial or
 technical assistance to any borrowing country for which a least cost energy
 plan giving priority to energy conservation, end use energy efficiency,
 and renewable energy sources is not in place, except where the Secretary
 determines that such goals are advanced more effectively by actions other
 than voting against such assistance.
 (c) The Secretary of State shall instruct the United States Ambassador to
 the United Nations vigorously to encourage the United Nations Development
 Program to adopt and implement energy conservation and efficiency programs
 for recipient countries substantially equivalent to those set out in
 subsection (a) that require least cost energy planning to give priority
 to energy conservation, end use energy efficiency, and renewable energy
 sources. Beginning two years after the enactment of this title, the Secretary
 of State shall instruct the United States Ambassador to the United Nations
 to oppose the adoption of any country programs for any country for which a
 program of least cost energy planning giving priority to energy conservation,
 end use energy efficiency, and renewable energy sources is not in place,
 except where the Secretary determines that such goals are advanced more
 effectively by actions other than opposing the adoption of such plan.
 (d) Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this title, and
 annually thereafter, the Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of
 State shall submit to the Congress a report describing progress by each
 of the multilateral development banks and the United Nations Development
 Program in adopting and implementing programs meeting the standards set
 out in subsections (a) and (c), including in par- ticular:
 (1) efforts by the Department of the Treasury, the Department of State, and
 other Federal agencies to assure implementation by each of the multilateral
 development banks and the United Nations Development Program of programs
 substantially equivalent to those set out in this section, and the results
 of such efforts;
 (2) progress by each multilateral development banks and the United Nations
 Development Program in drafting and adopting least cost energy plans for
 each recipient country;
 (3) the absolute dollar amounts, and proportion of total lending in the
 energy sector, of loans, portions of loans, or projects approved by each
 multilateral development bank and the United Nations Development Program
 in the previous year for projects or programs of energy conservation and
 end use energy efficiency; and
 (4) a description of proposed loans, country programs, and other financial
 and technical assistance to which subsections (b) and (c) apply, and votes
 and other actions on proposals by the United States Executive Director to
 the relevant multilateral development bank and the United States Ambassador
 to the United Nations.
 SEC. 1306. ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION AND DEBT REDUCTION- (a) It is
 the policy of the United States that the Secretary of the Treasury, in
 consultation with interested members of the public including commercial
 banks, shall enter into negotiations with selected developing country
 governments to obtain improvements in policies in the foresty and energy
 sectors by those countries as a condition of reducing or converting
 sovereign and private debt owned to creditors in the United States. As
 a condition of the adoption of policies or programs to preserve existing
 forested areas, encourage the creation of new forested areas, or promote
 energy conservation or end use energy efficiency, the Secretary may reduce
 the principal of, extend payments on, or reduce the rate of interest on
 up to one-half of the total sovereign debt owed to the United States by
 developing country governments.
 (b) Not later than 1 year after the enactment of this title, the Secretary
 of the Treasury, in consultation with interested members of the public
 including commercial banks, shall promulgate regulations to implement the
 program established in subsection (a). Such regulations shall--
 (1) identify those developing countries that are promising candidates for
 participation in such a program from the point of view of their contribution
 to global climate disruption and the total amount of debt owed to official
 and private creditors in the United States;
 (2) establish a timetable of the initiation of negotiations with each such
 country; and
 (3) establish criteria and standards for the adoption, implementation,
 and monitoring or programs and policies in the forest and energy sectors
 by developing country governments that wish to participate in the program
 established by subsection (a).
 (c) The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with interested members
 of the public including commercial banks, shall encouarge the adoption
 of joint initiatives of debt reduction and conversion by the public
 and private sectors in other member countries of the Organization for
 Economic Cooperation and Development. (a) Not later than 1 year after the
 enactment of this title, the Administrator of the Agency for International
 Development shall transmit to the Congress a report for each country that
 receives development assistance monies from the United States containing--
 (1) a least cost energy plan that provides for economic development;
 (2) a comparison of the economic and environmental costs of alternative
 investments in the energy sector, such as conservation and end use
 efficiency, with the economic and environmental costs of investments to
 provide additional power generating capacity;
 (3) an implementation strategy, including technical assistance grants as
 appropriate, for implementing the plan referred to in paragraph (1); and
 (4) the potential for reducing, mitigating, or preventing climate disruption
 by providing bilateral development assistance for least cost energy planning,
 energy efficiency, and end use efficiency.
 (b) The report referred to in subsection (a) shall be updated and transmitted
 to the Congress every 2 years. The first report and all subsequent reports
 shall be prepared in consultation with the government and the public in
 each recipient country and interested members of the public in the United
 States. The Administrator shall assure that all development assistance
 moneys expended in each recipient country are consistent with the least
 cost plan applicable to that country;
 (c) The Administrator shall promote the adoption by other bilateral donors
 of energy efficiency programs for countries that receive development
 assistance that emphasize least cost energy planning, energy efficiency,
 and end use efficiency;
 (d) Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this title,
 and annually thereafter, the Administrator shall submit to the Congress a
 report describing progress under the program established by this section,
 including in particular:
 (1) the nature of energy projects supported in each recipient country and
 the dollar amount of each;
 (2) improvements in energy conservation and end use efficiency resulting
 from projects financed in each recipient country;
 (3) progress in reducing, mitigating, or preventing climate disruption
 by providing bilateral development assistance to recipient countries
 through support of projects to encourage energy conservation and end use
 efficiency; and
 (4) progress by other bilateral donors in implementing least cost energy
 programs for recipient countries.
 SEC. 1307. MULTILATERAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY PROGRAM- (a) The Secretary of
 the Treasury shall instruct the United States Executive Director to each
 of the multilateral development banks to promote the adoption by each
 such bank of an energy efficiency program substantially equivalent to the
 program set out in section 1304 and containing the following components:
 (1) least cost energy planning for each borrowing country;
 (2) analysis for each proposed loan to support additional power generating
 capacity comparing the economic and environmental costs of alternative
 investments in the energy sector, including energy conservation and end
 use efficiency, with the economic and environmental costs of the proposal;
 (3) an implementation strategy, including technical assistance grants as
 appropriate, for implementing the plan referred to in paragraph (1); and
 (4) strict standards requiring consistency of each proposed loan with the
 relevant least cost energy plan for each borrowing country.
 (b) The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States Executive
 Director to each of the multilateral development banks to notify the staff
 of each bank that all future contributions to such bank from the United
 States shall be conditioned upon adoption and successful implementation
 of a program meeting the standards set out in subsection (a);
 (c) Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this title,
 and annually thereafter, the Secretary of the Treasury shall submit to
 the Congress a report describing progress by each of the multilateral
 development banks in adopting and implementing programs meeting the
 standards set out in subsection (a), including in particular--
 (1) efforts by the Department of the Treasury and other executive branch
 agencies to assure implementation by each of the multilateral development
 banks of a program substantially equivalent to that set out in this section,
 and the results of such efforts;
 (2) progress by each multilateral development bank in drafting and adopting
 least cost energy plans for each borrowing country; and
 (3) the absolute dollar amounts, and proportion as total lending in the
 energy sector, of loans or portions of loans approved by each multilateral
 development bank in the previous year for products or programs of energy
 efficiency and end use efficiency.
 SEC. 1308. REPORT BY THE ADMINISTRATOR OF THE AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL
 DEVELOPMENT- Not later than one year after the enactment of this title, the
 Administrator of the Agency for International Development, in consultation
 with the Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of State, shall submit
 to the Congress a report describing options and strategies for the use of
 bilateral and multilateral development assistance programs sponsored by the
 United States to control emissions into the atmosphere of carbon dioxide,
 nitrous oxide, methane, and other greenhouse gases. Interalia, this report
 shall analyze mechanisms by which strategies to encourage afforestation,
 reforestation, energy conservation, end use energy efficiency, and renewable
 energy sources can be incorporated into the programs of the International
 Monetary Fund.
TITLE XIV--INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES
Subtitle A
 SEC. 1401. MULTILATERAL GLOBAL CLIMATE PROTECTION CONVENTION- (a) It is the
 policy of the United States that the Secretary of State, in consultation
 with the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency and the
 Secretary of Energy, and science agencies (e.g., NASA, NOAA, and NSF)
 shall convene an international meeting to be held in the United States
 with invitations to representatives of all countries of the world, the
 purpose of which shall be to actively encourage the adoption of a binding
 multilateral global climate protection convention containing measures at
 least as stringent as those in this Act;
 (b) The Secretary of State shall sponsor such other meetings as may be
 necessary to assure that the convention is opened for signature no later
 than the end of 1992; and
 (c) The Secretary of State shall seek to assure that the convention, through
 least cost energy planning, energy efficiency, and end use efficiency,
 requires a reduction of not less than 20 per centum in global generation
 of carbon dioxide over 1988 levels by the year 2000, a reduction not less
 than 50 per centum in global generation of carbon dioxide over 1988 levels
 by the year 2015, and appropriate reductions in emissions of nitrous oxide,
 methane and other greenhouse gases.
 SEC. 1402. MULTILATERAL AGREEMENT TO REDUCE EMISSIONS OF OXIDES OF NITROGEN-
 Not later than one year after the enactment of this title, the Secretary
 of State, in consultation with the Administrator of the Environmental
 Protection Agency, the Secretary of Energy, and the administrators of
 NIST, NOAA, and NASA shall initiate negotiations on behalf of the United
 States and actively encourage the adoption by the end of 1991 of a binding
 multilateral agreement requiring reductions of not less than 30 per centum
 in emissions of oxides of nitrogen over 1987 levels by the year 1998.
 SEC. 1403. REASSESSMENT OF MONTREAL PROTOCOL ON SUBSTANCES THAT DEPLETE
 THE OZONE LAYER- (a) Not later than one year after the enactment of this
 title, the Secretary of State, in consultation with the Administrator
 of the Environmental Protection Agency, shall request and, if necessary,
 convene in the United States such meetings of the parties to the Montreal
 Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer as may be necessary
 for the reassessment of the control measures contained therein;
 (b) The Secretary of State shall actively encourage the adoption of
 additional control measures requiring the virtual elimination of emissions of
 all substances identified in the Montreal Protocol within five to seven years
 from the date of enactment of this title and appropriate control measures
 for other ozone-depleting chemicals not identified in the Montreal Protocol.
 SEC. 1404. INTERNATIONAL NUCLEAR CONFERENCE- The Secretary of State, in
 consultation with the Secretary of Energy, shall convene an international
 meeting to be held in the United States with invitations to representatives
 of all countries of the world, the purpose of which shall be to encourage
 the exchange of information concerning passively safe nuclear reactors,
 nuclear safety, and disposal of nuclear waste.
 SEC. 1405. SPECIAL PROGRAMS- The Secretary of State should encourage the
 establishment of a special office of the United Nations Environment Programme
 (UNEP) and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) to monitor annual
 generation of CO2 and estimated trace gases on a country-by-country
 basis. That office shall also be responsible for assisting global
 negotiations and ultimately administering a global protocol.
 SEC. 1406. (a) It is the policy of the United States that sustainable
 economic growth must be predicated on sustainable use of natural
 resources. The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States
 Executive Directors of the Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs)--
 (1) promote the adoption of internal guidelines requiring the use of
 least-cost planning techniques in evaluating proposed energy loans,
 and consider refusal to support power generation, utilization or energy
 sector loans unless cost-effective conservation measures have been fully
 evaluated and considered;
 (2) encourage each MDB to offer technical assistance to borrower nations
 in preparing national energy plans. Special emphasis shall be given to
 least-cost analysis in making decisions on energy use and development,
 and such analyses shall take into account all demand-side as well as
 supply-side options;
 (3) promote expansion of MDB expertise in the areas of energy conservation
 and renewable energy sources;
 (4) promote the adoption of lending strategies which place increased emphasis
 on energy efficiency as opposed to merely increasing generating capacity;
 (5) promote adoption of policies which minimize the generation of carbon
 dioxide and trade gases;
 (6) promote the adoption of lending strategies that place increased emphasis
 on energy efficient transportation programs. Such strategies shall consider
 alternatives to conventional mechanized transport such as non-motorized
 vehicles, public transport and increased energy and cost efficiency of
 transportation systems; and
 (7) promote the use of existing and the development of new mechanisms to
 promote conservation of biological diversity. Existing resources to be
 consulted shall include but not be limited to Conservation Data Centers.
 (b) The Administrator of the Agency for International Development shall--
 (1) in the submission of future `early warning system' reports,
 as required by the Foreign Operations, Export Financing, and Related
 Programs Appropriations Act of 1988, make use of resources that promote
 the conservation of biological diversity, such as Conservation Data Centers;
 (2) submit a report to the Committee on Appropriations, by January 15,
 1991, on the Agency's activities and practices which encourage or discourage
 the use of renewable energy technologies overseas, and on ways to correct
 or refocus those efforts. This report shall include but is not limited to
 Agency activities which could be directed to develop a stronger interface
 with the private sector through the establishment of a United States
 Renewable Energy Industry Advisory Council;
 (3) issue guidance to all Agency missions stating that renewable energy
 resources and conservation are to be the centerpiece of their energy efforts,
 and meeting energy needs through these means shall be discussed in every
 country Development Strategy Statement; and
 (4) take steps to implement recommendations set forth by a report of
 the Committee on Health and Environment on opportunities for the Agency
 to assist developing countries in the proper use of agricultural and
 industrial chemicals.
 SEC. 1407. INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH- (a) It is the policy of the United
 States to promote and support--
 (1) domestic and international research efforts with respect to the
 greenhouse effect and its impact;
 (2) studies of methods to reduce the rate of increase in the concentration
 of carbon dioxide and trace gases in the atmosphere of the Earth; and
 (3) efforts to prevent degradation of the environment of the Earth by the
 greenhouse effect.
 (b) The President is requested to take all appropriate actions, in
 cooperation with any international organizations which the President
 determines to be appropriate, to establish a long-term study, beginning
 with a one-year cooperative international research program, with respect
 to the greenhouse effect with the purposes of--
 (1) increasing the worldwide dissemination of information with respect to
 the causes of the greenhouse effect and methods to alleviate or avoid the
 effects of global warming and climate change;
 (2) coordinating the research efforts of the participating nations with
 respect to the greenhouse effect;
 (3) fostering cooperation among nations to develop more extensive research
 efforts with respect to the greenhouse effect;
 (4) preparing a report on the accomplishments of the program;
 (5) identifying the potential alternative policies necessary to avoid a
 buildup of carbon dioxide and trace gases beyond levels which could have
 catastrophic results; and
 (6) developing a long-term plan for future research efforts with respect
 to the greenhouse effect.
 (c) Any such program established by the President should be started
 during or before the calendar year 1991, which year shall be known as the
 `International Year of the Greenhouse Effect'.
 (d) The participation of the United States in any such program established
 by the President should be planned and coordinated on behalf of the United
 States by the Chairman of the National Academy of Sciences and the Secretary
 of Energy.
TITLE XV--MODERATING WORLD POPULATION GROWTH
 SEC. 1501. FINDINGS- (a) Taking into account the impact that future world
 population growth will have on increased demand for energy and on the rate
 of tropical deforestation, Congress hereby finds that--
 (1) in order to avoid the potentially catastrophic consequences
 of significant global warming a coordi- nated effort to address world
 population growth must be initiated;
 (2) United States participation in international programs to moderate
 high rates of population growth is necessary to control rising levels of
 atmospheric pollutants and greenhouse gases;
 (3) at current birth and death rates the world population, now at five
 billion, is adding an additional one billion people every ten years;
 (4) half of the world's people depend primarily on biomass energy,
 principally fuelwood, for their most basic nonfood energy needs--cooking,
 water heating, and space heating--and one and one-half billion people are
 cutting wood faster than forests can grow back;
 (5) growing rural populations will continue to encroach on remaining forests
 in search of land for food and commercial crops, for fuelwood needed for
 cooking and heating, and fodder for livestock;
 (6) the World Bank estimates that an average fertility rate of 2.4 children
 per woman, the rate needed for eventual population stabilization at present
 death rates, could be achieved by the year 2000 if the proportion of couples
 in developing countries using contraception were to rise from the current
 rate of 40 per centum to 72 per centum; and
 (7) these population stabilization goals can be accomplished through a mix
 of bilateral and international population policies to make family planning
 services universally available on a voluntary basis in order to slow the
 rate of population growth and therefore reduce pressures on global resources.
 (b) The overall purpose of this title is to--
 (1) significantly increase funding for new investments in international
 family planning information services to ensure universal access to effective
 modern contraception; and
 (2) increase funds available for applied research and development of new
 contraceptive technologies with a particular focus on methods adaptable
 for use in developing countries.
 (c) There is hereby authorized to be appropriated to the President
 $500,000,000 for fiscal year 1991 and $540,000,000 for fiscal year 1992
 and $580,000,000 for fiscal year 1993 for international population and
 family planning assistance. Of the funds appropriated, not less than 16 per
 centum or $60,000,000, whichever amount is less, shall be solely available
 for the United Nations Population Fund. None of the funds made available
 for international population and family planning assistance may be used
 to pay for the performance of involuntary sterilization or abortion or to
 coerce any person to accept family planning services. Restrictions may be
 applied by the President to information, counseling, or services that may
 be provided by family planning entities abroad only to the extent that the
 same restrictions are applied by the President to information, counseling,
 and services that may be provided by family planning entities receiving
 funds under grants and contracts made under title X of the Public Health
 Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300 and following).