HR 2074 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2074
To amend the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 for the purpose of enhancing
competition among air carriers, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
April 24, 1991
Mr. OBERSTAR (for himself, Mr. ROE, Mr. HAMMERSCHMIDT, and Mr. CLINGER)
introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on Public
Works and Transportation
A BILL
To amend the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 for the purpose of enhancing
competition among air carriers, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Airline Competition Enhancement Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. ENHANCEMENT OF COMPETITION RELATING TO GATES, SLOTS, AND CERTIFICATES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title IV of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49
 U.S.C. App. 1371-1389) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new section:
`SEC. 420. ENHANCEMENT OF COMPETITION WITH RESPECT TO GATES, SLOTS, AND
CERTIFICATES.
 `(a) LIMITATION ON CERTAIN TRANSFERS- No major air carrier may transfer--
 `(1) in any 1-year period rights to use more than 5 percent of the gates
 at an airport,
 `(2) in any 1-year period more than 5 percent of the slots allocated at
 a high density airport, or
 `(3) a certificate issued under section 401 of this Act authorizing the
 carrier to engage in foreign air transportation or any portion of such
 a certificate,
unless the Secretary has approved the transfer under subsection (b).
 `(b) APPROVAL OF TRANSFERS-
 `(1) PROCEDURES FOR TRANSFERS- Not later than 180 days after the date
 of the enactment of this section, the Secretary shall issue regulations
 establishing procedures for ensuring that all carriers and other persons
 interested in purchasing a right, slot, or certificate the transfer
 of which is subject to subsection (a), or any portion of such a right,
 slot, or certificate, are provided an opportunity to submit, to the air
 carrier transferring such right, slot, or certificate and the Secretary,
 proposals for purchasing the right, slot, or certificate or portion thereof,
 including proposals concerning purchase price and payment thereof and
 detailed descriptions of plans concerning the use of the right, slot,
 or certificate or portion thereof after its transfer.
 `(2) DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBLE PROPOSALS- The Secretary shall determine
 which of the proposals submitted to the Secretary pursuant to paragraph
 (1) for transfer of a right, slot, or certificate or portion thereof are
 eligible for approval under this subsection. A proposal shall be eligible
 for approval under this subsection if the Secretary determines that the
 purchase price included in such proposal is reasonable. Such determination
 shall be made on the basis of the following factors (among others):
 `(A) The price paid by the air carrier transferring the right, slot,
 or certificate to acquire the right, slot, or certificate.
 `(B) The period of time the air carrier has used the right, slot,
 or certificate and the funds expended by the air carrier for capital
 improvements, facilities, and equipment in order to use the right, slot,
 or certificate.
 `(3) STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL-
 `(A) GATES AND SLOTS- After determining which proposals for transfer of
 a right to use a gate or of a slot are eligible for approval under this
 subsection, the Secretary shall approve the proposal of those eligible for
 approval under this subsection which the Secretary determines would provide
 the maximum enhancement of competition among air carriers if approved.
 `(B) CERTIFICATES-
 `(i) GENERAL RULE- After determining which proposals for transfer of a
 certificate under section 401 of this Act or portion thereof are eligible
 for approval under this section, the Secretary shall approve the proposal
 of those eligible for approval under this subsection which the Secretary
 determines would provide the maximum enhancement of the public interest
 if approved.
 `(ii) FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED- In making a determination under this
 subparagraph, the Secretary shall consider as being in the public interest
 the following:
 `(I) The factors listed in section 102 of this Act.
 `(II) The enhancement of the financial viability of each of the carriers
 involved in the transfer.
 `(III) The enhancement of competition among air carriers.
 `(IV) The enhancement of the trade position of the United States in the
 international air transportation market.
 `(V) A commitment by the carrier transferring the certificate or portion
 thereof to use the funds received from the transfer to provide air
 transportation services in other markets.
 `(iii) DISAPPROVAL AUTHORITY- The Secretary may disapprove all proposals
 for transfer of a certificate or portion thereof eligible for approval
 under this subparagraph if the Secretary determines that none of the
 proposals would further the public interest.
 `(c) GATE USAGE AT CERTAIN AIRPORTS-
 `(1) REDUCED FEES- Notwithstanding section 511 of the Airport and Airway
 Improvement Act of 1982, section 1113 of this Act, or any other provision
 of law, an operator of a concentrated airport may allow an eligible air
 carrier to use unutilized gates or other facilities used in connection
 with air carrier operations at rates less than the rate currently being
 paid by other air carriers for the use of such gates or facilities at the
 airport. The period of usage for which a gate or other facility may be
 allowed under this paragraph shall not exceed 5 years.
 `(2) DOT ALLOCATION- Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment
 of this section, the Secretary shall establish, by regulation, a procedure
 under which the Secretary may direct the operator of a concentrated airport
 to take such actions as may be necessary (including modifications of existing
 contracts for the use of gates at the airport) to provide an eligible air
 carrier which petitions the Secretary for the right to use a gate at the
 airport during hours at which such gate is not being used. The Secretary
 may only issue a directive under this paragraph if the Secretary finds that
 the petitioning air carrier has not been able to obtain, after reasonable
 efforts, the use of such gate at the airport on terms comparable to those
 terms of air carriers already using gates at the airport. The terms for
 the use of gates directed to be provided to the petitioning air carrier
 shall be the same as such comparable terms.
 `(d) LIMITATION ON STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this section shall be
 construed as limiting or otherwise affecting any authority of the Secretary,
 the Department of Transportation, or the Federal Aviation Administration
 to amend, modify, revoke, or terminate the right of an air carrier to use
 a gate, have a slot, or hold a certificate issued under section 401 of
 this Act.
 `(e) DEFINITIONS- As used in this section, the following definitions apply:
 `(1) CONCENTRATED AIRPORT- The term `concentrated airport' means an airport
 at which 1 or 2 air carriers have the right to use 60 percent or more of
 the gates.
 `(2) ELIGIBLE AIR CARRIER- The term `eligible air carrier', as used with
 respect to a concentrated airport, means--
 `(A) an air carrier which does not conduct air carrier operations at the
 airport; and
 `(B) an air carrier which has the right to use less than 20 percent of
 the gates at the airport.
 `(3) GATE- The term `gate' means a facility at which passengers are enplaned
 or deplaned.
 `(4) HIGH DENSITY AIRPORT- The term `high density airport' means an airport
 at which the Administrator limits the number of instrument flight rule
 takeoffs and landings of aircraft.
 `(5) MAJOR AIR CARRIER- The term `major air carrier' means--
 `(A) an air carrier which has annual revenues of more than $750,000,000; and
 `(B) an air carrier which is a debtor in a case under title 11, United
 States Code, and which, in any calendar year beginning after December 31,
 1991, has annual revenues of more than $750,000,000.
 `(6) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Transportation.
 `(7) SLOT- The term `slot' means a reservation for an instrument flight
 rule takeoff or landing of an aircraft in air transportation.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 401(h) of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958
 (49 U.S.C. App. 1371(h)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(h) TRANSFER OF CERTIFICATES- See section 420 of this Act.'.
SEC. 3. REDUCTION OF U.S. CITIZENSHIP VOTING INTEREST OWNERSHIP REQUIREMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title IV of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49
 U.S.C. App. 1371-1389) is further amended by adding at the end the following
 new section:
`SEC. 421. REDUCTION OF U.S. CITIZENSHIP VOTING INTEREST OWNERSHIP REQUIREMENT.
 `(a) GENERAL RULE- Notwithstanding the requirement of section 101(16) of
 this Act that at least 75 percent of the stock of an air carrier be owned
 or controlled by persons who are citizens of the United States or of one
 of its possessions, a person who is not a citizen of the United States
 may purchase stock of a corporation or association which is, or owns or
 controls, an air carrier without regard to whether or not such purchase
 would result in the corporation or association failing to meet the stock
 ownership and control requirement of section 101(16) if the Secretary of
 Transportation finds that--
 `(1) the air service agreement between the United States and the foreign
 country of which the purchaser is a citizen is a procompetitive agreement
 which, at a minimum, allows those air carriers designated by the United
 States to provide air service from any point in the United States to any
 significant air service point in the foreign country;
 `(2) after the purchase, the president, chairman of the board of directors,
 chief operating officer, and two-thirds or more of the board of directors
 of the corporation or association which is, or owns or controls, the air
 carrier would be citizens of the United States;
 `(3) the laws and regulations of the foreign country would permit a citizen
 of the United States to acquire, under similar terms and conditions, the
 same percentage of stock (by vote or value) of a person who provides in the
 foreign country transportation by aircraft of persons or property as a common
 carrier for compensation or hire as the percentage of ownership which the
 person making the purchase would have in the air carrier after the purchase;
 `(4) the purchaser is not a corporation or association of which 50 percent or
 more of its stock (by vote or value) is owned or controlled by a government
 of a foreign country;
 `(5) the air carrier (or the person applying for a certificate under section
 401 of this Act to engage in foreign air transportation) is unlikely to be
 able to provide, or to continue to provide, air transportation without the
 revenues which would be derived from the sale of the stock and no citizen
 of the United States is willing to purchase the stock under comparable
 terms and conditions;
 `(6) after the purchase, a citizen of the United States would have the
 power to exercise control over the air carrier;
 `(7) the purchase is consistent with the national security interests of
 the United States; and
 `(8) the purchase is otherwise in the public interest.
 `(b) MAXIMUM REDUCED PERCENTAGE- The 75 percent stock ownership and control
 requirement of section 101(16) of this Act may not be reduced to less than
 51 percent under this section.'.
 (b) DEFINITION OF CITIZEN OF THE UNITED STATES- Section 101(16)(c) of the
 Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 U.S.C. App. 1301(16)(c)) is amended by
 striking `voting interest' and inserting `stock (by vote or value)'.
SEC. 4. COMPUTER RESERVATION SYSTEMS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title IV of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49
 U.S.C. App. 1371-1389) is further amended by adding at the end the following
 new section:
`SEC. 422. COMPUTER RESERVATIONS SYSTEMS.
 `(a) PROHIBITIONS AGAINST VENDOR DISCRIMINATION- No vendor, in the operation
 of its computer reservation system, may--
 `(1)(A) make available to subscribers an integrated display in which
 information is ordered or emphasized based upon factors relating to air
 carrier identity; or
 `(B) supply information from its computer reservations system to any person
 creating or attempting to create such an integrated display;
 `(2) make available, after the 365th day following the date of the enactment
 of this section, to a subscriber any subscriber transaction capability
 which is more functional, timely, complete, accurate, or efficient with
 respect to one participant than with respect to any other participant,
 unless the vendor offers a participant the opportunity to participate in
 such capability at the same price as other participants and the participant
 does not accept such offer;
 `(3) charge a participant fee which is above the fee or range of fees
 found fair and reasonable in a decision of an arbitrator under subsection
 (c) with respect to such vendor unless a period of one year or more has
 elapsed since such decision; or
 `(4) directly or indirectly prohibit a subscriber from obtaining or using
 any other computer reservation system.
 `(b) SUBSCRIBER CONTRACT RESTRAINTS- No subscriber contract--
 `(1) after the 180th day following the date of the enactment of this section,
 shall be for a term of more than 1 year;
 `(2) shall form a basis for a claim of actual or liquidated damages by the
 vendor in the event the subscriber cancels the contract, except as follows:
 `(A) damages related to the vendor's actual cost of removing its equipment
 from the subscriber's premises;
 `(B) the unamortized share of the vendor's actual cost of installing such
 equipment in the subscriber's premises exclusive of any element of capital
 investment in such equipment; and
 `(C) other amounts owed to the vendor by the subscriber during the unexpired
 term of such contract, but in no event including amounts which are in
 the nature of a penalty for cancellation or which otherwise become due
 upon cancellation;
 `(3) shall contain an expiration date later than the earliest expiration
 date of any other contract for computer reservations services between the
 same subscriber and vendor;
 `(4) shall directly or indirectly require that the subscriber use the
 vendor's computer reservations system for a minimum volume of transactions,
 whether measured as an absolute number, a percentage of total transactions
 of any kind, or otherwise; or
 `(5) shall be enforceable in law or equity after the 30th day following
 the date of the enactment of this section as to any provision to the extent
 that such provision is inconsistent with the requirements of this subsection.
 `(c) ARBITRATION OF PARTICIPANT FEES-
 `(1) DEMAND FOR ARBITRATION- Any participant who objects to an increased
 participant fee which is scheduled to take effect on or after April 15, 1991,
 may demand that such a fee be reviewed by an arbitrator as provided in this
 subsection. Review shall be instituted by such participant by submitting
 a demand for arbitration in writing to the Secretary of Transportation
 and mailing a copy thereof to the vendor imposing such fee. The Secretary
 shall within 30 days of receiving such demand determine whether the matter
 disputed is subject to arbitration under this section. The Secretary shall
 give timely notice of any such determination to other participants who
 may be affected by the disputed fee and shall take such action as may be
 necessary to permit their participation as parties to the arbitration.
 `(2) SELECTION OF ARBITRATOR- If the Secretary determines that a matter is
 subject to arbitration under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall promptly
 advise the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service and provide to
 the Service the names of persons eligible to participate as parties. The
 Service shall provide a procedure by which the parties shall agree on the
 selection of an arbitrator. If the parties fail to agree on an arbitrator
 within 30 days of the Secretary's determination that the matter disputed
 is subject to arbitration, the Service shall select an arbitrator. The
 submission of a demand for arbitration under this subsection shall not
 act as a stay of any fee.
 `(3) ARBITRATION FEES- The Secretary and the Service are authorized to
 make such orders and incur such expenditures as are necessary to give
 effect to this subsection. Arbitration fees and other common costs of the
 arbitration shall be borne by the parties. To assist it in the performance
 of its duties under this subsection, the Service may employ consultants
 on a contract basis.
 `(4) DISPUTE RESOLUTION- The arbitrator shall issue such orders as are
 necessary to the prompt and efficient resolution of the dispute and to assure
 the parties a fair and reasonable opportunity to be heard. After considering
 the submissions of the parties, the arbitrator shall render a decision as to
 whether the disputed participant fee exceeds that which would be fair and
 reasonable in light of the revenues and costs attributable to the computer
 reservations system. In so doing, the arbitrator shall give due regard
 to all revenues of the vendor, including any air transportation revenues
 attributable to the computer reservations system or any air carrier holding
 an ownership interest in the computer reservations system, and all applicable
 costs, including an allowance for a reasonable return on investment.
 `(5) DETERMINATION OF PARTICIPANT FEE- If the arbitrator determines the
 fee or charge is not fair and reasonable, the arbitrator shall specify
 a fee or charge, or range of fees or charges, which would be fair and
 reasonable. The arbitrator shall also specify an effective date for the
 decision. Such date shall be no earlier than the effective date of the
 challenged fee. The arbitrator shall issue a written statement setting
 forth the basis for the decision.
 `(6) APPEALS- The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding
 except that such award may be vacated by a United States court in and for
 the district where the award was made for any of the reasons set forth
 in subsections (a) through (d) of section 10 of title 9, United States
 Code. Unless the court otherwise orders in the interests of justice, any
 matter as to which an order is vacated under this paragraph shall be heard
 by an arbitrator as a new matter arising under this subsection.
 `(7) LIMITATION ON PARTICIPANT FEES- No participant fee shall be charged
 by a vendor which is above the fee or range of fees previously found fair
 and reasonable in an arbitration under this section with respect to such
 vendor unless a period of one year or more has elapsed since such decision.
 `(8) PAYMENT OF ARBITRATOR FEES- Unless the arbitrator holds otherwise,
 each party to an arbitration shall bear its own costs and each side shall
 pay one-half of the reasonable fees and costs of the arbitrator.
 `(d) TREATMENT OF CERTAIN REDUCED CRS SERVICES- If any computer reservation
 system service being provided to a participant in such system for a
 participant fee is reduced without a corresponding reduction in the
 participant fee, the participant fee shall be treated, for purposes of
 this section, as being increased by the vendor.
 `(e) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section, the following definitions
 apply:
 `(1) ARBITRATOR- The term `arbitrator' means either an individual not
 associated with any party or a panel of three such individuals.
 `(2) COMPUTER RESERVATIONS SYSTEM- The term `computer reservations system'
 means an electronic information and transaction processing system used
 by ticket agents in the United States which contains information on the
 schedules, fares, rules, or seat availability of 2 or more air carriers
 and provides for the booking of seats on air carrier flights.
 `(3) INTEGRATED DISPLAY- The term `integrated display' means a computerized
 display of information which relates to air carrier schedules, fares,
 rules, or availability and is designed to include information pertaining to
 more than one air carrier. Such term excludes the display of data from the
 internal reservations system of an individual air carrier when provided in
 response to a request by a ticket agent relating to a specific transaction.
 `(4) PARTICIPANT- The term `participant', as used with respect to a computer
 reservations system, means an air carrier which has its flight schedules,
 fares, or seat availability displayed through such system.
 `(5) PARTICIPANT FEE- The term `participant fee' means any fee, charge,
 penalty, or thing of value contractually required to be furnished to
 a vendor by a participant for display of the flight schedules, fares,
 or seat availability of the participant through the computer reservation
 system of the vendor or for other computer reservation system services
 provided to the participant.
 `(6) SUBSCRIBER- The term `subscriber' means a ticket agent that has an
 agreement with a vendor for use of such vendor's computer reservations
 services.
 `(7) SUBSCRIBER CONTRACT- The term `subscriber contract' means an agreement,
 and any amendment thereto, between a ticket agent and a vendor for the
 furnishing of computer reservations services to such subscriber.
 `(8) SUBSCRIBER TRANSACTION CAPABILITY- The term `subscriber transaction
 capability' means the capability of a ticket agent through a computer
 reservations system to view information on airline schedules, fares, rules,
 and seat availability or to book space, assign seats, or issue tickets or
 boarding passes for air transportation to be provided by air carriers.
 `(9) VENDOR- The term `vendor' means any person who owns, controls, or
 operates a computer reservations system.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- The table of contents contained in the first
 section of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 is amended by adding at the
 end of the matter relating to title IV of such Act the following:
`Sec. 420. Enhancement of competition with respect to gates, slots, and
certificates.
 `(a) Limitation on certain transfers.
 `(b) Approval of transfers.
 `(c) Gate usage at certain airports.
 `(d) Limitation on statutory construction.
 `(e) Definitions.
`Sec. 421. Reduction of U.S. citizenship voting interest ownership requirement.
 `(a) General rule.
 `(b) Maximum reduced percentage.
`Sec. 422. Computer reservations systems.
 `(a) Prohibitions against vendor discrimination.
 `(b) Subscriber contract restraints.
 `(c) Arbitration of participant fees.
 `(d) Treatment of certain reduced CRS services.
 `(e) Definitions.'.