HR 2605 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2605
Amending the Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety Act of 1979 to require the
installation of remote control valves and supervisory control and data
acquisition systems on certain pipeline facilities, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
June 10, 1991
Mr. VENTO introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the
Committees on Energy and Commerce and Public Works and Transportation
A BILL
Amending the Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety Act of 1979 to require the
installation of remote control valves and supervisory control and data
acquisition systems on certain pipeline facilities, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Safe Pipeline Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. REMOTE CONTROL VALVES AND SUPERVISORY CONTROL AND DATA ACQUISITION
SYSTEMS.
 The Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety Act of 1979 is amended by adding at
 the end the following new section:
`SEC. 220. REMOTE CONTROL VALVES AND SUPERVISORY CONTROL AND DATA ACQUISITION
SYSTEMS.
 `(a) INSTALLATION OF REMOTE CONTROL VALVES- The Secretary shall, within
 6 months after the date of enactment of this section, issue regulations
 requiring the installation of remote control valves--
 `(1) at intervals of not more than 5 miles on all pipeline facilities
 which are located in a Metropolitan Statistical Area, as defined by the
 Bureau of the Census; and
 `(2) on either side of a pipeline facility water crossing--
 `(A) more than 100 feet wide;
 `(B) of any reservoir holding water for human consumption; or
 `(C) of water with an average annual flow rate of 5 cubic feet per second
 or greater.
The regulations shall require such installation before transportation of any
hazardous liquid in a pipeline facility with respect to which construction
is begun after one year after the date of enactment of this section, and
before January 1, 1997, for all other pipeline facilities. Such regulations
shall also prescribe technical performance standards for remote control valves.
 `(b) INSTALLATION OF A SUPERVISORY CONTROL AND DATA ACQUISITION SYSTEMS-
 The Secretary shall, within 6 months after the date of enactment of this
 section, issue regulations requiring the installation of supervisory
 control and data acquisition systems, with leak detection subsystems--
 `(1) on all pipeline facilities which are located in a Metropolitan
 Statistical Area, as defined by the Bureau of the Census; and
 `(2) on either side of a pipeline facility water crossing--
 `(A) more than 100 feet wide;
 `(B) of any reservoir holding water for human consumption; or
 `(C) of water with an average annual flow rate of 5 cubic feet per second
 or greater.
The regulations shall require such installation before transportation of any
hazardous liquid in a pipeline facility with respect to which construction is
begun after one year after the date of enactment of this section, and before
January 1, 1997, for all other pipeline facilities. Such regulations shall
also prescribe technical performance standards for supervisory control and
data acquisition systems and leak detection subsystems.
 `(c) REPORTING OF ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS- The Secretary shall, within 6
 months after the date of enactment of this section, issue regulations to
 require operators of pipeline facilities to report environmental effects,
 including water pollution, soil contamination, and impact on wildlife, birds,
 fish, and waterfowl, resulting from any leak or discharge from a pipeline
 facility which is otherwise a reportable event pursuant to any Federal
 law or regulation. The Secretary shall make such information available to
 other agencies of the Federal Government and to the public on request.
 `(d) ADDITIONAL INSTALLATION ASSESSMENT- The Secretary shall, within one
 year after the date of enactment of this section, conduct an assessment of
 the advisability of requiring the installation of remote control valves and
 supervisory control and data acquisition systems on pipeline facilities not
 identified in subsections (a) and (b) but that involve a substantial risk--
 `(1) to public safety, property, wildlife, or the environment in the event
 of a pipeline facility accident; or
 `(2) of an accident due to regular seismic activity or other circumstances.'.