HR 229 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 229
To amend the Small Business Act to assist and protect small businesses and
to protect small businesses against unreasonable use of economic power by
major meatpacking companies, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
January 3, 1991
Mr. SMITH of Iowa introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly
to the Committees on Agriculture and Small Business
A BILL
To amend the Small Business Act to assist and protect small businesses and
to protect small businesses against unreasonable use of economic power by
major meatpacking companies, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be cited as the
 `Small Business Preservation and Protection Act of 1991'.
CONGRESSIONAL FINDING AND DECLARATION OF POLICY
 SEC. 2. (a) The Congress finds that the existence, in businesses engaged in
 commerce or in the production, processing, manufacturing, and distribution
 of livestock and meat food products for commerce, of marketing conditions
 detrimental to the maintenance of a free and competitive environment needed
 for the health, efficiency, and the general well-being of business (1) unduly
 burdens small businesses; (2) burdens commerce and the free flow of livestock
 and meat food products in commerce; (3) impairs the participation of small
 business enterprises in Federal procurement and Government contracts;
 (4) interferes with the orderly and fair marketing of goods in commerce
 by small businesses; (5) leads to a burdening and obstruction of commerce
 and the free flow of goods in commerce; and (6) that it is in the national
 interest to further define the level of activity and course of conduct
 which is appropriate for the protection of small businesses.
 (b) It is declared to be the policy of this Act, through the exercise by
 Congress of its power to assist and protect small businesses, to correct,
 to prevent, and as rapidly as possible to eliminate the conditions referred
 to above.
DEFINITIONS
 SEC. 3. As used in this Act--
 (a) `Administrator' means the Administrator of the Small Business
 Administration of the United States, or any officer or employee of the Small
 Business Administration to whom authority has been or may be delegated to
 act in his stead;
 (b) `State' means each of the several States of the United States, the
 District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the Virgin
 Islands;
 (c) `commerce' means trade, traffic, commerce, or transportation, within
 the jurisdiction of the United States (1) between a place in a State and
 any place outside of such State, or (2) which affects trade, traffic,
 commerce, or transportation described in clause (1);
 (d) `activity affecting commerce' means any activity in commerce, or
 burdening or obstructing commerce or the free flow of goods in commerce,
 or having led or tending to lead to a burdening or obstruction of commerce
 or the free flow of commerce, or having led or tending to impair a free
 and competitive environment needed for the health, efficiency, and general
 well-being of business;
 (e) `person' means any individual or any partnership, corporation, joint
 stock company, any organized group whether or not incorporated, or any other
 business association existing under or authorized by the laws of either
 the United States, the laws of any State, or the laws of any foreign country;
 (f) `packer' means any person engaged in the business (1) of buying livestock
 in commerce for the purposes of slaughter, or (2) of manufacturing or
 preparing meats or meat food products for sale, or shipment in commerce,
 or (3) of marketing meats, meat food products, or livestock products in an
 unmanufactured form acting as a wholesale broker, dealer, or distributor
 in commerce, or (4) of buying, slaughtering, manufacturing, preparing,
 or processing meats, meat food products, or livestock which involves any
 activity affecting commerce. For the purposes of this Act, all references
 to `packer' also include any person who directly or indirectly owns or
 controls a packer or any subsidiary, plant, facility, division, affiliate,
 joint venture, or any other entity under the direct or indirect control
 of a packer;
 (g) `small business meatpacking concern' means any packer which has less
 than a 5 per centum share of the national slaughter for each of the three
 classifications;
 (h) `slaughter' means the act of killing an animal for human consumption;
 (i) `process' means any reduction of the carcass, after slaughter, into
 smaller cuts (such as primals or fabricated cuts) or cutting the carcass
 or primals to subprimals or smaller. For purposes of this Act, `process'
 shall be synonymous with `fabricate' or `break';
 (j) `carcass' means the dressed body of a slaughtered animal, excluding
 viscera, and includes each of the four quarters of the animal;
 (k) `meat food products' means all products and byproducts of the cattle
 and hog slaughtering and meatpacking industry, if edible;
 (l) `livestock' means cattle or hogs, whether live or dead;
 (m) `classification' refers to each of the following: (1) steers and
 heifers, (2) cows and bulls, or (3) hogs. For the purposes of this Act,
 there are three separate classifications;
 (n) `livestock futures contract' means standardized contracts covering the
 purchase or sale of cattle, hogs or meat food products for future delivery
 on or subject to the rules of a contract market designated pursuant to
 section 5 of the Commodity Exchange Act as amended (7 U.S.C. 7);
 (o) `retail' means to sell directly to the consumer; and
 (p) `future livestock transaction' means any livestock futures contract and
 any contract dealing with cattle, hogs or meat food products, whether traded
 on a contract market or not, commonly known to the trade as a margin account,
 margin contract, leverage account, leverage contract, option, privilege,
 indemnity, bid, offer, put, call, advance guaranty, or decline guaranty.
PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
 SEC. 4. (a) Each of the following activities is deemed to be unfair and
 detrimental to small business meatpacking concerns and each such activity
 is prohibited as follows:
 (1) No packer which is not a small business meatpacking concern shall own,
 lease, or operate in any manner any retail meat outlet in the United States.
 (2) No packer's total slaughter for any classification during any calendar
 year shall exceed 25 per centum of the larger of the last two annual national
 slaughter totals for that classification as most recently published by
 the Crop Reporting Board, Economics, Statistics, and Cooperatives Service,
 United States Department of Agriculture. For the purposes of this paragraph,
 a packer's purchase, acquisition, or control in any manner of carcasses or
 any other meat food products from any other person or packer shall be added
 to that packer's annual slaughter total for the appropriate classification
 and this combined total shall not exceed 25 per centum of the larger of the
 last two annual national slaughter totals published for that classification.
 (3) No packer shall engage in any unreasonable use of economic power or
 discriminate in price between different purchasers of meat food products
 in any marketing area of the United States for the purpose of impairing in
 any manner the marketing ability of one or more small business meatpacking
 concerns in such marketing area.
 (4) No packer shall sell below cost or contract to sell below cost any
 meat food products for the purpose of impairing in any manner the marketing
 ability of one or more small business meatpacking concerns or for the purpose
 of eliminating one or more small business meatpacking concerns. Nothing
 contained herein shall prevent a packer from selling below cost from time
 to time where such action is in response to changing supply and demand
 conditions affecting the market for or the marketability of the meat
 food products concerned, such as but not limited to actual or imminent
 deterioration of perishable goods, distress sales under court process,
 or sales in good faith in discontinuance of business.
 (5) Any officer of a packer which is required to file an annual report by
 the regulations issued under the Packers and Stockyards Act (7 U.S.C. 181)
 by the United States Department of Agriculture is prohibited from owning
 or entering into any future livestock transaction.
 (6) No packer, which is required to file an annual report by the regulations
 issued under the Packers and Stockyards Act (7 U.S.C. 181) by the United
 States Department of Agriculture, may engage in any livestock futures
 contract activity or future livestock transaction other than a bona fide
 hedge transaction as defined by the regulations of the Commodity Futures
 Trading Commission enacted pursuant to the Commodity Exchange Act, as
 amended (7 U.S.C. 7).
 (b) Authority to enforce compliance with this section is vested in the
 Administrator. The Administrator is empowered to secure compliance with
 this section by filing a complaint with the appropriate department or
 agency of the United States. Such department or agency shall immediately
 and forthwith investigate the complaint filed by the Administrator and if
 such department or agency deems that the complaint has merit, shall initiate
 the appropriate action to enforce compliance with this section, utilizing
 all applicable statutes and regulations of such department or agency.
 (c) Any person or packer who knowingly violates any provision of this section
 shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $500,000 for
 each such offense committed. Additionally, after such person or packer has
 received notice from either the Administrator or the department or agency
 to whom the Administrator has referred the complaint that a violation
 of this section has occurred or is occurring, each day during which a
 violation of this section occurs shall be deemed a separate offense.
 (d) Any small business meatpacking concern which is injured in his business
 or property in an amount exceeding $10,000 by reason of any activity
 forbidden by this section may sue therefor in any district court in the
 United States in the district in which the defendant resides or is found
 or has an agent and shall recover threefold the damages sustained by such
 small business meatpacking concern, together with the cost of the suit,
 including a reasonable attorney's fee.
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND EFFECTIVE DATE
 SEC. 5. (a) If any provision of this Act or the application thereof to
 any person or circumstances is held invalid, the validity of the remainder
 of the Act and of the application of such provision to other persons and
 circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
 (b) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to prevent or interfere
 with the enforcement of the Antitrust Acts or the Acts to regulate commerce,
 nor shall anything contained in this Act be construed to release any person
 from any obligation, limitation, or requirement of any Act prohibiting
 restraint of trade or unfair competition.
 (c) This Act shall become effective on the first day of January after the
 date of enactment.