HR 2522 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2522
To provide that the compensation paid to certain corporate officers shall
be treated as a proper subject for action by security holders, to require
certain disclosures regarding such compensation, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
June 4, 1991
Mr. BRYANT introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To provide that the compensation paid to certain corporate officers shall
be treated as a proper subject for action by security holders, to require
certain disclosures regarding such compensation, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Corporate Pay Responsibility Act'.
SEC. 2. CORPORATE OFFICER COMPENSATION.
 Section 14 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78n) is
 amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(h) CORPORATE OFFICER COMPENSATION-
 `(1) SECURITY HOLDER PROPOSALS- For purposes of this Act and the rules
 and regulations issued by the Commission under this Act, recommendations,
 proposals, or statements on the policies, criteria, or methods to be used
 in determining or providing the compensation to be paid to the directors
 or the chief executive officer of an issuer shall be considered proper
 subjects for action by its security holders. If such recommendations,
 proposals, or statements otherwise meet the requirements of this section
 and the rules and regulations of the Commission, an issuer may not omit
 such recommendations or proposals or any statement in support thereof
 otherwise required by this section from its proxy statement.
 `(2) DISCLOSURE INFORMATION- Pursuant to the rules and regulations of
 the Commission, an issuer shall include in its proxy statement, clear and
 comprehensive information concerning the compensation paid to each director
 and senior executive, including--
 `(A) a single dollar figure representing the total compensation paid
 to such person, including deferred, future, or contingent compensation,
 by the issuer during the year to which such proxy statement pertains;
 `(B) the estimated present value, represented by a dollar figure, of any
 forms of deferred, future, or contingent compensation for such year; and
 `(C) a graphic representation of--
 `(i) the compensation referred to in subparagraph (A);
 `(ii) comparable figures for the total compensation paid to such person
 by the issuer during each of the 2 years prior to the year to which such
 proxy statement pertains; and
 `(iii) comparable figures for the estimated total compensation to be paid
 to such person by the issuer in each of the succeeding 5 years.
 `(3) PRESENT VALUE CALCULATIONS- For purposes of paragraph (2) of this
 subsection, the Commission shall--
 `(A) specify the method for estimating the present value of stock options
 and other forms of deferred, future, or contingent compensation paid to
 the directors or senior executives of an issuer; and
 `(B) require the issuer to reduce its earnings, as reflected in its
 earnings statements to its security holders, by the estimated present
 value of such compensation.'.
SEC. 3. SHAREHOLDER NOMINATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 14 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15
 U.S.C. 78n) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsections:
 `(i) CORPORATE OFFICER NOMINATIONS BY SECURITY HOLDERS-
 `(1) SECURITY HOLDER NOMINEES- Subject to the rules and regulations of
 the Commission, a person or group that is the beneficial owner of voting
 equity securities representing--
 `(A) not less than 3 percent of the voting power of such issuer's
 securities, or
 `(B) not less than $1,000,000 in market value,
may nominate persons for election to the board of directors of the issuer.
 `(2) INCLUSION IN PROXY STATEMENT- Subject to the rules and regulations of
 the Commission, such nominations shall be included in the issuer's proxy
 statement and form of proxy, and the person or group making such nominations
 may provide descriptions or other statements with respect to such nominations
 to the same extent as the board of directors or management of such issuer,
 and to the same extent as provided with respect to other nominations.
 `(j) AVAILABILITY OF SECURITY HOLDER LIST- Upon receipt of a written
 request, an issuer shall promptly deliver its list of security holders
 of record and any list of beneficial owners used by or available to it to
 any person entitled to obtain such list under applicable laws. An issuer
 that fails to promptly provide the list required by this subsection shall
 be subject to a monetary penalty imposed by the Commission, pursuant to
 rules or regulations established by the Commission.
 `(k) CONFIDENTIALITY- The Commission shall, by rule or regulation--
 `(1) require that the granting and voting of proxies, consents, and
 authorizations, be confidential; and
 `(2) require the tabulation of votes to be performed by an independent
 third party, certified in accordance with such rules and regulations; and
 `(3) provide for the announcement of the results of a vote following
 such tabulation.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to authorize any person to
withhold information from the Commission or from any other duly authorized
agency of the Federal Government or a State government that is otherwise
required by law.'.
SEC. 4. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The amendments made by this Act shall become effective 1
 year after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (b) COMMISSION ACTION- The Commission shall promulgate final rules and
 regulations necessary to carry out this Act not later than 1 year after
 the effective date of this Act.