102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 1506
AN ACT
To extend the terms of the olestra patents, and for other purposes.
S 1506 ES
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 1506
AN ACT
To extend the terms of the olestra patents, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. PATENT EXTENSION.
 That the Secretary of Commerce, acting through the Commissioner of Patents
 shall, when United States Patent Number 3,892,824 (relating to the drugs
 S-2-(3-aminopropylamino) ethyl dihydrogen phosphorothioate (Ethiofos)
 and S-3-(3-methylaminopropylamino) propyl dihydrogen phosphorothioate,
 including hydrates and alkali metal salts thereof) expires, or as soon
 thereafter as possible, extend such patent for three years, with all the
 rights pertaining thereto.
SEC. 2. STATUTORY EXTENSION OF PATENT TERMS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Congress finds that, in the future, any bill providing
 for the extension of the term of a patent should not be approved by the
 Congress unless the requirements set forth in subsection (b) or (c) are met.
 (b) REQUESTS BASED ON DELAY IN PREMARKET APPROVAL- When the basis for a
 bill providing for a patent extension is delay in premarket regulatory
 approval of a patented invention, the following requirements should be
 met before the bill is approved by the Congress:
 (1) GOVERNMENTAL MISCONDUCT- (A) Delay in the approval process must
 have been beyond the control of the patent holder and directly caused by
 governmental misconduct.
 (B) For purposes of this paragraph, governmental misconduct is established
 by presentation of adequate proof of--
 (i) dishonest or deceitful conduct,
 (ii) vindictive or retaliatory action, or
 (iii) serious failure to perform governmental duties or comply with
 governmental standards,
 by the Federal Government.
 (C) Unusual or unexpected delay alone does not constitute governmental
 misconduct for purposes of this paragraph.
 (2) UNJUSTIFIED INJURY TO THE PATENT HOLDER- The governmental misconduct
 under paragraph (1) must have caused a substantial inequity to the patent
 holder who, without the extension of the patent term, will suffer material
 harm directly attributable to the delay in the approval process. The
 unjustified harm to the patent holder if relief is not granted must outweigh
 any harm to the public (such as through higher prices) or to competitors
 that will result from extension of the patent.
 (3) EXPIRED PATENTS- Expired patents shall not be revived and extended,
 except under the most extraordinary and compelling circumstances. In no
 such case shall an extension be granted unless the patent holder exercised
 due diligence to prevent the invention from entering the public domain.
 (4) INTERVENING RIGHTS- In the event extraordinary circumstances justify
 the revival and extension of an expired patent, intervening rights shall
 be extended to persons using the subject matter of the patent after its
 expiration. Such rights shall not be provided in the case of statutory
 extension of unexpired patents, except that, in a case in which extreme
 injustice would result from the failure to provide such rights, they may be
 extended to persons who have, in good faith expectation of the expiration
 of the patent, made substantial preparation for use of the subject matter
 of the patent after its expiration.
 (c) OTHER REQUESTS- When the basis for a bill providing for a patent term
 extension is other than delay in premarket regulatory approval, the following
 requirements should be met before the bill is approved by the Congress:
 (1)(A) Either governmental misconduct (as described in subsection (b)(1)),
 or action or inaction by the United States Government, contributed
 substantially to significant injury to the patent rights of the person
 requesting extension of the patent.
 (B) For purposes of subparagraph (A), the action or inaction by the
 Government need not constitute governmental misconduct (as described in
 subsection (b)(1)), but must be of such a nature as to create a moral or
 ethical obligation on the part of the Government to provide relief to a
 person whose patent rights have been substantially injured by the action or
 inaction by the Government. Such action or inaction may include altering,
 by statute or rule, the regulatory approval procedures, standards, or
 requirements in a case in which there has been material reliance by an
 applicant on the prior procedures, standards, or requirements.
 (2) The requirements set forth in paragraphs (2) through (4) of subsection
 (b) are met, except that--
 (A) the reference in subsection (b)(2) to `governmental misconduct'
 shall be deemed to include, as applicable, the action or inaction by the
 Government described in paragraph (1) of this subsection; and
 (B) the reference in subsection (b)(2) to `delay in the approval process'
 shall be deemed to refer to `governmental misconduct', which shall be
 deemed to include, as applicable, the action or inaction by the Government
 described in paragraph (1) of this subsection.
 (d) LACK OF DUE DILIGENCE- Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of
 this section, in no case should the Congress approve a bill providing for
 the extension of the term of a patent in the case of delay attributable
 to a lack of due diligence by the patent holder.
SEC. 3. PATENT EXTENSION FOR NONSTEROIDAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORY DRUGS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The term of United States patent numbered 3,793,457 shall
 be extended for a period of 2 years beginning on the date of its expiration.
 (b) LIMITATION ON RIGHTS- The rights derived from any patent which is
 extended by this section shall be limited during the period of such extension
 to any use for which the subject matter of the patent was approved by the
 Food and Drug Administration before the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 4. PATENT TERM EXTENSION FOR OLESTRA.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The terms of United States patents numbered 4,005,195,
 4,005,196, and 4,034,083 (and any reissues of such patents) shall each
 be extended for a period beginning on the date of its expiration through
 December 31, 1997.
 (b) POST-MARKET SURVEILLANCE- At the time that the owner of record of the
 patent requests that the Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks certify its
 patent extension, it shall submit with such request a statement from the
 Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration indicating that the Food
 and Drug Administration and the proposed marketing entity for olestra have
 agreed upon a post-market surveillance program which shall provide data
 regarding the influence of olestra-containing products upon the overall
 dietary intake of fats. Such data shall be subject to the usual standards of
 professional peer review. At the end of the study period, such data shall
 be submitted to the Food and Drug Administration for review. Such study
 data shall be in a format which shall be made available to Congress for
 public review. The requirements of this section shall not in any manner
 preempt the authority of the Food and Drug Administration to request and
 to receive any other information it deems necessary in the course of its
 ongoing regulatory activities.
SEC. 5. EXTENSION OF PATENT FOR INSIGNIA.
 A certain design patent numbered 29,611, which was issued by the United
 States Patent Office on November 8, 1898, which is the insignia of the
 United Daughters of the Confederacy, and which was renewed and extended for
 a period of 14 years by the Act entitled `An Act granting an extension of
 patent to the United Daughters of the Confederacy', approved November 11,
 1977 (Public Law 95-168; 91 Stat. 1349), is renewed and extended for an
 additional period of 14 years beginning on the date of the enactment of
 this Act, with all the rights and privileges pertaining to such patent.
SEC. 6. PATENT TERM EXTENSIONS FOR AMERICAN LEGION.
 (a) BADGE OF AMERICAN LEGION- The term of a certain design patent numbered
 54,296 (for the badge of the American Legion) is renewed and extended for
 a period of 14 years beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act,
 with all the rights and privileges pertaining to such patent.
 (b) BADGE OF AMERICAN LEGION WOMEN'S AUXILIARY- The term of a certain
 design patent numbered 55,398 (for the badge of the American Legion Women's
 Auxiliary) is renewed and extended for a period of 14 years beginning on
 the date of the enactment of this Act, with all the rights and privileges
 pertaining to such patent.
 (c) BADGE OF SONS OF THE AMERICAN LEGION- The term of a certain design
 patent numbered 92,187 (for the badge of the Sons of the American Legion)
 is renewed and extended for a period of 14 years beginning on the date of
 the enactment of this Act, with all the rights and privileges pertaining
 to such patent.
SEC. 7. INTERVENING RIGHTS.
 The renewals and extensions of the patents under sections 5 and 6 shall
 not result in infringement of any such patent on account of any use of
 the subject matter of the patent, or substantial preparation for such use,
 which began after the patent expired but before the enactment of this Act.
Passed the Senate October 8 (legislative day, September 30), 1992.
Attest:
Secretary.